{"id": "12810", "revid": "27318187", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12810", "title": "Garry Kasparov", "text": "Russian chess grandmaster (born 1963)\nGarry Kimovich Kasparov (born Garik Kimovich Weinstein on 13 April 1963) is a Russian chess grandmaster, political activist and writer, who was the World Chess Champion from 1985 to 2000. His peak FIDE chess rating of 2851, achieved in 1999, was the highest recorded until being surpassed by Magnus Carlsen in 2013. From 1984 until his retirement from regular competitive chess in 2005, Kasparov was ranked the world's No. 1 player for a record 255 months overall. Kasparov also holds records for the most consecutive professional tournament victories (15) and Chess Oscars (11).\nKasparov became the youngest undisputed world champion in 1985 at age 22 by defeating then-champion Anatoly Karpov, a record he held until 2024. He defended the title against Karpov three times, in 1986, 1987 and 1990. Kasparov held the official FIDE world title until 1993, when a dispute with FIDE led him to set up a rival organisation, the Professional Chess Association. In 1997, he became the first world champion to lose a match to a computer under standard time controls when he was defeated by the IBM supercomputer Deep Blue in a highly publicised match. He continued to hold the \"Classical\" world title until his defeat by Vladimir Kramnik in 2000. Despite losing the PCA title, he continued winning tournaments and was the world's highest-rated player at the time of his official retirement. Kasparov coached Carlsen in 2009\u20132010, during which time Carlsen rose to world No. 1. Kasparov stood unsuccessfully for FIDE president in 2013\u20132014.\nSince retiring from chess, Kasparov has devoted his time to writing and politics. His book series \"My Great Predecessors\", first published in 2003, details the history and games of the world champion chess players who preceded him. He formed the United Civil Front movement and was a member of The Other Russia, a coalition opposing the administration and policies of Vladimir Putin. In 2008, he announced an intention to run as a candidate in that year's Russian presidential race, but after encountering logistical problems in his campaign, for which he blamed \"official obstruction\", he withdrew. Following the Russian mass protests that began in 2011, he announced in June 2013 that he had left Russia for the immediate future out of fear of persecution. Following his flight from Russia, he lived in New York City with his family. In 2014, he obtained Croatian citizenship and has maintained a residence in Podstrana near Split.\nKasparov was chairman of the Human Rights Foundation from 2011 to 2024. In 2017, he founded the Renew Democracy Initiative (RDI), an American political organisation promoting and defending liberal democracy in the U.S. and abroad. He serves as chairman of the group.\nEarly life.\nKasparov was born Garik Kimovich Weinstein () in Baku, Azerbaijan SSR (now Azerbaijan), Soviet Union. His father, Kim Moiseyevich Weinstein, was Jewish and his mother, Klara Shagenovna Kasparova, was Armenian. Both of his mother's parents were Armenians from Karabakh. According to Kasparov himself, he was named after United States President Harry S. Truman, \"whom my father admired for taking a strong stand against communism. It was a rare name in Russia, until Harry Potter came along.\" Kasparov has described himself as a \"self-appointed Christian\", although \"very indifferent\" and identifying as Russian: \"[A]lthough I'm half-Armenian, half-Jewish, I consider myself Russian because Russian is my native tongue, and I grew up with Russian culture.\"\nWhen he was seven years old, his father died of leukaemia. At the age of twelve, Kasparov, upon the request of his mother Klara and with the consent of the family, adopted Klara's surname Kasparov. Kasparov and his family had to flee anti-Armenian pogroms in Baku in January 1990.\nIntroduction to chess.\nKasparov began the serious study of chess after he came across a problem set up by his parents and proposed a solution. From age seven, he attended the Young Pioneer Palace in Baku and, at ten, began training at Mikhail Botvinnik's chess school under coach Vladimir Makogonov. When Kasparov was 11, Botvinnik wrote, \"The future of chess lies in the hands of this young man.\" Makogonov helped develop Kasparov's positional skills and taught him to play the Caro\u2013Kann Defence and the Tartakower System of the Queen's Gambit Declined. Kasparov won the Soviet Junior Championship in Tbilisi in 1976, scoring 7/9 points, at age 13. He repeated the feat the following year, winning with a score of 8.5/9. He was being coached by Alexander Shakarov during this time.\nChess career.\nRising up the ranks.\nIn early 1978, Kasparov participated in the Sokolsky Memorial tournament in Minsk. Normally only established masters and local players were invited, but he received a special invitation, and took first place. Kasparov said that after the victory, he thought he had a \"very good shot\" at the world championship. He first qualified for the USSR Chess Championship at age 15 in 1978, the youngest-ever player at that level, by winning a 64-player Swiss system tournament at Daugavpils. He scored 8.5/17 in that Soviet championship.\nKasparov's first international tournament was in Banja Luka, Yugoslavia, in April 1979 while he was still unrated. Kasparov won this high-class tournament by 2 points, emerging with a provisional rating of 2545, enough to rank him equal 40th in the world. The next year, 1980, he won the World Junior Chess Championship in Dortmund, West Germany. Later that year, he made his debut as the second reserve for the Soviet Union at the Chess Olympiad at Valletta, Malta, and became a Grandmaster. He quickly rose up the world rankings: equal 15th in January 1980, sixth in January 1981, equal fourth in July 1981, fourth in January 1982 and second behind Karpov in July 1982.\nAs a teenager, Kasparov shared the USSR Chess Championship in 1981 with Lev Psakhis (12.5/17), although Psakhis won their game. His first win in a superclass-level international tournament was scored at Bugojno, Yugoslavia, in 1982. He earned a place in the 1982 Moscow Interzonal tournament, which he won, to qualify for the Candidates Tournament. At age 19, he was the youngest Candidate since Bobby Fischer, who was 15 when he qualified in 1958.\nKasparov's first (quarter-final) Candidates match was against Alexander Beliavsky, whom he defeated 6\u20133 (four wins, one loss). Politics threatened Kasparov's semi-final against Victor Korchnoi, which was scheduled to be played in Pasadena, California. The Soviet authorities would not allow Kasparov to travel to the United States, meaning that Korchnoi could have had a walkover. This decision was met with disapproval by the chess world, and Korchnoi agreed to the match to being played in London instead, along with the previously scheduled match between Vasily Smyslov and Zolt\u00e1n Ribli. The Kasparov-Korchnoi match was put together on short notice by Raymond Keene. Kasparov lost the first game but won the match 7\u20134 (four wins, one loss).\nIn January 1984, Kasparov became the No. 1 ranked player in the world, with a FIDE rating of 2710. He became the youngest-ever world No. 1, a record that lasted 12 years until being broken by Kramnik in January 1996. That same year, he won the Candidates' final 8\u00bd\u20134\u00bd (four wins, no losses) against former world champion Smyslov at Vilnius, thus qualifying to play Karpov for the world championship.\n1984\u20131985 world championship.\nThe World Chess Championship 1984\u20131985 match between Kasparov and Karpov had many ups and downs and a controversial finish. Karpov started in very good form, and after nine games Kasparov was down 4\u20130 in a \"first to six wins\" match. In an unexpected turn of events, there followed a series of 17 successive draws, some relatively short, others drawn in unsettled positions. Kasparov lost game 27 (5\u20130), then fought back with another series of draws until game 32, earning his first-ever win against the world champion and bringing the score to 5\u20131. Another 14 successive draws followed, through game 46; the previous record length for a world title match had been 34 games (Jos\u00e9 Ra\u00fal Capablanca vs. Alexander Alekhine in 1927).\nKasparov won games 47 and 48 to bring the score to 5\u20133 in Karpov's favour. Then the match was ended without result by FIDE President Florencio Campomanes, and a new match was announced to start a few months later. The termination was controversial, as both players stated that they preferred the match to continue. Announcing his decision, Campomanes cited the health of the players, which had been strained by the length of the match. According to grandmasters Boris Gulko and Korchnoi, and historians Vladimir Popow and Yuri Felshtinsky in their \"The KGB Plays Chess\" book, Campomanes had been a KGB agent and was tasked with preventing Karpov's defeat at all costs; and the match was terminated while Karpov was still ahead to avoid the impression that the decision had been made for his benefit. US Grandmaster Andy Soltis said it was \"absurd\" to suggest that Campomones was a KGB agent, but thought that his decisions in the match favoured Karpov.\nThe match became the first, and so far only, world championship match to be abandoned without a result. Kasparov's relations with Campomanes and FIDE became strained, and matters came to a head in 1993 with Kasparov's complete break-away from FIDE.\nWorld champion.\nThe second Karpov\u2013Kasparov match in 1985 was organised in Moscow as the best of 24 games, where the first player to win 12\u00bd points would claim the title. The scores from the terminated match would not carry over; however, in the event of a 12\u201312 draw, the title would remain with Karpov. On 9 November 1985, Kasparov secured the world crown by a score of 13\u201311. Karpov, with White, needed to win the 24th game to retain the title but Kasparov won it with the Sicilian Defence. He was 22 years old at the time, making him the youngest-ever world champion, a record held by Mikhail Tal for over 20 years. Kasparov's win with Black in the 16th game has been recognised as one of the all-time chess masterpieces, including being voted the best game played during the first 64 issues of the magazine \"Chess Informant.\"\nAt the time, the champion still had the right to a rematch after losing the title. This rematch took place in 1986, hosted jointly in London and Leningrad, with each city hosting 12 games. At one point in the match, Kasparov opened a three-point lead and looked well on his way to a decisive victory. But Karpov fought back by winning three consecutive games to level the score late in the match. At this point, Kasparov dismissed one of his seconds, grandmaster Evgeny Vladimirov, accusing him of selling his opening preparation to the Karpov team. Kasparov scored one more win and kept his title by a score of 12\u00bd\u201311\u00bd.\nA fourth match for the world title took place in 1987 in Seville, as Karpov had qualified through the Candidates' Matches to become the official challenger once again. This match was also very close, with neither player holding more than a one-point lead at any time. With one game left, Kasparov was down a point and needed a win to draw the match and retain his title. A long, tense game ensued, in which Karpov blundered away a pawn just before the first time control. Kasparov then won a long ending to retain the title on a 12\u201312 scoreline.\nKasparov and Karpov met for a fifth time, on this occasion in New York City and Lyon in 1990, with each city hosting 12 games. Again, the result was a close one, with Kasparov winning by a margin of 12\u00bd\u201311\u00bd. In their five world championship matches, Kasparov had 21 wins, 19 losses and 104 draws in 144 games.\nBreak with and ejection from FIDE.\nIn November 1986, Kasparov had created the Grandmasters Association (GMA) to represent professional players and give them more say in FIDE's activities. Kasparov assumed a leadership role. GMA's major achievement was in organising a series of six World Cup tournaments for the world's top players. This caused an uneasy relationship to develop between Kasparov and FIDE. The previous month, Kasparov had made his feelings clear to fellow grandmaster Keene: \"Campomanes must go. It is war to the death with him as far as I am concerned. I will do everything I can to remove him.\"\nThis stand-off lasted until 1993, by which time a new challenger had qualified through the Candidates cycle: Nigel Short, a British grandmaster who had defeated Karpov in a qualifying match and then Jan Timman in the finals held in early 1993. After a confusing and compressed bidding process produced lower financial estimates than expected, the world champion and his challenger both rejected FIDE's bid for an August match in Manchester and decided to play outside FIDE's jurisdiction. Their match took place under the auspices of the Professional Chess Association (PCA), an organisation established by Kasparov and Short. At this point, a fracture occurred in the lineage of the FIDE World Championship. In an interview in 2007, Kasparov called the break with FIDE in 1993 the worst mistake of his career, as it hurt the game in the long run.\nKasparov and Short were ejected from FIDE and played their well-sponsored match in London in September 1993. Kasparov won convincingly by a score of 12\u00bd\u20137\u00bd. The match considerably raised the profile of chess in the UK, with a substantial level of coverage on Channel 4. Meanwhile, FIDE organised its world championship match between Timman (the defeated Candidates finalist) and former world champion Karpov (a defeated Candidates semi-finalist), which Karpov won. FIDE removed Kasparov and Short from its rating list. Subsequently, the PCA created a rating list of its own, which featured all the world's top players regardless of their relation to FIDE. There were now two world champions: PCA champion Kasparov and FIDE champion Karpov. The title remained split for 13 years.\nKasparov defended his PCA title in a 1995 match against Viswanathan Anand at the World Trade Center in New York City. Kasparov won the match by four wins to one, with thirteen draws. He tried to organise another world championship match under a different organisation, the World Chess Association (WCA), with Linares International Chess Tournament organiser Luis Rentero. Alexei Shirov and Kramnik played a candidates match to decide the challenger, which Shirov won in an upset. But when Rentero admitted that the funds required and promised had never materialised, the WCA collapsed. Yet another body stepped in, BrainGames.com, headed by Raymond Keene. After a match with Shirov could not be agreed by BrainGames.com and talks with Anand collapsed, a match was instead arranged against Kramnik.\nDuring this period, Kasparov was approached by Oakham School in the United Kingdom, at the time the only school in the country with a full-time chess coach, and developed an interest in the use of chess in education. In 1997, Kasparov supported a scholarship programme at the school.\nLosing the title and aftermath.\nThe Kasparov\u2013Kramnik match took place in London during the latter half of 2000. Kramnik had been a student of Kasparov's at the famous Botvinnik/Kasparov chess school in Russia and had served on Kasparov's team for the 1995 match with Anand. Kasparov found that Kramnik was better prepared. As White, Kasparov could not crack the passive but solid Berlin Defence in the Ruy Lopez, and Kramnik managed to draw all his games as Black. As black, Kasparov lost two (games 2 and 10), meaning Kramnik won the match 8\u00bd\u20136\u00bd, and Kramnik succeeded Kasparov as the Classical World Champion.\nAfter losing the title, Kasparov won a series of major tournaments and remained the top-rated player in the world, ahead of both Kramnik and the FIDE World Champion. In 2001, he refused an invitation to the 2002 Candidates Tournament to choose Kramnik's first challenger, claiming his results had earned him a rematch with Kramnik. Kasparov and Karpov played a four-game match with rapid time controls over two days in December 2002 in New York City. Kasparov suffered a surprise loss (1\u00bd\u20132\u00bd).\nBecause of Kasparov's continuing strong results and status as FIDE world No. 1, he was included in the so-called \"Prague Agreement\", masterminded by Yasser Seirawan and intended to reunite the two world championships. Kasparov was to play a match against the FIDE World Champion Ponomariov in September 2003. But this match was called off after Ponomariov refused to sign his contract for it without reservation. In its place, there were plans for a match against Rustam Kasimdzhanov, winner of the FIDE World Chess Championship 2004, to be held in January 2005 in the United Arab Emirates. These also fell through owing to a lack of funding. Plans to hold the match in Turkey instead came too late. Kasparov announced in January 2005 that he was tired of waiting for FIDE to arrange a match and had decided to stop all efforts to become undisputed world champion once more.\nRetirement from regular competitive chess.\nAfter winning the prestigious Linares tournament for the ninth time, Kasparov announced on 10 March 2005 that he would retire from regular competitive chess. He cited as the reason a lack of personal goals in the chess world. When winning the Russian championship in 2004, he commented that it had been the last major title he had never won outright. He also expressed frustration at the failure to reunify the world championship. Kasparov said he might play in some rapid chess events for fun, but he intended to spend more time on his books, including the \"My Great Predecessors\" series, and work on the links between decision-making in chess and other areas of life. He also stated that he would continue to involve himself in Russian politics, which he viewed as \"headed down the wrong path\".\nPost-retirement chess.\nOn 22 August 2006, in his first public chess games since his retirement, Kasparov played in the Lichthof Chess Champions Tournament, a blitz event played at the time control of five minutes per side and three-second increments per move. Kasparov tied for first with Karpov, scoring 4\u00bd/6. The pair played a 12-game match from 21 to 24 September 2009, in Valencia, Spain. It consisted of four rapid (or semi rapid) games, in which Kasparov won 3\u20131, and eight blitz games, in which Kasparov won 6\u20132, winning the match with a final result of 9\u20133. The event took place exactly 25 years after the two players' unfinished encounter at World Chess Championship 1984.\nKasparov coached Carlsen for approximately one year, beginning in February 2009. The collaboration remained secret until September 2009. Under Kasparov's tutelage, in October 2009 Carlsen became the youngest ever to achieve a FIDE rating higher than 2800, and he rose from world number four to world number one. While the pair initially planned to work together throughout 2010, in March of that year it was announced that Carlsen had split from Kasparov and would no longer be using him as a trainer. According to an interview with the German magazine \"Der Spiegel\", Carlsen indicated that he would remain in contact and that he would continue to attend training sessions with Kasparov; however, no further training sessions were held, and the cooperation fizzled out over the course of the spring. In 2011, Carlsen said: \"Thanks to [Kasparov] I began to understand a whole class of positions better.\u00a0... Kasparov gave me a great deal of practical help.\" In 2012, when asked what he learnt from working with Kasparov, Carlsen answered: \"Complex positions. That was the most important thing.\"\nIn May 2010, Kasparov played and won 30 games simultaneously against players at Tel Aviv University in Israel. In the same month, it was revealed that he had aided Anand in his preparation for the World Chess Championship 2010 against challenger Veselin Topalov. Anand won the match 6\u00bd\u20135\u00bd to retain the title. Kasparov began training the U.S. grandmaster Hikaru Nakamura in January 2011. The first of several training sessions was held in New York just before Nakamura participated in the Tata Steel Chess tournament in Wijk aan Zee, the Netherlands. In December 2011, it was announced that their cooperation had come to an end.\nKasparov played two blitz exhibition matches in the autumn of 2011. The first was in September against French grandmaster Maxime Vachier-Lagrave, in Clichy (France), which Kasparov won 1\u00bd\u2013\u00bd. The second was a longer match consisting of eight blitz games played on 9 October, against English grandmaster Short. Kasparov won again by a score of 4\u00bd\u20133\u00bd. A little after that, in October 2011, Kasparov played and defeated fourteen opponents in a simultaneous exhibition that took place in Bratislava.\nOn 25 and 26 April 2015, Kasparov played a mini-match against Short. The match consisted of two rapid games and eight blitz games and was contested over the course of two days. Commentators GM Maurice Ashley and Alejandro Ram\u00edrez remarked how Kasparov was an 'initiative hog' throughout the match, consistently not allowing Short to gain any foothold in the games. Kasparov won the match decisively (8\u00bd\u20131\u00bd), winning all five games on the second day. These victories were characterised by aggressive pawn moves breaking up Short's position, thereby allowing Kasparov's pieces to achieve positional superiority.\nKasparov played and won all nineteen games of a simultaneous exhibition in Pula, Croatia on 19 August 2015. At the Chess Club and Scholastic Center of Saint Louis on 28 and 29 April 2016, Kasparov played a 6-round exhibition blitz round-robin tournament with Fabiano Caruana, Wesley So and Nakamura in an event called the Ultimate Blitz Challenge. He finished the tournament third with 9.5/18, behind Nakamura (11/18) and So (10/18). At the post-tournament interview, Kasparov announced that he would donate his winnings from playing the next top-level blitz exhibition match to assist funding of the American Olympic Team. On 2 June 2016, Kasparov played against fifteen chess players in a simultaneous exhibition in the Kaiser-Friedrich-Halle of M\u00f6nchengladbach. He won all games.\nKasparov participated in the inaugural St. Louis Rapid and Blitz tournament from 14 to 19 August 2017, scoring 3.5/9 in the rapid and 9/18 in the blitz, representing Croatia. He finished eighth in a strong field of ten, including Nakamura, Caruana, former world champion Anand and the eventual winner, Levon Aronian. Kasparov promised that any tournament money he earned would go towards charities to promote chess in Africa. In 2020, he participated in 9LX, a Chess960 tournament, and finished eighth of a field of ten players. His game against Carlsen, who tied for first place, was drawn.\nHe launched Kasparov Chess, a subscription-based online chess community featuring documentaries, lessons, puzzles, podcasts, articles, interviews and playing zones, in 2021. He also played in the blitz section of the Grand Chess Tour 2021 event in Zagreb, Croatia. He performed poorly, however, scoring 0.5/9 on the first day and 2/9 on the second day, getting his only win against Jorden van Foreest. He also participated in 9LX 2, finishing fifth in a field of ten players, with a score of 5/9.\nOlympiads and major team events.\nKasparov played in a total of eight Chess Olympiads. He represented the Soviet Union four times and Russia four times, following the break-up of the Soviet Union in 1991. In his 1980 Olympiad debut, he became, at age 17, the youngest player to represent the Soviet Union or Russia at that level, a record which was broken by Kramnik in 1992. In 82 games, he scored (+50\u22123=29), for 78.7%, and won a total of nineteen medals, including team gold medals all eight times he competed.\nFor the 1994 Moscow Olympiad, he had a significant organisational role in helping to put together the event on short notice, after Thessaloniki cancelled its offer to host only a few weeks before the scheduled dates. Kasparov's detailed Olympiad record follows:\nKasparov made his international debut for the USSR at age 16 in the 1980 European Team Championship and played for Russia in the 1992 edition of that championship. He won a total of five medals. His detailed record in this event follows:\nKasparov also represented the USSR once at the Youth Olympiad in Austria (1981). He scored 9/10 (+8\u20130=2) on the top board and his team lifted the title.\nAssessment and legacy.\nKasparov received a Chess Oscar eleven times as the best chess player of the year, in 1982\u20131983, 1985\u20131988, 1995\u20131996, 1999, and 2001\u20132002. He was also awarded the Marca Leyenda trophy in 1997. Between 1981 and 1991, he won or tied for first place in every tournament he entered. In 1999, Kasparov reached an Elo rating of 2851, a record that stood for over thirteen years, until Carlsen achieved 2861 in January 2013. With the exception of the PCA period and sharing first place with Kramnik in 1996, Kasparov led the rating list from 1985 to 2006 \u2013 a total of 255 months. On 1 January 2006, Kasparov ranked first with 2812. However, he was excluded from the FIDE rating list of 1 April 2006 because he had not participated in tournaments for the previous twelve months.\nThe rivalry between Kasparov and Karpov (often referred to as the \"two Ks\") is one of the greatest in the history of chess. In six years they played five matches comprising 144 games. For a long time there was personal enmity between Karpov and Kasparov. The conflict between the two men also had a political connotation. Karpov was considered a representative of the Soviet nomenklatura, while Kasparov was young and popular, positioned himself as a \"child of change\", willingly gave candid interviews and (especially in the West) had an aura of a rebel, although he was never a dissident. Kasparov's 1985 victory coincided with the start of perestroika in the Soviet Union.\nCarlsen said of Kasparov: \"I've never seen someone with such a feel for dynamics in complex positions.\" Kramnik has opined that Kasparov's \"capacity for study is second to none\", adding \"There is nothing in chess he has been unable to deal with.\" In 2007, the international consulting company Synectics published a rating of 100 living geniuses in science, politics, art and entrepreneurship, in which Kasparov ranked 25th. Less known about Kasparov is his emphasis on physical fitness, including taking a month off each year to work out strenuously.\nPlaying style.\nKramnik called Kasparov a chess player with virtually no weaknesses. His games are characterised by a dynamic style of play with a focus on tactics, depth of strategy, subtle calculation and original opening ideas. Kasparov was known for his extensive opening preparation and aggressive play in it. Sergey Shipov considered Kasparov's moral and volitional qualities (impulsiveness and psychological instability) and excessive reliance on options, which can lead to overwork and mistakes, as amongst his few shortcomings.\nKasparov's attacking style of play has been compared by many to Alekhine, his chess idol since childhood. Kasparov has described his style as being influenced chiefly by Alekhine, Tal and Fischer. Other influences on Kasparov were his early coaches. At a young age, he met with experienced teachers Alexander Nikitin and Alexander Shakarov. Shakarov collected and systematised materials, and then became the keeper of Kasparov's \"information bank\". A revolutionary step at that time was the involvement of computer programs in analysing games, and it was Kasparov and his team who took the first steps in this direction. In 1973, Kasparov entered the Botvinnik school and immediately attracted attention. Botvinnik commented on the young schoolboy: \"Garry's speed and memory capacity are amazing. He counts deep variations and finds unexpected moves. The power of combinational vision makes him similar to Alekhine himself.\"\nContributions to opening theory.\nKasparov has made many contributions to opening theory, including co-authoring several books on the subject. In the 1990s, he systematically developed new variants with computer programs. He also \"reanimated\" the Scotch Game in top-level competitions. Kasparov successfully used this opening, which was considered outdated, in the 1990 match against Karpov and in matches with Short and Anand. One of the offshoots of the Sicilian in the Sz\u00e9n Variation is called the Kasparov Gambit. Kasparov used this variation in the 12th and 16th games of the match with Karpov in 1985; in the second of these games, he scored a victory. Another well-known case of winning an important game thanks to a novelty in the opening is Kasparov's 10th game of the 1995 match against Anand. On the 14th move, in a well-known position of the open variation of the Spanish Game (Ruy Lopez), Kasparov discovered a new idea with a rook sacrifice, which brought a decisive attack.\nChess rating.\nKasparov holds the record for the longest time as the No. 1 rated player in the world\u2014from 1984 to 2005 (Kramnik shared the No. 1 ranking with him once, in the January 1996 FIDE rating list). He headed the PCA rating list during the split from FIDE. At the time of his retirement, he was still ranked No. 1 in the world, with a rating of 2812. His rating has fallen inactive since the January 2006 rating list. In January 1990, Kasparov achieved the (then) highest FIDE rating ever, passing 2800 and breaking Fischer's old record of 2785. By the July 1999 and January 2000 FIDE rating lists, Kasparov had reached a 2851 Elo rating, at that time the highest rating ever achieved. He held that record until Carlsen attained a new record high rating of 2861 in January 2013.\nOther achievements.\nKasparov holds the record for most consecutive professional tournament victories, placing first or equal first in fifteen individual tournaments from 1981 to 1990. The streak was broken by Vasyl Ivanchuk at Linares 1991, where Kasparov placed second, half a point behind him after losing their individual game. The details of this record winning streak follow:\nKasparov went nine years winning every super-tournament he played, in addition to contesting his series of five consecutive matches with Karpov. His only failure in this time period in either tournament or match play was the 1984 world title match against Karpov.\nIn the late 1990s, Kasparov went on another long streak of ten consecutive super-tournament wins.\nIn these tournament victories, Kasparov had a score of 53 wins, 61 draws and 1 loss in 115 games, his only defeat coming against Ivan Sokolov in Wijk aan Zee 1999.\nChess and computers.\nAcorn Computers acted as one of the sponsors for Kasparov's Candidates semi-final match against Korchnoi in 1983. This was Kasparov's first introduction to computers. Kasparov was awarded a BBC Micro, which he took back with him to Baku, making it perhaps one of the first Western-made microcomputers to reach the Soviet Union at that time. Computer chess magazine editor Frederic Friedel consulted with Kasparov in 1985 on how a chess database program would be useful preparation for competition. Friedel founded Chessbase two years later, and he gave a copy of the program to Kasparov, who started using it in his preparation. That same year, Kasparov played against thirty-two chess computers in Hamburg, winning all games. Several commercially available Kasparov computers were made in the 1980s, the Saitek Kasparov Turbo King models. On 22 October 1989, Kasparov defeated the chess computer Deep Thought in both games of a two-game match. In December 1992, Kasparov played thirty-seven blitz games against Fritz 2 in Cologne, winning 24, drawing 4 and losing 9.\nKasparov cooperated in producing video material for the computer game \"Kasparov's Gambit\" released by Electronic Arts in November 1993. In April 1994, Intel acted as a sponsor for the first Professional Chess Association Grand Prix event in Moscow, played at a time control of twenty-five minutes per game. In May, Chessbase's Fritz 3 running on an Intel Pentium PC defeated Kasparov in their first game in the Intel Express blitz tournament in Munich, but Kasparov managed to tie it for first and won the play-off (+3=2). The next day, Kasparov lost to Fritz 3 again in a game on ZDF TV. In August, Kasparov was knocked out of the London Intel Grand Prix by Richard Lang's ChessGenius 2 program in the first round. In 1995, during Kasparov's world title match with Anand, he unveiled an opening novelty that had been checked with a chess engine, an approach that would become increasingly common in subsequent years.\nKasparov played in a pair of six-game chess matches with IBM supercomputer Deep Blue. The first match took place in Philadelphia in February 1996 and was won by Kasparov (4\u20132). The second was played in New York City in May 1997 and won by Deep Blue (3\u00bd\u20132\u00bd). The 1997 match was the first defeat of a reigning world champion by a computer under tournament conditions. The match was even after five games but Kasparov lost quickly in Game 6. Kasparov said that he was \"not well prepared\" to face Deep Blue in 1997. He said that based on his \"objective strengths\" his play was stronger than that of Deep Blue. Kasparov claimed that several factors weighed against him in this match. In particular, he was denied access to Deep Blue's recent games, in contrast to the computer's team, which could study hundreds of Kasparov's.\nAfter the loss, Kasparov said that he sometimes saw deep intelligence and creativity in the machine's moves, suggesting that during the second game chess players had intervened in contravention of the rules. IBM denied that it had cheated, stating the only human intervention occurred between games. The rules provided for the developers to modify the program between games, an opportunity they said they used to shore up weaknesses in the computer's play revealed during the course of the match. Kasparov requested printouts of the machine's log files but IBM refused, although the company later published them on the Internet. Much later, it was suggested that the behaviour Kasparov noted had resulted from a glitch in the computer program. Plans for further engagement between Kasparov and IBM, including a rematch, did not come to fruition, due to the accusations of cheating.\nKasparov versus the World was a game that took place in 1999. Kasparov conducted the white moves while more than 50,000 people from all over the globe played against him. The game was a huge mixture of tactical and strategical ideas, with Kasparov saying: \"It is the greatest game in the history of chess. The sheer number of ideas, the complexity, and the contribution it has made to chess make it the most important game ever played.\" After 62 moves, Kasparov won the game.\nIn January 2003, he engaged in a six-game classical time control match, with a $1\u00a0million prize fund, against Deep Junior. It was billed as the FIDE \"Man vs. Machine\" world championship. The engine evaluated three million positions per second. After one win each and three draws, it was all up to the final game. After reaching a decent position, Kasparov offered a draw, which was accepted by the Deep Junior team. Asked why he had offered the draw, Kasparov said he feared making a blunder. Deep Junior was the first machine to beat Kasparov with Black and at a standard time control.\nIn June 2003, Mindscape released the computer game \"Kasparov Chessmate\", with Kasparov himself listed as a co-designer. In November 2003, he engaged in a four-game match against the computer program X3D Fritz, using a virtual board, 3D glasses and a speech recognition system. After two draws and one win apiece, the X3D Man\u2013Machine match ended in a draw. Kasparov received $175,000 and took home a golden trophy. He continued to regret the blunder in the second game that cost him a crucial point. He felt that he had outplayed the machine overall and performed well: \"I only made one mistake but unfortunately that one mistake lost the game.\"\nIn 2021, Kasparov promoted a series of 32 Non-fungible tokens (NFTs) that detailed important moments in his career. The top four sold for more than $11,000.\nCandidate for FIDE presidency.\nOn 7 October 2013, Kasparov announced his candidacy for World Chess Federation president during a reception in Tallinn, Estonia, where the 84th FIDE Congress took place. He was supported by reigning world champion and FIDE No. 1 ranked player Carlsen. At the FIDE General Assembly in August 2014, Kasparov lost the presidential election to the incumbent Kirsan Ilyumzhinov, with a vote of 110\u201361. A few days before the election took place, \"The New York Times Magazine\" had published a report on the viciously fought campaign. Included was information about a leaked contract between Kasparov and former FIDE Secretary General Ignatius Leong from Singapore, in which the Kasparov campaign reportedly \"offered to pay Leong US$500,000 and to pay $250,000 a year for four years to the ASEAN Chess Academy, an organisation Leong helped create to teach the game, specifying that Leong would be responsible for delivering 11 votes from his region [...]\". In September 2015, the FIDE Ethics Commission found Kasparov and Leong guilty of violating its Code of Ethics and later suspended them for two years from all FIDE functions and meetings.\nPolitics and political views.\nRussia.\nEarly political activities.\nKasparov's grandfather was a staunch communist, but the young Kasparov gradually began to have doubts about the Soviet Union's political system at age 13 when he travelled abroad for the first time in 1976 to Paris for a chess tournament. In 1981, at age 18, he read Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn's \"The Gulag Archipelago\", a copy of which he bought while abroad. Nevertheless, Kasparov joined the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU) in 1984, and was elected to the Central Committee of Komsomol in 1987. In 1990, he left the party. In May 1990, Kasparov took part in the creation of the Democratic Party of Russia. He left the party on 28 April 1991, after its conference. Kasparov was also involved with the creation of the \"Choice of Russia\" bloc of parties in June 1993. He took part in the election campaign of Boris Yeltsin in 1996. In 2001, he voiced his support for the Russian television channel NTV.\nAfter his retirement from chess in 2005, Kasparov turned to politics and created the United Civil Front, a social movement whose main goal is to \"work to preserve electoral democracy in Russia.\" He has vowed to \"restore democracy\" to Russia by restoring the rule of law. A year later the United Civil Front became part of The Other Russia. Kasparov was instrumental in setting up this coalition, which opposes Putin's government and the United Russia party. The Other Russia was boycotted by the leaders of Russia's mainstream opposition parties, Yabloko and Union of Right Forces, due to its inclusion of both nationalist and radical groups. Kasparov has criticised these two parties as being secretly under the auspices of the Kremlin.\nIn April 2005, Kasparov was in Moscow at a promotional event when he was struck over the head with a chessboard he had just signed. The assailant was reported to have said: \"I admired you as a chess player, but you gave that up for politics\" immediately before the attack. Kasparov has been the subject of a number of other episodes since, including police brutality and alleged harassment from the Russian secret service.\nKasparov helped organise the Saint Petersburg Dissenters' March on 3 March 2007 and The March of the Dissenters on 24 March 2007, both involving several thousand people rallying against Putin and Saint Petersburg Governor Valentina Matviyenko. Kasparov led a pro-democracy demonstration in Moscow in April 2007. Soon after it started, however, over 9,000 police descended on the group and seized almost everyone. Kasparov, who was briefly arrested, was warned by the prosecution office on the eve of the march that anyone participating risked being detained. He was held for some ten hours and then fined and released. He was later summoned by the FSB for violations of Russian anti-extremism laws.\nSpeaking about Kasparov in 2007, former KGB defector Oleg Kalugin remarked: \"I do not talk in details\u00a0\u2013 people who knew them are all dead now because they were vocal, they were open. I am quiet. There is only one man who is vocal, and he may be in trouble: world chess champion Kasparov. He has been very outspoken in his attacks on Putin, and I believe that he is probably next on the list.\"\nPresidential candidate (2008).\nOn 30 September 2007, Kasparov entered the Russian presidential race, receiving 379 of 498 votes at a congress held in Moscow by The Other Russia. In October 2007, Kasparov announced his intention of standing for the Russian presidency as the candidate of the \"Other Russia\" coalition and vowed to fight for a \"democratic and just Russia\". Later that month he travelled to the United States, where he appeared on several popular television programmes.\nIn November 2007, Kasparov and other protesters were detained by police at an Other Russia rally in Moscow, which drew 3,000 demonstrators to protest against election rigging. Following an attempt by about 100 protesters to march through police lines to the electoral commission, which had barred Other Russia candidates from parliamentary elections, arrests were made. The Russian authorities stated a rally had been approved but not any marches, resulting in several demonstrators being detained. Kasparov was subsequently charged with resisting arrest and organising an unauthorised protest, and was given a jail sentence of five days. Kasparov appealed the charges, citing that he had been following orders given by the police. He was released from jail on 29 November. Putin castigated Kasparov at the rally for his use of English when speaking rather than Russian.\nIn December 2007, Kasparov announced that he had to withdraw his presidential candidacy due to inability to rent a meeting hall where at least 500 of his supporters could assemble. With the deadline expiring on that date, he explained it was impossible for him to run. Russian election laws required sufficient meeting hall space for assembling supporters. Kasparov's spokeswoman accused the government of using pressure to deter anyone from renting a hall for the gathering and said that the electoral commission had rejected a proposal that would have allowed for smaller gathering sizes rather than one large gathering at a meeting hall.\nOpposition to Putin administration (2010\u20132013).\nKasparov was among the 34 first signatories and a key organiser of the online anti-Putin campaign \"Putin Must Go\", started on 10 March 2010. Within the text is a call to Russian law enforcement to ignore Putin's orders. By June 2011, there were 90,000 signatures. While the identity of the petition author remained anonymous, there was wide speculation that it was indeed Kasparov. On 31 January 2012, Kasparov hosted a meeting of opposition leaders planning a mass march on 4 February 2012, the third major opposition rally held since the disputed State Duma elections of December 2011. Among other opposition leaders attending were Alexei Navalny and Yevgeniya Chirikova.\nKasparov was arrested and beaten outside a Moscow court on 17 August 2012 while attending sentencing in the case involving the all-female punk band Pussy Riot. On 24 August, he was cleared of charges that he had taken part in an unauthorised protest against the conviction of three members of the band. Judge Yekaterina Veklich said there were \"no grounds to believe the testimony of the police.\" Kasparov later thanked all the bloggers and reporters who provided video evidence that contradicted the testimony of the police. Kasparov wrote in February 2013 that \"fascism has come to Russia. ...Project Putin, just like the old Project Hitler, is but the fruit of a conspiracy by the ruling elite. Fascist rule was never the result of the free will of the people. It was always the fruit of a conspiracy by the ruling elites\"!\nKasparov denied rumours in April 2013 that he was planning to leave Russia for good. \"I found these rumors to be deeply saddening and, moreover, surprising\", he wrote. \"I was unable to respond immediately because I was in such a state of shock that such an incredibly inaccurate statement, the likes of which is constantly distributed by the Kremlin's propagandists, came this time from Ilya Yashin, a fellow member of the Opposition Coordination Council (KSO) and my former colleague from the Solidarity movement.\" He also accused prominent Russian journalist Vladimir Posner of failing to stand up to Putin and to earlier Russian and Soviet leaders.\nHowever, Kasparov subsequently fled Russia less than three months later. On 6 June 2013, he announced that he had left his homeland on account of fear of persecution for his political views. Further, at the 2013 Women in the World conference, Kasparov told \"The Daily Beast\"'s Michael Moynihan that democracy no longer existed in what he called Russia's \"dictatorship\".\nOpposition to Putin from exile (2013\u2013).\nKasparov said at a press conference in June 2013 that if he returned to Russia, he doubted he would be allowed to leave again, given Putin's ongoing crackdown on dissenters. \"So for the time being\", he said: \"I refrain from returning to Russia.\" He explained shortly thereafter in an article for \"The Daily Beast\" that this had not been intended as \"a declaration of leaving my home country, permanently or otherwise\", but merely an expression of \"the dark reality of the situation in Russia today, where nearly half the members of the opposition's Coordinating Council are under criminal investigation on concocted charges.\" He noted that the Moscow prosecutor's office was \"opening an investigation that would limit my ability to travel\", making it impossible for him to fulfil \"professional speaking engagements\" and hindering his \"work for the non-profit Kasparov Chess Foundation, which has centres in New York City, Brussels and Johannesburg, to promote chess in education.\"\nKasparov further wrote that the mass protests in Moscow 18 months earlier against fraudulent Russian elections had been \"a proud moment for me\". He recalled that after joining the opposition movement in March 2005, he had been criticised for seeking to unite \"every anti-Putin element in the country to march together regardless of ideology\". Therefore, the sight of \"hundreds of flags representing every group from liberals to nationalists all marching together for 'Russia Without Putin' was the fulfillment of a dream.\" Yet most Russians, he lamented, had continued to \"slumber\" even as Putin had \"taken off the flimsy mask of democracy to reveal himself in full as the would-be KGB dictator he has always been.\"\nKasparov wrote in July 2013 about the trial in Kirov of fellow opposition leader Navalny, who had been convicted \"on concocted embezzlement charges\", only to see the prosecutor, surprisingly, ask for his release the next day pending appeal: \"The judicial process and the democratic process in Russia are both elaborate mockeries created to distract the citizenry at home and to help Western leaders avoid confronting the awkward fact that Russia has returned to a police state.\" Still, Kasparov felt that whatever had caused the Kirov prosecutor's about-face, \"my optimism tells me it was a positive sign. After more than 13 years of predictable repression under Putin, anything different is good.\"\nKasparov has been outspoken regarding Putin's antigay laws, describing them as \"only the most recent encroachment on the freedom of speech and association of Russia's citizens\", which the international community had largely ignored. Regarding Russia's hosting of the 2014 Winter Olympics, Kasparov explained in August 2013 that he had opposed Russia's bid from the outset, since it would \"allow Vladimir Putin's cronies to embezzle hundreds of millions of dollars\" and \"lend prestige to Putin's authoritarian regime.\" Kasparov did not support the proposed Sochi Olympics boycott\u2014writing that it would \"unfairly punish athletes\"\u2014but called for athletes and others to \"transform Putin's self-congratulatory pet project into a spotlight that exposes his authoritarian rule\" to the world. In September, Kasparov called upon politicians to refuse to attend the games and the public to pressure sponsors and the media, such that Coca-Cola, for example, could put \"a rainbow flag on each Coca-Cola can\" and NBC could \"do interviews with Russian gay activists or with Russian political activists.\" Kasparov also emphasised that although he was \"still a Russian citizen\", he had \"good reason to be concerned about my ability to leave Russia if I returned to Moscow.\"\nKasparov spoke out against the 2014 Russian annexation of Crimea and has stated that control of Crimea should be returned to Ukraine after the overthrow of Putin without additional conditions. Kasparov's website was blocked by the Russian government censorship agency, Roskomnadzor, at the behest of the public prosecutor, allegedly due to Kasparov's opinions on the annexation of Crimea. Kasparov's block was made in unison with several other notable Russian sites that were accused of inciting public outrage. Reportedly, several of the blocked sites received an affidavit noting their violations. However, Kasparov stated that his site had received no such notice of violations after its block. In 2015, a whole note on Kasparov was removed from a Russian language encyclopaedia of greatest Soviet players after an intervention from \"senior leadership\".\nIn October 2015, Kasparov published a book titled \"Winter Is Coming: Why Vladimir Putin and the Enemies of the Free World Must Be Stopped\". In the book, Kasparov likens Putin to Adolf Hitler and explains the need for the West to oppose Putin sooner, rather than appeasing him and postponing the eventual confrontation. According to his publisher, \"Kasparov wants this book out fast, in a way that has potential to influence the discussion during the primary season.\" In 2018, he said that \"anything is better than Putin because that eliminates the probability of a nuclear war. Putin is insane.\" Following reports of Russian ransomware attacks against American agencies and companies in 2021, Kasparov stated that \"the only language that Putin understands is power, and his power is his money\", arguing that the United States should target the bank accounts of Russian oligarchs to force Russia to rein in its criminals' cyberattacks.\nKasparov spoke out against the invasion of Ukraine by Russia on Twitter: \"The only way this really ends is the fall of Putin's regime by collapse of Russian economy and defeat in Ukraine.\" He also believed that \"pressure must be kept up\" in terms of sanctions and condemnations against Russia's actions and joined with other prominent Russian figures-in-exile to form the Anti-War Committee of Russia. He said that Russia should be \"thrown back into the Stone Age to make sure that the oil and gas industry and any other sensitive industries that are vital for survival of the regime cannot function without Western technological support.\" On 20 May 2022, Kasparov was designated as \"foreign agent\" by the Ministry of Justice of the Russian Federation.\nIn May 2023, along with a large group of fellow exiles, Kasparov participated in the drafting of Mikhail Khodorkovsky's \"Declaration of Russia's Democratic Forces\". On 4 August 2023, Kasparov participated on the radio show \"Open to Debate\". In a debate with Charles Kupchan, he argued for Ukrainian admission into NATO and against any form of appeasement towards Putin.\nIn March 2024, Russia placed Kasparov on its list of \"terrorists and extremists\". On 24 April 2024 an arrest warrant was issued by a court in Russia's Komi region charging Kasparov of creating and leading a \"terrorist\" group.\nUnited States.\nKasparov received the Keeper of the Flame award in 1991 from the Center for Security Policy, a Washington, D.C.-based far-right, anti-Muslim think tank. In his acceptance speech, Kasparov lauded the defeat of communism while also urging the United States to give no financial assistance to central Soviet leaders. Kasparov gave speeches at other think tanks such as the Hoover Institution.\nIn a 12 May 2013 op-ed for \"The Wall Street Journal\", Kasparov questioned reports that the Russian security agency, the FSB, had fully cooperated with the FBI in the matter of the Boston bombers. He noted that the elder bomber, Tamerlan Tsarnaev, had reportedly met in Russia with two known jihadists who \"were killed in Dagestan by the Russian military just days before Tamerlan left Russia for the U.S.\". Kasparov argued, \"If no intelligence was sent from Moscow to Washington\" about this meeting, \"all this talk of FSB cooperation cannot be taken seriously.\" He further observed, \"This would not be the first time Russian security forces seemed strangely impotent in the face of an impending terror attack\", pointing out that in both the 2002 Moscow theater hostage crisis and the 2004 Beslan school siege, \"there were FSB informants in both terror groups \u2013 yet the attacks went ahead unimpeded.\" Given this history, he wrote, \"it is impossible to overlook that the Boston bombing took place just days after the U.S. Magnitsky List was published, creating the first serious external threat to the Putin power structure by penalising Russian officials complicit in human-rights crimes.\" In sum, Putin's \"dubious record on counterterrorism and its continued support of terror sponsors Iran and Syria mean only one thing: common ground zero.\"\nIn the 2016 United States presidential election, Kasparov described Republican Donald Trump as \"a celebrity showman with racist leanings and authoritarian tendencies\" and criticised him for calling for closer ties with Putin. After Trump's running mate, Mike Pence, called Putin a strong leader, Kasparov said that Putin is a strong leader \"in the same way arsenic is a strong drink\". He also disparaged the economic policies of Democratic primary candidate Bernie Sanders, but showed respect for Sanders as \"a charismatic speaker and a passionate believer in his cause\". Kasparov opined that Henry Kissinger \"was selling the Trump Administration on the idea of a mirror of 1972 [Richard Nixon's visit to China], except, instead of a Sino-U.S. alliance against the U.S.S.R., this would be a Russian-American alliance against China.\" In a 2024 interview, Kasparov expressed concern over Elon Musk potentially running the Department of Government Efficiency: \"Musk could be the first oligarch\", he stated.\nArmenia.\nIn a 2020 interview discussing the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, Kasparov stated that the Republic of Artsakh has a right to independence and that Azerbaijan has no sovereign right over it. He considers this stance to be objective and without bias, as Soviet law allowed for autonomous republics (such as the Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous Oblast) to vote for independence separately and were given an equal right for self-determination, a factor he felt often went ignored. Kasparov recalled that he was criticised by Armenians for not taking a strong stance when the Karabakh movement began in 1988, explaining that he was living in Baku with 200,000 other Armenians at the time and did not want to increase tensions. Kasparov and his family later fled Baku in January 1990 to escape pogroms against Armenians. Kasparov has declined invitations back to visit Baku, stating he would only return \"if every other Armenian born there can do it without a problem and without special favors from the government.\" He welcomed the Velvet Revolution in Armenia in 2018. Kasparov supports Armenian genocide recognition.\nOther international affairs.\nDuring the Yugoslav Wars, Kasparov advocated for the Western world to destroy the Yugoslav People's Army and accused Slobodan Milo\u0161evi\u0107 of creating a \"siege mentality\" to maintain control over Serbia. In 1997, he was awarded the title of \"honorary citizen of Bosnia and Herzegovina\" for his support of Bosnian people during the Bosnian War. Kasparov was named Chairman of the Human Rights Foundation in 2011; he served in this position until 2024, being succeeded by Yulia Navalnaya. In addition, Kasparov was presented with the Morris B. Abram Human Rights Award, UN Watch's annual human-rights prize, in 2013. The organisation praised him as \"not only one of the world's smartest men\" but \"also among its bravest\".\nBefore the first Gulf War, Kasparov expressed an unconventional viewpoint, recommending the United States to consider the use of an atomic bomb against Saddam Hussein in Iraq. In 2002, supporting military action against Iraq, he also recommended planning for military action against Iran, Syria and Saudi Arabia.\nIn April 2013, Kasparov joined in an HRF condemnation of Kanye West for having performed for the leader of Kazakhstan in exchange for a payment of $3\u00a0million, saying that West \"has entertained a brutal killer and his entourage\" and that his fee \"came from the loot stolen from the Kazakhstan treasury.\" Further, in September 2013, Kasparov wrote in \"Time\" magazine that in Syria, Putin and Bashar al-Assad \"won by forfeit when President Obama, Prime Minister Cameron and the rest of the so-called leaders of the free world walked away from the table.\" Kasparov lamented the \"new game at the negotiating table where Putin and Assad set the rules and will run the show under the protection of the U.N.\". Kasparov said in September 2013 that Russia was now a dictatorship. In the same month he told an interviewer that \"Obama going to Russia now is dead wrong, morally and politically\", because Putin's regime \"is behind Assad.\"\nKasparov was critical of the violence unleashed by the Spanish police against the 2017 independence referendum in Catalonia and accused the Spanish PM Mariano Rajoy of \"betraying\" the European promise of peace. After the Catalan regional election held later the same year, Kasparov wrote: \"Despite unprecedented pressure from Madrid, Catalonian separatists won a majority. Europe must speak and help find a peaceful path toward resolution and avoid more violence.\" Kasparov recommended that Spain look to how Britain handled the 2014 Scottish independence referendum, adding: \"look only at how Turkey and Iraq have treated the separatist Kurds. That cannot be the road for Spain and Catalonia.\"\nOn the occasion of the 2015 centennial of the Armenian genocide, Kasparov reflected that in 2002 he had called for Turkey to be admitted to the European Union if Turkey recognised the genocide. He condemned the assassination of Saudi journalist Jamal Khashoggi. In October 2018, Kasparov wrote that President Erdo\u011fan's regime in Turkey \"has jailed more journalists than any country in the world and scores of them remain in prison in Turkey. Since 2016, Turkey's intelligence agency has abducted at least 80 people in operations in 18 countries.\"\nThe second series of \"Rise of the Nazis\", broadcast by the BBC in February 2022, featured Kasparov's views on the Soviet leader Joseph Stalin. Kasparov stated: \"Stalin, ruthless dictator, didn't hesitate to eliminate opposition, didn't hesitate to send millions of people to die. It's recorded that Stalin had very high opinion about the Night of the Long Knives, Hitler's ruthlessness. And, of course, in 1940 Stalin admires Hitler because he succeeded in destroying France and almost bringing up England on her knees. It's a very special love story.\"\nIn the wake of the Gaza war, Kasparov vigorously called on the Biden administration for the destruction of Hamas and Hezbollah. He further demanded the US to set up regime change in Russia and Iran.\nArtificial intelligence.\nSpeaking to \"Forbes\" in spring 2023, Kasparov said that he was not overly concerned about the potential for ChatGPT to gain unauthorised access into everyday appliances. Rather, he felt that it is individuals who \"still have the monopoly on evil\".\nCroatian citizenship.\nKasparov had maintained a summer home in the Croatian city of Makarska. In February 2014, he applied for citizenship by naturalisation in Croatia, according to media reports, claiming he was finding it increasingly difficult to live in Russia. According to an article in \"The Guardian\", Kasparov was \"widely perceived\" as having been a vocal supporter of Croatian independence during the early 1990s. Later in February 2014, his application for naturalisation was approved and he had a meeting with Croatian prime minister Zoran Milanovi\u0107 on 27 February. Croatian press cited his \"lobbying for Croatia in 1991\" as grounds for the expedited naturalisation. In an interview for a Croatian daily published in February 2022, Kasparov said he was \"very grateful\" to Milanovi\u0107 for the help rendered by him (then as prime minister) in obtaining Croatian citizenship.\nBooks and other writings.\nEarly writings.\nKasparov has written books on chess. He published a controversial autobiography when still in his early 20s. Originally titled \"Child of Change\", it was later published as \"Unlimited Challenge\". This book was updated several times after he became world champion. Its content is mainly literary, with a small chess component of key unannotated games. He published an annotated games collection in 1983, \"Fighting Chess: My Games and Career\", which has been updated in further editions. He also wrote a book annotating the games from his World Chess Championship 1985 victory, \"World Chess Championship Match: Moscow, 1985\".\nHe has annotated his own games extensively for the Yugoslav \"Chess Informant\" series. In 1982, he co-authored \"Batsford Chess Openings\" with British grandmaster Keene. That book sold well and was updated in a second edition in 1989. He also co-authored two opening books with his trainer Alexander Nikitin in the 1980s for British publisher Batsford\u00a0\u2013 on the Classical Variation of the Caro\u2013Kann Defence and on the Scheveningen Variation of the Sicilian Defence. Kasparov also contributed extensively to the five-volume openings series \"Encyclopedia of Chess Openings\" from Chess Informant, for which Kasparov also wrote personal columns called \"Garry's Choice\".\nIn 2000, Kasparov co-authored \"Kasparov Against the World: The Story of the Greatest Online Challenge\" with grandmaster Daniel King. The 202-page book analyses the 1999 Kasparov versus the World game, and holds the record for the longest analysis devoted to a single chess game.\n\"My Great Predecessors\" series.\nIn 2003, the first volume of his five-volume work \"Garry Kasparov on My Great Predecessors\" was published. This volume deals with world champions Wilhelm Steinitz, Emanuel Lasker, Capablanca and Alekhine, and some of their strong contemporaries. It won the British Chess Federation's Book of the Year award in 2003. Volume two, covering Max Euwe, Botvinnik, Smyslov and Tal, appeared later in 2003. Volume three, featuring Tigran Petrosian and Boris Spassky, was published in early 2004. In December 2004, Kasparov released volume four, which covers Samuel Reshevsky, Miguel Najdorf and Bent Larsen (none of whom was world champion), but focuses on Fischer. The fifth volume, devoted to the chess careers of world champion Karpov and challenger Korchnoi, was published in March 2006.\n\"Modern Chess\" series.\nHis \"Revolution in the 70s\" (published in March 2007) covers \"the openings revolution of the 1970s\u20131980s\" and was the first work in a new venture, \"Modern Chess Series\", which recounted his matches with Karpov and selected games. \"Revolution in the 70s\" is about the development of opening theory witnessed in that decade. Systems like the novel \"Hedgehog\" opening plan of passively developing the pieces no further than the first three ranks were examined in great detail. Kasparov also analysed some of the most notable games played in that period. In a section at the end of the book, top opening theoreticians provided their opinion on progress made in opening theory in the 1980s.\n\"Garry Kasparov on Garry Kasparov\" series.\n From 2011 to 2014, Kasparov published a three-volume series of his games, spanning his career in three eras until he stopped playing full-time in 2005.\n\"Winter Is Coming\".\nIn October 2015, Kasparov published a book titled \"Winter Is Coming: Why Vladimir Putin and the Enemies of the Free World Must Be Stopped\". The title is a reference to the HBO television series \"Game of Thrones\". In the book, Kasparov writes about the need for an organisation composed solely of democratic countries to replace the United Nations. In an interview, he called the United Nations a \"catwalk for dictators\".\nHistorical revisionism.\nKasparov believes that the conventional history of civilisation is incorrect. Specifically, he contends that the history of ancient civilisations is based on misdating of events and achievements that occurred in the medieval period. He has cited several aspects of ancient history that, he argues, are likely to be anachronisms. Kasparov has written in support of the pseudohistorical new chronology theory proposed by Anatoly Fomenko, although with some reservations. In 2001, he expressed a desire to devote his time to promoting the new chronology after his chess career. \"New Chronology is a great area for investing my intellect\u00a0... My analytical abilities are well placed to figure out what was right and what was wrong.\" \"When I stop playing chess, it may well be that I concentrate on promoting these ideas... I believe they can improve our lives.\" Later, Kasparov renounced his support of Fomenko's theories but reaffirmed his belief that mainstream historical knowledge is inconsistent.\nOther post-retirement writing.\nKasparov wrote \"How Life Imitates Chess\", an examination of the parallels between decision-making in chess and in the business world, in 2007. In 2008, he published a sympathetic obituary for Fischer: \"I am often asked if I ever met or played Bobby Fischer. The answer is no, I never had that opportunity. But even though he saw me as a member of the evil chess establishment that he felt had robbed and cheated him, I am sorry I never had a chance to thank him personally for what he did for our sport.\"\nKasparov is the chief advisor for the book publisher Everyman Chess. He works closely with Mig Greengard and his comments can often be found on Greengard's blog. Kasparov collaborated with Max Levchin and Peter Thiel on \"The Blueprint\", a book calling for a revival of world innovation, planned for release in March 2013 but cancelled after the authors disagreed on its contents. In an editorial comment on Google's AlphaZero chess-playing system, Kasparov argued that chess has become the model for reasoning in the same way that the fruit fly \"Drosophila melanogaster\" became a model organism for geneticists: \"I was pleased to see that AlphaZero had a dynamic, open style like my own\", he wrote in late 2018.\nKasparov served as a consultant for the 2020 Netflix miniseries \"The Queen's Gambit\" and gave an interview to \"Slate\" on his contributions. That same year, Kasparov collaborated with Matt Calkins, founder and CEO of Appian, on \"Hyperautomation\", a book about low-code development and the future of business automation. Kasparov wrote the foreword where he discusses his experiences with human\u2013machine relationships. \"The New York Times\" published an essay by Kasparov titled \"Garry Kasparov: What We Believe About Reality\" in 2021. The essay is part of a series called \"The Big Ideas: What Do We Believe\". This work was later published in a compendium titled \"Question Everything: A Stone Reader.\"\nPersonal life.\nKasparov has been married three times: to Masha, with whom he had a daughter, Polina, before divorcing; to Yulia, with whom he had a son, Vadim, before their 2005 divorce; and to Daria (Dasha), with whom he has two children, daughter Aida born in 2006 and son Nickolas born in 2015. Kasparov's wife manages his business activities worldwide through Kasparov International Management Inc. He has lived in New York City since 2013.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12812", "revid": "44690822", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12812", "title": "Geheime Staatspolizei", "text": ""}
{"id": "12814", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12814", "title": "Gianlorenzo Bernini", "text": ""}
{"id": "12815", "revid": "43331825", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12815", "title": "Flag of Greenland", "text": "The flag of Greenland ( or , ) was designed by Greenland native Thue Christiansen. It features two equal horizontal bands of white (top) and red (bottom) with a counter-changed red-and-white disk slightly to the hoist side of centre. The entire flag measures 18 by 12 parts; each stripe measures 6 parts; the disk is 8 parts in diameter, horizontally offset by 7 parts from the hoist to the centre of the circle, and vertically centered.\nIts local name in the Greenlandic language is ', which means \"our flag\". The term ' (meaning \"the red\") is also used for both the Greenlandic flag and the flag of Denmark ('). Today, Greenlanders display both the ' and the \"\"\u2014often side by side. The flag of Greenland is the only national flag of a Nordic country or territory without a Nordic cross, but is similar to the cultural S\u00e1mi flag, which also features a circular design and counterchanging of field and charge.\nHistory.\nGreenland first entertained the idea of a flag of its own in 1973 when five Greenlanders proposed a green, white and blue flag. The following year, a newspaper solicited eleven design proposals (all but one of which was a Nordic cross) and polled the people to determine the most popular.\nThe deciding committee came to no consensus, so more proposals were solicited. Finally, the present red-and-white design by Thue Christiansen narrowly won over a green-and-white Nordic cross by a vote of fourteen to eleven. Christiansen's red-and-white flag was officially adopted on 21 June 1985.\nTo honour the tenth anniversary of the flag, the Greenland Post Office issued commemorative postage stamps and a leaflet by the flag's creator. He described the white stripe as representing the glaciers and ice cap, which cover more than 80% of the island; the red stripe, the ocean; the red semicircle, the sun, with its bottom part sunk in the ocean; and the white semicircle, the icebergs and pack ice. The design is also reminiscent of the setting Sun half-submerged below the horizon and reflected on the sea. In 1985, it was reported that Greenland's flag had exactly the same motif as the flag of the Danish rowing club HEI Rosport, which was founded before Greenland's flag was chosen. It is not clear whether this is a case of plagiarism or just a coincidence, but the rowing club gave Greenland permission to use their flag.\nThe colours of the flag are the same as those of the flag of Denmark, symbolizing Greenland's place in the Danish realm.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12816", "revid": "9021902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12816", "title": "Gustav Radbruch", "text": "German legal scholar and politician (1878\u20131949)\nGustav Radbruch (; 21 November 1878 \u2013 23 November 1949) was a German legal scholar and politician. He served as Minister of Justice of Germany during the early Weimar period. Radbruch is also regarded as one of the most influential legal philosophers of the 20th century.\nLife.\nBorn in L\u00fcbeck, Radbruch studied law in Munich, Leipzig and Berlin. He passed his first bar exam (\"Staatsexamen\") in Berlin in 1901, and the following year he received his doctorate with a dissertation on \"The Theory of Adequate Causation\". This was followed in 1903 by his qualification to teach criminal law in Heidelberg. In 1904, he was appointed Professor of criminal and trial law and legal philosophy at Heidelberg. In 1914 he accepted a call to a professorship in K\u00f6nigsberg, and later that year assumed a professorship at Kiel.\nRadbruch was a member of the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD), and held a seat in the Reichstag from 1920 to 1924. In 1921\u201322 and throughout 1923, he was minister of justice in the cabinets of Joseph Wirth and Gustav Stresemann. During his time in office, a number of important laws were implemented, such as those giving women access to the justice system, and, after the assassination of Foreign Minister Walther Rathenau, the Law for the Protection of the Republic, which increased the punishments for politically motivated acts of violence and banned organizations that opposed the \"constitutional republican form of government\" along with their printed matter and meetings.\nIn 1926, Radbruch accepted a renewed call to lecture at Heidelberg where he delivered his inaugural lecture entitled \"\"Der Mensch im Recht\" (Law's Image of the Human)\" as the newly appointed Professor of Criminal Law on 13 November 1926. After the Nazi seizure of power in January 1933, Radbruch, as a former Social Democratic politician, was dismissed from his university post under the terms of the so-called \"Law for the Restoration of the Professional Civil Service\" (\"Gesetz zur Wiederherstellung des Berufsbeamtentums\"), as universities, similar to public bodies, were subject to civil service laws and regulations. Despite the employment ban in Nazi Germany, during 1935/36 he was able to spend a year in England, at University College, Oxford. An important practical outcome of this was his book, \"Der Geist des englischen Rechts\" (The Spirit of English Law), although this could be published only in 1945. During the Nazi period, he devoted himself primarily to cultural-historical work.\nImmediately after the end of the Second World War in 1945, he resumed his teaching activities, but died in Heidelberg in 1949 without being able to complete his planned updated edition of his textbook on legal philosophy.\nIn September 1945, Radbruch published a short paper \"F\u00fcnf Minuten Rechtsphilosophie\" (Five Minutes of Legal Philosophy), which was influential in shaping the jurisprudence of values (\"Wertungsjurisprudenz\"), prevalent in the aftermath of World War II as a reaction against legal positivism.\nWork.\nRadbruch's legal philosophy derived from neo-Kantianism, which assumes that a categorical cleavage exists between \"is\" (\"sein\") and \"ought\" (\"sollen\"). According to this view, \"should\" can never be derived from \"Being.\" Indicative of the Heidelberg school of neo-Kantianism to which Radbruch subscribed was that it interpolated the value-related cultural studies between the explanatory sciences (being) and philosophical teachings of values (should).\nIn relation to the law, this triadism shows itself in the subfields of legal sociology, legal philosophy and legal dogma. Legal dogma assumes a place in between. It posits itself in opposition to positive law, as the latter depicts itself in social reality and methodologically in the objective \"should-have\" sense of law, which reveals itself through value-related interpretation.\nThe core of Radbruch's legal philosophy consists of his tenets the concept of law and the idea of law. The idea of law is defined through a triad of justice, utility and certainty. Radbruch thereby had the idea of utility or usefulness spring forth from an analysis of the idea of justice. Upon this notion was based the Radbruch formula, which is still vigorously debated today. The concept of law, for Radbruch, is \"nothing other than the given fact, which has the sense to serve the idea of law\".\nHotly disputed is the question whether Radbruch was a legal positivist before 1933 and executed an about-face in his thinking due to the advent of Nazism, or whether he continued to develop, under the impression of Nazi crimes, the relativistic values-teaching he had already been advocating before 1933.\nThe problem of the controversy between the spirit and the letter of the law, in Germany, has been brought back to public attention due to the trials of former East German soldiers who guarded the Berlin Wall\u2014the so-called necessity of following orders.\nIn sum, Radbruch's formula argues that where statutory law is incompatible with the requirements of justice \"to an intolerable degree\", or where statutory law was obviously designed in a way that deliberately negates \"the equality that is the core of all justice\", statutory law must be disregarded by a judge in favour of the justice principle. Since its first publication in 1946 the principle has been accepted by Germany's Federal Constitutional Court in a variety of cases. Many people partially blame the older German legal tradition of legal positivism for the ease with which Hitler obtained power in an outwardly \"legal\" manner, rather than by means of a coup. Arguably, the shift to a concept of natural law ought to act as a safeguard against dictatorship, an untrammeled State power and the abrogation of civil rights.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12817", "revid": "7457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12817", "title": "Great programmer", "text": ""}
{"id": "12821", "revid": "51019446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12821", "title": "Gate", "text": "Point of entry to a space enclosed by walls\nA gate or gateway is a point of entry to or from a space enclosed by walls. The word is derived from Proto-Germanic \"*gatan\", meaning an opening or passageway. Gates may be designed for decorative or functional purposes, and they vary widely in style depending on architectural trends and material choices.\nSynonyms include yett (which comes from the same root word) and portal. The concept originally referred to the gap or hole in the wall or fence, rather than a barrier which closed it. Gates may prevent or control the entry or exit of individuals, or they may be merely decorative. The moving part or parts of a gateway may be considered \"doors\", as they are fixed at one side whilst opening and closing like one.\nA gate may have a latch that can be raised and lowered to both open a gate or prevent it from swinging. Gate operation can be either automated or manual. Locks are also used on gates to increase security. \nLarger gates can be used for a whole building, such as a castle or fortified town. Doors can also be considered gates when they are used to block entry as prevalent within a gatehouse.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12822", "revid": "1316687865", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12822", "title": "Greek fire", "text": "Incendiary weapon used by the Byzantines\nGreek fire was an incendiary weapon system used by the Byzantine Empire from the seventh to the fourteenth centuries. The recipe for Greek fire was a closely-guarded state secret; historians have variously speculated that it was based on saltpeter, sulfur, or quicklime, but most modern scholars agree that it was based on petroleum mixed with resins, comparable in composition to modern napalm. Byzantine sailors would toss grenades loaded with Greek fire onto enemy ships or spray it from tubes. Its ability to burn on water made it an effective and destructive naval incendiary weapon, and rival powers tried unsuccessfully to copy the material.\nName.\nUsage of the term \"Greek fire\" has been general in English and most other languages since the Crusades. Original Byzantine sources called the substance a variety of names, such as \"sea fire\" (Medieval Greek: ), \"Roman fire\" ( ), \"war fire\" ( ), \"liquid fire\" ( ), \"sticky fire\" ( ), or \"manufactured fire\" ( ).\nHistory.\nIncendiary and flaming weapons were used in warfare for centuries before Greek fire was invented. They included sulfur-, petroleum-, and bitumen-based mixtures. Incendiary arrows and pots or small pouches containing combustible substances surrounded by caltrops or spikes, or launched by catapults, were used in the Greco-Roman world. Thucydides mentions that in the siege of Delium in 424\u00a0BC a long tube on wheels was used which blew flames forward using a large bellows. The Graeco-Roman treatise , compiled in the late 2nd or early 3rd century AD and traditionally ascribed to Julius Africanus, records a mixture that ignited from adequate heat and intense sunlight, used in grenades or night attacks:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Automatic fire also by the following formula. This is the recipe: take equal amounts of sulphur, rock salt, ashes, thunder stone, and pyrite and pound fine in a black mortar at midday sun. Also in equal amounts of each ingredient mix together black mulberry resin and Zakynthian asphalt, the latter in a liquid form and free-flowing, resulting in a product that is sooty colored. Then add to the asphalt the tiniest amount of quicklime. But because the sun is at its zenith, one must pound it carefully and protect the face, for it will ignite suddenly. When it catches fire, one should seal it in some sort of copper receptacle; in this way you will have it available in a box, without exposing it to the sun. If you should wish to ignite enemy armaments, you will smear it on in the evening, either on the armaments or some other object, but in secret; when the sun comes up, everything will be burnt up.\nIn naval warfare, the Byzantine emperor Anastasius I (r.\u2009491\u00a0\u2013\u00a0518) is recorded by chronicler John Malalas to have been advised by a philosopher from Athens called Proclus to use sulfur to burn the ships of the rebel general Vitalian.\nGreek fire proper was developed in c.\u2009672 and is ascribed by the chronicler Theophanes the Confessor to Kallinikos (Latinized Callinicus), a Jewish architect from Heliopolis, in Syria, by then overrun by the Muslim conquests:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;At that time Kallinikos, an artificer from Heliopolis, fled to the Romans. He had devised a sea fire which ignited the Arab ships and burned them with all hands. Thus it was that the Romans returned with victory and discovered the sea fire.\nThe accuracy and exact chronology of this account is open to question: elsewhere, Theophanes reports the use of fire-carrying ships equipped with nozzles () by the Byzantines a couple of years before the supposed arrival of Kallinikos at Constantinople. If this is not due to chronological confusion of the events of the siege, it may suggest that Kallinikos introduced an improved version of an established weapon. The historian James Partington thinks it likely that Greek fire was not the creation of any single person but \"invented by chemists in Constantinople who had inherited the discoveries of the Alexandrian chemical school\". The 11th-century chronicler George Kedrenos records that Kallinikos came from Heliopolis in Egypt, but most scholars reject this as an error. Kedrenos also records the story, considered implausible by modern scholars, that Kallinikos' descendants, a family called , \"brilliant\", kept the secret of the fire's manufacture and continued doing so to Kedrenos' time.\nKallinikos' development of Greek fire came at a critical moment in the Byzantine Empire's history: weakened by its long wars with Sassanid Persia, the Byzantines had been unable to effectively resist the onslaught of the Muslim conquests. Within a generation, Syria, Palestine, and Egypt had fallen to the Arabs, who in c.\u2009672 set out to conquer the imperial capital of Constantinople. Greek fire was used to great effect against the Muslim fleets, helping to repel the Muslims at the first and second Arab sieges of the city. Records of its use in later naval battles against the Saracens are more sporadic, but it secured victories during the Byzantine expansion in the late 9th and early 10th centuries. Use of the substance was prominent in Byzantine civil wars, chiefly the revolt of the thematic fleets in 727 and the large-scale rebellion led by Thomas the Slav in 821\u2013823. In both cases, the rebel fleets were defeated by the Constantinople-based central Imperial fleet through the use of Greek fire. The Byzantines also used the weapon to devastating effect against the various Rus' raids on the Bosporus, especially those of 941 and 1043, as well as during the Bulgarian war of 970\u2013971, when the fire-carrying Byzantine ships blockaded the Danube.\nThe importance placed on Greek fire during the Empire's struggle against the Arabs led to its discovery being ascribed to divine intervention. The Emperor Constantine Porphyrogennetos (r.\u2009945\u00a0\u2013\u00a0959), in his book , admonishes his son and heir, Romanos II (r.\u2009959\u00a0\u2013\u00a0963), never to reveal the secrets of its composition, as it was \"shown and revealed by an angel to the great and holy first Christian emperor Constantine\" and that the angel bound him \"not to prepare this fire but for Christians, and only in the imperial city\". As a warning, he adds that one official, who was bribed into handing some of it over to the Empire's enemies, was struck down by a \"flame from heaven\" as he was about to enter a church. As the latter incident demonstrates, the Byzantines could not avoid capture of their secret weapon: the Arabs captured at least one fireship intact in 827, and the Bulgars captured several s and much of the substance itself in 812/814. This was apparently not enough to allow their enemies to copy it (see below). The Arabs used various incendiary substances similar to the Byzantine weapon, but were never able to copy the Byzantine method of deployment by , and used catapults and grenades instead.\nGreek fire continued to be mentioned during the 12th century, and Anna Komnene gives a vivid description of its use in a naval battle against the Pisans in 1099. The use of hastily improvised fireships is mentioned during the 1203 siege of Constantinople by the Fourth Crusade, but no report confirms the use of Greek fire. This might be because of the general disarmament of the Empire in the 20 years leading up to the sacking, or because the Byzantines had lost access to the areas where the primary ingredients were to be found, or even perhaps because the secret had been lost over time.\nRecords of a 13th-century use of \"Greek fire\" by the Saracens against the Crusaders can be read through the Memoirs of the Lord of Joinville during the Seventh Crusade. One description of the memoir says \"the tail of fire that trailed behind it was as big as a great spear; and it made such a noise as it came, that it sounded like the thunder of heaven. It looked like a dragon flying through the air. Such a bright light did it cast, that one could see all over the camp as though it were day, by reason of the great mass of fire, and the brilliance of the light that it shed.\"\nIn the 19th century, it is reported that an Armenian called Kavafian approached the government of the Ottoman Empire with a new type of Greek fire he claimed to have developed. Kavafian refused to reveal its composition when asked by the government, insisting that he be placed in command of its use during naval engagements. Not long after this, he was poisoned by imperial authorities, without their ever having found out his secret.\nManufacture.\nGeneral characteristics.\nAs Constantine Porphyrogennetos' warnings show, the ingredients and the processes of manufacture and deployment of Greek fire were carefully guarded military secrets. So strict was the secrecy that the composition of Greek fire was lost forever and remains a source of speculation. The mystery of the formula has long dominated the research into Greek fire. Despite this almost exclusive focus, Greek fire is best understood as a complete weapon system of many components, all of which were needed to operate together to render it effective. This comprised not only the formula of its composition, but also the specialized dromon ships that carried it into battle, the device used to prepare the substance by heating and pressurizing it, the \n projecting it, and the special training of the who used it. Knowledge of the whole system was highly compartmentalised, with operators and technicians aware of the secrets of only one component, ensuring that no enemy could gain knowledge of it in its entirety. This accounts for the fact that when the Bulgarians took Mesembria and Debeltos in 814, they captured 36 s and even quantities of the substance itself, but were unable to make any use of them.\nThe information available on Greek fire is indirect, based on references in the Byzantine military manuals and secondary historical sources such as Anna Komnene and Western European chroniclers, which are often inaccurate. In her \"Alexiad\", Anna Komnene provides a description of an incendiary weapon, which was used by the Byzantine garrison of Dyrrhachium in 1108 against the Normans. It is often regarded as an at least partial \"recipe\" for Greek fire:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This fire is made by the following arts: From the pine and certain such evergreen trees, inflammable resin is collected. This is rubbed with sulfur and put into tubes of reed, and is blown by men using it with violent and continuous breath. Then in this manner it meets the fire on the tip and catches light and falls like a fiery whirlwind on the faces of the enemies.\nAt the same time, the reports by Western chroniclers of the famed are largely unreliable, since they apply the name to all incendiary substances.\nIn attempting to reconstruct the Greek fire system, the evidence from the contemporary literary references provides the following characteristics:\nTheories on composition.\nThe first and, for a long time, most popular theory regarding the composition of Greek fire held that its chief ingredient was saltpeter, making it an early form of gunpowder. This argument was based on the \"thunder and smoke\" description, as well as on the distance the flame could be projected from the , which suggested an explosive discharge. From the times of Isaac Vossius, several scholars adhered to this position, most notably the so-called \"French school\" during the 19th century, which included chemist Marcellin Berthelot.\nThis view has subsequently been rejected, since saltpeter does not appear to have been used in warfare in Europe or the Middle East before the 13th century, and is absent from the accounts of the Muslim writers \u2013 the foremost chemists of the early medieval world \u2013 before the same period. In addition, the behavior of the suggested mixture would have been very different from the -projected substance described by Byzantine sources.\nA second view, based on the fact that Greek fire was inextinguishable by water (some sources suggest that water intensified the flames), suggested that its destructive power was the result of the explosive reaction between water and quicklime. Although quicklime was known and used by the Byzantines and the Arabs in warfare, the theory is refuted by literary and empirical evidence. A quicklime-based substance would have to come in contact with water to ignite, while Emperor Leo's indicates that Greek fire was often poured directly onto the decks of enemy ships, although admittedly, decks were kept wet due to lack of sealants. Likewise, Leo describes the use of grenades, which further reinforces the view that contact with water was not necessary for the substance's ignition. Zenghelis (1932) pointed out that, based on experiments, the result of the water\u2013quicklime reaction would be negligible in the open sea.\nAnother similar proposition suggested that Kallinikos had discovered calcium phosphide, which can be made by boiling bones in urine in a sealed vessel. On contact with water it releases phosphine, which ignites spontaneously. Extensive experiments with calcium phosphide also failed to reproduce the described intensity of Greek fire.\nConsequently, although the presence of either quicklime or saltpeter in the mixture cannot be entirely excluded, they were not the primary ingredient. Most modern scholars agree that Greek fire was based on either crude or refined petroleum, comparable to modern napalm. The Byzantines had easy access to crude oil from the naturally occurring wells around the Black Sea (e.g., the wells around Tmutorakan noted by Constantine Porphyrogennetos) or in various locations throughout the Middle East. An alternate name for Greek fire was \"Median fire\" (), and the 6th-century historian Procopius records that crude oil, called \"naphtha\" (in Greek: , from Old Persian ) by the Persians, was known to the Greeks as \"Median oil\" (). This seems to corroborate the availability of naphtha as a basic ingredient of Greek fire.\nNaphtha was also used by the Abbasids in the 9th century, with special troops, the , who wore thick protective suits and used small copper vessels containing burning oil, which they threw onto the enemy troops. There is also a surviving 9th-century Latin text, preserved at Wolfenb\u00fcttel in Germany, which mentions the ingredients of what appears to be Greek fire and the operation of the s used to project it. Although the text contains some inaccuracies, it identifies the main component as naphtha. Resins were probably added as a thickener (the refer to the substance as , \"sticky fire\"), and to increase the duration and intensity of the flame. A modern theoretical concoction included the use of pine tar and animal fat.\nA 12th-century treatise prepared by Mardi bin Ali al-Tarsusi for Saladin records an Arab version of Greek fire, called , which also had a petroleum base, with sulfur and various resins added. Any direct relation with the Byzantine formula is unlikely. An Italian recipe from the 16th century has been recorded for recreational use; it includes charcoal from a willow tree, saltpeter (), alcohol, sulfur, incense, tar (), wool, and camphor; the concoction was guaranteed to \"burn under water\" and to be \"beautiful\".\nMethods of deployment.\nThe chief method of deployment of Greek fire, which sets it apart from similar substances, was its projection through a tube (\"siph\u014dn\"), for use aboard ships or in sieges. Portable projectors (\"cheirosiph\u014dnes\", \u03c7\u03b5\u03b9\u03c1\u03bf\u03c3\u03af\u03c6\u03c9\u03bd\u03b5\u03c2) were also invented, reputedly by Emperor Leo VI. The Byzantine military manuals also mention that jars (\"chytrai\" or \"tzykalia\") filled with Greek fire and caltrops wrapped with tow and soaked in the substance were thrown by catapults, while pivoting cranes (\"gerania\") were employed to pour it upon enemy ships. The \"cheirosiph\u014dnes\" especially were prescribed for use at land and in sieges, both against siege machines and against defenders on the walls, by several 10th-century military authors, and their use is depicted in the \"Poliorcetica\" of Hero of Byzantium. The Byzantine dromons usually had a \"siph\u014dn\" installed on their prow under the forecastle, but additional devices could also be placed elsewhere on the ship. Thus in 941, when the Byzantines were facing the vastly more numerous Rus' fleet, \"siph\u014dn\"s were placed also amidships and even astern.\nProjectors.\nThe use of tubular projectors (\u03c3\u03af\u03c6\u03c9\u03bd, \"siph\u014dn\") is amply attested in the contemporary sources. Anna Komnene gives this account of beast-shaped Greek fire projectors being mounted to the bow of warships:\nAs he [the Emperor Alexios I] knew that the Pisans were skilled in sea warfare and dreaded a battle with them, on the prow of each ship he had a head fixed of a lion or other land-animal, made in brass or iron with the mouth open and then gilded over, so that their mere aspect was terrifying. And the fire which was to be directed against the enemy through tubes he made to pass through the mouths of the beasts, so that it seemed as if the lions and the other similar monsters were vomiting the fire.\nSome sources provide more information on the composition and function of the whole mechanism. The Wolfenb\u00fcttel manuscript provides the following description:\n...having built a furnace right at the front of the ship, they set on it a copper vessel full of these things, having put fire underneath. And one of them, having made a bronze tube similar to that which the rustics call a \"squitiatoria\", \"squirt,\" with which boys play, they spray [it] at the enemy.\nAnother, possibly first-hand, account of the use of Greek fire comes from the 11th-century \"Yngvars saga v\u00ed\u00f0f\u00f6rla\", in which the Viking Ingvar the Far-Travelled faces ships equipped with Greek fire weapons:\n[They] began blowing with smiths\u2019 bellows at a furnace in which there was fire and there came from it a great din. There stood there also a brass [or bronze] tube and from it flew much fire against one ship, and it burned up in a short time so that all of it became white ashes...\nThe account, albeit embellished, corresponds with many of the characteristics of Greek fire known from other sources, such as a loud roar that accompanied its discharge. These two texts are also the only two sources that explicitly mention that the substance was heated over a furnace before being discharged; although the validity of this information is open to question, modern reconstructions have relied upon them.\nBased on these descriptions and the Byzantine sources, John Haldon and Maurice Byrne designed a hypothetical apparatus as consisting of three main components: a bronze pump, which was used to pressurize the oil; a brazier, used to heat the oil (\u03c0\u03c1\u03cc\u03c0\u03c5\u03c1\u03bf\u03bd, \"propyron\", \"pre-heater\"); and the nozzle, which was covered in bronze and mounted on a swivel (\u03c3\u03c4\u03c1\u03b5\u03c0\u03c4\u03cc\u03bd, \"strepton\"). The brazier, burning a match of linen or flax that produced intense heat and the characteristic thick smoke, was used to heat oil and the other ingredients in an airtight tank above it, a process that also helped to dissolve the resins into a fluid mixture. The substance was pressurized by the heat and the use of a force pump. After it had reached the proper pressure, a valve connecting the tank with the swivel was opened and the mixture was discharged from its end, being ignited at its mouth by a flame. The intense heat of the flame made necessary the presence of heat shields made of iron (\u03b2\u03bf\u03c5\u03ba\u03cc\u03bb\u03b9\u03b1, \"boukolia\"), which are attested in the fleet inventories.\nThe process of operating Haldon and Byrne's design was fraught with danger, as the mounting pressure could easily make the heated oil tank explode, a flaw which was not recorded as a problem with the historical fire weapon. In the experiments conducted by Haldon in 2002 for the episode \"Fireship\" of the television series \"Machines Times Forgot\", even modern welding techniques failed to secure adequate insulation of the bronze tank under pressure. This led to the relocation of the pressure pump between the tank and the nozzle. The full-scale device built on this basis established the effectiveness of the mechanism's design, even with the simple materials and techniques available to the Byzantines. The experiment used crude oil mixed with wood resins, and achieved a flame temperature of over and an effective range of up to .\nHand-held projectors.\nThe portable \"cheirosiph\u014dn\" (\"hand-\"siph\u014dn\"\"), the earliest analogue to a modern flamethrower, is extensively attested in the military documents of the 10th century, and recommended for use in both sea and land. They first appear in the \"Tactica\" of emperor Leo VI the Wise, who claims to have invented them. Subsequent authors continued to refer to the \"cheirosiph\u014dnes\", especially for use against siege towers; Nikephoros II Phokas also advises their use in field armies, with the aim of disrupting the enemy formation. Although both Leo VI and Nikephoros Phokas claim that the substance used in the \"cheirosiph\u014dnes\" was the same as in the static devices used on ships, Haldon and Byrne consider that the former were manifestly different from their larger cousins, and theorize that the device was fundamentally different, \"a simple syringe [that] squirted both liquid fire (presumably unignited) and noxious juices to repel enemy troops.\" The illustrations of Hero's \"Poliorcetica\" show the \"cheirosiph\u014dn\" also throwing the ignited substance.\nGrenades.\nIn its earliest form, Greek fire was hurled onto enemy forces by firing a burning cloth-wrapped ball, perhaps containing a flask, using a form of light catapult, most probably a seaborne variant of the Roman light catapult or onager. These were capable of hurling loads of around a distance of .\nEffectiveness and countermeasures.\nAlthough the destructiveness of Greek fire is indisputable, it did not make the Byzantine navy invincible. It was not, in the words of naval historian John Pryor, a \"ship-killer\" comparable to the naval ram, which, by then, had fallen out of use. While Greek fire remained a potent weapon, its limitations were significant when compared to more traditional forms of artillery: in its \"siph\u014dn\"-deployed version, it had a limited range, and it could be used safely only in a calm sea and with favorable wind conditions.\nThe Muslim navies eventually adapted themselves to it by staying out of its effective range and devising methods of protection such as felt or hides soaked in vinegar.\nNevertheless, it was still a decisive weapon in many battles. John Julius Norwich wrote: \"It is impossible to exaggerate the importance of Greek fire in Byzantine history.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12823", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12823", "title": "Garbage in, garbage out", "text": "Phrase used in computer science\nIn computer science, garbage in, garbage out (GIGO) is the concept that flawed, biased or poor quality (\"garbage\") information or input produces a result or output of similar (\"garbage\") quality. The saying points to the need to improve data quality in, for example, programming. Rubbish in, rubbish out (RIRO) is an alternate wording.\nThe principle applies to all logical argumentation: soundness implies validity, but validity does not imply soundness. In essence, the logic or algorithm may be correct, but using flawed inputs (premises) is still an informal fallacy.\nHistory.\nThe expression was popular in the early days of computing. The first known use is in a 1957 syndicated newspaper article about US Army mathematicians and their work with early computers, in which an Army Specialist named William D. Mellin explained that computers cannot think for themselves, and that \"sloppily programmed\" inputs inevitably lead to incorrect outputs. The underlying principle was noted by the inventor of the first programmable computing device design:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;On two occasions I have been asked, \"Pray, Mr. Babbage, if you put into the machine wrong figures, will the right answers come out?\"\u00a0... I am not able rightly to apprehend the kind of confusion of ideas that could provoke such a question.\u2014\u200a\nMore recently, the Marine Accident Investigation Branch comes to a similar conclusion:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A loading computer is an effective and useful tool for the safe running of a ship. However, its output can only be as accurate as the information entered into it.\u2014\u200a\nThe term may have been derived from last-in, first-out (LIFO) or first-in, first-out (FIFO).\nUses.\nThis phrase can be used as an explanation for the poor quality of a digitized audio or video file. Although digitizing can be the first step in cleaning up a signal, it does not, by itself, improve the quality. Defects in the original analog signal will be faithfully recorded, but might be identified and removed by a subsequent step by digital signal processing.\nGIGO is also used to describe failures in human decision-making due to faulty, incomplete, or imprecise data.\nIn audiology, GIGO describes the process that occurs at the dorsal cochlear nucleus (DCN) when auditory neuropathy spectrum disorder is present. This occurs when the neural firing from the cochlea has become unsynchronized, resulting in a static-filled sound being input into the DCN and then passed up the chain to the auditory cortex. The term was applied by Dan Schwartz at the 2012 Worldwide ANSD Conference, St. Petersburg, Florida, on 16 March 2012; and adopted as industry jargon to describe the electrical signal received by the DCN and passed up the auditory chain to the superior olivary complex on the way to the auditory cortex destination.\nGIGO was the name of a Usenet gateway program to FidoNet, MAUSnet, e.a.\nThe phrase may also be used in the context of machine learning, where poor-quality training data will inevitably lead to a poor-quality model.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12824", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12824", "title": "Gdingen", "text": ""}
{"id": "12828", "revid": "37664675", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12828", "title": "GATT (disambiguation)", "text": "GATT or the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade is a legal agreement between many countries, whose overall purpose was to promote international trade.\nGatt or GATT may also refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "12829", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12829", "title": "General agreement on tariffs and trade", "text": ""}
{"id": "12830", "revid": "11677590", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12830", "title": "Gipsy (disambiguation)", "text": ""}
{"id": "12831", "revid": "47406457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12831", "title": "General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade", "text": "1947\u201395 multilateral trade agreement; predecessor to WTO\nThe General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) is a legal agreement between many countries, whose overall purpose was to promote international trade by reducing or eliminating trade barriers such as tariffs or quotas. According to its preamble, its purpose was the \"substantial reduction of tariffs and other trade barriers and the elimination of preferences, on a reciprocal and mutually advantageous basis\".\nThe GATT was first discussed during the United Nations Conference on Trade and Employment and was the outcome of the failure of negotiating governments to create the International Trade Organization (ITO). It was signed by 23 nations in Geneva on 30 October 1947, and was applied on a provisional basis 1 January 1948. It remained in effect until 1 January 1995, when the World Trade Organization (WTO) was established after agreement by 123 nations in Marrakesh on 15 April 1994, as part of the Uruguay Round Agreements. The WTO is the successor to the GATT, and the original GATT text (GATT 1947) is still in effect under the WTO framework, subject to the modifications of GATT 1994. Nations that were not party in 1995 to the GATT need to meet the minimum conditions spelled out in specific documents before they can accede; in September 2019, the list contained 36 nations.\nThe GATT, and its successor the WTO, have succeeded in reducing tariffs. The average tariff levels for the major GATT participants were about 22% in 1947, but were 5% after the Uruguay Round in 1999. Experts attribute part of these tariff changes to GATT and the WTO.\nHistory.\nThe General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade is a multi-national trade treaty. It has been updated in a series of global trade negotiations consisting of nine \"rounds\" between 1947 and 1995. The \"GATT's major intellectual architects\" were the GATT lawyer Ernst-Ulrich Petersmann, Jan Tumlir, an economics professor at the Geneva Graduate Institute, and the U.S. law professor John Jackson. The GATT's role in international trade was largely succeeded in 1995 by the World Trade Organization.\nDuring the 1940s, the United States sought to establish a set of post-war multilateral institutions, one of which would be devoted to the reconstruction of world trade. In 1945 and 1946, the U.S. took concrete steps to bring about such an organisation, proposing a conference to negotiate a charter for a trade organisation. The GATT was first conceived at the 1947 United Nations Conference on Trade and Employment (UNCTE), at which the International Trade Organization (ITO) was one of the ideas proposed. It was hoped that the ITO would be run alongside the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF). More than 50 nations negotiated ITO and organising its founding charter, but after the withdrawal of the United States these negotiations collapsed.\nInitial round.\nPreparatory sessions were held simultaneously at the UNCTE regarding the GATT. After several of these sessions, 23 nations signed the GATT on 30 October 1947 in Geneva, Switzerland. It came into force on 1 January 1948. From the outset, government procurement was excluded from the scope of the agreement.\nAnnecy Round: 1949.\nThe second round took place in 1949 in Annecy, France. 13 countries took part in the round. The main focus of the talks was more tariff reductions, around 5,000 in total.\nTorquay Round: 1951.\nThe third round occurred in Torquay, England, in 1951. Thirty-eight countries took part in the round. 8,700 tariff concessions were made totalling the remaining amount of tariffs to \u00be of the tariffs which were in effect in 1948. The contemporaneous rejection by the U.S. of the Havana Charter signified the establishment of the GATT as a governing world body.\nGeneva Round: 1955\u20131956.\nThe fourth round returned to Geneva in 1955 and lasted until May 1956. Twenty-six countries took part in the round. $2.5\u00a0billion in tariffs were eliminated or reduced.\nDillon Round: 1960\u20131962.\nThe fifth round occurred once more in Geneva and lasted from 1960 to 1962. The talks were named after U.S. Treasury Secretary and former Under Secretary of State Douglas Dillon, who first proposed the talks. Twenty-six countries took part in the round. Along with reducing over $4.9\u00a0billion in tariffs, it also yielded discussion relating to the creation of the European Economic Community (EEC).\nKennedy Round: 1964\u20131967.\nThe sixth round of GATT multilateral trade negotiations took place between 1964 and 1967. It was named after U.S. President John F. Kennedy in recognition of his support for the reformulation of the United States trade agenda, which resulted in the Trade Expansion Act of 1962. This Act gave the President the widest-ever negotiating authority.\nAs the Dillon Round went through the laborious process of item-by-item tariff negotiations, it became clear, long before the Round ended, that a more comprehensive approach was needed to deal with the emerging challenges resulting from the formation of the European Economic Community (EEC) and EFTA, as well as Europe's re-emergence as a significant international trader more generally.\nJapan's high economic growth rate portended the major role it would play later as an exporter, but the focal point of the Kennedy Round always was the United States\u2013EEC relationship. Indeed, there was an influential American view that saw what became the Kennedy Round as the start of a transatlantic partnership that might ultimately lead to a transatlantic economic community.\nTo an extent, this view was shared in Europe, but the process of European unification created its own stresses under which the Kennedy Round at times became a secondary focus for the EEC. An example of this was the French veto in January 1963, before the round had even started, on membership by the United Kingdom.\nAnother was the internal crisis of 1965, which ended in the Luxembourg Compromise. Preparations for the new round were immediately overshadowed by the Chicken War, an early sign of the impact variable levies under the Common Agricultural Policy would eventually have. Some participants in the Round had been concerned that the convening of UNCTAD, scheduled for 1964, would result in further complications, but its impact on the actual negotiations was minimal.\nIn May 1963 Ministers reached agreement on three negotiating objectives for the round:\nThe working hypothesis for the tariff negotiations was a linear tariff cut of 50% with the smallest number of exceptions. A drawn-out argument developed about the trade effects a uniform linear cut would have on the dispersed rates (low and high tariffs quite far apart) of the United States as compared to the much more concentrated rates of the EEC which also tended to be in the lower held of United States tariff rates.\nThe EEC accordingly argued for an evening-out or harmonisation of peaks and troughs through its cerement, double cart and thirty: ten proposals. Once negotiations had been joined, the lofty working hypothesis was soon undermined. The special-structure countries (Australia, Canada, New Zealand and South Africa), so called because their exports were dominated by raw materials and other primary commodities, negotiated their tariff reductions entirely through the item-by-item method.\nIn the end, the result was an average 35% reduction in tariffs, except for textiles, chemicals, steel and other sensitive products; plus a 15% to 18% reduction in tariffs for agricultural and food products. In addition, the negotiations on chemicals led to a provisional agreement on the abolition of the American Selling Price (ASP). This was a method of valuing some chemicals used by the noted States for the imposition of import duties which gave domestic manufacturers a much higher level of protection than the tariff schedule indicated.\nHowever, this part of the outcome was disallowed by Congress, and the American Selling Price was not abolished until Congress adopted the results of the Tokyo Round. The results on agriculture overall were poor. The most notable achievement was agreement on a Memorandum of Agreement on Basic Elements for the Negotiation of a World Grants Arrangement, which eventually was rolled into a new International Grains Arrangement.\nThe EEC claimed that for it the main result of the negotiations on agriculture was that they \"greatly helped to define its own common policy\". The developing countries, who played a minor role throughout the negotiations in this round, benefited nonetheless from substantial tariff cuts particularly in non-agricultural items of interest to them.\nTheir main achievement at the time, however, was seen to be the adoption of Part IV of the GATT, which absolved them from according reciprocity to developed countries in trade negotiations. In the view of many developing countries, this was a direct result of the call at UNCTAD I for a better trade deal for them.\nThere has been argument ever since whether this symbolic gesture was a victory for them, or whether it ensured their exclusion in the future from meaningful participation in the multilateral trading system. On the other hand, there was no doubt that the extension of the Long-Term Arrangement Regarding International Trade in Cotton Textiles, which later became the Multi-Fiber Arrangement, for three years until 1970 led to the longer-term impairment of export opportunities for developing countries.\nAnother outcome of the Kennedy Round was the adoption of an Anti-dumping Code, which gave more precise guidance on the implementation of Article VI of the GATT. In particular, it sought to ensure speedy and fair investigations, and it imposed limits on the retrospective application of anti-dumping measures.\n$40\u00a0billion in tariffs were eliminated or reduced via the Kennedy Round.\nTokyo Round: 1973\u20131979.\nReduced tariffs and established new regulations aimed at controlling the proliferation of non-tariff barriers and voluntary export restrictions. 102 countries took part in the round. Concessions were made on $19\u00a0billion worth of trade.\nFormation of Quadrilateral Group: 1981.\nThe Quadrilateral Group was formed in 1982 by the European Union, the United States, Japan and Canada, to influence the GATT.\nUruguay Round: 1986\u20131994.\nThe Uruguay Round began in 1986. It was the most ambitious round to date, as of 1986, hoping to expand the competence of the GATT to important new areas such as services, capital, intellectual property, textiles, and agriculture. 123 countries took part in the round. The Uruguay Round was also the first set of multilateral trade negotiations in which developing countries had played an active role.\nAgriculture was essentially exempted from previous agreements as it was given special status in the areas of import quotas and export subsidies, with only mild caveats. However, by the time of the Uruguay round, many countries considered the exception of agriculture to be sufficiently glaring that they refused to sign a new deal without some movement on agricultural products. These fourteen countries came to be known as the \"Cairns Group\", and included mostly small and medium-sized agricultural exporters such as Australia, Brazil, Canada, Indonesia, and New Zealand.\nThe Agreement on Agriculture of the Uruguay Round continues to be the most substantial trade liberalisation agreement in agricultural products in the history of trade negotiations. The goals of the agreement were to improve market access for agricultural products, reduce domestic support of agriculture in the form of price-distorting subsidies and quotas, eliminate over time export subsidies on agricultural products and to harmonise to the extent possible sanitary and phytosanitary measures between member countries.\nWorld Trade Organization.\nIn 1993, the GATT was updated ('GATT 1994') to include new obligations upon its signatories. One of the most significant changes was the creation of the World Trade Organization (WTO). The 76 existing GATT members and the European Communities became the founding members of the WTO on 1 January 1995. The other 51 GATT members rejoined the WTO in the following two years (the last being Congo in 1997). Since the founding of the WTO, 33 new non-GATT members have joined and 22 are currently negotiating membership. There are a total of 164 member countries in the WTO, with Liberia and Afghanistan being the newest members as of 2018.\nOf the original GATT members, Syria, Lebanon and the SFR Yugoslavia have not rejoined the WTO. Since FR Yugoslavia (renamed as Serbia and Montenegro and with membership negotiations later split in two), is not recognised as a direct SFRY successor state; therefore, its application is considered a new (non-GATT) one. The General Council of WTO, on 4 May 2010, agreed to establish a working party to examine the request of Syria for WTO membership. The contracting parties who founded the WTO ended official agreement of the \"GATT 1947\" terms on 31 December 1995. Montenegro became a member in 2012, while Serbia is in the decision stage of the negotiations and is expected to become a member of the WTO in the future.\nWhile GATT was a set of rules agreed upon by nations, the WTO is an intergovernmental organisation with its own headquarters and staff, and its scope includes both traded goods and trade within the service sector and intellectual property rights. Although it was designed to serve multilateral agreements, during several rounds of GATT negotiations (particularly the Tokyo Round) plurilateral agreements created selective trading and caused fragmentation among members. WTO arrangements are generally a multilateral agreement settlement mechanism of GATT.\nEffects on trade liberalisation.\nThe average tariff levels for the major GATT participants were about 22 per cent in 1947. As a result of the first negotiating rounds, tariffs were reduced in the GATT core of the United States, United Kingdom, Canada, and Australia, relative to other contracting parties and non-GATT participants. By the Kennedy round (1962\u201367), the average tariff levels of GATT participants were about 15%. After the Uruguay Round, tariffs were under 5%.\nIn addition to facilitating applied tariff reductions, the early GATT's contribution to trade liberalisation \"include binding the negotiated tariff reductions for an extended period (made more permanent in 1955), establishing the generality of non-discrimination through most favoured nation (MFN) treatment and national treatment status, ensuring increased transparency of trade policy measures, and providing a forum for future negotiations and for the peaceful resolution of bilateral disputes. All of these elements contributed to the rationalization of trade policy and the reduction of trade barriers and policy uncertainty.\"\nAccording to Dartmouth economic historian Douglas Irwin,\nThe prosperity of the world economy over the past half century owes a great deal to the growth of world trade which, in turn, is partly the result of farsighted officials who created the GATT. They established a set of procedures giving stability to the trade-policy environment and thereby facilitating the rapid growth of world trade. With the long run in view, the original GATT conferees helped put the world economy on a sound foundation and thereby improved the livelihood of hundreds of millions of people around the world.\nArticle 24.\nFollowing the United Kingdom's vote to withdraw from the European Union, supporters of leaving the EU suggested that Article 24, paragraph 5B of the treaty could be used to maintain a \"standstill\" in trading conditions between the UK and the EU in the event of the UK leaving the EU without a trade deal, hence preventing the introduction of tariffs. According to proponents of this approach, it could be used to implement an interim agreement pending negotiation of a final agreement lasting up to ten years.\nThis claim formed the basis of the so-called \"Malthouse compromise\" between Conservative party factions as to how to replace the withdrawal agreement. However, this plan was rejected by parliament. The claim that Article 24 might be used was also adopted by Boris Johnson during his 2019 campaign to lead the Conservative Party.\nThe claim that Article 24 might be used in this way has been criticised by Mark Carney, Liam Fox and others as being unrealistic given the requirement in paragraph 5c of the treaty that there be an agreement between the parties for paragraph 5b to be of use as, in the event of a \"no-deal\" scenario, there would be no agreement. Moreover, critics of the GATT 24 approach point out that services would not be covered by such an arrangement.\nSpecial and differential treatment.\nSpecial and differential treatment (S&amp;D) is a set of GATT provisions (GATT 1947, Article XVIII) that exempts developing countries from the same strict trade rules and disciplines of more industrialized countries. That is, developed countries will treat developing countries differently. In the Uruguay Round Agreement on Agriculture, for example, developing countries are given longer time periods to phase in export subsidy and tariff reductions than the more industrialized countries. The least developed countries are exempt from any reduction commitments.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12832", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12832", "title": "G protein-coupled receptor", "text": "Class of cell surface receptors coupled to G-protein-associated intracellular signaling\nG protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), also known as seven-(pass)-transmembrane domain receptors, 7TM receptors, heptahelical receptors, serpentine receptors, and G protein-linked receptors (GPLR), form a large group of evolutionarily related proteins that are cell surface receptors that detect molecules outside the cell and activate cellular responses. They are coupled with G proteins. They pass through the cell membrane seven times in the form of six loops (three\u00a0extracellular loops interacting with ligand molecules, three intracellular loops interacting with G proteins, an N-terminal extracellular region and a C-terminal intracellular region) of amino acid residues, which is why they are sometimes referred to as seven-transmembrane receptors. Ligands can bind either to the extracellular N-terminus and loops (e.g. glutamate receptors) or to the binding site within transmembrane helices (rhodopsin-like family). They are all activated by agonists, although a spontaneous auto-activation of an empty receptor has also been observed.\nG protein-coupled receptors are found only in eukaryotes, including yeast, and choanoflagellates. The ligands that bind and activate these receptors include light-sensitive compounds, odors, pheromones, hormones, and neurotransmitters. They vary in size from small molecules to peptides, to large proteins. G protein-coupled receptors are involved in many diseases.\nThere are two principal signal transduction pathways involving the G protein-coupled receptors:\nWhen a ligand binds to the GPCR it causes a conformational change in the GPCR, which allows it to act as a guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF). The GPCR can then activate an associated G protein by exchanging the GDP bound to the G protein for a GTP. The G protein's \u03b1 subunit, together with the bound GTP, can then dissociate from the \u03b2 and \u03b3 subunits to further affect intracellular signaling proteins or target functional proteins directly depending on the \u03b1 subunit type (G\u03b1s, G\u03b1i/o, G\u03b1q/11, G\u03b112/13).\nGPCRs are an important drug target, and approximately 34% of all Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved drugs target 108 members of this family. The global sales volume for these drugs is estimated to be 180 billion US dollars as of 2018[ [update]]. It is estimated that GPCRs are targets for about 50% of drugs currently on the market, mainly due to their involvement in signaling pathways related to many diseases i.e. mental, metabolic including endocrinological disorders, immunological including viral infections, cardiovascular, inflammatory, senses disorders, and cancer. The long ago discovered association between GPCRs and many endogenous and exogenous substances, resulting in e.g. analgesia, is another dynamically developing field of the pharmaceutical research.\nHistory and significance.\nWith the determination of the first structure of the complex between a G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR) and a G-protein trimer (G\u03b1\u03b2\u03b3) in 2011 a new chapter of GPCR research was opened for structural investigations of global switches with more than one protein being investigated. The previous breakthroughs involved determination of the crystal structure of the first GPCR, rhodopsin, in 2000 and the crystal structure of the first GPCR with a diffusible ligand (\u03b22AR) in 2007. The way in which the seven transmembrane helices of a GPCR are arranged into a bundle was suspected based on the low-resolution model of frog rhodopsin from cryogenic electron microscopy studies of the two-dimensional crystals. The crystal structure of rhodopsin, that came up three years later, was not a surprise apart from the presence of an additional cytoplasmic helix H8 and a precise location of a loop covering retinal binding site. However, it provided a scaffold which was hoped to be a universal template for homology modeling and drug design for other GPCRs \u2013 a notion that proved to be too optimistic.\nResults 7 years later were surprising because the crystallization of \u03b22-adrenergic receptor (\u03b22AR) with a diffusible ligand revealed quite a different shape of the receptor extracellular side than that of rhodopsin. This area is important because it is responsible for the ligand binding and is targeted by many drugs. Moreover, the ligand binding site was much more spacious than in the rhodopsin structure and was open to the exterior. In the other receptors crystallized shortly afterwards the binding side was even more easily accessible to the ligand. New structures complemented with biochemical investigations uncovered mechanisms of action of molecular switches which modulate the structure of the receptor leading to activation states for agonists or to complete or partial inactivation states for inverse agonists.\nThe 2012 Nobel Prize in Chemistry was awarded to Brian Kobilka and Robert Lefkowitz for their work that was \"crucial for understanding how G protein-coupled receptors function\". There have been at least seven other Nobel Prizes awarded for some aspect of G protein\u2013mediated signaling. As of 2012, two of the top ten global best-selling drugs (Advair Diskus and Abilify) act by targeting G protein-coupled receptors.\nClassification.\nThe exact size of the GPCR superfamily is unknown, but at least 831 different human genes (or about 4% of the entire protein-coding genome) have been predicted to code for them from genome sequence analysis. Although numerous classification schemes have been proposed, the superfamily was classically divided into three main classes (A, B, and C) with no detectable shared sequence homology between classes.\nThe largest class by far is class A, which accounts for nearly 85% of the GPCR genes. Of class\u00a0A GPCRs, over half of these are predicted to encode olfactory receptors, while the remaining receptors are liganded by known endogenous compounds or are classified as orphan receptors. Despite the lack of sequence homology between classes, all GPCRs have a common structure and mechanism of signal transduction. The very large rhodopsin\u00a0A group has been further subdivided into 19 subgroups (A1-A19).\nAccording to the classical A-F system, GPCRs can be grouped into six classes based on sequence homology and functional similarity:\nMore recently, an alternative classification system called GRAFS (Glutamate, Rhodopsin, \"Adhesion\", Frizzled/Taste2, Secretin) has been proposed for vertebrate GPCRs. They correspond to classical classes C, A, B2, F, and B.\nAn early study based on available DNA sequence suggested that the human genome encodes roughly 750 G protein-coupled receptors, about 350 of which detect hormones, growth factors, and other endogenous ligands. Approximately 150 of the GPCRs found in the human genome have unknown functions.\nSome web-servers and bioinformatics prediction methods have been used for predicting the classification of GPCRs according to their amino acid sequence alone, by means of the pseudo amino acid composition approach.\nPhysiological roles.\nGPCRs are involved in a wide variety of physiological processes. Some examples of their physiological roles include:\nReceptor structure.\nGPCRs are integral membrane proteins that possess seven membrane-spanning domains or transmembrane helices. The extracellular parts of the receptor can be glycosylated. These extracellular loops also contain two highly conserved cysteine residues that form disulfide bonds to stabilize the receptor structure. Some seven-transmembrane helix proteins (channelrhodopsin) that resemble GPCRs may contain ion channels, within their protein.\nIn 2000, the first crystal structure of a mammalian GPCR, that of bovine rhodopsin (https://\u200b), was solved. In 2007, the first structure of a human GPCR was solved This human \u03b22-adrenergic receptor GPCR structure proved highly similar to the bovine rhodopsin. The structures of activated or agonist-bound GPCRs have also been determined. These structures indicate how ligand binding at the extracellular side of a receptor leads to conformational changes in the cytoplasmic side of the receptor. The biggest change is an outward movement of the cytoplasmic part of the 5th and 6th transmembrane helix (TM5 and TM6). The structure of activated beta-2 adrenergic receptor in complex with Gs confirmed that the G\u03b1 binds to a cavity created by this movement.\nGPCRs exhibit a similar structure to some other proteins with seven transmembrane domains, such as microbial rhodopsins and adiponectin receptors 1 and 2 (ADIPOR1 and ADIPOR2). However, these 7TMH (7-transmembrane helices) receptors and channels do not associate with G proteins. In addition, ADIPOR1 and ADIPOR2 are oriented oppositely to GPCRs in the membrane (i.e. GPCRs usually have an extracellular N-terminus, cytoplasmic C-terminus, whereas ADIPORs are inverted).\nStructure\u2013function relationships.\nIn terms of structure, GPCRs are characterized by an extracellular N-terminus, followed by seven transmembrane (7-TM) \u03b1-helices (TM-1 to TM-7) connected by three intracellular (IL-1 to IL-3) and three extracellular loops (EL-1 to EL-3), and finally an intracellular C-terminus. The GPCR arranges itself into a tertiary structure resembling a barrel, with the seven transmembrane helices forming a cavity within the plasma membrane that serves a ligand-binding domain that is often covered by EL-2. Ligands may also bind elsewhere, however, as is the case for bulkier ligands (e.g., proteins or large peptides), which instead interact with the extracellular loops, or, as illustrated by the class C metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs), the N-terminal tail. The class C GPCRs are distinguished by their large N-terminal tail, which also contains a ligand-binding domain. Upon glutamate-binding to an mGluR, the N-terminal tail undergoes a conformational change that leads to its interaction with the residues of the extracellular loops and TM domains. The eventual effect of all three types of agonist-induced activation is a change in the relative orientations of the TM helices (likened to a twisting motion) leading to a wider intracellular surface and \"revelation\" of residues of the intracellular helices and TM domains crucial to signal transduction function (i.e., G-protein coupling). Inverse agonists and antagonists may also bind to a number of different sites, but the eventual effect must be prevention of this TM helix reorientation.\nThe structure of the N- and C-terminal tails of GPCRs may also serve important functions beyond ligand-binding. For example, The C-terminus of M3 muscarinic receptors is sufficient, and the six-amino-acid polybasic (KKKRRK) domain in the C-terminus is necessary for its preassembly with Gq proteins. In particular, the C-terminus often contains serine (Ser) or threonine (Thr) residues that, when phosphorylated, increase the affinity of the intracellular surface for the binding of scaffolding proteins called \u03b2-arrestins (\u03b2-arr). Once bound, \u03b2-arrestins both sterically prevent G-protein coupling and may recruit other proteins, leading to the creation of signaling complexes involved in extracellular-signal regulated kinase (ERK) pathway activation or receptor endocytosis (internalization). As the phosphorylation of these Ser and Thr residues often occurs as a result of GPCR activation, the \u03b2-arr-mediated G-protein-decoupling and internalization of GPCRs are important mechanisms of desensitization. In addition, internalized \"mega-complexes\" consisting of a single GPCR, \u03b2-arr(in the tail conformation), and heterotrimeric G protein exist and may account for protein signaling from endosomes.\nA final common structural theme among GPCRs is palmitoylation of one or more sites of the C-terminal tail or the intracellular loops. Palmitoylation is the covalent modification of cysteine (Cys) residues via addition of hydrophobic acyl groups, and has the effect of targeting the receptor to cholesterol- and sphingolipid-rich microdomains of the plasma membrane called lipid rafts. As many of the downstream transducer and effector molecules of GPCRs (including those involved in negative feedback pathways) are also targeted to lipid rafts, this has the effect of facilitating rapid receptor signaling.\nGPCRs respond to extracellular signals mediated by a huge diversity of agonists, ranging from proteins to biogenic amines to protons, but all transduce this signal via a mechanism of G-protein coupling. This is made possible by a guanine-nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) domain primarily formed by a combination of IL-2 and IL-3 along with adjacent residues of the associated TM helices.\nMechanism.\nThe G protein-coupled receptor is activated by an external signal in the form of a ligand or other signal mediator. This creates a conformational change in the receptor, causing activation of a G protein. Further effect depends on the type of G protein. G proteins are subsequently inactivated by GTPase activating proteins, known as RGS proteins.\nLigand binding.\nGPCRs include one or more receptors for the following ligands:\nsensory signal mediators (e.g., light and olfactory stimulatory molecules);\nadenosine, bombesin, bradykinin, endothelin, \u03b3-aminobutyric acid (GABA), hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), melanocortins, neuropeptide Y, opioid peptides, opsins, somatostatin, GH, tachykinins, members of the vasoactive intestinal peptide family, and vasopressin;\nbiogenic amines (e.g., dopamine, epinephrine, norepinephrine, histamine, serotonin, and melatonin);\nglutamate (metabotropic effect);\nglucagon;\nacetylcholine (muscarinic effect);\nchemokines;\nlipid mediators of inflammation (e.g., prostaglandins, prostanoids, platelet-activating factor, and leukotrienes);\npeptide hormones (e.g., calcitonin, C5a anaphylatoxin, follicle-stimulating hormone [FSH], gonadotropin-releasing hormone [GnRH], neurokinin, thyrotropin-releasing hormone [TRH], and oxytocin);\nand endocannabinoids.\nGPCRs that act as receptors for stimuli that have not yet been identified are known as orphan receptors.\nHowever, in contrast to other types of receptors that have been studied, wherein ligands bind externally to the membrane, the ligands of GPCRs typically bind within the transmembrane domain. However, protease-activated receptors are activated by cleavage of part of their extracellular domain.\nConformational change.\nThe transduction of the signal through the membrane by the receptor is not completely understood. It is known that in the inactive state, the GPCR is bound to a heterotrimeric G protein complex. Binding of an agonist to the GPCR results in a conformational change in the receptor that is transmitted to the bound G\u03b1 subunit of the heterotrimeric G protein via . The activated G\u03b1 subunit exchanges GTP in place of GDP which in turn triggers the dissociation of G\u03b1 subunit from the G\u03b2\u03b3 dimer and from the receptor. The dissociated G\u03b1 and G\u03b2\u03b3 subunits interact with other intracellular proteins to continue the signal transduction cascade while the freed GPCR is able to rebind to another heterotrimeric G protein to form a new complex that is ready to initiate another round of signal transduction.\nIt is believed that a receptor molecule exists in a conformational equilibrium between active and inactive biophysical states. The binding of ligands to the receptor may shift the equilibrium toward the active receptor states. Three types of ligands exist: Agonists are ligands that shift the equilibrium in favour of active states; inverse agonists are ligands that shift the equilibrium in favour of inactive states; and neutral antagonists are ligands that do not affect the equilibrium. It is not yet known how exactly the active and inactive states differ from each other.\nG-protein activation/deactivation cycle.\nWhen the receptor is inactive, the GEF domain may be bound to an also inactive \u03b1-subunit of a heterotrimeric G-protein. These \"G-proteins\" are a trimer of \u03b1, \u03b2, and \u03b3 subunits (known as G\u03b1, G\u03b2, and G\u03b3, respectively) that is rendered inactive when reversibly bound to Guanosine diphosphate (GDP) (or, alternatively, no guanine nucleotide) but active when bound to guanosine triphosphate (GTP). Upon receptor activation, the GEF domain, in turn, allosterically activates the G-protein by facilitating the exchange of a molecule of GDP for GTP at the G-protein's \u03b1-subunit. The cell maintains a 10:1 ratio of cytosolic GTP:GDP so exchange for GTP is ensured. At this point, the subunits of the G-protein dissociate from the receptor, as well as each other, to yield a G\u03b1-GTP monomer and a tightly interacting G\u03b2\u03b3 dimer, which are now free to modulate the activity of other intracellular proteins. The extent to which they may diffuse, however, is limited due to the palmitoylation of G\u03b1 and the presence of an isoprenoid moiety that has been covalently added to the C-termini of G\u03b3.\nBecause G\u03b1 also has slow GTP\u2192GDP hydrolysis capability, the inactive form of the \u03b1-subunit (G\u03b1-GDP) is eventually regenerated, thus allowing reassociation with a G\u03b2\u03b3 dimer to form the \"resting\" G-protein, which can again bind to a GPCR and await activation. The rate of GTP hydrolysis is often accelerated due to the actions of another family of allosteric modulating proteins called regulators of G-protein signaling, or RGS proteins, which are a type of GTPase-activating protein, or GAP. In fact, many of the primary effector proteins (e.g., adenylate cyclases) that become activated/inactivated upon interaction with G\u03b1-GTP also have GAP activity. Thus, even at this early stage in the process, GPCR-initiated signaling has the capacity for self-termination.\nCrosstalk.\nGPCRs downstream signals have been shown to possibly interact with integrin signals, such as FAK. Integrin signaling will phosphorylate FAK, which can then decrease GPCR G\u03b1s activity.\nSignaling.\nIf a receptor in an active state encounters a G protein, it may activate it. Some evidence suggests that receptors and G proteins are actually pre-coupled. For example, binding of G proteins to receptors affects the receptor's affinity for ligands. Activated G proteins are bound to GTP.\nFurther signal transduction depends on the type of G protein. The enzyme adenylate cyclase is an example of a cellular protein that can be regulated by a G protein, in this case the G protein Gs. Adenylate cyclase activity is activated when it binds to a subunit of the activated G protein. Activation of adenylate cyclase ends when the G protein returns to the GDP-bound state.\nAdenylate cyclases (of which 9 membrane-bound and one cytosolic forms are known in humans) may also be activated or inhibited in other ways (e.g., Ca2+/calmodulin binding), which can modify the activity of these enzymes in an additive or synergistic fashion along with the G proteins.\nThe signaling pathways activated through a GPCR are limited by the primary sequence and tertiary structure of the GPCR itself but ultimately determined by the particular conformation stabilized by a particular ligand, as well as the availability of transducer molecules. Currently, GPCRs are considered to utilize two primary types of transducers: G-proteins and \u03b2-arrestins. Because \u03b2-arr's have high affinity only to the phosphorylated form of most GPCRs (see above or below), the majority of signaling is ultimately dependent upon G-protein activation. However, the possibility for interaction does allow for G-protein-independent signaling to occur.\nG-protein-dependent signaling.\nThere are three main G-protein-mediated signaling pathways, mediated by four sub-classes of G-proteins distinguished from each other by sequence homology (G\u03b1s, G\u03b1i/o, G\u03b1q/11, and G\u03b112/13). Each sub-class of G-protein consists of multiple proteins, each the product of multiple genes or splice variations that may imbue them with differences ranging from subtle to distinct with regard to signaling properties, but in general they appear reasonably grouped into four classes. Because the signal transducing properties of the various possible \u03b2\u03b3 combinations do not appear to radically differ from one another, these classes are defined according to the isoform of their \u03b1-subunit.\nWhile most GPCRs are capable of activating more than one G\u03b1-subtype, they also show a preference for one subtype over another. When the subtype activated depends on the ligand that is bound to the GPCR, this is called functional selectivity (also known as agonist-directed trafficking, or conformation-specific agonism). However, the binding of any single particular agonist may also initiate activation of multiple different G-proteins, as it may be capable of stabilizing more than one conformation of the GPCR's GEF domain, even over the course of a single interaction. In addition, a conformation that preferably activates one isoform of G\u03b1 may activate another if the preferred is less available. Furthermore, feedback pathways may result in receptor modifications (e.g., phosphorylation) that alter the G-protein preference. Regardless of these various nuances, the GPCR's preferred coupling partner is usually defined according to the G-protein most obviously activated by the endogenous ligand under most physiological or experimental conditions.\nG\u03b2\u03b3 signaling.\nThe above descriptions ignore the effects of G\u03b2\u03b3\u2013signalling, which can also be important, in particular in the case of activated G\u03b1i/o-coupled GPCRs. The primary effectors of G\u03b2\u03b3 are various ion channels, such as G-protein-regulated inwardly rectifying K+ channels (GIRKs), P/Q- and N-type voltage-gated Ca2+ channels, as well as some isoforms of AC and PLC, along with some phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K) isoforms.\nG-protein-independent signaling.\nAlthough they are classically thought of working only together, GPCRs may signal through G-protein-independent mechanisms, and heterotrimeric G-proteins may play functional roles independent of GPCRs. GPCRs may signal independently through many proteins already mentioned for their roles in G-protein-dependent signaling such as \u03b2-arrs, GRKs, and Srcs. Such signaling has been shown to be physiologically relevant, for example, \u03b2-arrestin signaling mediated by the chemokine receptor CXCR3 was necessary for full efficacy chemotaxis of activated T cells. In addition, further scaffolding proteins involved in subcellular localization of GPCRs (e.g., PDZ-domain-containing proteins) may also act as signal transducers. Most often the effector is a member of the MAPK family.\nExamples.\nIn the late 1990s, evidence began accumulating to suggest that some GPCRs are able to signal without G proteins. The ERK2 mitogen-activated protein kinase, a key signal transduction mediator downstream of receptor activation in many pathways, has been shown to be activated in response to cAMP-mediated receptor activation in the slime mold \"D. discoideum\" despite the absence of the associated G protein \u03b1- and \u03b2-subunits.\nIn mammalian cells, the much-studied \u03b22-adrenoceptor has been demonstrated to activate the ERK2 pathway after arrestin-mediated uncoupling of G-protein-mediated signaling. Therefore, it seems likely that some mechanisms previously believed related purely to receptor desensitisation are actually examples of receptors switching their signaling pathway, rather than simply being switched off.\nIn kidney cells, the bradykinin receptor B2 has been shown to interact directly with a protein tyrosine phosphatase. The presence of a tyrosine-phosphorylated ITIM (immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory motif) sequence in the B2 receptor is necessary to mediate this interaction and subsequently the antiproliferative effect of bradykinin.\nGPCR-independent signaling by heterotrimeric G-proteins.\nAlthough it is a relatively immature area of research, it appears that heterotrimeric G-proteins may also take part in non-GPCR signaling. There is evidence for roles as signal transducers in nearly all other types of receptor-mediated signaling, including integrins, receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs), cytokine receptors (JAK/STATs), as well as modulation of various other \"accessory\" proteins such as GEFs, guanine-nucleotide dissociation inhibitors (GDIs) and protein phosphatases. There may even be specific proteins of these classes whose primary function is as part of GPCR-independent pathways, termed activators of G-protein signalling (AGS). Both the ubiquity of these interactions and the importance of G\u03b1 vs. G\u03b2\u03b3 subunits to these processes are still unclear.\nDetails of cAMP and PIP2 pathways.\nThere are two principal signal transduction pathways involving the G protein-linked receptors: the cAMP signal pathway and the phosphatidylinositol signal pathway.\ncAMP signal pathway.\nThe cAMP signal transduction contains five main characters: stimulative hormone receptor (Rs) or inhibitory hormone receptor (Ri); stimulative regulative G-protein (Gs) or inhibitory regulative G-protein (Gi); adenylyl cyclase; protein kinase\u00a0A (PKA); and cAMP phosphodiesterase.\nStimulative hormone receptor (Rs) is a receptor that can bind with stimulative signal molecules, while inhibitory hormone receptor (Ri) is a receptor that can bind with inhibitory signal molecules.\nStimulative regulative G-protein is a G-protein linked to stimulative hormone receptor (Rs), and its \u03b1 subunit upon activation could stimulate the activity of an enzyme or other intracellular metabolism. On the contrary, inhibitory regulative G-protein is linked to an inhibitory hormone receptor, and its \u03b1 subunit upon activation could inhibit the activity of an enzyme or other intracellular metabolism.\nAdenylyl cyclase is a 12-transmembrane glycoprotein that catalyzes the conversion of ATP to cAMP with the help of cofactor Mg2+ or Mn2+. The cAMP produced is a second messenger in cellular metabolism and is an allosteric activator of protein kinase A.\nProtein kinase\u00a0A is an important enzyme in cell metabolism due to its ability to regulate cell metabolism by phosphorylating specific committed enzymes in the metabolic pathway. It can also regulate specific gene expression, cellular secretion, and membrane permeability. The protein enzyme contains two catalytic subunits and two regulatory subunits. When there is no cAMP, the complex is inactive. When cAMP binds to the regulatory subunits, their conformation is altered, causing the dissociation of the regulatory subunits, which activates protein kinase A and allows further biological effects.\nThese signals then can be terminated by cAMP phosphodiesterase, which is an enzyme that degrades cAMP to 5'-AMP and inactivates protein kinase\u00a0A.\nPhosphatidylinositol signal pathway.\nIn the phosphatidylinositol signal pathway, the extracellular signal molecule binds with the G-protein receptor (Gq) on the cell surface and activates phospholipase C, which is located on the plasma membrane. The lipase hydrolyzes phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) into two second messengers: inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3) and diacylglycerol (DAG). IP3 binds with the IP3 receptor in the membrane of the smooth endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria to open Ca2+ channels. DAG helps activate protein kinase C (PKC), which phosphorylates many other proteins, changing their catalytic activities, leading to cellular responses.\nThe effects of Ca2+ are also remarkable: it cooperates with DAG in activating PKC and can activate the CaM kinase pathway, in which calcium-modulated protein calmodulin (CaM) binds Ca2+, undergoes a change in conformation, and activates CaM kinase II, which has unique ability to increase its binding affinity to CaM by autophosphorylation, making CaM unavailable for the activation of other enzymes. The kinase then phosphorylates target enzymes, regulating their activities. The two signal pathways are connected together by Ca2+-CaM, which is also a regulatory subunit of adenylyl cyclase and phosphodiesterase in the cAMP signal pathway.\nReceptor regulation.\nGPCRs become desensitized when exposed to their ligand for a long period of time. There are two recognized forms of desensitization: 1) homologous desensitization, in which the activated GPCR is downregulated; and 2) heterologous desensitization, wherein the activated GPCR causes downregulation of a different GPCR. The key reaction of this downregulation is the phosphorylation of the intracellular (or cytoplasmic) receptor domain by protein kinases.\nPhosphorylation by cAMP-dependent protein kinases.\nCyclic AMP-dependent protein kinases (protein kinase A) are activated by the signal chain coming from the G protein (that was activated by the receptor) via adenylate cyclase and cyclic AMP (cAMP). In a \"feedback mechanism\", these activated kinases phosphorylate the receptor. The longer the receptor remains active the more kinases are activated and the more receptors are phosphorylated. In \u03b22-adrenoceptors, this phosphorylation results in the switching of the coupling from the Gs class of G-protein to the Gi class. cAMP-dependent PKA mediated phosphorylation can cause heterologous desensitisation in receptors other than those activated.\nPhosphorylation by GRKs.\nThe G protein-coupled receptor kinases (GRKs) are protein kinases that phosphorylate only active GPCRs. G-protein-coupled receptor kinases (GRKs) are key modulators of G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) signaling. They constitute a family of seven mammalian serine-threonine protein kinases that phosphorylate agonist-bound receptor. GRKs-mediated receptor phosphorylation rapidly initiates profound impairment of receptor signaling and desensitization. Activity of GRKs and subcellular targeting is tightly regulated by interaction with receptor domains, G protein subunits, lipids, anchoring proteins and calcium-sensitive proteins.\nPhosphorylation of the receptor can have two consequences:\nMechanisms of GPCR signal termination.\nAs mentioned above, G-proteins may terminate their own activation due to their intrinsic GTP\u2192GDP hydrolysis capability. However, this reaction proceeds at a slow rate (\u22480.02 times/sec) and, thus, it would take around 50 seconds for any single G-protein to deactivate if other factors did not come into play. Indeed, there are around 30 isoforms of RGS proteins that, when bound to G\u03b1 through their GAP domain, accelerate the hydrolysis rate to \u224830 times/sec. This 1500-fold increase in rate allows for the cell to respond to external signals with high speed, as well as spatial resolution due to limited amount of second messenger that can be generated and limited distance a G-protein can diffuse in 0.03 seconds. For the most part, the RGS proteins are promiscuous in their ability to deactivate G-proteins, while which RGS is involved in a given signaling pathway seems more determined by the tissue and GPCR involved than anything else. In addition, RGS proteins have the additional function of increasing the rate of GTP-GDP exchange at GPCRs, (i.e., as a sort of co-GEF) further contributing to the time resolution of GPCR signaling.\nIn addition, the GPCR may be desensitized itself. This can occur as:\nOnce \u03b2-arrestin is bound to a GPCR, it undergoes a conformational change allowing it to serve as a scaffolding protein for an adaptor complex termed AP-2, which in turn recruits another protein called clathrin. If enough receptors in the local area recruit clathrin in this manner, they aggregate and the membrane buds inwardly as a result of interactions between the molecules of clathrin, in a process called opsonization. Once the pit has been pinched off the plasma membrane due to the actions of two other proteins called amphiphysin and dynamin, it is now an endocytic vesicle. At this point, the adapter molecules and clathrin have dissociated, and the receptor is either trafficked back to the plasma membrane or targeted to lysosomes for degradation.\nAt any point in this process, the \u03b2-arrestins may also recruit other proteins\u2014such as the non-receptor tyrosine kinase (nRTK), c-SRC\u2014which may activate ERK1/2, or other mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling through, for example, phosphorylation of the small GTPase, Ras, or recruit the proteins of the ERK cascade directly (i.e., Raf-1, MEK, ERK-1/2) at which point signaling is initiated due to their close proximity to one another. Another target of c-SRC are the dynamin molecules involved in endocytosis. Dynamins polymerize around the neck of an incoming vesicle, and their phosphorylation by c-SRC provides the energy necessary for the conformational change allowing the final \"pinching off\" from the membrane.\nGPCR cellular regulation.\nReceptor desensitization is mediated through a combination phosphorylation, \u03b2-arr binding, and endocytosis as described above. Downregulation occurs when endocytosed receptor is embedded in an endosome that is trafficked to merge with an organelle called a lysosome. Because lysosomal membranes are rich in proton pumps, their interiors have low pH (\u22484.8 vs. the pH\u22487.2 cytosol), which acts to denature the GPCRs. In addition, lysosomes contain many degradative enzymes, including proteases, which can function only at such low pH, and so the peptide bonds joining the residues of the GPCR together may be cleaved. Whether or not a given receptor is trafficked to a lysosome, detained in endosomes, or trafficked back to the plasma membrane depends on a variety of factors, including receptor type and magnitude of the signal.\nGPCR regulation is additionally mediated by gene transcription factors. These factors can increase or decrease gene transcription and thus increase or decrease the generation of new receptors (up- or down-regulation) that travel to the cell membrane.\nReceptor oligomerization.\nG-protein-coupled receptor oligomerisation is a widespread phenomenon. One of the best-studied examples is the metabotropic GABAB receptor. This so-called constitutive receptor is formed by heterodimerization of GABABR1 and GABABR2 subunits. Expression of the GABABR1 without the GABABR2 in heterologous systems leads to retention of the subunit in the endoplasmic reticulum. Expression of the GABABR2 subunit alone, meanwhile, leads to surface expression of the subunit, although with no functional activity (i.e., the receptor does not bind agonist and cannot initiate a response following exposure to agonist). Expression of the two subunits together leads to plasma membrane expression of functional receptor. It has been shown that GABABR2 binding to GABABR1 causes masking of a retention signal of functional receptors.\nOrigin and diversification of the superfamily.\nSignal transduction mediated by the superfamily of GPCRs dates back to the origin of multicellularity. Mammalian-like GPCRs are found in fungi, and have been classified according to the GRAFS classification system based on GPCR fingerprints. Identification of the superfamily members across the eukaryotic domain, and comparison of the family-specific motifs, have shown that the superfamily of GPCRs have a common origin. Characteristic motifs indicate that three of the five GRAFS families, \"Rhodopsin\", \"Adhesion\", and \"Frizzled\", evolved from the \"Dictyostelium discoideum\" cAMP receptors before the split of opisthokonts. Later, the \"Secretin\" family evolved from the \"Adhesion\" GPCR receptor family before the split of nematodes. Insect GPCRs appear to be in their own group and Taste2 is identified as descending from \"Rhodopsin\". Note that the \"Secretin\"/\"Adhesion\" split is based on presumed function rather than signature, as the classical Class B (7tm_2, Pfam https://) is used to identify both in the studies.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12833", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12833", "title": "GTPase", "text": "Class of enzymes\nGTPases are a large family of hydrolase enzymes that bind to the nucleotide guanosine triphosphate (GTP) and hydrolyze it to guanosine diphosphate (GDP). The GTP binding and hydrolysis takes place in the highly conserved P-loop \"G domain\", a protein domain common to many GTPases.\nFunctions.\nGTPases function as molecular switches or timers in many fundamental cellular processes.\nExamples of these roles include: \nGTPases are active when bound to GTP and inactive when bound to GDP. In the generalized receptor-transducer-effector signaling model of Martin Rodbell, signaling GTPases act as transducers to regulate the activity of effector proteins. This inactive-active switch is due to conformational changes in the protein distinguishing these two forms, particularly of the \"switch\" regions that in the active state are able to make protein-protein contacts with partner proteins that alter the function of these effectors.\nMechanism.\nHydrolysis of GTP bound to an (active) G domain-GTPase leads to deactivation of the signaling/timer function of the enzyme. The hydrolysis of the third (\u03b3) phosphate of GTP to create guanosine diphosphate (GDP) and Pi, inorganic phosphate, occurs by the SN2 mechanism (see nucleophilic substitution) via a pentacoordinate transition state and is dependent on the presence of a magnesium ion Mg2+.\nGTPase activity serves as the shutoff mechanism for the signaling roles of GTPases by returning the active, GTP-bound protein to the inactive, GDP-bound state. Most \"GTPases\" have functional GTPase activity, allowing them to remain active (that is, bound to GTP) only for a short time before deactivating themselves by converting bound GTP to bound GDP. However, many GTPases also use accessory proteins named GTPase-activating proteins or GAPs to accelerate their GTPase activity. This further limits the active lifetime of signaling GTPases. Some GTPases have little to no intrinsic GTPase activity, and are entirely dependent on GAP proteins for deactivation (such as the ADP-ribosylation factor or ARF family of small GTP-binding proteins that are involved in vesicle-mediated transport within cells).\nTo become activated, GTPases must bind to GTP. Since mechanisms to convert bound GDP directly into GTP are unknown, the inactive GTPases are induced to release bound GDP by the action of distinct regulatory proteins called guanine nucleotide exchange factors or GEFs. The nucleotide-free GTPase protein quickly rebinds GTP, which is in far excess in healthy cells over GDP, allowing the GTPase to enter the active conformation state and promote its effects on the cell. For many GTPases, activation of GEFs is the primary control mechanism in the stimulation of the GTPase signaling functions, although GAPs also play an important role. For heterotrimeric G proteins and many small GTP-binding proteins, GEF activity is stimulated by cell surface receptors in response to signals outside the cell (for heterotrimeric G proteins, the G protein-coupled receptors are themselves GEFs, while for receptor-activated small GTPases their GEFs are distinct from cell surface receptors).\nSome GTPases also bind to accessory proteins called guanine nucleotide dissociation inhibitors or GDIs that stabilize the inactive, GDP-bound state.\nThe amount of active GTPase can be changed in several ways: \nG domain GTPases.\nIn most GTPases, the specificity for the base guanine versus other nucleotides is imparted by the base-recognition motif, which has the consensus sequence [N/T]KXD. The following classification is based on shared features; some examples have mutations in the base-recognition motif that shift their substrate specificity, most commonly to ATP.\nTRAFAC class.\nThe TRAFAC class of G domain proteins is named after the prototypical member, the translation factor G proteins. They play roles in translation, signal transduction, and cell motility.\nTranslation factor superfamily.\nMultiple classical translation factor family GTPases play important roles in initiation, elongation and termination of protein biosynthesis. Sharing a similar mode of ribosome binding due to the \u03b2-EI domain following the GTPase, the most well-known members of the family are EF-1A/EF-Tu, EF-2/EF-G, and class 2 release factors. Other members include EF-4 (LepA), BipA (TypA), \"SelB\" (bacterial selenocysteinyl-tRNA EF-Tu paralog), \"Tet\" (tetracycline resistance by ribosomal protection), and HBS1L (eukaryotic ribosome rescue protein similar to release factors).\nThe superfamily also includes the Bms1 family from yeast.\nHeterotrimeric G proteins.\nHeterotrimeric G protein complexes are composed of three distinct protein subunits named \"alpha\" (\u03b1), \"beta\" (\u03b2) and \"gamma\" (\u03b3) subunits. The alpha subunits contain the GTP binding/GTPase domain flanked by long regulatory regions, while the beta and gamma subunits form a stable dimeric complex referred to as the beta-gamma complex. When activated, a heterotrimeric G protein dissociates into activated, GTP-bound alpha subunit and separate beta-gamma subunit, each of which can perform distinct signaling roles. The \u03b1 and \u03b3 subunit are modified by lipid anchors to increase their association with the inner leaflet of the plasma membrane.\nHeterotrimeric G proteins act as the transducers of G protein-coupled receptors, coupling receptor activation to downstream signaling effectors and second messengers. In unstimulated cells, heterotrimeric G proteins are assembled as the GDP bound, inactive trimer (G\u03b1-GDP-G\u03b2\u03b3 complex). Upon receptor activation, the activated receptor intracellular domain acts as GEF to release GDP from the G protein complex and to promote binding of GTP in its place. The GTP-bound complex undergoes an activating conformation shift that dissociates it from the receptor and also breaks the complex into its component G protein alpha and beta-gamma subunit components. While these activated G protein subunits are now free to activate their effectors, the active receptor is likewise free to activate additional G proteins \u2013 this allows catalytic activation and amplification where one receptor may activate many G proteins.\nG protein signaling is terminated by hydrolysis of bound GTP to bound GDP. This can occur through the intrinsic GTPase activity of the \u03b1 subunit, or be accelerated by separate regulatory proteins that act as GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs), such as members of the Regulator of G protein signaling (RGS) family). The speed of the hydrolysis reaction works as an internal clock limiting the length of the signal. Once G\u03b1 is returned to being GDP bound, the two parts of the heterotrimer re-associate to the original, inactive state.\nThe heterotrimeric G proteins can be classified by sequence homology of the \u03b1 unit and by their functional targets into four families: Gs family, Gi family, Gq family and G12 family. Each of these G\u03b1 protein families contains multiple members, such that the mammals have 16 distinct \u03b1-subunit genes. The G\u03b2 and G\u03b3 are likewise composed of many members, increasing heterotrimer structural and functional diversity. Among the target molecules of the specific G proteins are the second messenger-generating enzymes adenylyl cyclase and phospholipase C, as well as various ion channels.\nSmall GTPases.\nSmall GTPases function as monomers and have a molecular weight of about 21 kilodaltons that consists primarily of the GTPase domain. They are also called small or monomeric guanine nucleotide-binding regulatory proteins, small or monomeric GTP-binding proteins, or small or monomeric G-proteins, and because they have significant homology with the first-identified such protein, named Ras, they are also referred to as Ras superfamily GTPases. Small GTPases generally serve as molecular switches and signal transducers for a wide variety of cellular signaling events, often involving membranes, vesicles or cytoskeleton. According to their primary amino acid sequences and biochemical properties, the many Ras superfamily small GTPases are further divided into five subfamilies with distinct functions: Ras, Rho (\"Ras-homology\"), Rab, Arf and Ran. While many small GTPases are activated by their GEFs in response to intracellular signals emanating from cell surface receptors (particularly growth factor receptors), regulatory GEFs for many other small GTPases are activated in response to intrinsic cell signals, not cell surface (external) signals.\nMyosin-kinesin superfamily.\nThis class is defined by loss of two beta-strands and additional N-terminal strands. Both namesakes of this superfamily, myosin and kinesin, have shifted to use ATP.\nLarge GTPases.\nSee dynamin as a prototype for large monomeric GTPases.\nSIMIBI class.\nMuch of the SIMIBI class of GTPases is activated by dimerization. Named after the signal recognition particle (SRP), MinD, and BioD, the class is involved in protein localization, chromosome partitioning, and membrane transport. Several members of this class, including MinD and Get3, has shifted in substrate specificity to become ATPases.\nTranslocation factors.\nFor a discussion of Translocation factors and the role of GTP, see signal recognition particle (SRP).\nOther GTPases.\nWhile tubulin and related structural proteins also bind and hydrolyze GTP as part of their function to form intracellular tubules, these proteins utilize a distinct tubulin domain that is unrelated to the G domain used by signaling GTPases.\nThere are also GTP-hydrolyzing proteins that use a P-loop from a superclass other than the G-domain-containing one. Examples include the NACHT proteins of its own superclass and McrB protein of the AAA+ superclass.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12835", "revid": "34329925", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12835", "title": "Galla Placidia", "text": "Roman empress in 421\nGalla Placidia (392/93 \u2013 27 November 450), daughter of the Roman emperor Theodosius I, was a mother, tutor, and advisor to emperor Valentinian III. She was queen consort to Ataulf, King of the Visigoths from 414 until his death in 415, briefly empress consort to Constantius III in 421, and managed the government administration as a regent during the early reign of Valentinian III until her death.\nFamily.\nPlacidia was the daughter of Theodosius I and his second wife, Galla, who was herself daughter of Valentinian I and his second wife, Justina. Galla Placidia's date of birth is not recorded, but she must have been born either in the period 388\u201389 or 392\u201393. Between these dates, her father was in Italy following his campaign against the usurper Magnus Maximus, while her mother remained in Constantinople.\nA surviving letter from Bishop Ambrose of Milan, dated 390, refers to a younger son of Theodosius named Gratianus, who died in infancy; as Gratianus must have been born in the period 388\u201389, it is most probable that Galla Placidia was born during the second period, 392\u201393. Placidia's mother Galla died some time in 394, perhaps giving birth to a stillborn son.\nPlacidia was a younger, paternal half-sister of emperors Arcadius and Honorius. Her older half-sister Pulcheria predeceased her parents according to Gregory of Nyssa, placing the death of Pulcheria prior to the death of Aelia Flaccilla, the first wife of Theodosius I, in 385. Coins issued in Placidia's honour in Constantinople after 425 give her name as AELIA PLACIDIA; this may have been intended to integrate Placidia with the eastern dynasty of Theodosius II. There is no evidence that the name Aelia was ever used in the west, or that it formed part of Placidia's official nomenclature.\nEarly life.\nPlacidia was granted her own household by her father in the early 390s and was thus financially independent while underage. She was summoned to the court of her father in Mediolanum (Milan) during 394, and was present at Theodosius' death on 17 January 395. She was granted the title of \"nobilissima puella\" (\"most noble girl\") during her childhood.\nPlacidia spent most of her early years in the household of Stilicho, foremost military officer in the West, and his wife, Serena. She is presumed to have learned weaving and embroidery. She might have also been given a classical education. Serena was a first cousin of Arcadius, Honorius and Placidia. The poem \"In Praise of Serena\" by Claudian and the \"Historia Nova\" by Zosimus clarify that Serena's father was an elder Honorius, a brother to Theodosius I. According to \"De Consulatu Stilichonis\" by Claudian, Placidia was betrothed to Eucherius, only known son of Stilicho and Serena. Her scheduled marriage is mentioned in the text as the third union between Stilicho's family and the Theodosian dynasty.\nArcadius died in 408 and was succeeded by his son Theodosius II. In August of the same year, Honorius' courtiers convinced him to depose and execute Stilicho, leading to a weakening of the state. Eucherius, who had sought refuge in Rome, was also killed.\nResidence with the Visigoths.\nIn the disturbances that followed the fall of Stilicho, wives and children of \"foederati\" living in the cities of Italy were killed. Most of the \"foederati\", regarded as loyal to Stilicho, joined the forces of Alaric I, King of the Visigoths. Alaric led them to Rome and put it under siege, with minor interruptions, from autumn 408 to 24 August 410. Zosimus records that Placidia was within the city during the siege. When Serena was accused of conspiring with Alaric, the whole senate and Placidia sentenced her to death.\nPlacidia was captured by Alaric before the fall of Rome, and accompanied the Visigoths from Italy to Gaul in 412. Their ruler Ataulf, having succeeded Alaric, entered an alliance with Honorius against Jovinus and Sebastianus, rival Western Roman emperors located in Gaul, and managed to defeat and execute both in 413. After this victory, Ataulf cemented his improved relations with Honorius by marrying Galla Placidia at Narbonne on 1 January 414. The nuptials were celebrated with high Roman festivities and magnificent gifts. Priscus Attalus gave the wedding speech, a classical epithalamium. The marriage was recorded by Hydatius and Jordanes, although the latter states that it was earlier, in 411 at Forum Livii (Forl\u00ec) (possibly a more informal event).\nPlacidia and Ataulf had one son, Theodosius, born in Barcelona by the end of 414, but the child died early in the following year, eliminating an opportunity for a Romano-Visigothic line; years later the corpse was exhumed and reburied in the imperial mausoleum in Old St. Peter's Basilica, Rome. In August or September of 415, Ataulf was killed in Hispania. The assassin, a servant identified as \"Dubius\" or \"Eberwolf\", was avenging his former master Sarus the Goth, who had died fighting under Jovinus and Sebastianus.\nThe Amali faction proceeded to proclaim Sigeric, a brother of Sarus, as the next king of the Visigoths. Ataulf's six children from a former marriage were killed, and his widow Galla Placidia was forced to walk more than twelve miles on foot among the crowd of captives driven ahead of the mounted Sigeric. After 7 days of ruling, Sigeric was assassinated and replaced with Wallia, Ataulf's relative.\nMarriage to Constantius III and the papal succession crisis.\nAccording to the \"Chronicon Albeldense\", included in the \"C\u00f3dice de Roda\", Wallia was desperate for food supplies. He surrendered to Constantius III, at the time \"magister militum\" of Honorius, negotiating terms giving foederati status for the Visigoths. As part of the peace treaty, Placidia was returned to Honorius, who forced her to marry Constantius III on 1 January 417. Their daughter Justa Grata Honoria was probably born in 417 or 418. The history of Paul the Deacon mentions her first among the children of the marriage, suggesting that she was the eldest. Their son Valentinian III was born 2 July 419.\nPlacidia intervened in the succession crisis following the death of Pope Zosimus on 26 December 418. Two factions of the Roman clergy had plunged the city into tumult by electing rival successors, Eulalius (elected 27 December) and Boniface I (elected 28 December). Symmachus, Prefect of Rome, wrote to the court at Ravenna, requesting an imperial decision on the matter. Placidia and, presumably, Constantius petitioned the emperor in favor of Eulalius. This was arguably the first intervention by an Emperor in the Papal election.\nThe controversy persisted after Honorius confirmed Eulalius as the legitimate pope, and a synod of Italian bishops, meeting at Ravenna from February to March 419, also failed to reach a conclusion. In the meantime, the two rival popes were ordered to leave Rome. Soon before Easter, Eulalius forfeited the imperial favor by making an unauthorized return to the city and attempting to take possession of the Basilica of Saint John Lateran. Boniface was proclaimed the legitimate pope as of 3 April 419, returning to Rome a week later. Honorius called a second synod in May, this time including attendees from Gaul and Africa. Placidia personally wrote to summon the African bishops; three of her letters are known to have survived.\nOn 8 February 421, Constantius was proclaimed an Augustus, becoming co-ruler with the childless Honorius. Placidia was proclaimed an Augusta. She was the only Empress in the West, since Honorius had divorced his second wife Thermantia in 408 and had never remarried. Neither title was recognised by Theodosius II, the Eastern Roman Emperor. Constantius reportedly complained about the loss of personal freedom and privacy that came with the imperial office. He died of an illness on 2 September 421.\nWidowhood and civil war.\nAccording to Olympiodorus of Thebes, a historian used as a source by Zosimus, Sozomen and probably Philostorgius, the public grew suspicious of the increasingly scandalous public caresses she was said to have received from her own brother Honorius after her husband's death. However, the siblings' relationship suddenly turned hostile, and around this time, she may have plotted against him. After her soldiers clashed with those of Honorius, Galla Placidia herself was now forced to flee to Constantinople with her children. Despite this setback, Bonifacius, governor of the Diocese of Africa continued to be loyal to her.\nPlacidia, Valentinian, and Honoria arrived in Constantinople around 422/423. On 15 August 423, Honorius died of edema, perhaps pulmonary edema. With no member of the Theodosian dynasty present at Ravenna to claim the throne, an official named Joannes was made Western Roman Emperor without the approval of Theodosius II. Joannes' rule was accepted in the provinces of Italia, Gaul and Hispania, but not in the province of Africa.\nTheodosius II reacted by preparing Valentinian III to take Joannes' place. In 423/424, Valentinian was named \"nobilissimus\". In 424 he was betrothed to Licinia Eudoxia, his first cousin once removed and the daughter of Theodosius II and Aelia Eudocia. At the same time, forces of the Eastern Roman army, under the general command of Ardaburius, invaded Italy by land and sea. Placidia and Valentinian traveled with Ardaburius' son Aspar, commander of the land forces. Along the way, Valentinian was proclaimed \"Caesar\" by Helion, a \"magister officiorum\" under Theodosius, on 23 October 424. Ardaburius, whose fleet had been dispersed by a storm, was captured by loyalist forces and imprisoned in Ravenna. He convinced some of his captors to defect to Theodosius' side and to summon Aspar, who took the city after a siege. Joannes was publicly executed in Aquileia.\nValentinian was officially proclaimed the new Augustus of the Western Roman Empire on 23 October 425, by Helion, in the presence of the Roman Senate, with Theodosius II's support. Three days after Joannes' death, his ally Flavius Aetius belatedly arrived with an army of Huns from across the Danube. After some skirmishing, Placidia, Valentinian and Aetius came to an agreement and established peace. The Huns were paid off and sent home, while Aetius received the position of \"comes\" and \"magister militum per Gallias\" (commander-in-chief of the Roman army in Gaul).\nRegent.\nGalla Placidia became a regent of Western Roman Empire for her son, Valentinian, in 425 until Aetius' rise. Among her early supporters were Bonifacius and Felix. The latter was assassinated in 430, possibly by Aetius.\nConflict between Bonifacius and Aetius.\nConflict between Placidia and Bonifacius started in 429. Procopius records that Aetius played the two against each other, advising Placidia that Bonifacius should be recalled to Rome as a dubious character, then writing to Bonifacius, warning him that Placidia was about to summon him for no good reason in order to put him away.\nBonifacius trusted the warning from Aetius and refused the summons; thinking his position untenable, he sought an alliance with the Vandals, who crossed from Spain into Libya to join him. Friends of Bonifacius in Rome, finding his apparent act of hostility toward the Empire entirely out of character, traveled to Carthage at Placidia's behest to intercede with him. He showed them the letter from Aetius, whose contents they communicated to Placidia. She did not move against Aetius, as he wielded great influence, and as the Empire was already in danger; but she urged Bonifacius to return to Rome \"and not to permit the empire of the Romans to lie under the hand of barbarians.\"\nBonifacius now regretted his alliance with the Vandals and tried to persuade them to return to Spain. Gaiseric offered battle instead, and Bonifacius was besieged at Hippo Regius in Numidia by the sea (Augustine of Hippo was its bishop and died in this siege). Unable to take the city, the Vandals eventually raised the siege. The Romans, with reinforcements under Aspar, renewed the struggle but were routed and lost Africa to the Vandals.\nBonifacius had meanwhile returned to Rome, where Placidia raised him to the rank of patrician and made him \"master-general of the Roman armies\". Aetius returned from Gaul with an army of \"barbarians\", and was met by Bonifacius in the bloody Battle of Ravenna (432). Bonifacius won the battle, but was mortally wounded and died a few days later. Aetius was compelled to retire to Pannonia.\nRise of Aetius.\nWith the generals loyal to her having either died or defected to Aetius, Placidia acknowledged Aetius' political role as legitimate. In 433, Aetius was given the titles \"magister militum\" and \"patrician\". The appointments effectively left Aetius in control of the entire Western Roman army and gave him considerable influence over imperial policy. Aetius later played a pivotal role in the defense of the Western Empire against Attila. Placidia continued to act as regent until 437, though her direct influence over decisions was diminished. She would continue to exercise political influence until her death in 450\u2014no longer, however, the only power at court.\nDuring these years, Galla Placidia befriended bishop Peter Chrysologus, both having a shared interest in building churches. She also befriended a certain Barbatianus, whom she met in Rome. He came to Ravenna to be her confessor. According to his later biography, through his intercession she miraculously obtained a sandal of John the Evangelist for the church she had built to honour the saint. When Barbatianus died, Placidia and Chrysologus arranged his burial.\nPlacidia joined the rest of the imperial family in forcing her daughter, Justa Grata Honoria, into an unwanted political marriage. In the spring of 450 Honoria wrote for help to Attila, who chose to interpret the message as a marriage proposal and asked for half of the western Empire as dowry. Valentinian denied the legitimacy of the proposal, and only the influence of Placidia dissuaded him from executing his sister. Instead Honoria was quickly married to Flavius Bassus Herculanus, though this did not prevent Attila from pressing his claim.\nPlacidia died shortly afterwards at Rome, in November 450, and was buried in the Theodosian family mausoleum adjacent to Old St. Peter's Basilica, later the chapel of Saint Petronilla.\nPublic works.\nBeing a devout Christian, she was involved in the building and restoration of various churches throughout her period of influence. She restored and expanded the Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls in Rome and the Church of the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem. She built San Giovanni Evangelista, Ravenna in thanks for the sparing of her life and those of her children in a storm while crossing the Adriatic Sea. The dedicatory inscription reads \"Galla Placidia, along with her son Placidus Valentinian Augustus and her daughter Justa Grata Honoria Augusta, paid off their vow for their liberation from the danger of the sea.\"\nAnother monument in Ravenna, one of the UNESCO World Heritage Sites inscribed in 1996, is known as the Mausoleum of Galla Placidia. However, the building never served as her tomb, but was initially erected as a chapel dedicated to Lawrence of Rome. It is unknown whether the sarcophagi therein contained the bodies of other members of the Theodosian dynasty, or when they were placed in the building.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12836", "revid": "41294494", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12836", "title": "Georg Friedrich Handel", "text": ""}
{"id": "12837", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12837", "title": "Galicia (Spain)", "text": "Autonomous community in the northwest of Spain\nGalicia ( ; (officially) or ; ) is an autonomous community of Spain and historic nationality under Spanish law. Located in the northwest Iberian Peninsula, it includes the provinces of A Coru\u00f1a, Lugo, Ourense, and Pontevedra.\nGalicia is located in Atlantic Europe. It is bordered by Portugal to the south, the Spanish autonomous communities of Castile and Le\u00f3n and Asturias to the east, the Atlantic Ocean to the west, and the Cantabrian Sea to the north. It had a population of 2,705,833 in 2024 and a total area of . Galicia has over of coastline, including its offshore islands and islets, among them C\u00edes Islands, Ons, S\u00e1lvora, Cortegada Island, which together form the Atlantic Islands of Galicia National Park, and the largest and most populated, A Illa de Arousa.\nThe area now called Galicia was first inhabited by humans during the Middle Paleolithic period, and takes its name from the Gallaeci, the Celtic people living north of the Douro River during the last millennium BC. Galicia was incorporated into the Roman Empire at the end of the Cantabrian Wars in 19 BC, and was made a Roman province in the 3rd century AD. In 410, the Germanic Suebi established a kingdom with its capital in Braga; this kingdom was incorporated into that of the Visigoths in 585. In 711, the Islamic Umayyad Caliphate invaded the Iberian Peninsula conquering the Visigoth kingdom of Hispania by 718, but soon Galicia was incorporated into the Christian kingdom of Asturias by 740. During the Middle Ages, the kingdom of Galicia was occasionally ruled by its own kings, but most of the time it was leagued to the kingdom of Leon and later to that of Castile, while maintaining its own legal and customary practices and culture. From the 13th century on, the kings of Castile, as kings of Galicia, appointed an \"Adiantado-m\u00f3r\", whose attributions passed to the \"Governor and Captain General of the Kingdom of Galiza\" from the last years of the 15th century. The Governor also presided the \"Real Audiencia do Reino de Galicia\", a royal tribunal and government body. From the 16th century, the representation and voice of the kingdom was held by an assembly of deputies and representatives of the cities of the kingdom, the \"Cortes\" or \"Junta of the Kingdom of Galicia.\" This institution was forcibly discontinued in 1833 when the kingdom was divided into four administrative provinces with no legal mutual links. During the 19th and 20th centuries, demand grew for self-government and for the recognition of the culture of Galicia. This resulted in the Statute of Autonomy of 1936, soon frustrated by Franco's \"coup d'\u00e9tat\" and subsequent long dictatorship. After democracy was restored the legislature passed the Statute of Autonomy of 1981, approved in referendum and currently in force, providing Galicia with self-government.\nThe interior of Galicia is characterized by a hilly landscape; mountain ranges rise to in the east and south. The coastal areas are mostly an alternate series of rias and beaches. The climate of Galicia is usually temperate and rainy, with markedly drier summers; it is usually classified as Oceanic. Its topographic and climatic conditions have made animal husbandry and farming the primary source of Galicia's wealth for most of its history, allowing for a relatively high density of population. Except shipbuilding and food processing, Galicia was based on a farming and fishing economy until after the mid-20th century, when it began to industrialize. In 2018, the nominal gross domestic product was \u20ac62.900\u00a0billion, with a nominal GDP per capita of \u20ac23,300. Galicia is characterised, unlike other Spanish regions, by the absence of a metropolis dominating the territory. Indeed, the urban network is made up of 7 main cities: the four provincial capitals A Coru\u00f1a, Pontevedra, Ourense and Lugo, the political capital Santiago de Compostela and the industrial cities Vigo and Ferrol. The population is largely concentrated in two main areas: from Ferrol to A Coru\u00f1a on the northern coast, and in the R\u00edas Baixas region in the southwest, including the cities of Vigo, Pontevedra, and the interior city of Santiago de Compostela. There are smaller populations around the interior cities of Lugo and Ourense. The political capital is Santiago de Compostela, in the province of A Coru\u00f1a. Vigo, in the province of Pontevedra, is the largest municipality and A Coru\u00f1a the most populated city in Galicia. Two languages are official and widely used today in Galicia: the native Galician; and Spanish, usually called \"Castilian\". While most Galicians are bilingual, a 2013 survey reported that 51% of the Galician population spoke Galician most often on a day-to-day basis, while 48% most often used Spanish.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nToponymy.\nThe name \"Galicia\" derives from the Latin toponym Callaecia, later \"Gallaecia\", related to the name of an ancient Celtic tribe that resided north of the Douro river, the Gallaeci or Callaeci in Latin, or (\"Kalla\u00efko\u00ed\") in Greek. These \"Callaeci\" were the first tribe in the area to help the Lusitanians against the invading Romans. The Romans applied their name to all the other tribes in the northwest who spoke the same language and lived the same life.\nThe toponymy of the name has been studied since the 7th century by authors such as Isidore of Seville, who wrote that \"Galicians are called so, because of their fair skin, as the Gauls\", relating the name to the Greek word for milk. (See the etymology of the word \"galaxy\".) In the 21st century, some scholars (J.J. Moralejo, Carlos B\u00faa) have derived the name of the ancient Callaeci either from Proto-Indo-European *kl(H)-no- 'hill', through a local relational suffix -aik-, also attested in Celtiberian, so meaning 'the hill (people)'; or from Proto-Celtic *kall\u012b- 'forest', so meaning 'the forest (people)'. In any case, \"Galicia\", being \"per se\" a derivation of the ethnic name \"Kallaik\u00f3i\", means 'the land of the Galicians'.\nAnother recent proposal comes from linguist Francesco Benozzo after identifying the root \"gall-\" / \"kall-\" in a number of Celtic words with the meaning \"stone\" or \"rock\", as follows: \"gall\" (old Irish), \"gal\" (Middle Welsh), \"gailleichan\" (Scottish Gaelic), \"kailho\u00f9\" (Breton), \"galagh\" (Manx) and \"gall\" (Gaulish). Hence, Benozzo explains the ethnonym \"Callaeci\" as being \"the stone people\" or \"the people of the stone\" (\"those who work with stones\"), about the builders of the ancient megaliths and stone formations so common in Galicia.\nThe name evolved during the Middle Ages from \"Gallaecia\", sometimes written \"Galletia\", to \"Gallicia\". In the 13th century, with the written emergence of the Galician language, \"Galiza\" became the most usual written form of the name of the country, being replaced during the 15th and 16th centuries by the current form, \"Galicia\", which is also the spelling of the name in Spanish. The historical denomination \"Galiza\" became popular again during the end of the 19th and the first three-quarters of the 20th century and is still used with some frequency today. The Xunta de Galicia, the local devolved government, uses \"Galicia\". The Royal Galician Academy, the institution responsible for regulating the Galician language, whilst recognizing \"Galiza\" as a legitimate current denomination, has stated that the only official name of the country is \"Galicia\".\nDue to Galicia's history and culture with mythology, the land has been called \"Terra Meiga\" (land of the witches/witch(ing) land).\nHistory.\nPrehistory and antiquity.\nThe oldest attestation of human presence in Galicia has been found in the Eir\u00f3s Cave, in the municipality of Triacastela, which has preserved animal remains and Neanderthal stone objects from the Middle Paleolithic. The earliest culture to have left significant architectural traces is the Megalithic culture, which expanded along the western European coasts during the Neolithic and Calcolithic eras. Thousands of Megalithic tumuli are distributed throughout the country, mostly along the coastal areas. Within each tumulus is a stone burial chamber known locally as \"anta\" (dolmen), frequently preceded by a corridor. Galicia was later influenced by the Bell Beaker culture. Its rich mineral deposits of tin and gold led to the development of Bronze Age metallurgy, and the commerce of bronze and gold items all along the Atlantic coast of Western Europe. A shared elite culture evolved in this region during the Atlantic Bronze Age.\nDating from the end of the Megalithic era, and up to the Bronze Age, numerous stone carvings (petroglyphs) are found in open air. They usually represent cup and ring marks, labyrinths, deer, Bronze Age weapons, and riding and hunting scenes. Large numbers of these stone carvings can be found in the R\u00edas Baixas regions, at places such as Tour\u00f3n and Campo Lameiro.\nThe Castro culture ('Culture of the Castles') developed during the Iron Age, and flourished during the second half of the first millennium BC. It is usually considered a local evolution of the Atlantic Bronze Age, with later developments and influences overlapping into the Roman era. Geographically, it corresponds to the people the Romans called Gallaeci, which were composed of a large series of nations or tribes, among them the \"Artabri\", \"Bracari\", \"Limici\", \"Celtici\", \"Albiones\" and \"Lemavi\". They were capable fighters: Strabo described them as the most difficult foes the Romans encountered in conquering Lusitania, while Appian mentions their warlike spirit, noting that the women bore their weapons side by side with their men, frequently preferring death to captivity. According to Pomponius Mela all the inhabitants of the coastal areas were Celtic people.\nGallaeci lived in \"castros\". These were usually annular forts, with one or more concentric earthen or stony walls, with a trench in front of each one. They were frequently located on hills, or in seashore cliffs and peninsulas. Some well known \"castros\" can be found on the seashore at: Fazouro, Santa Tegra, Baro\u00f1a, and O Neix\u00f3n; and inland at: San Cibrao de L\u00e1s, Borneiro, Castromao, and Viladonga. Some other distinctive features, such as temples, baths, reservoirs, warrior statues, and decorative carvings have been found associated with this culture, together with rich gold and metalworking traditions.\nThe Roman legions first entered the area under Decimus Junius Brutus in 137\u2013136 BC, but the country was only incorporated into the Roman Empire by the time of Augustus (29 BC \u2013 19 BC). The Romans were interested in Galicia mainly for its mineral resources, most notably gold. Under Roman rule, most Galician hillforts began to be \u2013 sometimes forcibly \u2013 abandoned, and Gallaeci served frequently in the Roman army as auxiliary troops. Romans brought new technologies, new travel routes, new forms of organizing property, and a new language: Latin. The Roman Empire established its control over Galicia through camps (\"castra\") as \"Aquis Querquennis\", Ciadella camp or Lucus Augusti (Lugo), roads (\"viae\") and monuments as the lighthouse known as \"Tower of Hercules\", in Corunna, but the remoteness and lesser interest of the country since the 2nd century AD, when the gold mines stopped being productive, led to a lesser degree of \"Romanization\". In the 3rd century, it was made a province, under the name Gallaecia, which included also northern Portugal, Asturias, and a large section of what today is known as Castile and Le\u00f3n.\nEarly Middle Ages.\nIn the early 5th century, the deep crisis suffered by the Roman Empire allowed different tribes of Central Europe (Suebi, Vandals and Alani) to cross the Rhine and penetrate the rule on 31 December 406. Its progress towards the Iberian Peninsula forced the Roman authorities to establish a treaty (\"foedus\") by which the Suebi would settle peacefully and govern Galicia as imperial allies. So, from 409 Galicia was taken by the Suebi, forming the first medieval kingdom to be created in Europe, in 411, even before the fall of the Roman Empire, being also the first Germanic kingdom to mint coinage in Roman lands. During this period a Briton colony and bishopric (see Mailoc) was established in Northern Galicia (Britonia), probably as foederati and allies of the Suebi. In 585, the Visigothic King Leovigild invaded the Suebic kingdom of Galicia and defeated it, bringing it under Visigoth control.\nLater the Muslims invaded Spain (711), but the Arabs and Moors never managed to have any real control over Galicia, which was later incorporated into the expanding Christian Kingdom of Asturias, usually known as Gallaecia or Galicia (\"Yill\u012bqiya\" and \"Gal\u012bsiya\") by Muslim chroniclers, as well as by many European contemporaries. This era consolidated Galicia as a Christian society which spoke a Romance language. During the next century Galician noblemen took northern Portugal, conquering Coimbra in 871, thus freeing what was considered the southernmost city of ancient Galicia.\nHigh and Low Middle Ages.\nIn the 9th century, the rise of the cult of the Apostle James in Santiago de Compostela gave Galicia particular symbolic importance among Christians, an importance it would hold throughout the \"Reconquista\". As the Middle Ages went on, Santiago became a major pilgrim destination and the Way of Saint James (Cami\u00f1o de Santiago) a major pilgrim road, a route for the propagation of Romanesque art and the words and music of the troubadors. During the 10th and 11th centuries, a period during which Galician nobility become related to the royal family, Galicia was at times headed by its own native kings, while Vikings (locally known as \"Leodemanes\" or \"Lordomanes\") occasionally raided the coasts. The Towers of Catoira (Pontevedra) were built as a system of fortifications to prevent and stop the Viking raids on Santiago de Compostela.\nIn 1063, Ferdinand I of Castile divided his realm among his sons, and the Kingdom of Galicia was granted to Garcia II of Galicia. In 1072, it was forcibly annexed by Garcia's brother Alfonso VI of Le\u00f3n; from that time Galicia was united with the Kingdom of Le\u00f3n under the same monarchs. In the 13th century Alfonso X of Castile standardized the Castilian language (i.e. Spanish) and made it the language of court and government. Nevertheless, in his Kingdom of Galicia the Galician language was the only language spoken, and the most used in government and legal uses, as well as in literature.\nDuring the 14th and 15th centuries, the progressive distancing of the kings from Galician affairs left the kingdom in the hands of the local knights, counts, and bishops, who frequently fought each other to increase their fiefs, or simply to plunder the lands of others. At the same time, the deputies of the Kingdom in the \"Cortes\" stopped being called. The Kingdom of Galicia, slipping away from the control of the King, responded with a century of fiscal insubordination.\nOn the other hand, the lack of an effective royal justice system in the Kingdom led to the social conflict known as the \"Guerras Irmandi\u00f1as\" ('Wars of the brotherhoods'), when leagues of peasants and burghers, with the support of several knights, noblemen, and under legal protection offered by the remote king, toppled many of the castles of the Kingdom and briefly drove the noblemen into Portugal and Castile. Soon after, in the late 15th century, in the dynastic conflict between Isabella I of Castile and Joanna La Beltraneja, part of the Galician aristocracy supported Joanna. After Isabella's victory, she initiated an administrative and political reform which the chronicler Jeronimo Zurita defined as \"doma del Reino de Galicia\": 'It was then when the taming of Galicia began, because not just the local lords and knights, but all the people of that nation were the ones against the others very bold and warlike'. These reforms, while establishing a local government and tribunal (the \"Real Audiencia del Reino de Galicia\"), and bringing the nobleman under submission, also brought most Galician monasteries and institutions under Castilian control, in what has been criticized as a process of centralisation. At the same time the kings began to call the \"Xunta\" or \"Cortes\" of the Kingdom of Galicia, an assembly of deputies or representatives of the cities of the Kingdom, to ask for monetary and military contributions. This assembly soon developed into the voice and legal representation of the Kingdom, and the depositary of its will and laws.\nEarly Modern.\nThe modern period of the Kingdom of Galicia began with the defeat of some of the most powerful Galician lords, such as Pedro \u00c1lvarez de Sotomayor, called Pedro Madruga, and Rodrigo Henriquez Osorio, at the hands of the Castilian armies sent to Galicia between the years 1480 and 1486. Isabella I of Castile, considered a usurper by many Galician nobles, defeated all armed resistance and definitively established the royal power of the Castilian monarchy. Fearing a general revolt, the monarchs ordered the banishing of the rest of the great lords like Pedro de Bola\u00f1o, Diego de Andrade, or Lope S\u00e1nchez de Moscoso, among others.\nThe establishment of the Santa Hermandad in 1480, and the Real Audiencia del Reino de Galicia in 1500\u2014a tribunal and executive body directed by the Governor-Captain General as a direct representative of the King\u2014implied initially the submission of the Kingdom to the Crown, after a century of unrest and fiscal insubordination. As a result, from 1480 to 1520 the Kingdom of Galicia contributed more than 10% of the total earnings of the Crown of Castille, including the Americas, well over its economic relevance. Like the rest of Spain, the 16th century was marked by population growth up to 1580, when the simultaneous wars with the Netherlands, France, and England hampered Galicia's Atlantic commerce, which consisted mostly in the exportation of sardines, wood, and some cattle and wine.\nIn the late years of the 15th century the written form of the Galician language began a slow decline as it was increasingly replaced by Spanish, which would culminate in the \"S\u00e9culos Escuros\" \"the Dark Centuries\" of the language, roughly from the 16th century through to the mid-18th century, when written Galician almost completely disappeared except for private or occasional uses but the spoken language remained the common language of the people in the villages and even the cities.\nFrom that moment Galicia, which participated to a minor extent in the American expansion of the Spanish Empire, found itself at the center of the Atlantic wars fought by Spain against the French and the Protestant powers of England and the Netherlands, whose privateers attacked the coastal areas, but major assaults were not common as the coastline was difficult and the harbors easily defended. The most famous assaults were upon the city of Vigo by Sir Francis Drake in 1585 and 1589, and the siege of A Coru\u00f1a in 1589 by the \"English Armada\". Galicia also suffered occasional slave raids by Barbary pirates, but not as frequently as the Mediterranean coastal areas. The most famous Barbary attack was the bloody sack of the town of Cangas in 1617. At the time, the king's petitions for money and troops became more frequent, due to the human and economic exhaustion of Castile; the Junta of the Kingdom of Galicia (the local \"Cortes\" or representative assembly) was initially receptive to these petitions, raising large sums, accepting the conscription of the men of the kingdom, and even commissioning a new naval squadron which was sustained with the incomes of the Kingdom.\nAfter the rupture of the wars with Portugal and Catalonia, the \"Junta\" changed its attitude, this time due to the exhaustion of Galicia, now involved not just in naval or oversea operations, but also in an exhausting war with the Portuguese, war which produced thousands of casualties and refugees and was heavily disturbing to the local economy and commerce. So, in the second half of the 17th century the \"Junta\" frequently denied or considerably reduced the initial petitions of the monarch, and though the tension did not rise to the levels experienced in Portugal or Catalonia, there were frequent urban mutinies and some voices even asked for the secession of the Kingdom of Galicia.\nLate Modern and Contemporary.\nDuring the Peninsular War the successful uprising of the local people against the new French authorities, together with the support of the British Army, limited the occupation to six months in 1808\u20131809. During the pre-war period the Supreme Council of the Kingdom of Galicia (\"Junta Suprema del Reino de Galicia\"), auto-proclaimed interim sovereign in 1808, was the sole government of the country and mobilized near 40,000 men against the invaders.\nThe 1833 territorial division of Spain put a formal end to the Kingdom of Galicia, unifying Spain into a single centralized monarchy. Instead of seven provinces and a regional administration, Galicia was reorganized into the current four provinces. Although it was recognized as a \"historical region\", that status was strictly honorific. In reaction, nationalist and federalist movements arose.\nThe liberal General Miguel Sol\u00eds Cuetos led a separatist coup attempt in 1846 against the authoritarian regime of Ram\u00f3n Mar\u00eda Narv\u00e1ez. Sol\u00eds and his forces were defeated at the Battle of Cacheiras, 23 April 1846, and the survivors, including Sol\u00eds himself, were shot. They have taken their place in Galician memory as the Martyrs of Carral or simply the Martyrs of Liberty.\nDefeated on the military front, Galicians turned to culture. The \"Rexurdimento\" focused on the recovery of the Galician language as a vehicle of social and cultural expression. Among the writers associated with this movement are Rosal\u00eda de Castro, Manuel Murgu\u00eda, Manuel Leiras Pulpeiro, and Eduardo Pondal.\nIn the early 20th century came another turn toward nationalist politics with \"Solidaridad Gallega\" (1907\u20131912) modeled on \"Solidaritat Catalana\" in Catalonia. Solidaridad Gallega failed, but in 1916 \"Irmandades da Fala\" (Brotherhood of the Language) developed first as a cultural association but soon as a full-blown nationalist movement. Vicente Risco and Ram\u00f3n Otero Pedrayo were outstanding cultural figures of this movement, and the magazine \"N\u00f3s\" ('Us'), founded in 1920, its most notable cultural institution, Lois Pe\u00f1a Novo the outstanding political figure.\nThe Second Spanish Republic was declared in 1931. During the republic, the Partido Galeguista (PG) was the most important of a shifting collection of Galician nationalist parties. Following a referendum on a Galician Statute of Autonomy, Galicia was granted the status of an autonomous region.\nGalicia was spared the worst of the fighting in that war: it was one of the areas where the initial coup attempt at the outset of the war was successful, and it remained in Nationalist hands (Franco's army) throughout the war. While there were no pitched battles, there was repression and death: all political parties were abolished, as were all labor unions and Galician nationalist organizations as the \"Seminario de Estudos Galegos\". Galicia's statute of autonomy was annulled (as were those of Catalonia and the Basque provinces once those were conquered). According to Carlos Fern\u00e1ndez Santander, at least 4,200 people were killed either extrajudicially or after summary trials, among them republicans, communists, Galician nationalists, socialists, and anarchists. Victims included the civil governors of all four Galician provinces; Juana Capdevielle, the wife of the governor of A Coru\u00f1a; mayors such as \u00c1nxel Casal of Santiago de Compostela, of the Partido Galeguista; prominent socialists such as Jaime Quintanilla in Ferrol and Emilio Mart\u00ednez Garrido in Vigo; Popular Front deputies Antonio Bilbat\u00faa, Jos\u00e9 Mi\u00f1ones, D\u00edaz Villamil, Ignacio Seoane, and former deputy Heraclio Botana); soldiers who had not joined the rebellion, such as Generals Rogelio Caridad Pita and Enrique Salcedo Molinuevo and Admiral Antonio Azarola; and the founders of the PG, Alexandre B\u00f3veda and V\u00edctor Casas, as well as other professionals akin to republicans and nationalists, as the journalist Manuel Lustres Rivas or physician Luis Poza Pastrana. Many others were forced to escape into exile, or were victims of other reprisals and removed from their jobs and positions.\nGeneral Francisco Franco \u2013 himself a Galician from Ferrol \u2013 ruled as dictator from the civil war until he died in 1975. Franco's centralizing regime suppressed any official use of the Galician language, including the use of Galician names for newborns, although its everyday oral use was not forbidden. Among the attempts at resistance were small leftist guerrilla groups such as those led by Jos\u00e9 Castro Veiga (\"O Piloto\") and Benigno Andrade (\"Foucellas\"), both of whom were ultimately captured and executed. In the 1960s, ministers such as Manuel Fraga Iribarne introduced some reforms allowing technocrats affiliated with Opus Dei to modernize administration in a way that facilitated capitalist economic development. However, for decades Galicia was largely confined to the role of a supplier of raw materials and energy to the rest of Spain, causing environmental havoc and leading to a wave of migration to Venezuela and to various parts of Europe. Fenosa, the monopolistic supplier of electricity, built hydroelectric dams, flooding many Galician river valleys.\nThe Galician economy finally began to modernize with a French Citro\u00ebn factory in Vigo, the modernization of the canning industry and the fishing fleet, and eventually a modernization of small peasant farming practices, especially in the production of cows' milk. In the province of Ourense, businessman and politician Eulogio G\u00f3mez Franqueira gave impetus to the raising of livestock and poultry by establishing the Cooperativa Orensana S.A. (Coren).\nDuring the last decade of Franco's rule, there was a renewal of nationalist feeling in Galicia. The early 1970s were a time of unrest among university students, workers, and farmers. In 1972, general strikes in Vigo and Ferrol cost the lives of Amador Rey and Daniel Niebla. Later, the bishop of Mondo\u00f1edo-Ferrol, Miguel Anxo Ara\u00faxo Iglesias, wrote a pastoral letter that was not well received by the Franco regime, about a demonstration in Baz\u00e1n (Ferrol) where two workers died.\nAs part of the transition to democracy upon the death of Franco in 1975, Galicia regained its status as an autonomous region within Spain with the Statute of Autonomy of 1981, which begins, \"Galicia, historical nationality, is constituted as an Autonomous Community to access to its self-government, in agreement with the Spanish Constitution and with the present Statute (\u2026)\". Varying degrees of nationalist or independentist sentiment are evident at the political level. The \"Bloque Nacionalista Galego\" or BNG, is a conglomerate of left-wing parties and individuals that claims Galician political status as a nation.\nFrom 1990 to 2005, Manuel Fraga, former minister and ambassador in the Franco dictatorship, presided over the Galician autonomous government, the Xunta de Galicia. Fraga was associated with the \"Partido Popular\" ('People's Party', Spain's main national conservative party) since its founding. In 2002, when the oil tanker Prestige sank and covered the Galician coast in oil, Fraga was accused by the grassroots movement \"Nunca Mais\" (\"Never again\") of having been unwilling to react. In the 2005 Galician elections, the 'People's Party' lost its absolute majority, though remaining (barely) the largest party in the parliament, with 43% of the total votes. As a result, power passed to a coalition of the \"Partido dos Socialistas de Galicia\" (PSdeG) ('Galician Socialists' Party'), a federal sister-party of Spain's main social-democratic party, the \"Partido Socialista Obrero Espa\u00f1ol\" (PSOE, 'Spanish Socialist Workers Party') and the nationalist \"Bloque Nacionalista Galego\" (BNG). As the senior partner in the new coalition, the PSdeG nominated its leader, Emilio P\u00e9rez Touri\u00f1o, to serve as Galicia's new president, with Anxo Quintana, the leader of BNG, as its vice president.\nIn 2009, the PSdG-BNG coalition lost the elections, and the government went back to the People's Party (conservative), even though the PSdG-BNG coalition obtained the most votes.\nGeography.\nGalicia has a surface area of . Its northernmost point, at 43\u00b047\u2032N, is Estaca de Bares (also the northernmost point of Spain); its southernmost, at 41\u00b049\u2032N, is on the Portuguese border in the Baixa Limia-Serra do Xur\u00e9s Natural Park. The easternmost longitude is at 6\u00b042\u2032W on the border between the province of Ourense and the Castilian-Leonese province of Zamora) its westernmost at 9\u00b018\u2032W reached in two places: the A Nave Cape in Fisterra (also known as Finisterre), and Cape Touri\u00f1\u00e1n, both in the province of A Coru\u00f1a.\nTopography.\nThe interior of Galicia is a hilly landscape, composed of relatively low mountain ranges, usually below high, without sharp peaks, rising to in the eastern mountains. There are many rivers, most (though not all) running down relatively gentle slopes in narrow river valleys, though at times their courses become far more rugged, as in the canyons of the Sil river, Galicia's second most important river after the Mi\u00f1o.\nTopographically, a remarkable feature of Galicia is the presence of many firth-like inlets along the coast, estuaries that were drowned with rising sea levels after the ice age. These are called \"r\u00edas\" and are divided into the smaller \"R\u00edas Altas\" (\"High R\u00edas\"), and the larger \"R\u00edas Baixas\" (\"Low R\u00edas\"). The \"R\u00edas Altas\" include Ribadeo, Foz, Viveiro, O Barqueiro, Ortigueira, Cedeira, Ferrol, Betanzos, A Coru\u00f1a, Corme e Laxe and Camari\u00f1as. The R\u00edas Baixas, found south of Fisterra, include Corcubi\u00f3n, Muros e Noia, Arousa, Pontevedra and Vigo. The R\u00edas Altas can sometimes refer only to those east of Estaca de Bares, with the others being called \"R\u00edas Medias\" (\"Intermediate R\u00edas\").\nErosion by the Atlantic Ocean has contributed to the great number of capes. Besides the aforementioned Estaca de Bares in the far north, separating the Atlantic Ocean from the Cantabrian Sea, other notable capes are Cape Ortegal, Cape Prior, Punta Santo Adrao, Cape Vil\u00e1n, Cape Touri\u00f1\u00e1n (westernmost point in Galicia), Cape Finisterre or Fisterra, considered by the Romans, along with Finist\u00e8re in Brittany and Land's End in Cornwall, to be the end of the known world.\nAll along the Galician coast are various archipelagos near the mouths of the \"r\u00edas\". These archipelagos provide protected deepwater harbors and also provide habitat for seagoing birds. A 2007 inventory estimates that the Galician coast has 316 archipelagos, islets, and freestanding rocks. Among the most important of these are the archipelagos of C\u00edes, Ons, and S\u00e1lvora. Together with Cortegada Island, these make up the Atlantic Islands of Galicia National Park. Other significant islands are Islas Malveiras, Islas Sisargas, and, the largest and holding the largest population, Arousa Island.\nThe coast of this 'green corner' of the Iberian Peninsula, some in length, attracts great numbers of tourists, although real estate development in the 2000\u20132010 decade has degraded it partially.\nGalicia is quite mountainous, a fact which has contributed to isolate the rural areas, hampering communications, most notably in the inland. The main mountain range is the Macizo Galaico (Serra do Eixe, Serra da Lastra, Serra do Courel), also known as \"Macizo Galaico-Leon\u00e9s\", located in the eastern parts, bordering with Castile and Le\u00f3n. Noteworthy mountain ranges are O Xistral (northern Lugo), the Serra dos Ancares (on the border with Le\u00f3n and Asturias), O Courel (on the border with Le\u00f3n), O Eixe (the border between Ourense and Zamora), Serra de Queixa (in the center of Ourense province), O Faro (the border between Lugo and Pontevedra), Cova da Serpe (border of Lugo and A Coru\u00f1a), Montemaior (A Coru\u00f1a), Montes do Testeiro, Serra do Su\u00eddo, and Faro de Avi\u00f3n (between Pontevedra and Ourense); and, to the south, A Peneda, O Xur\u00e9s and O Larouco, all on the border of Ourense and Portugal.\nThe highest point in Galicia is Trevinca or Pena Trevinca (), located in the Serra do Eixe, at the border between Ourense and Le\u00f3n and Zamora provinces. Other tall peaks are Pena Survia () in the Serra do Eixe, O Mustallar () in Os Ancares, and Cabeza de Manzaneda () in Serra de Queixa, where there is a ski resort.\nHydrography.\nGalicia is poetically known as the \"country of the thousand rivers\" (\"o pa\u00eds dos mil r\u00edos\"). The largest and most important of these rivers is the Mi\u00f1o, poetically known as \"O Pai Mi\u00f1o\" (Father Mi\u00f1o), which is long and discharges per second, with its affluent the Sil, which has created a spectacular canyon. Most of the rivers in the inland are tributaries of this river system, which drains some . Other rivers run directly into the Atlantic Ocean or the Cantabrian Sea, most of them having short courses. Only the Navia, Ulla, Tambre, and Limia have courses longer than .\nGalicia's many hydroelectric dams take advantage of the steep, deep, narrow rivers and their canyons. Due to their steep course, few of Galicia's rivers are navigable, other than the lower portion of the Mi\u00f1o and the portions of various rivers that have been dammed into reservoirs. Some rivers are navigable by small boats in their lower reaches: this is taken great advantage of in several semi-aquatic festivals and pilgrimages.\nEnvironment.\nGalicia has preserved some of its dense forests. It is relatively unpolluted, and its landscapes composed of green hills, cliffs, and \"rias\" are generally different from what is commonly understood as Spanish landscape. Nevertheless, Galicia has some important environmental problems.\nDeforestation and forest fires are a problem in many areas, as is the continual spread of the eucalyptus tree, a species imported from Australia, actively promoted by the paper industry since the mid-20th century. Galicia is one of the more forested areas of Spain, but the majority of Galicia's plantations, usually growing eucalyptus or pine, lack any formal management. Massive eucalyptus plantation, especially of \"Eucalyptus globulus\", began in the Francisco Franco era, largely on behalf of the paper company Empresa Nacional de Celulosas de Espa\u00f1a (ENCE) in Pontevedra, which wanted it for its pulp. Galician photographer Delmi \u00c1lvarez began documenting the fires in Galicia in 2006 in a project called \"Queiman Galiza (Burn Galicia)\". Wood products figure significantly in Galicia's economy. Apart from tree plantations, Galicia is also notable for the extensive surface occupied by meadows used for animal husbandry, especially cattle, an important activity. Hydroelectric development in most rivers has been a serious concern for local conservationists during the last decades.\nFauna, most notably the European wolf, has suffered because of the actions of livestock owners and farmers, and because of the loss of habitats, whilst the native deer species have declined because of hunting and development.\nOil spills are a major issue. The Prestige oil spill in 2002 spilled more oil than the Exxon Valdez in Alaska.\nBiodiversity.\nGalicia has more than 2,800 plant species and 31 endemic plant taxa. Plantations and mixed forests of eucalyptus predominate in the west and north; a few oak forests (variously known locally as \"fragas\" or \"devesas\") remain, particularly in the north-central part of the province of Lugo and the north of the province of A Coru\u00f1a (Fragas do Eume). In the interior regions of the country, oak and bushland predominate.\nGalicia has 262 inventoried species of vertebrates, including 12 species of freshwater fish, 15 amphibians, 24 reptiles, 152 birds, and 59 mammals.\nThe animals most often thought of as being \"typical\" of Galicia are the livestock raised there. The Galician horse is native to the region, as is the Galician Blond cow and the domestic fowl known as the \"gali\u00f1a de Mos\". The last is an endangered species, although it is showing signs of a comeback since 2001.\nGalicia is home to one of the largest populations of wolves in western Europe. Galicia's woodlands and mountains are also home to rabbits, hares, wild boars, and roe deer, all of which are popular with hunters. Several important bird migration routes pass through Galicia, and some of the community's relatively few environmentally protected areas are Special Protection Areas (such as on the R\u00eda de Ribadeo) for these birds. From a domestic point of view, Galicia has been credited by the author Manuel Rivas as the \"land of one million cows\". Galician Blond and Holstein cattle coexist on meadows and farms.\nClimate.\nBeing located on the Atlantic coastline, Galicia has a very mild climate for the latitude and the marine influence affects most of the province to various degrees. In comparison to similar latitudes on the other side of the Atlantic, winters are exceptionally mild, with consistent rainfall. At sea level snow is exceptional, with temperatures just occasionally dropping below freezing; on the other hand, snow regularly falls in the eastern mountains from November to May. Overall, the climate of Galicia is comparable to the Pacific Northwest region of the United States; the warmest coastal station of Pontevedra has a yearly mean temperature of . Ourense located somewhat inland is only slightly warmer with . Lugo, to the north, is colder, with , similar to the of Portland, Oregon.\nIn coastal areas summers are tempered, with daily maximums averaging around in Vigo. Temperatures are further cooler in A Coru\u00f1a, with a subdued normal. Temperatures are much higher in inland areas such as Ourense, where days above are regular.\nThe lands of Galicia are ascribed to two different areas in the K\u00f6ppen climate classification: a south area (roughly, the province of Ourense and Pontevedra) with appreciable summer drought, classified as a warm-summer Mediterranean climate (\"Csb\"), with mild temperatures and rainfall usual throughout the year; and the western and northern coastal regions, the provinces of Lugo and A Coru\u00f1a, which are characterized by their Oceanic climate (\"Cfb\"), with a more uniform precipitation distribution along the year, and milder summers. However, precipitation in southern coastal areas are often classified as oceanic since the averages remain significantly higher than a typical Mediterranean climate.\nAs an example, Santiago de Compostela, the capital city, has an average of 129 rainy days (&gt; 1\u00a0mm) and per year (with just 17 rainy days in the three summer months) and 2,101 sunlight hours per year, with just 6 days with frosts per year. But the colder city of Lugo, to the east, has an average of 1,759 sunlight hours per year, 117 days with precipitations (&gt; 1\u00a0mm) totalling , and 40 days with frosts per year. The more mountainous parts of the provinces of Ourense and Lugo receive significant snowfall during the winter months. The sunniest city is Pontevedra with 2,223 sunny hours per year.\nClimate data for some locations in Galicia (average 1981\u20132010):\nGovernment and politics.\nLocal government.\nGalicia has partial self-governance, in the form of a devolved government, established on 16 March 1978 and reinforced by the Galician Statute of Autonomy, ratified on 28 April 1981. There are three branches of government: the executive branch, the Xunta de Galicia, consisting of the President and the other independently elected councillors; the legislative branch consisting of the Galician Parliament; and the judicial branch consisting of the High Court of Galicia and lower courts.\nExecutive.\nThe Xunta de Galicia is a collective entity with executive and administrative power. It consists of the President, a vice president, and twelve councillors. Administrative power is largely delegated to dependent bodies. The Xunta also coordinates the activities of the provincial councils () located in A Coru\u00f1a, Pontevedra, Ourense and Lugo.\nThe President of the Xunta directs and coordinates the actions of the Xunta. The president is simultaneously the representative of the autonomous community and of the Spanish state in Galicia. The president is a member of the parliament and is elected by its deputies and then formally named by the monarch of Spain.\nLegislative.\nThe Galician Parliament consists of 75 deputies elected by universal adult suffrage under a system of proportional representation. The franchise includes also Galicians who reside abroad. Elections occur every four years.\nThe last elections, held 12 July 2020, resulted in the following distribution of seats:\nMunicipal governments.\nThere are 314 municipalities () in Galicia, each of which is run by a mayor\u2013council government known as a .\nThere is a further subdivision of local government known as an ; each has its own council () and mayor (). There are nine of these in Galicia: Arcos da Condesa, Bembrive, Camposancos, Chenlo, Morgad\u00e1ns, Pazos de Reis, Queimadelos, Vilasobroso and Ber\u00e1n.\nGalicia is also traditionally subdivided in some 3,700 civil parishes, each one comprising one or more \"vilas\" (towns), \"aldeas\" (villages), \"lugares\" (hamlets) or \"barrios\" (neighbourhoods).\nNational government.\nGalicia's interests are represented at the national level by 25 elected deputies in the Congress of Deputies and 19 senators in the Senate \u2013 of these, 16 are elected and 3 are appointed by the Galician parliament.\nAdministrative divisions.\nBefore the 1833 territorial division of Spain, Galicia was divided into seven administrative provinces:\nFrom 1833, the seven original provinces of the 15th century were consolidated into four:\nGalicia is further divided into 53 \"comarcas\", 315 municipalities (93 in A Coru\u00f1a, 67 in Lugo, 92 in Ourense, 62 in Pontevedra) and 3,778 parishes. Municipalities are divided into parishes, which may be further divided into \"aldeas\" (\"hamlets\") or \"lugares\" (\"places\"). This traditional breakdown into such small areas is unusual when compared to the rest of Spain. Roughly half of the named population entities of Spain are in Galicia, which occupies only 5.8 percent of the country's area. It is estimated that Galicia has over a million named places, over 40,000 of them being communities.\nEconomy.\nTextiles, fishing, livestock, forestry, and car manufacturing are the most dynamic sectors of the Galician economy.\nThe companies based in the province of Coru\u00f1a generate 70% of the entrepreneurial output of Galicia. Arteixo, an industrial municipality in the A Coru\u00f1a metropolitan area, is the headquarters of Inditex, the world's largest fashion retailer. Of their eight brands, Zara is the best-known; indeed, it is the best-known Spanish brand of any sort on an international basis. In 2022, Inditex reported \u20ac32.6 billion in sales and net income of \u20ac4.1 billion. The company president, Amancio Ortega, is the richest person in Spain and indeed Europe with a net worth of 45\u00a0billion euros.\nA major economic sector of Galicia is its fishing Industry; the main ports are A Coru\u00f1a, Mar\u00edn-Pontevedra, Vigo and Ferrol. Related to this fact, the European Fisheries Control Agency, which coordinates fishing controls in European Union waters, is based in Vigo.\nGalicia is a land of economic contrast. While the western coast, with its major population centers and its fishing and manufacturing industries, is prosperous and increasing in population, the rural hinterland\u2014the provinces of Ourense and Lugo\u2014is economically dependent on traditional agriculture, based on small landholdings called \"minifundios\". However, the rise of tourism, sustainable forestry, and organic and traditional agriculture are bringing other possibilities to the Galician economy without compromising the preservation of the natural resources and the local culture.\nTraditionally, Galicia depended mainly on agriculture and fishing. Nonetheless, today the tertiary sector of the economy (the service sector) is the largest, with 582,000 workers out of a regional total of 1,072,000 (as of 2002).\nThe secondary sector (manufacturing) includes shipbuilding in Vigo, Mar\u00edn-Pontevedra and Ferrol, textiles and granite work in A Coru\u00f1a. A Coru\u00f1a also manufactures automobiles. The French \"Centro de Vigo de PSA Peugeot Citro\u00ebn\", founded in 1958, makes about 450,000 vehicles annually (455,430 in 2006); a Citro\u00ebn C4 Picasso made in 2007 was their nine-millionth vehicle.\nOther companies with a large number of workers and a significant turnover are San Jos\u00e9, based in Pontevedra, belonging to the construction sector, and Gadisa and Vego, based in A Coru\u00f1a and Froiz, based in Pontevedra, linked to the retail sector.\nGalicia is home to the savings bank, and to Spain's two oldest commercial banks Banco Etcheverr\u00eda (the oldest) and Banco Pastor, owned since 2011 by Banco Popular Espa\u00f1ol.\nGalicia was late to catch the tourism boom that has swept Spain in recent decades, but the coastal regions (especially the R\u00edas Baixas and Santiago de Compostela) are now significant tourist destinations and are especially popular with visitors from other regions in Spain, where the majority of tourists come from. In 2007, 5.7\u00a0million tourists visited Galicia, an 8% growth over the previous year, and part of a continual pattern of growth in this sector. 85% of tourists who visit Galicia visit Santiago de Compostela. Tourism constitutes 12% of Galician GDP and employs about 12% of the regional workforce.\nThe Gross domestic product (GDP) of the autonomous community was 62.6\u00a0billion euros in 2018, accounting for 5.2% of Spanish economic output. GDP per capita adjusted for purchasing power was 24,900 euros or 82% of the EU27 average in the same year. The GDP per employee was 95% of the EU average.\nThe unemployment rate stood at 15.7% in 2017 and was lower than the national average.\nTransportation.\nGalicia's main airport is Santiago de Compostela Airport. Having been used by 2,083,873 passengers in 2014, it connects the Galician capital with cities in Spain as well as several major European cities. There are two other domestic airports in Galicia: A Coru\u00f1a Airport \u2013 Alvedro and Vigo-Peinador Airport.\nThe most important Galician fishing port is the Port of Vigo; It is one of Europe's leading fishing ports, with an annual catch worth 1,500\u00a0million euros. In 2007 the port took in of fish and seafood, and about of other cargoes. Other important ports are A Coru\u00f1a, Mar\u00edn-Pontevedra, Ferrol and the smaller port of Vilagarc\u00eda de Arousa, as well as important recreational ports in Pontevedra capital city and Burela. Beyond these, Galicia has 120 other organized ports.\nThe Galician road network includes \"autopistas\" and \"autov\u00edas\" connecting the major cities, as well as national and secondary roads to the rest of the municipalities. The Autov\u00eda A-6 connects A Coru\u00f1a and Lugo to Madrid, entering Galicia at Pedrafita do Cebreiro. The Autov\u00eda A-52 connects O Porri\u00f1o, Ourense and Benavente, and enters Galicia at A Gudi\u00f1a. Two more autov\u00edas are under construction. Autov\u00eda A-8 enters Galicia on the Cantabrian coast, and ends in Baamonde (Lugo province). Autov\u00eda A-76 enters Galicia in Valdeorras; it is an upgrade of the existing N-120 to Ourense.\nWithin Galicia are the Autopista AP-9 from Ferrol to Portugal and the Autopista AP-53 (also known as AG-53, because it was initially built by the Xunta de Galicia) from Santiago to Ourense. Additional roads under construction include Autov\u00eda A-54 from Santiago de Compostela to Lugo, the Autov\u00eda A-57 that will pass through Pontevedra and Autov\u00eda A-56 from Lugo to Ourense. The Xunta de Galicia has built roads connecting comarcal capitals, such as the before mentioned AG-53, Autov\u00eda AG-55 connecting A Coru\u00f1a to Carballo or AG-41 connecting Pontevedra to Sanxenxo.\nThe first railway line in Galicia was inaugurated on 15 September 1873. It ran from O Carril, Vilagarc\u00eda da Arousa to Cornes, Conxo, Santiago de Compostela. A second line was inaugurated in 1875, connecting A Coru\u00f1a and Lugo. In 1883, Galicia was first connected by rail to the rest of Spain, by way of O Barco de Valdeorras. Galicia today has roughly of rail lines. Several lines operated by Adif and Renfe Operadora connect all the important Galician cities. A line operated by FEVE connects Ferrol to Ribadeo and Oviedo. An old electrified line is the Ponferrada-Monforte de Lemos-Ourense-Vigo line. Several high-speed rail lines are under construction. Among these are the Olmedo-Zamora-Galicia high-speed rail line that opened partly in 2011, and the AVE Atlantic Axis route, which will connect all of the major Galician Atlantic coast cities A Coru\u00f1a, Santiago de Compostela, Pontevedra and Vigo to Portugal.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;Galicia's inhabitants are known as Galicians (, ). For well over a century Galicia has grown more slowly than the rest of Spain, largely due to a poorer economy compared with other regions of Spain and emigration to Latin America and other parts of Spain. Sometimes, Galicia has lost population in absolute terms. In 1857, Galicia had Spain's densest population and constituted 11.5% of the national population. As of 2007[ [update]], only 6.1% of the Spanish population resided in the autonomous community. This is due to an exodus of Galician people since the 19th century, first to South America and later to Central Europe and the development of population centers and industry in other parts of Spain.\nAccording to a 2006 estimate, Galicia has a fertility rate of 1.03 children per woman, compared to 1.38 nationally, and far below the figure of 2.1 that represents a stable populace. Lugo and Ourense provinces have the lowest fertility rates in Spain, 0.88 and 0.93, respectively.\nIn northern Galicia, the A Coru\u00f1a-Ferrol metropolitan area has become increasingly dominant in terms of population. The population of the city of A Coru\u00f1a in 1900 was 43,971. The population of the rest of the province, including the City and Naval Station of nearby Ferrol and Santiago de Compostela, was 653,556. A Coru\u00f1a's growth occurred after the Spanish Civil War at the same speed as other major Galician cities, but since the revival of democracy after the death of Francisco Franco, A Coru\u00f1a has grown at a faster rate than all the other Galician cities.\nDuring the mid-20th century, the population rapidly increased in A Coru\u00f1a, Vigo, and to a lesser degree, other major Galician cities, such as Ourense, Pontevedra or Santiago de Compostela as the rural population declined after the Spanish Civil War: many villages and hamlets of the four provinces of Galicia disappeared or nearly disappeared during the same period. Economic development and mechanization of agriculture resulted in the fields being abandoned, and most of the population moved to find jobs in the main cities. The number of people working in the tertiary and quaternary sectors of the economy increased significantly.\nSince 1999, the absolute number of births in Galicia has been increasing. In 2006, 21,392 births were registered in Galicia, 300 more than in 2005, according to the Instituto Galego de Estat\u00edstica. Since 1981, the Galician life expectancy has increased by five years, thanks to a higher quality of life.\nRoman Catholicism is, by far, the largest religion in Galicia. In 2012, the proportion of Galicians that identify themselves as Roman Catholic was 82.2%.\nAs a Celtic region of Spain, Galicia has a tartan called Galicia National.\nUrbanization.\nThe principal cities are the four capitals A Coru\u00f1a, Pontevedra, Ourense and Lugo, Santiago de Compostela \u2013 the political capital and archiepiscopal seat \u2013 and the industrial cities Vigo and Ferrol.\nThe largest conurbations are:\nMigration.\nLike many rural areas of Western Europe, Galicia's history has been defined by mass emigration. Significant internal migration took place from Galicia in the late 19th and early 20th centuries to the industrialized Spanish cities of Barcelona, Bilbao, Zaragoza and Madrid. Other Galicians emigrated to Latin America \u2013 Argentina, Uruguay, Venezuela, Mexico, Brazil and Cuba in particular.\nThe two cities with the greatest number of people of Galician descent outside Galicia are Buenos Aires, Argentina, and nearby Montevideo, Uruguay. Immigration from Galicia was so significant in these areas that Argentines and Uruguayans now commonly refer to all Spaniards as \"gallegos\" (Galicians).\nDuring the Franco years, there was a new wave of emigration out of Galicia to other European countries, most notably to France, Germany, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. Many of these immigrant or expatriate communities have their groups or clubs, which they formed in the first decades of settling in a new place. The Galician diaspora is so widespread that websites such as Fillos de Galicia have been created in the 21st century to organize and form a network of ethnic Galicians throughout the world.\nAfter this, a third wave was a Spanish internal emigration to heavier industrialised areas of Spain, like the Basque Country or Catalonia.\nThe proportion of foreign-born people in Galicia is only 2.9 percent compared to the national figure of 10 percent; among the autonomous communities, only Extremadura has a lower percentage of immigrants. Of the foreign nationals resident in Galicia, 17.93 percent are the ethnically related Portuguese, 10.93 percent are Colombian and 8.74 percent Brazilian.\nLanguage.\nGalicia has two official languages: Galician (Galician: \"galego\") and Spanish (also known in Spain as \"Castellano\", i.e. \"Castilian\"), both of them Romance languages. The former (Galician) originated regionally; the latter (Castilian) was associated with Castile. Galician is recognized in the Statute of Autonomy of Galicia as the \"lingua propia\" (\"own language\") of Galicia.\nGalician and Portuguese share a common medieval phase known as Galician-Portuguese. The independence of Portugal since the late Middle Ages has favored the divergence of the Galician and Portuguese languages as they developed. Though considered to be independent languages in Galicia, the shared history between Galician and Portuguese has been widely acknowledged; in 2014, the Galician parliament approved Law 1/2014 on the promotion of Portuguese and links with the Lusophony.\nThe official Galician language has been standardized by the based on literary tradition. Although there are local dialects, Galician media conform to this standard form, which is also used in primary, secondary, and university education. There are more than three million Galician speakers in the world. Galician ranks in the lower orders of the 150 most widely spoken languages on earth.\nFor more than four centuries of Castilian domination, Spanish was the only official language in Galicia. Galician faded from day-to-day use in urban areas. Since the re-establishment of democracy in Spain\u2014in particular since the passage and implementation of the \"Lei de Normalizaci\u00f3n Ling\u00fc\u00edstica\" (\"Law of Linguistic Normalization\", Ley 3/1983, 15 June 1983)\u2014the first generation of students in mass education has attended schools conducted in Galician. (Spanish is also taught.)\nSince the late 20th century and the establishment of Galicia's autonomy, the Galician language is resurgent. In the cities, it is generally used as a second language for most. According to a 2001 census, 99.16 percent of the population of Galicia understood the language, 91.04 percent spoke it, 68.65 percent could read it and 57.64 percent could write it. The first two numbers (understanding and speaking) were roughly the same as responses a decade earlier. But there were great gains in the percentage of the population who could read and write Galician: a decade earlier, only 49.3 percent of the population could read Galician, and 34.85 percent could write it. During the Franco era, the teaching of Galician was prohibited. Today older people may speak the language but have no written competence because of those years. Among the regional languages of Spain, Galician has the highest percentage of speakers in its population. \nThe earliest known document in Galician-Portuguese dates from 1228. The \"Foro do bo burgo do Castro Caldelas\" was granted by Alfonso IX of Le\u00f3n to the town of Burgo, in Castro Caldelas, after the model of the constitutions of the town of Allariz. A distinct Galician literature emerged during the Middle Ages: In the 13th century important contributions were made to the Romance canon in Galician-Portuguese, the most notable those by the troubadour Mart\u00edn Codax, the priest Airas Nunes, King Denis of Portugal, and King Alfonso X of Castile, \"Alfonso O Sabio\" (\"Alfonso the Wise\"), the same monarch who began the process of standardization of the Spanish language. During this period, Galician-Portuguese was considered the language of love poetry in the Iberian Romance linguistic culture. The names and memories of Codax and other popular cultural figures are well preserved in modern Galicia.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChristianity is the most widely practised religion in Galicia. It was introduced in Late Antiquity and was practiced alongside the native Celtic religion for a few centuries which, incidentally, was re-established as an officially recognised religion in 2015. Still, today about 77.7% of Galicians identify as Catholic. Most Christians adhere to Catholicism, though only 32.1% of the population described themselves as active members.\nThe Catholic Church in Galicia has had its primatial see in Santiago de Compostela since the 12th century. In fact, since the Middle Ages, the Galician Catholic Church has been organized into five dioceses: the Metropolitan see Santiago de Compostela, and four suffragan dioceses: Lugo, Ourense, Mondo\u00f1edo-Ferrol and Tui-Vigo. While in the 15th-century diocesan boundaries may have coincided with those of the civil province, this is no longer the case. The five dioceses of Galicia are subdivided into a total of 163 districts and 3,792 parishes. In a minority of cases, the parish priest is represented by an administrator.\nThe patron saint of Galicia is Saint James the Greater. According to Catholic tradition, his body was discovered in 814 near Compostela. After that date, the relics of Saint James attracted an extraordinary number of pilgrims. Since the 9th century these relics have been kept in the heart of the church \u2013 the modern-day cathedral \u2013 dedicated to him. There are many other Galician and associated saints; some of the best-known are: Saint Ansurius, Saint Rudesind, Saint Mari\u00f1a of Augas Santas, Saint Senorina, Trahamunda and Froilan.\nEducation.\nGalicia's education system is administered by the regional government's Ministry of Education and University Administration. 76% of Galician teenagers achieve a high school degree \u2013 ranked fifth out of the 17 autonomous communities.\nThere are three public universities in Galicia: University of A Coru\u00f1a with campuses in A Coru\u00f1a and Ferrol, University of Santiago de Compostela with campuses in Santiago de Compostela and Lugo and the University of Vigo with campuses in Pontevedra, Ourense and Vigo.\nHealth care.\nGalicia's public healthcare system is the (SERGAS). It is administered by the regional government's Ministry of Health.\nCulture.\nArchitecture and Art.\nHundreds of ancient standing stone monuments like dolmens, menhirs, and megalithic tumuli were erected during the prehistoric period in Galicia. Amongst the best-known are the dolmens of Dombate, Corveira, Axeitos of Pedra da Arca, and menhirs like the Lapa de Gargant\u00e1ns. From the Iron Age, Galicia has a rich heritage based mainly on a great number of hill forts, few of them excavated like Baro\u00f1a, Sta. Tegra, San Cibrao de L\u00e1s and Formigueiros among others. With the introduction of Ancient Roman architecture, there was a development of basilicas, castra, city walls, cities, villas, Roman temples, Roman roads, and the Roman bridge of Ponte Vella. It was the Romans who founded some of the first cities in Galicia like Lugo and Ourense. Perhaps the best-known examples are the Roman Walls of Lugo and the Tower of Hercules in A Coru\u00f1a.\nDuring the Middle Ages, many fortified castles were built by Galician feudal nobles to mark their powers against their rivals. Although most of them were demolished during the Irmandi\u00f1o Wars (1466\u20131469), some Galician castles that survived are Pambre, Castro Caldelas, Sobroso, Soutomaior and Monterrei. The ecclesiastical architecture was raised early in Galicia, and the first churches and monasteries as San Pedro de Rocas began to be built in the 5th and 6th centuries. However, the most famous medieval architecture in Galicia had been using Romanesque architecture like most of Western Europe. Some of the greatest examples of Romanesque churches in Galicia are the Cathedral of Santiago de Compostela, the Ourense Cathedral, Saint John of Caaveiro, Our Lady Mary of Cambre, and the Church of San Xo\u00e1n of Portomar\u00edn among others.\nIn the art of Galicia, the stone has a strong imprint, especially the granite, which served as a support from the prehistoric petroglyphs figures to the development of medieval art in the Galician Romanesque sculptures from Portico of Glory by Master Mateo, in Santiago de Compostela Cathedral. Medieval splendor was followed, as in literature, by a few centuries of darkness (the \"S\u00e9culos escuros\") until the arrival of the Compostela Baroque. In painting, the romanticism and impressionist-influenced landscapes of the 20th century were materialized by a generation of artists who died young, so they were called the \"Xeraci\u00f3n Doente\" (Sick Generation). In the 20th century, the renovation came in the 20s by \"Os renovadores\", and by the \"Atl\u00e1ntica\" group after the dictatorship.\nCuisine.\nGalician cuisine often uses fish and shellfish. The \"empanada\" is a meat or fish pie, with a bread-like base, top, and crust with the meat or fish filling usually being in a tomato sauce including onions and garlic. \"Caldo galego\" is a hearty soup whose main ingredients are potatoes and a local vegetable named grelo (broccoli rabe). The latter is also employed in \"lac\u00f3n con grelos\", a typical carnival dish, consisting of pork shoulder boiled with \"grelos\", potatoes, and chorizo. \"Centolla\" is the equivalent of king crab. It is prepared by being boiled alive, having its main body opened like a shell, and then having its innards mixed vigorously. Another popular dish is octopus, boiled (traditionally in a copper pot) and served on a wooden plate, cut into small pieces, and laced with olive oil, sea salt, and \"piment\u00f3n\" (Spanish paprika). This dish is called \"pulpo a la gallega\" or in Galician \"polbo \u00e1 feira\", which roughly translates as 'fair-style octopus', most commonly translated as 'Galician-style octopus'. There are several regional varieties of cheese. The best-known one is the so-called \"tetilla\", named after its breast-like shape. Other highly regarded varieties include the San Sim\u00f3n cheese from Vilalba and the creamy cheese produced in the Arz\u00faa-Ulloa area. A classical is \"filloas\", cr\u00eape-like pancakes made with flour, broth or milk, and eggs. When cooked at a pig slaughter festival, they may also contain the animal's blood. A famous almond cake called \"Tarta de Santiago\" (St. James' cake) is a Galician sweet specialty mainly produced in Santiago de Compostela and all around Galicia.\nGalicia has 30 products with \"Denominaci\u00f3n de orixe\" (D.O.), some of them with \"Denominaci\u00f3n de Orixe Protexida\" (D.O.P.). D.O. and D.O.P. are part of a system of regulation of quality and geographical origin among Spain's finest producers. Galicia produces a number of high-quality Galician wines, including Albari\u00f1o, Ribeiro, Ribeira Sacra, Monterrei and Valdeorras. The grape varieties used are local and rarely found outside Galicia and Northern Portugal. Just as notably from Galicia comes the spirit \"Augardente\"\u2014the name means burning water\u2014often referred to as Orujo in Spain and internationally or as ca\u00f1a in Galicia. This spirit is made from the distillation of the pomace of grapes.\nMusic.\nFolk and traditionally based music.\nThe traditional music of Galicia and Asturias features highly distinctive folk styles that have some similarities with the neighboring area of Cantabria. The music is characterized by the use of bagpipes.\nLiterature, poetry and philosophy.\nAs with many other Romance languages, Galician-Portuguese emerged as a literary language in the Middle Ages, during the 12th and 13th centuries, when a rich lyric tradition developed, followed by a minor prose tradition, whilst being the predominant language used for legal and private texts till the 15th century. However, in the face of the hegemony of Spanish, during the so-called \"S\u00e9culos Escuros\" (\"Dark Centuries\") from 1530 to the late 18th century, it fell from major literary or legal written use.\nAs a literary language it was revived again during the 18th and, most notably, the 19th-century (\"Rexurdimento\" \"Resurgence\") with such writers as Rosal\u00eda de Castro, Manuel Murgu\u00eda, Manuel Leiras Pulpeiro, and Eduardo Pondal. In the 20th century, before the Spanish Civil War the \"Irmandades da Fala\" (\"Brotherhood of the Language\") and \"Grupo N\u00f3s\" included such writers as Vicente Risco, Ram\u00f3n Cabanillas and Castelao. Public use of Galician was largely suppressed during the Franco dictatorship but has been resurgent since the restoration of democracy. Though written primarily in Castilian, several works by the Nobel laureate Camilo Jos\u00e9 Cela, notably \"Mazurka for Two Dead Men\", are set in the author's native Galicia and make frequent allusions to Galician folklore, customs, and language. Other notable Galician authors who wrote mostly in Spanish, but always around Galician subjects, are Valle-Incl\u00e1n, Wenceslao Fern\u00e1ndez Fl\u00f3rez, Emilia Pardo Baz\u00e1n and Gonzalo Torrente Ballester. Contemporary writers in Galician include Xos\u00e9 Lu\u00eds M\u00e9ndez Ferr\u00edn, Manuel Rivas, Chus Pato, and Suso de Toro.\nPublic holidays.\nFestivals.\nIn 2015 only five \"corridas\" took place within Galicia.\nIn addition, recent studies have stated that 92% of Galicians are firmly against bullfighting, the highest rate in Spain. Despite this, popular associations, such as \"Galicia Mellor Sen Touradas\" (\"Galicia Better without Bullfights\"), have blamed politicians for having no compromise to abolish it and have been very critical of local councils', especially those governed by the PP and PSOE, payment of subsidies for corridas. The province government of Pontevedra stopped the end of these subsidies and declared the province \"free of bullfights\". The province government of A Coru\u00f1a approved a document supporting the abolition of these events.\nMedia.\nTelevision.\nTelevisi\u00f3n de Galicia (TVG) is the autonomous community's public channel, which has broadcast since 24 July 1985 and is part of the Compa\u00f1\u00eda de Radio-Televisi\u00f3n de Galicia (CRTVG). TVG broadcasts throughout Galicia and has two international channels, Galicia Televisi\u00f3n Europa and Galicia Televisi\u00f3n Am\u00e9rica, available throughout the European Union and the Americas through Hispasat. CRTVG also broadcasts a digital terrestrial television (DTT) channel known as tvG2 and is considering adding further DTT channels, with a 24-hour news channel projected for 2010.\nRadio.\nRadio Galega (RG) is the autonomous community's public radio station and is part of CRTVG. Radio Galega began broadcasting on 24 February 1985, with regular programming starting on 29 March 1985. There are two regular broadcast channels: Radio Galega and Radio Galega M\u00fasica. In addition, there is a DTT and internet channel, Son Galicia Radio, dedicated specifically to Galician music.\nGalicia has several free and community radio stations. Cuac FM is the headquarters of the Community Media Network (which brings together media non-profit oriented and serves their community). CUAC FM (A Coru\u00f1a), Radio Filispim (Ferrol), Radio Roncudo (corme), Kalimera Radio (Santiago de Compostela), Radio Piratona (Vigo) and Radio Clavi (Lugo) are part of the Galician Network of Free and Association of Community Radio Broadcasters(ReGaRLiC)\nPress.\nThe most widely distributed newspaper in Galicia is \"La Voz de Galicia\", with 12 local editions and a national edition. Other major newspapers are \"El Correo Gallego\" (Santiago de Compostela), \"Faro de Vigo\" (Vigo), \"Diario de Pontevedra\" (Pontevedra), \"El Progreso\" (Lugo), (Ourense), and \"Galicia Hoxe\" \u2013 The first daily newspaper to publish exclusively in Galician. Other newspapers are \"Diario de Ferrol\", the sports paper \"DxT Campe\u00f3n\", \"El Ideal Gallego\" from A Coru\u00f1a, the \"Heraldo de Vivero\", \"Atl\u00e1ntico Diario\" from Vigo and the \"Xornal de Galicia\".\nSport.\nGalicia has a long sporting tradition dating back to the early 20th century when the majority of sports clubs in Spain were founded. The most popular and well-supported teams in the region are Deportivo de La Coru\u00f1a and Celta Vigo. When the two sides play, it is referred to as the Galician derby. Deportivo was champion of La Liga in the 1999\u20132000 season.\nPontevedra CF from Pontevedra and Racing Ferrol from Ferrol are two other notable clubs from Galicia as well as CD Lugo and SD Compostela. The Galician Football Federation periodically fields a national team against international opposition.\nFootball aside, the most popular team sports in Galicia are futsal, handball and basketball. In basketball, Obradoiro CAB is the most successful team of note, and currently, the only Galician team that plays in the Liga ACB; other teams are CB Breogan, Club Ourense Baloncesto and OAR Ferrol. In the sport of handball, Club Balonm\u00e1n Cangas plays in the top-flight (Liga ASOBAL). The sport is particularly popular in the province of Pontevedra with the three other Galician teams in the top two divisions: SD Teucro (Pontevedra), Octavio Pilotes Posada (Vigo) and SD Chapela (Redondela).\nIn roller hockey HC Liceo is the most successful Galician team, in any sport, with numerous European and World titles. In futsal teams, Lobelle Santiago and Azkar Lugo.\nGalicia is also known for its tradition of participation in water sports both at sea and in rivers; these include rowing, yachting, canoeing and surfing. Its athletes have regularly won medals in the Olympics; currently, the most notable examples are David Cal, Carlos P\u00e9rez Rial, and Fernando Echavarri.\nGalician triathlon contenders Francisco Javier G\u00f3mez Noya and Iv\u00e1n Ra\u00f1a have been world champions. In 2006 the cyclist Oscar Pereiro won the Tour de France after the disqualification of American Floyd Landis, gaining the top position on the penultimate day of the race. Galicians are also prominent athletes in the sport of mountaineering\u2014Chus Lago is the third woman to reach the summit of Everest without supplemental oxygen.\nIn 2022, the cycling race O Gran Cami\u00f1o was held for the first time and was won by the Spanish legend Alejandro Valverde. In subsequent years, it rose to fame as the scene of the season debut of two times Tour de France winner Jonas Vingegaard who won the race in both 2023 and 2024.\nEmerging sports.\nSince 2011, several Gaelic football teams have been set up in Galicia. The first was Fillos de Breog\u00e1n (A Coru\u00f1a), followed Artabros (Oleiros), Irmandinhos (A Estrada), SDG Corvos (Pontevedra), and Suebia (Santiago de Compostela) with talk of creating a Galician league. Galicia also fielded a Gaelic football side (recognised as national by the GAA) that beat Brittany in July 2012 and was reported in the Spanish nationwide press.\nRugby is growing in popularity, although the success of local teams is hampered by the absence of experienced ex-pat players from English-speaking countries typically seen at teams based on the Mediterranean coast or in the big cities. Galicia has a long-established Rugby Federation that organises its own women's, children's, and men's leagues. Galicia has also fielded a national side for friendly matches against other regions of Spain and Portugal. A team of ex-pat Galicians in Salvador, Brazil have also formed Galicia Rugby, a sister team of the local football club.\nSymbols.\nA golden chalice enclosed in a field of azure has been the symbol of Galicia since the 13th century. Originated as a Canting arms due to the phonetic similarity between the words \"chalice\" and \"Galyce\" (\"Galicia\" in old Norman language), the first documented mention of this emblem is on the \"Segar's Roll\", an English medieval roll of arms where are represented all the Christian kingdoms of 13th-century Europe. In the following centuries, the Galician emblem varied; diverse shapes and several numbers of chalices (initially three and later one or five) were used. It would not be until the 16th century that its number was fixed as one single chalice. Centuries after, a field of crosses was slowly added to the azure background, and latterly also a silver host. Since then, the emblem of the kingdom would be kept until now.\nThe ancient flag of the Kingdom of Galicia was based mainly on its coat of arms until the 19th century. However, when in 1833 the government of Spain abolished the kingdom and divided it into four provinces, the Galician emblem, as well as the flag, lost its legal status and international validity. It would not be until the late 19th century that some Galician intellectuals (nationalist politicians and writers) began to use a new flag as a symbol of renewed national unity for Galicia. That flag, which was composed of a diagonal stripe over a white background, was designated the \"official flag of Galicia\" in 1984, after the fall of Franco's dictatorship. In addition, the Royal Academy of Galicia asked the Galician government to incorporate the ancient coat of arms of the kingdom onto the modern flag, being present in it since then.\nIn addition to its coat of arms and flag, Galicia also has its own anthem. While it is true that the Kingdom of Galicia had an unofficial anthem known as the \"Solemn March of the kingdom\" for centuries, the current Galician anthem was not created until 1907, although its composition had begun already in 1880. Titled \"Os Pinos\" (\"The Pines\"), the Galician anthem's lyrics were written by Eduardo Pondal, one of the greatest modern Galician poets, and its music was composed by Pascual Veiga. Performed for the first time in 1907 in Havana (Cuba) by Galician emigrants, the anthem was banned from 1927 by various Spanish governments until 1977 when it was officially established by the Galician authorities.\nHonour.\nGalicia Peak in Vinson Massif, Antarctica is named after the autonomous community of Galicia.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12838", "revid": "3499605", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12838", "title": "Gaelic languages", "text": ""}
{"id": "12840", "revid": "36257533", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12840", "title": "Gregory Rasputin", "text": ""}
{"id": "12841", "revid": "50717717", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12841", "title": "G protein", "text": "Type of proteins\nG proteins, also known as guanine nucleotide-binding proteins, are a family of proteins that act as molecular switches inside cells, and are involved in transmitting signals from a variety of stimuli outside a cell to its interior. Their activity is regulated by factors that control their ability to bind to and hydrolyze guanosine triphosphate (GTP) to guanosine diphosphate (GDP). When they are bound to GTP, they are 'on', and, when they are bound to GDP, they are 'off'. G proteins belong to the larger group of enzymes called GTPases.\nThere are two classes of G proteins. The first function as monomeric small GTPases (small G-proteins), while the second function as heterotrimeric G protein complexes. The latter class of complexes is made up of \"alpha\" (G\u03b1), \"beta\" (G\u03b2) and \"gamma\" (G\u03b3) subunits. In addition, the beta and gamma subunits can form a stable dimeric complex referred to as the beta-gamma complex\nHeterotrimeric G proteins located within the cell are activated by G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) that span the cell membrane. Signaling molecules bind to a domain of the GPCR located outside the cell, and an intracellular GPCR domain then in turn activates a particular G protein. Some active-state GPCRs have also been shown to be \"pre-coupled\" with G proteins, whereas in other cases a collision coupling mechanism is thought to occur. The G protein triggers a cascade of further signaling events that finally results in a change in cell function. G protein-coupled receptors and G proteins working together transmit signals from many hormones, neurotransmitters, and other signaling factors. G proteins regulate metabolic enzymes, ion channels, transporter proteins, and other parts of the cell machinery, controlling transcription, motility, contractility, and secretion, which in turn regulate diverse systemic functions such as embryonic development, learning and memory, and homeostasis.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nG proteins were discovered in 1980 when Alfred G. Gilman and Martin Rodbell investigated stimulation of cells by adrenaline. They found that when adrenaline binds to a receptor, the receptor does not stimulate enzymes (inside the cell) directly. Instead, the receptor stimulates a G protein, which then stimulates an enzyme. An example is adenylate cyclase, which produces the second messenger cyclic AMP. For this discovery, they won the 1994 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine.\nNobel prizes have been awarded for many aspects of signaling by G proteins and GPCRs. These include receptor antagonists, neurotransmitters, neurotransmitter reuptake, G protein-coupled receptors, G proteins, second messengers, the enzymes that trigger protein phosphorylation in response to cAMP, and consequent metabolic processes such as glycogenolysis.\nProminent examples include (in chronological order of awarding):\nFunction.\nG proteins are important signal transducing molecules in cells. \"Malfunction of GPCR [G Protein-Coupled Receptor] signaling pathways are involved in many diseases, such as diabetes, blindness, allergies, depression, cardiovascular defects, and certain forms of cancer. It is estimated that about 30% of the modern drugs' cellular targets are GPCRs.\" The human genome encodes roughly 800 G protein-coupled receptors, which detect photons of light, hormones, growth factors, drugs, and other endogenous ligands. Approximately 150 of the GPCRs found in the human genome still have unknown functions.\nWhereas G proteins are activated by G protein-coupled receptors, they are inactivated by RGS proteins (for \"Regulator of G protein signalling\"). Receptors stimulate GTP binding (turning the G protein on). RGS proteins stimulate GTP hydrolysis (creating GDP, thus turning the G protein off).\nDiversity.\nAll eukaryotes use G proteins for signaling and have evolved a large diversity of G proteins. For instance, humans encode 18 different G\u03b1 proteins, 5 G\u03b2 proteins, and 12 G\u03b3 proteins.\nSignaling.\nG protein can refer to two distinct families of proteins. Heterotrimeric G proteins, sometimes referred to as the \"large\" G proteins, are activated by G protein-coupled receptors and are made up of alpha (\u03b1), beta (\u03b2), and gamma (\u03b3) subunits. \"\"Small\" G proteins\" (20-25kDa) belong to the Ras superfamily of small GTPases. These proteins are homologous to the alpha (\u03b1) subunit found in heterotrimers, but are in fact monomeric, consisting of only a single unit. However, like their larger relatives, they also bind GTP and GDP and are involved in signal transduction.\nHeterotrimeric.\nDifferent types of heterotrimeric G proteins share a common mechanism. They are activated in response to a conformational change in the GPCR, exchanging GDP for GTP, and dissociating in order to activate other proteins in a particular signal transduction pathway. The specific mechanisms, however, differ between protein types.\nMechanism.\nReceptor-activated G proteins are bound to the inner surface of the cell membrane. They consist of the G\u03b1 and the tightly associated G\u03b2\u03b3 subunits. \nThere are four main families of G\u03b1 subunits: G\u03b1s (G stimulatory), G\u03b1i (G inhibitory), G\u03b1q/11, and G\u03b112/13. They behave differently in the recognition of the effector molecule, but share a similar mechanism of activation.\nActivation.\nWhen a ligand activates the G protein-coupled receptor, it induces a conformational change in the receptor that allows the receptor to function as a guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) that exchanges GDP for GTP. The GTP (or GDP) is bound to the G\u03b1 subunit in the traditional view of heterotrimeric GPCR activation. This exchange triggers the dissociation of the G\u03b1 subunit (which is bound to GTP) from the G\u03b2\u03b3 dimer and the receptor as a whole. However, models which suggest molecular rearrangement, reorganization, and pre-complexing of effector molecules are beginning to be accepted. Both G\u03b1-GTP and G\u03b2\u03b3 can then activate different \"signaling cascades\" (or \"second messenger pathways\") and effector proteins, while the receptor is able to activate the next G protein.\nTermination.\nThe G\u03b1 subunit will eventually hydrolyze the attached GTP to GDP by its inherent enzymatic activity, allowing it to re-associate with G\u03b2\u03b3 and starting a new cycle. A group of proteins called Regulator of G protein signalling (RGSs), act as GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs), are specific for G\u03b1 subunits. These proteins accelerate the hydrolysis of GTP to GDP, thus terminating the transduced signal. In some cases, the effector \"itself\" may possess intrinsic GAP activity, which then can help deactivate the pathway. This is true in the case of phospholipase C-beta, which possesses GAP activity within its C-terminal region. This is an alternate form of regulation for the G\u03b1 subunit. Such G\u03b1 GAPs do not have catalytic residues (specific amino acid sequences) to activate the G\u03b1 protein. They work instead by lowering the required activation energy for the reaction to take place.\nSpecific mechanisms.\nG\u03b1s.\nG\u03b1s activates the cAMP-dependent pathway by stimulating the production of cyclic AMP (cAMP) from ATP. This is accomplished by direct stimulation of the membrane-associated enzyme adenylate cyclase. cAMP can then act as a second messenger that goes on to interact with and activate protein kinase A (PKA). PKA can phosphorylate a myriad downstream targets.\nThe cAMP-dependent pathway is used as a signal transduction pathway for many hormones including:\nG\u03b1i.\nG\u03b1i inhibits the production of cAMP from ATP.\ne.g. somatostatin, prostaglandins\nG\u03b1q/11.\nG\u03b1q/11 stimulates the membrane-bound phospholipase C beta, which then cleaves phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) into two second messengers, inositol trisphosphate (IP3) and diacylglycerol (DAG). IP3 induces calcium release from the endoplasmic reticulum. DAG activates protein kinase C.\nThe Inositol Phospholipid Dependent Pathway is used as a signal transduction pathway for many hormones including:\nSmall GTPases.\nSmall GTPases, also known as small G-proteins, bind GTP and GDP likewise, and are involved in signal transduction. These proteins are homologous to the alpha (\u03b1) subunit found in heterotrimers, but exist as monomers. They are small (20-kDa to 25-kDa) proteins that bind to guanosine triphosphate (GTP). This family of proteins is homologous to the Ras GTPases and is also called the Ras superfamily GTPases.\nLipidation.\nIn order to associate with the inner leaflet of the plasma membrane, many G proteins and small GTPases are lipidated, that is, covalently modified with lipid extensions. They may be myristoylated, palmitoylated or prenylated.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12842", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12842", "title": "Grigory Efimovich Rasputin", "text": ""}
{"id": "12848", "revid": "2304267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12848", "title": "Gary Gygax", "text": "American game designer and author (1938\u20132008)\nErnest Gary Gygax ( ; July 27, 1938 \u2013 March 4, 2008) was an American game designer and author best known for co-creating the pioneering tabletop role-playing game \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" (\"D&amp;D\") with Dave Arneson.\nIn the 1960s, Gygax created an organization of wargaming clubs and founded the Gen Con tabletop game convention. In 1971, he co-developed \"Chainmail\", a miniatures wargame based on medieval warfare with Jeff Perren. He co-founded the company TSR (originally Tactical Studies Rules) with childhood friend Don Kaye in 1973. The next year, TSR published \"D&amp;D\", created by Gygax and Arneson the year before. In 1976, he founded \"The Dragon\", a magazine based around the new game. In 1977, he began developing a more comprehensive version of the game called \"Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons\". He designed numerous manuals for the game system, as well as several pre-packaged adventures called \"modules\" that gave a person running a \"D&amp;D\" game (the \"Dungeon Master\") a rough script and ideas. In 1983, he worked to license the \"D&amp;D\" product line into the successful \"D&amp;D\" cartoon series.\nGygax left TSR in 1986 over conflicts with its new majority owner, but he continued to create role-playing game titles independently, beginning with the multi-genre \"Dangerous Journeys\" in 1992. He designed the \"Lejendary Adventure\" gaming system, released in 1999. In 2005, he was involved in the \"Castles &amp; Crusades\" role-playing game, which was conceived as a hybrid between the third edition of \"D&amp;D\" and the original version of the game.\nIn 2004, he had two strokes and narrowly avoided a subsequent heart attack; he was then diagnosed with an abdominal aortic aneurysm and died in March 2008 at age 69. Following Gygax's funeral, many mourners formed an impromptu game event which became known as Gary Con 0, and gamers celebrate in Lake Geneva each March with a large role-playing game convention in Gygax's honor.\nEarly life and inspiration.\nGygax was born in Chicago, the son of Almina Emelie \"Posey\" Burdick and Swiss immigrant and former Chicago Symphony Orchestra violinist Ernst Gygax. He was named Ernest after his father, but was commonly known as Gary, the middle name given to him by his mother after the actor Gary Cooper. The family lived on Kenmore Avenue, close enough to Wrigley Field that he could hear the roar of the crowds watching the Chicago Cubs play. At age 7, he became a member of a small group of friends who called themselves the \"Kenmore Pirates\". In 1946, after the Kenmore Pirates were involved in a fracas with another gang of boys, his father decided to move the family to Posey's family home in Lake Geneva, Wisconsin, where Posey's family had settled in the early 19th century, and where Gary's grandparents still lived.\nIn this new setting, Gygax soon made friends with several of his peers, including Don Kaye and Mary Jo Powell. During his childhood and teen years, he developed a love of games and an appreciation for fantasy and science fiction literature. When he was five, he played card games such as pinochle and then board games such as chess. At age ten, he and his friends played the sort of make-believe games that eventually came to be called \"live action role-playing games\", with one of them acting as referee. His father introduced him to science fiction and fantasy through pulp novels. His interest in games, combined with an appreciation of history, eventually led Gygax to begin playing miniature war games in 1953 with his best friend, Don Kaye. As teenagers, Gygax and Kaye designed their own miniatures rules for toy soldiers with a large collection of 54 mm and 70 mm figures, where they used \"ladyfingers\" (small firecrackers) to simulate explosions.\nBy his teens, Gygax had a voracious appetite for pulp fiction authors such as Robert E. Howard, Jack Vance, Fritz Leiber, H. P. Lovecraft, and Edgar Rice Burroughs. He was a mediocre student, and in 1956, a few months after his father died, he dropped out of high school in his junior year. He joined the Marines, but after being diagnosed with walking pneumonia, he received a medical discharge and moved back home with his mother. From there, he commuted to a job as a shipping clerk with Kemper Insurance Co. in Chicago. Shortly after his return, a friend introduced him to Avalon Hill's new wargame \"Gettysburg.\" Gygax was soon obsessed with the game, often playing marathon sessions once or more a week. It was also from Avalon Hill that he ordered the first blank hex mapping sheets available, which he then employed to design his own games.\nAbout the same time that he discovered \"Gettysburg\", his mother reintroduced him to Mary Jo Powell, who had left Lake Geneva as a child and just returned. Gygax was smitten with her and, after a short courtship, persuaded her to marry him, despite being only 19. This caused some friction with Kaye, who had also been wooing Mary Jo. Kaye refused to attend Gygax's wedding. Kaye and Gygax reconciled after the wedding.\nThe couple moved to Chicago where Gygax continued as a shipping clerk at Kemper Insurance. He found a job for Mary Jo there, but the company laid her off when she became pregnant with their first child. He also took anthropology classes at the University of Chicago.\nDespite his commitments to his job, raising a family, and attending college, Gygax continued to play wargames. It reached the point that Mary Jo, pregnant with their second child, believed he was having an affair and confronted him in a friend's basement only to discover him and his friends sitting around a map-covered table.\nIn 1962, Gygax got a job as an insurance underwriter at Fireman's Fund Insurance Co. His family continued to grow, and after his third child was born, he decided to move his family back to Lake Geneva. Except for a few months he spent in Clinton, Wisconsin, after his divorce, and his time in Hollywood while he was the head of TSR's entertainment division, Lake Geneva was his home for the rest of his life.\nBy 1966, Gygax was active in the wargame hobby world and was writing many magazine articles on the subject. He learned about H. G. Wells's \"Little Wars\" book for play of military miniatures wargames and Fletcher Pratt's \"Naval Wargame\" book. Gygax later looked for innovative ways to generate random numbers, and used not only common six-sided dice, but dice of all five Platonic solid shapes, which he discovered in a school supply catalog.\nGygax cited as influences the fantasy and science fiction authors Robert E. Howard, L. Sprague de Camp, Jack Vance, Fletcher Pratt, Fritz Leiber, Poul Anderson, A. Merritt, and H. P. Lovecraft.\nWargames.\nIn 1967, Gygax co-founded the International Federation of Wargamers (IFW) with Bill Speer and Scott Duncan. The IFW grew rapidly, particularly by assimilating several preexisting wargaming clubs, and aimed to promote interest in wargames of all periods. It provided a forum for wargamers via its newsletters and societies, which enabled them to form local groups and share rules. In 1967, Gygax organized a 20-person gaming meet in the basement of his home; this event was later called \"Gen Con 0\". In 1968, he rented Lake Geneva's vine-covered Horticultural Hall for $50 () to hold the first Lake Geneva Convention, also known as the Gen Con gaming convention. Gen Con is now one of North America's largest annual hobby-game gatherings. Gygax met Dave Arneson, the future co-creator of \"D&amp;D\", at the second Gen Con in August 1969.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I'm very fond of the Medieval period, the Dark Ages in particular. We started playing in the period because I had found appropriate miniatures. I started devising rules where what the plastic figure was wearing was what he had. If he had a shield and no armor, then he just has a shield. Shields and half-armor = half-armor rules; full-armor figure = full armor rules. I did rules for weapons as well.\u2014\u200a\nTogether with Don Kaye, Mike Reese, and Leon Tucker, Gygax created a military miniatures society called Lake Geneva Tactical Studies Association (LGTSA) in 1970, with its first headquarters in Gygax's basement. Shortly thereafter in 1970, Gygax and Robert Kuntz founded the Castle &amp; Crusade Society of the IFW.\nIn October 1970, Gygax lost his job at the insurance company after almost nine years. Unemployed and now with five children he tried to use his enthusiasm for games to make a living by designing board games for commercial sale. This proved unsustainable when he grossed only $882 in 1971 (). He began cobbling shoes in his basement, which provided him with a steady income and gave him more time for game development. In 1971, he began doing some editing work at Guidon Games, a publisher of wargames, for which he produced the board games \"Alexander the Great\" and \"\". Early that same year, Gygax published \"Chainmail\", a miniatures wargame that simulated medieval-era tactical combat, which he had originally written with hobby-shop owner Jeff Perren. The \"Chainmail\" medieval miniatures rules were originally published in the Castle &amp; Crusade Society's fanzine \"The Domesday Book\". Guidon Games hired Gygax to produce a game series called \"Wargaming with Miniatures\", with the initial release for the series being a new edition of \"Chainmail\" (1971). The first edition of \"Chainmail\" included a fantasy supplement to the rules. These comprised a system for warriors, wizards, and various monsters of nonhuman races drawn from the works of J. R. R. Tolkien and other sources. For a small publisher like Guidon Games, \"Chainmail\" was relatively successful, selling 100 copies per month.\nGygax also collaborated on \"Tractics\" with Mike Reese and Leon Tucker, his contribution being the change to a 20-sided spinner or a coffee can with 20 numbered poker chips (eventually, 20-sided dice) to decide combat resolutions instead of the standard six-sided dice. He also collaborated with Arneson on the Napoleonic naval wargame \"Don't Give Up the Ship!\"\nDave Arneson briefly adapted the \"Chainmail\" rules for his fantasy \"Blackmoor\" campaign. In the winter of 1972\u20131973, Arneson and friend David Megarry, inventor of the \"Dungeon!\" board game, traveled to Lake Geneva to showcase their respective games to Gygax, in his role as a representative of Guidon Games. Gygax saw potential in both games, and was especially excited by Arneson's role-playing game. Gygax and Arneson immediately started to collaborate on creating \"The Fantasy Game\", the role-playing game that evolved into \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\".\nFollowing Arneson's \"Blackmoor\" demonstration, Gygax requested more information from Arneson and began testing ideas for the game on his two oldest children, Ernie and Elise, in a setting he called \"Greyhawk\". This group rapidly expanded to include Kaye, Kuntz, and eventually a large circle of players. Gygax and Arneson continued to trade notes about their respective campaigns as Gygax began work on a draft. Several aspects of the system governing magic in the game were inspired by fantasy author Jack Vance's \"The Dying Earth\" stories (notably that \"magic-users\" in the game forget the spells that they have learned immediately upon casting them and must re-study them in order to cast them again), and the system as a whole drew upon the work of authors such as Robert E. Howard, L. Sprague de Camp, Michael Moorcock, Roger Zelazny, Poul Anderson, Tolkien, Bram Stoker, and others. The final draft contained changes not vetted by Arneson, and Gygax's vision differed on some rule details Arneson had preferred.\nGygax asked Guidon Games to publish it, but the three-volume rule set in a labeled box was beyond the small publisher's scope. Gygax pitched the game to Avalon Hill, but it did not understand the concept of role-playing and turned down his offer.\nBy 1974, Gygax's Greyhawk group, which had started off with himself, Ernie Gygax, Don Kaye, Rob Kuntz, and Terry Kuntz, had grown to over 20 people, with Rob Kuntz operating as co-dungeon-master so that each of them could referee smaller groups of about a dozen players.\nTSR.\nGygax left Guidon Games in 1973 and in October, with Don Kaye as a partner, founded Tactical Studies Rules. The two men each invested $1,000 in the venture\u2014Kaye borrowed his share on his life insurance policy\u2014to print a thousand copies of the \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" boxed set. They also tried to raise money by immediately publishing a set of wargame rules called \"Cavaliers and Roundheads\", but sales were poor; when the printing costs for the thousand copies of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" rose from $2,000 to $2,500, they still did not have enough capital to publish it. Worried that the other playtesters and wargamers now familiar with Gygax's rules would bring a similar product to the market first, the two accepted an offer in December 1973 from gaming acquaintance Brian Blume to invest $2,000 in TSR to become an equal one-third partner. (Gygax accepted Blume's offer right away. Kaye was less enthusiastic, and after a week to consider the offer, he questioned Blume closely before acquiescing.) Blume's investment finally brought the financing that enabled them to publish \"D&amp;D\". Gygax worked on rules for more miniatures and tabletop battle games including \"Classic Warfare\" (Ancient Period: 1500 BC to 500 AD) and \"Warriors of Mars\".\nTSR released the first commercial version of \"D&amp;D\" in January 1974 as a boxed set. Sales of the hand-assembled print run of 1,000 copies, put together in Gygax's home, sold out in less than a year. (In 2018, a first printing of the boxed set sold at auction for more than $20,000.)\nAt the end of 1974, with sales of D&amp;D skyrocketing, the future looked bright for Gygax and Kaye, who were only 36. But in January 1975, Kaye unexpectedly died of a heart attack. He had not made any specific provision in his will regarding his share of the company, simply leaving his entire estate to his wife Donna. Although she had worked briefly for TSR as an accountant, she did not share her husband's enthusiasm for gaming, and made clear that she would not have anything to do with managing the company. Gygax called her \"less than personable... After Don died she dumped all the Tactical Studies Rules materials off on my front porch. It would have been impossible to manage a business with her involved as a partner.\" Gygax relocated TSR from the Kaye dining room to the basement at his own house. In July 1975, Gygax and Blume reorganized their company from a partnership to a corporation called TSR Hobbies. Gygax owned 150 shares, Blume the other 100 shares, and both had the option to buy up to 700 shares at any time in the future. But TSR Hobbies had nothing to publish\u2014D&amp;D was still owned by the three-way partnership of TSR, and neither Gygax nor Blume had the money to buy out Donna Kaye's shares. Blume persuaded a reluctant Gygax to allow his father, Melvin Blume, to buy Donna's shares, and those were converted to 200 shares in TSR Hobbies. In addition, Brian bought another 140 shares. These purchases reduced Gygax from majority shareholder in control of the company to minority shareholder; he effectively became the Blumes' employee.\nGygax wrote the supplements \"Greyhawk\", \"Eldritch Wizardry\", and \"Swords &amp; Spells\" for the original \"D&amp;D game\". With Brian Blume, he also designed the wild west-oriented role-playing game \"Boot Hill\". The same year, Gygax created the magazine \"The Strategic Review\" with himself as editor. But wanting a more industry-wide periodical, he hired Tim Kask as TSR's first employee to change this magazine to the fantasy periodical \"The Dragon\", with Gygax as writer, columnist, and publisher (from 1978 to 1981). \"The Dragon\" debuted in June 1976, and Gygax said of its success years later: \"When I decided that \"The Strategic Review\" was not the right vehicle, hired Tim Kask as a magazine editor for Tactical Studies Rules, and named the new publication he was to produce \"The Dragon\", I thought we would eventually have a great periodical to serve gaming enthusiasts worldwide\u00a0... At no time did I ever contemplate so great a success or so long a lifespan.\"\nTSR moved out from the Gygax house in 1976 into the first professional location it could call home, known as \"The Dungeon Hobby Shop\". Arneson was hired as part of the creative staff, but was let go after only ten months, another sign that Gygax and Arneson had creative differences over D&amp;D.\n\"Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" and Hollywood.\nThe \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons Basic Set\" released in 1977 was an introductory version of the original \"D&amp;D\" geared toward new players and edited by John Eric Holmes. The same year, TSR Hobbies released \"Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" (\"AD&amp;D\"), a completely new and complex version of \"D&amp;D\". The \"Monster Manual\" was also released that year and became the first supplemental rule book of the new system, and many more followed. \"AD&amp;D\"'s rules were not fully compatible with those of the \"D&amp;D Basic Set\", and \"D&amp;D\" and \"AD&amp;D\" became distinct product lines. Splitting the game lines created a further rift between Gygax and Arneson. Arneson received a ten-percent royalty on sales of all \"D&amp;D\" products, but Gygax refused to pay him royalties on \"AD&amp;D\" books, claiming that it was a new and different property. In 1979, Arneson sued TSR; they settled in March 1981 with the agreement that Arneson would receive a 2.5-percent royalty on all AD&amp;D products, giving him a six-figure annual income for the next decade.\nGygax wrote the \"AD&amp;D\" hardcovers \"Players Handbook\", \"Dungeon Masters Guide\", \"Monster Manual,\" and \"Monster Manual II\". He also wrote or co-wrote many \"AD&amp;D\" and basic \"D&amp;D\" adventure modules, including \"The Keep on the Borderlands\", \"Tomb of Horrors\", \"Expedition to the Barrier Peaks\", \"The Temple of Elemental Evil\", \"The Forgotten Temple of Tharizdun\", \"Mordenkainen's Fantastic Adventure\", \"Isle of the Ape\", and all seven of the modules later combined into \"Queen of the Spiders\". In 1980, Gygax's long-time campaign setting Greyhawk was published in the form of the \"World of Greyhawk Fantasy World Setting\" folio, which was expanded in 1983 into the \"World of Greyhawk Fantasy Game Setting\" boxed set. Sales of the \"D&amp;D\" game reached $8.5 million in 1980. Gygax also provided assistance on the \"Gamma World\" science fantasy role-playing game in 1981 and co-authored the \"Gamma World\" adventure \"Legion of Gold\".\nIn 1979, Michigan State University student James Dallas Egbert III allegedly disappeared into the school's steam tunnels while playing a live-action version of \"D&amp;D\". In fact, Egbert was discovered in Louisiana several weeks later, but negative mainstream media attention focused on \"D&amp;D\" as the cause. In 1982, Patricia Pulling's son killed himself. Pulling blamed \"D&amp;D\" for her son's suicide and formed the organization B.A.D.D. (Bothered About Dungeons &amp; Dragons) to attack the game and TSR. Gygax defended the game on a segment of \"60 Minutes\" that aired in 1985. Death threats started arriving at the TSR office, so he hired a bodyguard. Nevertheless, TSR's annual \"D&amp;D\" sales increased in 1982 to $16 million. In January 1983, \"The New York Times\" speculated that \"D&amp;D\" might become \"the great game of the 1980s\" in the same manner that \"Monopoly\" was emblematic of the Great Depression.\nBrian Blume persuaded Gygax to allow Brian's brother Kevin to purchase Melvin Blume's shares. This gave the Blume brothers a controlling interest, and Gygax and the Blumes were increasingly at loggerheads over the company's management by 1981. Gygax's frustrations at work and increased prosperity from his generous royalties brought a number of changes to his personal life. He and Mary Jo had been active members of the local Jehovah's Witnesses, but others in the congregation already felt uneasy about his smoking and drinking; his connection to the \"satanic\" game D&amp;D caused enough friction that the family finally disassociated themselves from Jehovah's Witnesses. Mary Jo resented the amount of time that her husband spent \"playing games\"; she had begun to drink excessively, and the couple argued frequently. Gygax had started smoking marijuana when he lost his insurance job in 1970, and he started to use cocaine and had a number of extramarital affairs. In 1983, the two got an acrimonious divorce.\nAt the same time, the Blumes wanted to get Gygax out of Lake Geneva so that they could manage the company without his \"interference\", so they split TSR Hobbies into TSR, Inc. and TSR Entertainment, Inc. Gygax became president of TSR Entertainment, Inc., and the Blumes sent him to Hollywood to develop TV and film opportunities. He became co-producer of the licensed \"D&amp;D\" cartoon series for CBS, which led its time slot for two years.\nGygax' life continued to unravel on the West Coast, as he rented an immense mansion, increased his cocaine use, and spent time with several young starlets.\nLeaving TSR.\nGygax was occupied with getting a movie off the ground in Hollywood, so he had to leave TSR in the hands of Kevin and Brian Blume to oversee its day-to-day operations. He reached an agreement with Orson Welles in 1984 to star in a D&amp;D movie, with John Boorman to act as producer and director. But almost at the same time, he received word that TSR had run into severe financial difficulties, and Kevin Blume was attempting to sell the company for six million dollars.\nGygax immediately discarded his movie ambitions\u2014his \"D&amp;D\" movie was never made\u2014and flew back to Lake Geneva. He discovered that industry leader TSR was grossing $30 million, yet it was barely breaking even; it was in fact $1.5 million in debt and teetering on the edge of insolvency. Gygax brought his findings to the five other company directors. He charged that the financial crisis was due to Kevin Blume's mismanagement: excess inventory, overstaffing, too many company cars, and some questionable projects such as dredging up a 19th-century shipwreck. Gygax gained control and produced the new AD&amp;D book \"Unearthed Arcana\" and the Greyhawk novel \"Saga of Old City\", featuring a protagonist called Gord the Rogue; both sold well. He also hired company manager Lorraine Williams. She bought the Blumes' shares and replaced Gygax as president and CEO in October 1985, stating that Gygax would make no further creative contributions to TSR. Several of his projects were immediately shelved. Gygax took TSR to court in a bid to block the Blumes' sale of their shares to Williams, but he lost.\nSales of \"D&amp;D\" reached $29 million in 1985, but Gygax resigned from all of his positions with TSR in October 1986, and all of his disputes with TSR were settled in December. By the terms of the settlement, he gave up his rights except to Gord the Rogue and to those \"D&amp;D\" characters whose names were anagrams or plays on his own name (for example, Yrag and Zagyg).\nAfter TSR.\n1985\u20131989: New Infinities Productions, Inc..\nImmediately after leaving TSR, Gygax was approached by a wargaming acquaintance, Forrest Baker, who had done some consulting work for TSR in 1983 and 1984. Tired of company management, Gygax was simply looking for a way to market more of his Gord the Rogue novels, but Baker had a vision for a new gaming company. He promised that he would handle the business end while Gygax would handle the creative projects. Baker also guaranteed that, using Gygax's name, he would be able to bring in one to two million dollars of investment. Gygax decided this was a good opportunity, and in October 1986, New Infinities Productions, Inc. (NIPI) was announced publicly. To help him with the creative work, Gygax poached Frank Mentzer and \"Dragon\" magazine editor Kim Mohan from TSR. But before a single product was released, Forrest Baker left NIPI when the outside investment he promised of one to two million dollars failed to materialize.\nAgainst his will, Gygax was back in charge again; he immediately looked for a quick product to get NIPI off the ground. He had been able to keep the rights to Gord the Rogue as part of the severance agreement he made with TSR, so he made a new licensing agreement with TSR for the Greyhawk setting and began writing new novels starting with \"Sea of Death\" (1987); novel sales were brisk, and Gygax's Gord the Rogue novels kept New Infinities operating.\nGygax brought in Don Turnbull from Games Workshop to manage the company, then worked with Mohan and Mentzer on a science fiction-themed RPG, \"Cyborg Commando\", which was published in 1987. But sales of the new game were not brisk. As game historian Shannon Appelcline noted in 2014, the game was \"seen as one of the biggest flops in the industry.\" Mentzer and Mohan wrote a series of generic RPG adventures, \"Gary Gygax Presents Fantasy Master\", and began working on a third line of products, which began with an adventure written by Mentzer, \"The Convert\" (1987). He had written it as an RPGA tournament for \"D&amp;D\", but TSR was not interested in publishing it. Mentzer got verbal permission to publish it with New Infinities, but since the permission was not in writing TSR filed an injunction for a period to prevent the adventure's sale.\nDuring all this drama, Gygax had a romantic relationship with Gail Carpenter, his former assistant at TSR. In November 1986, she gave birth to Gygax's sixth child, Alex. Biographer Michael Witwer believes Alex's birth forced Gygax to reconsider the equation of work, gaming and family that, until this time, had been dominated by work and gaming. \"Gary, keenly aware that he had made mistakes as a father and husband in the past, was determined not to make them again\u00a0... Gary was also a realist, and knew what good fatherhood would demand, especially at his age.\" On August 15, 1987, on what would have been his parents' 50th wedding anniversary, Gygax married Carpenter.\nDuring 1987 and 1988, Gygax worked with Flint Dille on the \"Sagard the Barbarian\" books, as well as \"Role-Playing Mastery\" and its sequel, \"Master of the Game\". He also wrote two more Gord the Rogue novels, \"City of Hawks\" (1987), and \"Come Endless Darkness\" (1988). But by 1988, TSR had rewritten the setting for the world of Greyhawk, and Gygax was not happy with the new direction in which TSR was taking \"his\" creation. In a literary declaration that his old world was dead, and wanting to make a clean break with all things Greyhawk, Gygax destroyed his version of Oerth in the final Gord the Rogue novel, \"Dance of Demons\".\nWith the Gord the Rogue novels finished, NIPI's main source of steady income dried up. The company needed a new product. Gygax announced in 1988 in a company newsletter that he and Rob Kuntz, his co-Dungeon Master during the early days of the Greyhawk campaign, were working as a team again. This time they would create a new multi-genre fantasy role-playing game called \"Infinite Adventures\", which would receive support through different gamebooks for each genre. This line would explore the original visions of the Castle and City of Greyhawk by Gygax and Kuntz, now called \"Castle Dunfalcon\". Before work on this project could commence, NIPI ran out of money, was forced into bankruptcy, and dissolved in 1989.\n1990\u20131994: \"Dangerous Journeys\".\nAfter NIPI folded, Gygax decided to create an entirely new RPG called \"The Carpenter Project\", one considerably more complex and \"rules heavy\" than his original \"D&amp;D\" system, which had encompassed a mere 150 pages. He also wanted to create a horror setting for the new RPG called \"Unhallowed\". He began working on the RPG and the setting with the help of games designer Mike McCulley. Game Designers' Workshop became interested in publishing the new system, and it also drew the attention of JVC and NEC, who were looking for a new RPG system and setting to turn into a series of computer games. NEC and JVC were not interested in horror, however, so they shelved the \"Unhallowed\" setting in favor of a fantasy setting called \"Mythus\". JVC also wanted a name change for the RPG, favoring \"Dangerous Dimensions\" over \"The Carpenter Project\". Work progressed favorably until March 1992, when TSR filed an injunction against \"Dangerous Dimensions\", claiming that the name and initials were too similar to \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\". Gygax changed the name to \"Dangerous Journeys\".\nThe marketing strategy for \"Dangerous Journeys: Mythus\" was multi-pronged. The RPG and setting were to be published by Game Designers' Workshop, and the \"Mythus\" computer game was being prepared by NEC and JVC. There would also be a series of books based on the Mythus setting written by Gygax. He wrote three novels published by Penguin/Roc and later reprinted by Paizo Publishing: \"The Anubis Murders\", \"The Samarkand Solution\", and \"Death in Delhi\".\nIn late 1992, the \"Dangerous Journeys\" RPG was released by Game Designers' Workshop, but TSR immediately applied for an injunction against the entire \"Dangerous Journeys\" RPG and the \"Mythus\" setting, arguing that \"Dangerous Journeys\" was based on \"D&amp;D\" and \"AD&amp;D\". The injunction failed, but TSR moved forward with litigation. Gygax believed that the legal action was without merit and fueled by Lorraine Williams' personal enmity, but NEC and JVC both withdrew from the project, killing the \"Mythus\" computer game. By 1994, the legal costs had drained all of Gygax's resources, so he offered to settle. In the end, TSR paid Gygax for the complete rights to \"Dangerous Journeys\" and \"Mythus\".\n1995\u20132000: \"Lejendary Adventures\".\nIn 1995, Gygax began work on a new computer role-playing game called \"Lejendary Adventures\". In contrast to the rules-heavy \"Dangerous Journeys\", this new system was a return to simple and basic rules. Although he was not able to successfully release a \"Lejendary Adventures\" computer game, Gygax decided to instead publish it as a tabletop game.\nMeanwhile, in 1996 the games industry was rocked by the news that TSR had run into insoluble financial problems and had been bought by Wizards of the Coast. While WotC was busy refocusing TSR's products, Christopher Clark of Inner City Games Designs suggested to Gygax in 1997 that they could publish role-playing game adventures that game stores could sell while TSR was otherwise occupied, so Inner City published the fantasy adventures \"A Challenge of Arms\" (1998) and \"The Ritual of the Golden Eyes\" (1999). Gygax introduced some investors to the publication setup that Clark was using, and although the investors were not willing to fund publication of \"Legendary Adventures\", Clark and Gygax were able to start the partnership Hekaforge Productions. Gygax was thus able to return to publish \"Lejendary Adventures\" in 1999. Hekaforge published the game in a three-volume set: \"The Lejendary Rules for All Players\" (1999), \"Lejend Master's Lore\" (2000) and \"Beasts of Lejend\" (2000).\nThe new owner of TSR, WotC's Peter Adkison, clearly did not harbor any of Lorraine Williams' ill-will toward Gygax: Adkison purchased all of Gygax's residual rights to D&amp;D and AD&amp;D for a six-figure sum. Gygax did not author any new game supplements or novels for TSR or WotC, but he did agree to write the preface to the 1998 adventure \"Return to the Tomb of Horrors\", a paean to Gygax's original AD&amp;D adventure \"Tomb of Horrors\". He also returned to the pages of Dragon Magazine, writing the \"Up on a Soapbox\" column which was published from Issue #268 (January 2000) to Issue #320 (June 2004).\n2000\u20132008: Later works and death.\nGygax continued to work on \"Lejendary Adventures\" which he believed was his best work. However, sales were below expectation.\nStephen Chenault and Davis Chenault of Troll Lord Games announced on June 11, 2001, that Gygax would be writing supplements for their company. Gygax wrote a hardcover book series for Troll Lord known as \"Gygaxian Fantasy Worlds\", beginning with \"The Canting Crew\" (2002) about the underworld of rogues, and including the game design books \"World Builder\" (2003) and \"Living Fantasy\" (2003) for various different settings. Gygax wrote the first four books before taking an advisory role on the series, but the series logo continued to carry his name. Troll Lord also published some adventures as a result of their partnership with Gygax, including \"The Hermit\" (2002) which was meant to be an adventure for d20 as well as \"Lejendary Adventures\".\nGygax had given an encyclopedic 72,000-word manuscript to Christopher Clark of Hekaforge by 2002 which detailed the setting for the Lejendary Earth, which Clark expanded and split into five books. Hekaforge was only able to publish the first two Lejendary Earth sourcebooks \"Gazetteer\" (2002) and \"Noble Kings and Great Lands\" (2003), and the small company was having financial difficulties by 2003. Clark got Troll Lord Games to be their \"angel\" investor and publish the three remaining \"Lejendary Adventures\" books.\nNecromancer Games announced their plans to publish a d20 version of the adventure \"Necropolis\" on October 9, 2001. Gygax had originally intended to release this through New Infinities Productions, but GDW published it in 1992 as an adventure for \"Mythus\"; \"Gary Gygax's Necropolis\" was published a year later.\nGygax also performed voiceover narration for cartoons and video games. In 2000, he voiced his own cartoon self for an episode of Futurama entitled \"Anthology of Interest I\" which also included the voices of Al Gore, Stephen Hawking, and Nichelle Nichols. Gygax also performed as a guest Dungeon Master in the Delera's Tomb quest series of the massively multiplayer online role-playing game \"\".\nDuring his time with TSR, Gygax had often mentioned the mysterious Castle Greyhawk which formed the center of his own home campaign, but he had never published details of the castle. In 2003, he announced that he was again partnering with Rob Kuntz to publish the original details of Castle Greyhawk and the City of Greyhawk in six volumes, although the project would use the rules for \"Castles and Crusades\" rather than \"D&amp;D\". As Gygax wrote in an on-line forum:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I have laid out a new schematic of castle and dungeon levels based on both my original design of 13 levels plus side adjuncts, and the 'New Greyhawk Castle' that resulted when Rob and I combined our efforts and added a lot of new levels too. From that Rob will draft the level plans for the newest version of the work. Meantime, I am collecting all the most salient feature, encounters, tricks, traps, etc. for inclusion on the various levels. So the end result will be what is essentially the best of our old work in a coherent presentation usable by all DMs, the material having all the known and yet to be discussed features of the original work that are outstanding\u00a0... I hope.\"\nWizards of the Coast had bought TSR in 1997 and still owned the rights to the name \"Greyhawk\", so Gygax changed the name of Castle Greyhawk to \"Castle Zagyg\" and also changed the name of the nearby city to \"Yggsburgh\", a play on his initials \"E.G.G.\"\nThe scale of the project was enormous. By the time that Gygax and Kuntz had stopped working on their original home campaign, the castle dungeons had encompassed 50 levels of complex passages with thousands of rooms and traps, plus plans for the city of Yggsburgh and encounter areas outside the castle and city. All of this would be too much to fit into the proposed six volumes, so Gygax decided that he would compress the castle dungeons into 13 levels, the size of his original Castle Greyhawk in 1973, by amalgamating the best of what could be gleaned from binders and boxes of old notes. However, neither Gygax nor Kuntz had kept comprehensive plans because they had often made up details of play sessions on the spot. They usually just scribbled a quick map as they played, with cursory notes about monsters, treasures, and traps. These sketchy maps had contained just enough detail that the two could ensure that their independent work would dovetail. All of these old notes now had to be deciphered, 25-year old memories dredged up as to what had happened in each room, and a decision made whether to keep or discard each new piece. Recreating the city too would be a challenge. Gygax still had his old maps of the original city, but all of his previously published work on it was owned by WotC, so he would have to create most of it from scratch while still maintaining the \"look and feel\" of his original.\nDue to creative differences, Kuntz backed out of the project but created an adventure module that would be published at the same time as Gygax's first book. Gygax continued to put Castle Zagyg together on his own, but this came to a complete halt when he had a serious stroke in April 2004 and then another one a few weeks later. He returned to his keyboard after a seven-month convalescence, his output reduced from 14-hour work days to only one or two hours per day. \"Castle Zagyg Part I: Yggsburgh\" finally appeared in 2005, the first book in the six-book series. Later that year, Troll Lord Games also published \"Castle Zagyg: Dark Chateau\" (2005), the adventure module written for the Yggsburgh setting by Rob Kuntz. Jeff Talanian assisted in creating the dungeon, which was ultimately published in the limited edition release \"CZ9: The East Marks Gazetteer\" (2007).\nThat same year, Gygax was diagnosed with a potentially deadly abdominal aortic aneurysm. Doctors concurred that surgery was needed, but their estimates of success varied from 50-percent to 90-percent. Gygax came to believe that he would likely die on the operating table, and he refused to consider surgery, although he realized that a rupture of the aneurysm would be fatal. In one concession to his condition, he switched from cigarettes, which he had smoked since high school, to cigars.\nIt was not until 2008 that Gygax was able to finish the second of six volumes entitled \"Castle Zagyg: The Upper Works\", which described details of the castle above ground. The next two volumes were supposed to detail the dungeons beneath Castle Zagyg, but Gygax died in March 2008 before they could be written. His widow Gail had formed the new company Gygax Games, and the company withdrew all of the Gygax licenses from Troll Lord and from Hekaforge three months after he died.\nPersonal life.\nGygax married Mary Jo Powell on September 14, 1958. They had five children together: Ernie, Elise, Heidi, Cindy, and Luke. They became Jehovah's Witnesses, but he eventually left the religion; he remained a Christian, citing his favorite Bible verses of a few months before he died. He divorced Mary Jo in 1983 and married Gail Carpenter, one of his former accountants, on August 15, 1987. Their son, Alex, was born in 1986.\nGygax was an avid hunter and target shooter from an early age with both bow and gun. He collected guns and owned a variety of rifles, shotguns, and handguns at various times. He was a keen supporter of the Chicago Bears. He described himself as a \"biological determinist\" and believed gaming in general to be a male pursuit, stating in 2004 that \"it isn't that females can't play games well, it is just that it isn't a compelling activity to them as is the case for males\".\nAwards and honors.\nImmediately after Gygax's 2008 funeral, mourners adjourned to Lake Geneva's American Legion Hall to play games in the deceased's honor. Members of his family served refreshments and played games with friends. This event inspired Luke Gygax to create a locally hosted game event around the date of his father's death. Years later, Gary Con is so well-attended a dozen Lake Geneva hotels must be utilized in order to serve the demand. The funeral day event is now regarded as Gary Con 0.\nAs the \"father of role-playing games\", Gygax received many awards, honors, and tributes related to gaming:\nIn 2008 Gail Gygax, the widow of Gary Gygax, began the process to establish a memorial to her late husband in Lake Geneva. On March 28, 2011, the City Council of Lake Geneva, Wisconsin, approved Gail Gygax's application for a site of memorial in Donian Park; however, the Gygax family was unable to raise the money at the time to complete the memorial during a 2012 funding campaign. The design of the monument is a stone castle look with medieval pole arms, a family crest and a dragon.\nIn 2014, with the approval of Gary's eldest son, Ernie, Epic Quest Publishing started a Kickstarter campaign to raise the initial funding for a museum dedicated to Gary featuring a gaming and event center and hall of fame for authors, artists, designers and game masters.\nLake Geneva mayor Charlene Klein proclaimed July 27, 2023, as \"Gary Gygax Day\", and on that day dedicated a lakeside park bench in his honor. In her proclamation she reminds residents that in 1983 TSR employed over 400 people, \"over 6% of Lake Geneva's population at the time.\"\nIn popular culture.\nIn 2000, Gygax voiced his cartoon self for the \"Futurama\" episode \"Anthology of Interest I\", that also included the voices of Al Gore, Stephen Hawking, and Nichelle Nichols. Gygax appeared as his 8-bit self on \"Code Monkeys\" in 2007-8. Stephen Colbert, an avid \"D&amp;D\" gamer in his youth, dedicated the last part of the March 5, 2008, episode of \"The Colbert Report\" to Gygax.\nNumerous names in \"D&amp;D\", such as Zagyg, Ring of Gaxx, and Gryrax, are anagrams or alterations of Gygax's name.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12850", "revid": "27564898", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12850", "title": "Governor of New South Wales", "text": "Vice-regal representative\nThe governor of New South Wales is the representative of the monarch, King Charles III, in the state of New South Wales. In an analogous way to the Governor-General of Australia at the national level, the Governors of the Australian States perform constitutional and ceremonial functions at the state level. The governor is appointed by the monarch on the advice of the Premier of New South Wales, and serves in office for an unfixed period of time\u2014known as serving \"At His Majesty's pleasure\"\u2014though five years is the general standard of office term. The current governor is retired judge Margaret Beazley, who succeeded David Hurley on 2 May 2019.\nThe office has its origin in the 18th-century colonial governors of New South Wales upon its settlement in 1788, and is the oldest continuous institution in Australia. The present incarnation of the position emerged with the Federation of Australia and the \"New South Wales Constitution Act 1902\", which defined the viceregal office as the governor acting by and with the advice of the Executive Council of New South Wales. However, the post still ultimately represented the Government of the United Kingdom until, after continually decreasing involvement by the British government, the passage in 1942 of the Statute of Westminster Adoption Act 1942 (see Statute of Westminster) and the Australia Act 1986, after which the governor became the direct, personal representative of the sovereign.\nAppointment.\nThe office of governor is prescribed by the New South Wales Constitution. The Monarch, on the advice and recommendation of the Premier of New South Wales, appoints the governor with a commission issued under the Royal sign-manual and Public Seal of the State, who is from then until being sworn in by the premier and chief justice referred to as the \"governor-designate\".\nBesides the administration of the oaths of office, there is no set formula for the swearing-in of a governor-designate. The constitution act stipulates: \"Before assuming office, a person appointed to be Governor shall take the Oath or Affirmation of Allegiance and the Oath or Affirmation of Office in the presence of the Chief Justice or another Judge of the Supreme Court.\" The sovereign will also hold an audience with the appointee and will at that time induct the governor-designate as a Companion of the Order of Australia (AC).\nThe incumbent will generally serve for at least five years, though this is only a developed convention, and the governor still technically acts at His Majesty's pleasure (or the \"Royal Pleasure\"). The premier may therefore recommend to the King that the viceroy remain in his service for a longer period of time, sometimes upwards of more than seven years. A governor may also resign and three have died in office. In such a circumstance, or if the governor leaves the country for longer than one month, the Lieutenant-Governor of New South Wales, concurrently held by the Chief Justice of New South Wales since 1872, serves as Administrator of the Government and exercises all powers of the governor. Furthermore, if the lieutenant governor becomes incapacitated while serving in the office of governor or is also absent from the state, the next most senior judge of the Supreme Court is sworn in as the administrator.\nSelection.\nBetween 1788 and 1957, all governors were born outside New South Wales and were often members of the peerage. Historian A. J. P. Taylor once noted that \"going out and governing New South Wales became the British aristocracy's 'abiding consolation'\". However, the position eventually became filled by Australians, with the first Australian-born governor, Sir John Northcott on 1 August 1946, being the first Australian-born governor of any state. However, as Northcott was born in Victoria, it was not until Sir Eric Woodward's appointment by Queen Elizabeth II in 1957 that the position was filled by a New South Welshman. This practice continued until 1996, when Queen Elizabeth II commissioned as her representative Gordon Samuels, a London-born immigrant to Australia.\nEarly governors were frequently former politicians, many being members of the House of Lords by virtue of their peerage; however they were required by the tenets of constitutional monarchy to be non-partisan while in office. The first governors were all military officers and the majority of governors since have come from a military background, numbering 19. Samuels was the first governor in New South Wales history without a political or common public service background\u2014a former justice of the Supreme Court of New South Wales. The first woman to hold this position is also the first Lebanese-Australian governor, Dame Marie Bashir.\nRole.\nAs the sovereign lives outside New South Wales, the Governor's primary task is to perform the Sovereign's constitutional duties on their behalf. \nThe Governor is enpowered by the \"Constitution Act 1902\" to appoint the ministers of the Government of New South Wales. Convention dictates that the governor must select as premier an individual from Legislative Assembly that has the confidence of that body. The premier then advises the governor on who to appoint as ministers. The executive branch of government exercises power formally through the governor-in-council, the governor acting with the advice of the Executive Council of New South Wales. This council is made up of cabinet ministers and gives legal effect to decisions already reached in cabinet. While the governor must almost always act only on the advice of ministers, in exceptional circumstances they may act in the absence or contrary to advice\u2014this is known as the reserve powers. The circumstances when these powers may be exercised is disputed, however in 1932 the governor justified the use of these powers to revoke the commission of premier Jack Lang during the 1932 New South Wales constitutional crisis on the grounds of alleged illegal activity by the premier.\nThe Governor alone is constitutionally mandated to summon Parliament and may also prorogue and dissolve it on the advice of the premier. The Governor grants Royal Assent in the King's name to bills as the final step required to give them the force of law. While in the past Governors had the discretion to refuse or reserve assent to bills, usually where they were seen as unfavourable to imperial interests, now the only likely grounds on which a bill could be refused if it was passed contrary to manner and form requirements (for example the requirement to hold a referendum to approve of any law that abolished or changed the powers of either of the houses of Parliament). A Governor's view that a bill is likely unconstitutional is not a ground for the reservation of royal assent as the legality of a bill is determined by the courts. With most constitutional functions delegated to Cabinet, the Governor acts in a primarily ceremonial fashion. The Governor hosts members of Australia's Royal Family, as well as foreign royalty and heads of state. Also as part of international relations, the Governor receives letters of credence and of recall from foreign Consuls-general appointed to Sydney. When they are the longest-serving State Governor, the governor of New South Wales holds a dormant commission to act as the Administrator of the Commonwealth when the Governor-General of Australia is absent from Australia, a role currently held by Margaret Beazley, and previously by Marie Bashir.\nThe Governor is also tasked with fostering unity and pride. The governor inducts individuals into the various national orders and present national medals and decorations, however the most senior awards such as ACs or the Victoria Cross are the sole prerogative of the governor general. The Governor also \"ex-officio\" serves as Honorary Colonel of the Royal New South Wales Regiment (since 1960), Honorary Air Commodore of No. 22 (City of Sydney) Squadron, Royal Australian Air Force (since 1937) and Honorary Commodore of the Royal Australian Navy, as well as the Chief Scout for New South Wales.\nAlthough not a responsibility of the office of Governor of New South Wales, governors of New South Wales are - like all Governors of the Australian states - normally given a dormant commission to administer the government of the Commonwealth of Australia in the absence from Australia, or the death, incapacity or removal from office of the Governor-General by the Sovereign. New South Wales governors are often also appointed as a Deputy of the Governor-General to perform certain responsibilities of the Governor-General while the Governor-General is present in Australia, but unable to perform them personally.\nSymbols and protocol.\nThe Governor is listed second in New South Wales' table of precedence, behind the Governor-General. The incumbent Governor is entitled to use the style of \"His\" or \"Her Excellency\", while in office. On 28 November 2013 the Premier of NSW announced that the Queen had given approval for the title of \"The Honourable\" to be accorded to the governors and former Governors of New South Wales. Upon installation, the governor serves as a Deputy Prior of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of Saint John of Jerusalem in Australia and is also traditionally invested as either a Knight or Dame of Justice or Grace of the Order. It is also customary that the Governor is made a Companion of the Order of Australia, though this is not necessarily automatic. The use by the Governor of an elaborate uniform, comprising a plain blue tailcoat, scarlet collar and cuffs (embroidered in silver), silver epaulettes, and a plumed bicorne hat, fell out of use with the appointment of the first Australian-born Governor, Sir John Northcott, in 1946.\nThe musical vice regal salute\u2014composed of the first and last four bars of the national anthem (\"Advance Australia Fair\")\u2014is played on the arrival and departure of the Governor from a formal event in which a military or service guard is present. It is optional to play if no guard is at the event.\nTo mark the Governor's presence at any building, ship, aeroplane, or car in Australia, the Governor's standard or flag is employed. Following the example of other states adopting unique Governor's standards, in 1980 the Government of New South Wales sought to introduce a new standard for the Governor to replace the Union Flag that had been in use since 1788. Premier Neville Wran wrote to the Governor, Sir Roden Cutler, on 25 November 1980 advising: \"His Excellency\u2019s Ministers of State now consider that there should be a change in the Personal Standard of the Governor of New South Wales, such change to take effect at the conclusion of His Excellency\u2019s term of office. The Premier therefore recommends for approval a change in the Governor\u2019s distinctive flag from the Union Flag to the New South Wales State Flag with a Crown surmounting the State badge in the fly.\" However, Cutler did not agree with this change, and it was recommended that the change be undertaken after he had left office. The new Governor's Standard was designed and presented by the Garter King of Arms to the Agent-General for New South Wales in London on 8 January 1981, who then sought Royal assent of the new design, which was given on 15 January 1981. The flag was first flown on 20 January 1981 over Parliament House for the official swearing-in of Governor Sir James Rowland, and was flown for the first time over Government House on 29 January 1981. \nHistory.\nAside from the Crown itself, the office of Governor of New South Wales is the oldest constitutional office in Australia. Captain Arthur Phillip assumed office as Governor of New South Wales on 7 February 1788, when the Colony of New South Wales, the first British settlement in Australia, was formally proclaimed. The early colonial governors held an almost autocratic power due to the distance from and poor communications with Great Britain, until 1824 when the New South Wales Legislative Council, Australia's first legislative body, was appointed to advise the governor.\nBetween 1850 and 1861, the Governor of New South Wales was titled Governor-General, in an early attempt at federalism imposed by Earl Grey. All communication between the Australian colonies and the British Government was meant to go through the Governor-General, and the other colonies had lieutenant-Governors. As South Australia (1836), Tasmania (January 1855) and Victoria (May 1855) obtained responsible government, their lieutenant-Governors were replaced by Governors. Although he had ceased acting as a Governor-General, Sir William Denison retained the title until his retirement in 1861.\nThe six British colonies in Australia joined to form the Commonwealth of Australia in 1901. New South Wales and the other colonies became states in the federal system under the Constitution of Australia. In 1902, the \"New South Wales Constitution Act\" 1902 confirmed the modern system of government of New South Wales as a state. Like the new federal Governor-General and the other state governors, in the first years after federation, the governor of New South Wales continued to act both in their constitutional role, and as a liaison between the local government and the imperial government in London. \nIn 1942, the Commonwealth of Australia passed the \"Statute of Westminster Adoption Act 1942\", which rendered Australia dominion status under the Statute of Westminster, and while Australia and Britain share the same person as monarch, that person acts in a distinct capacity when acting as the monarch of each dominion. The convention that the monarch acts in respect of Australian affairs on the advice of his or her Australian ministers, rather than his or her British ministers, became enshrined in law. For New South Wales however, because the Statute of Westminster did not disturb the constitutional arrangements of the Australian states, the governor remained (at least formally) in New South Wales the representative of the British monarch. This arrangement seemed incongruous with the Commonwealth of Australia's independent dominion status conferred by the Statute of Westminster, and with the federal structure.\nAfter much negotiation between the federal and state governments of Australia, the British government and Buckingham Palace, the \"Australia Act 1986\" removed any remaining constitutional roles of the British monarch and British government in the Australian states, and established that the governor of New South Wales (along with the other state governors) was the direct, personal representative of the Australian monarch, and not the British monarch or the British government, nor the governor-general of Australia or the Australian federal government.\nResidences and household.\nGovernment House.\nOn his arrival in Sydney in 1788, Governor Phillip resided in a temporary wood and canvas house before the construction of a more substantial house on a site now bounded by Bridge and Phillip Streets. This first Government House was extended and repaired by the following eight governors, but was generally in poor condition and was vacated when the governor relocated to the new building in 1845, designed by Edward Blore and Mortimer Lewis.\nWith the federation of the Australian colonies in 1901, it was announced that Government House was to serve as the secondary residence of the new governor-general of Australia. As a consequence the NSW Government leased the residence of Cranbrook, Bellevue Hill as the residence of the governor. This arrangement lasted until 1913 when the NSW Government terminated the Commonwealth lease of Government House (the governor-general moved to the new Sydney residence of Admiralty House), the governor from 1913 to 1917, Sir Gerald Strickland, continued to live in Cranbrook and on his departure his successor returned to Government House.\nOn 16 January 1996, Premier Bob Carr announced that the next governor would be Gordon Samuels, that he would not live or work at Government House and that he would retain his appointment as chairman of the New South Wales Law Reform Commission. On these changes, Carr said: \"The Office of the Governor should be less associated with pomp and ceremony, less encumbered by anachronistic protocol, more in tune with the character of the people.\" The state's longest-serving governor, Sir Roden Cutler, was also reported as saying: \"It's a political push to make way in New South Wales to lead the push for a republic. If they decide not to have a Governor and the public agrees with that, and Parliament agrees, and the Queen agrees to it, that is a different matter, but while there is a Governor you have got to give him some respectability and credibility, because he is the host for the whole of New South Wales. For the life of me I cannot understand the logic of having a Governor who is part-time and doesn't live at Government House. It is such a degrading of the office and of the Governor.\"\nIn October 2011, the new premier, Barry O'Farrell, announced that the Governor, now Dame Marie Bashir, had agreed with O'Farrell's offer to move back into Government House: \"A lot of people believe the Governor should live at Government House. That's what it was built for ... [A]t some stage a rural or regional Governor will be appointed and we will need to provide accommodation at Government House so it makes sense to provide appropriate living areas\". With the Governor's return, management of the residence reverted to the Office of the Governor in December 2013.\nSummer residence.\nIn addition to the primary Sydney Vice-Regal residence, many Governors had also felt the need for a 'summer retreat' to escape the hard temperatures of the Sydney summers. In 1790, Governor Phillip had a secondary residence built in the township of Parramatta. In 1799 the second governor, John Hunter, had the remains of Arthur Phillip's cottage cleared away, and a more permanent building erected on the same site. This residence remained occupied until the completion of the primary Government House in 1845, however the hard summers and growing size of Sydney convinced successive governors of the need for a rural residence.\nThe governor from 1868 to 1872, the Earl Belmore, used Throsby Park in Moss Vale as his summer residence. His successor, Sir Hercules Robinson, often retired privately to the same area, in the Southern Highlands, for the same reason. In 1879 it was then decided that the colony should purchase a house at Sutton Forest for use as a permanent summer residence, and in 1881 the NSW Government purchased for \u00a36000 a property known as \"Prospect\" that had been built by Robert Pemberton Richardson (of the firm Richardson &amp; Wrench). This was renamed \"Hillview\", and became the primary summer governor's residence from 1885 to 1957. In 1957, seen as unnecessary and expensive, Hillview was put up for sale and purchased from the state government by Edwin Klein. Hillview was returned to the people of NSW in 1985 and is currently leased under the ownership of the Environment and Heritage Group of the Department of Planning &amp; Environment.\nHousehold.\nThe viceregal household aids the governor in the execution of the royal constitutional and ceremonial duties and is managed by the Office of the Governor, whose current official secretary and chief of staff is Michael Miller LVO, RFD. These organised offices and support systems include aides-de-camp, press officers, financial managers, speech writers, trip organisers, event planners and protocol officers, chefs and other kitchen employees, waiters, and various cleaning staff, as well as tour guides. In this official and bureaucratic capacity, the entire household is often referred to as \"Government House\". These departments are funded through the annual budget, as is the governor's salary of $529,000.\nList of Governors of New South Wales.\nThe following individuals have served as a Governor of New South Wales:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12851", "revid": "525927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12851", "title": "Governor of Victoria", "text": "Representative of the monarch in Victoria\nThe governor of Victoria is the representative of the monarch, currently King Charles III, in the Australian state of Victoria. The governor has many constitutional and ceremonial roles in the Victorian political system; however, they are generally bound by convention to act on the advice of the premier and the Executive Council of Victoria. They also have a significant community role, through investing Australian Honours on behalf of the governor-general, patronage of community organisations, and representing the state as a whole. The current governor is Margaret Gardner.\nSignificant functions of the governor include giving royal assent to bills passed by the houses of parliament, issuing writs for elections, exercising executive power on the advice of the Victorian Executive Council, formally appointing government officials (including the premier, other ministers, judges and officials), opening sessions of state parliament, and presenting Australian honours. Although Australia has a federal system of government, the governor is the direct representative of the monarch and is not subordinate to the governor-general.\nIn almost all instances, the governor only exercises \"de jure\" power in accordance with the principles of the Westminster system and responsible government. This requires them to remain politically neutral and to only act in accordance with Parliament (such as when selecting the premier and providing royal assent) or on the advice of ministers (when performing executive actions). In certain limited circumstances, the governor can exercise reserve powers (powers that may be exercised without or against formal advice). Governors are rarely called upon to exercise these reserve powers in the modern period. However, as the Legislative Council of Victoria has always had a majority of elected members, and the Legislative Council of Victoria had three major parties forming ministries, the government of Victoria prior to 1960 required more active involvement by the governors than in the other Australian states. Sir Charles Darling in 1868 and Sir George Bowen in 1879 were both recalled for their poor management of constitutional crises, while premiers Albert Dunstan in 1945, Thomas Hollway in 1952 and John Cain Sr. in 1955 all lost office due to failing to maintain supply. The governors consulted Victoria's Chief Justice for advice on their exercise of the reserve powers, with Sir Dallas Brooks also consulting the Chief Justice of the High Court, Victorian Sir Owen Dixon, during the 1955 incident.\nIn their ceremonial and community roles, the governor represents the state as a whole. Domestically, this role entails attending services and commemorations, sponsoring community organisations and hosting events at their official residence, Government House, located next to the Royal Botanic Gardens and surrounded by Kings Domain in Melbourne. The governor also promotes Victoria's economic, social and cultural interests abroad and is entitled to travel on an Australian diplomatic passport on official business. The governor is supported an Official Secretary, and the Office of the Governor, an administrative office within the Department of Premier and Cabinet which employed 47 FTE staff in 2024.\nThe governor is selected by the premier and formally appointed by the monarch on the premier's advice. The term of office is not fixed, but they typically serve for five years. Between Victoria's separation from the Colony of New South Wales in 1851 and 1900, ten British-born officials served as governor, including Charles La Trobe and Charles Hotham, who were titled \"Lieutenant-Governor of Victoria\" until the colony achieved responsible government in 1855. Three of these colonial governors were minor British nobility, the other seven came from the landed gentry. Since Federation in 1901, the position was held by a series of minor British nobles, including Baron Huntingfield, the first person born in Australia to serve as governor in any state, however Victoria was the last state to begin appointing Australians as governor on a regular basis. The first Australian appointed governor was Sir Henry Winneke in 1974, and all governors since have been Australian citizens. Several governors since 1974 were born overseas, namely Davis McCaughey (born in Ireland) came to Australia for work and David de Kretser (born in Ceylon, now Sri Lanka) and Alex Chernov (born in Lithuania), both of whom came to Australia while at school. The first woman to be appointed governor was Linda Dessau, who served from 2015 to 2023.\nAppointment.\nThe governor is formally appointed by the monarch with a commission made under the authority of section 6 of the Victorian Constitution. When a new governor is to be appointed, the current premier recommends a name to the monarch, who by convention accepts that recommendation. Prior to 1986, the governor was appointed by the monarch of the United Kingdom acting on the advice of the Colonial Secretary (after 1966, the Foreign Secretary), although local recommendations were considered and usually accepted by the British minister.\nThe incoming governor is publicly announced usually several months before the end of the existing governor's term. After receiving their commission, the new governor takes an oath or affirmation of allegiance to the monarch and an oath or affirmation of office. These oaths are administered by the chief justice of Victoria or another justice of the Supreme Court. Traditionally, the ceremony takes place in the Legislative Council chamber, although between 2001 and 2015 it was conducted at Government House.\nTenure.\nThe Victorian Constitution does not set a term of office, so a governor may continue to hold office for any agreed length of time. The typical term of office is five years, although after this initial term, a commission may be extended. The term of Linda Dessau was extended by three years in June 2020, due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in Australia. This made Deassau the longest-serving governor since Major General Sir Rohan Delacombe, who served 1963 to 1974.\nThere are two other offices that are authorised to administer the government of Victoria on behalf of the governor. The lieutenant-governor of Victoria is appointed by the governor by commission under the Public Seal of Victoria while the administrator of Victoria is \"ex officio\" the chief justice of the Supreme Court, unless:\nIn these cases, the administrator is the next most senior justice of the supreme course who is in Victoria, willing and able to act as administrator.\nThe lieutenant-governor may assume the administration of the government of the state when:\nThe administrator may assume the administration of the government of the state in the same situations, but not when there is a lieutenant-governor who is in Victoria, willing and able to assume the administration of the government.\nThe governor may also appoint the lieutenant governor or administrator as their deputy to perform some or all of the functions of the governor on behalf of the governor while the governor is exercising the office.\nDismissal.\nA governor may be dismissed by the monarch before their term is complete. Since the passage of the \"Australia Act 1986\" the monarch may only dismiss a governor on advice from the premier, who is responsible for selecting an immediate replacement or letting the vacancy provisions take effect. Prior to 1986, the governors were dismissed, or recalled to the United Kingdom, by the monarch of the United Kingdom.\nConstitutional role.\nThe governor has a key role in performing constitutional duties in all branches of government of the state. The governor also has a subsidiary role performing some constitutional duties relating to the government of the Commonwealth.\nRole in the Victorian Parliament.\nThe Victorian Constitution defines the Parliament of Victoria as consisting of the monarch, the Legislative Council and the Legislative Assembly. However, the monarch's role is no more than titular, with the governor responsible under the Victorian Constitution and \"Australia Act 1986\" for all of the functions undertaken by the monarch in regard to the UK parliament. These include the power to summon, dissolve and prorogue the Parliament, to issue writs for elections, as well as the power to give royal assent to bills in the monarch's name.\nThe governor also has a ceremonial role in swearing in and accepting the resignations of members of Parliament. All members must make an oath or affirmation of allegiance to the King in the presence of the governor or someone appointed by them before they take their seats. On the day parliament opens, the governor makes a speech in the Legislative Council (similar to the King's Speech in the UK), entirely written by the government, explaining the government's proposed legislative program.\nOne of the most significant powers of the governor is the power to grant royal assent in the King's name. This assent gives bills that have been passed by the houses of parliament the force of law. It is unclear whether the governor acts on the advice of the government when giving assent, with previous governors giving conflicting views. Previously the Executive Council advised the granting of assent, but since 1996 a standing instruction has been given by the premier stating assent should be given in the absence of advice otherwise. This differs from Commonwealth and other state vice-regal representatives (with the exception of South Australia) who are not given advice regarding royal assent. Assent has not been refused since the early days of responsible government. In 1857, Governor Sir Henry Barkly refused assent to the Oaths of Office Bill 1857 on the grounds that it conflicted with an act of the Imperial Parliament (the \"Roman Catholic Relief Act 1829\"). The next year, he similarly refused to assent to the Duration of Parliament Bill 1858, which aimed to alter the new constitution, but had not been passed in the manner required for constitutional alterations. In both cases, Barker assented to replacement bills that he did not consider to be beyond the power of the colonial parliament.\nPrior to the \"Australia Act 1986\", the \"Australian Constitutions Act 1850\" (UK) authorised the governor to reserve a bill for the monarch's pleasure, that is allow the monarch to give royal assent personally to a proposed bill. When the governor acted as a representative of the British government, this provision allowed for the governor to refer a bill back to the British government for review, which would then advise the monarch whether or not to grant assent. Since the passage of the \"Australia Act 1986\", the powers of the monarch in relation to the state - save for the power to appoint the governor - are exercised by the governor. Under the \"Australian Constitutions Act 1842\" (UK), the British government could also advise the monarch to disallow a law passed within the last two years, which would annul the law on the governor's proclamation or message to the parliament. This power was also removed by the \"Australia Act 1986\".\nFinally, the governor can refer a bill back to the houses with suggested changes.\nRole in executive government.\nExecutive powers vested in governor by statute or as part of the prerogative are exercised on the advice of ministers in accordance with the principles of responsible government. This occurs formally through the Executive Council, a body of all current (and technically former) ministers that advises the governor. Such advice is generally the result of decisions already made in Cabinet, the \"de facto\" highest executive body in Victoria.\nFormally, the governor exercises the traditional rights of the monarch as identified by Bagehot: the right to be consulted, to encourage and to warn.\nRole in the government of the Commonwealth.\nThe role of state governors in the government of the Commonwealth is limited to the issue and return of the writs for the election of senators representing their state, and the nomination of new senators to fill a casual vacancy.\nWhen the prime minister advises governor-general to call an election of the House of Representatives within the 12 months before the expiration of the term of half the Senate, or the dissolution of both houses of parliament under section 57 of the Australian Constitution, they will also advise the governor-general to invite the state governors to issue the writs for the election of senators on the same date.\nWhile the office of governor of Victoria has little role in the administration of the government of the Commonwealth, the individuals who serve as governors of Victoria are - like all the Governors of the Australian states - normally given a dormant commission to administer the government of the Commonwealth in the absence from Australia, or the death, incapacity or removal from office of the governor-general by the Sovereign. Victorian governors are often also appointed as a deputy of the governor-general to perform certain responsibilities of the governor-general while the governor-general is present in Australia, but unable to perform them personally.\nCeremonial role.\nIn addition to the formal constitutional role, the governor has a representative and ceremonial role, though the extent and nature of that role has depended on the expectations of the time, the individual in office at the time, the wishes of the incumbent government, and the individual's reputation in the wider community. Governors generally become patrons of various charitable institutions, present honours and awards, host functions for various groups of people including representatives of other countries, and travel widely throughout the state.\nThe governor is generally invited to become patron of various charitable and service organisations. Historically the governor has often served as Chief Scout of Victoria, Deputy Prior of the Order of St John, and by law is the Visitor of Deakin, Federation, La Trobe, Melbourne, Monash, RMIT, and Victoria Universities.\nThe governor makes official visits overseas on behalf of Victoria at the request of the state government. During these periods, the Lieutenant-Governor of Victoria or an administrator executes the government of the state.\nThe governor fills the honorary role of Representative Colonel for the Australian Army Reserve's Royal Victoria Regiment. They are an Honorary Commodore of the Royal Australian Navy, and the Honorary Air Commodore of No 21 (City of Melbourne) Squadron, Royal Australian Air Force. These appointments are strictly honorary, and unlike governors in the United States who exercise operational control their state National Guard, the governor of Victoria plays no formal role in the command structure of these units.\nPrivileges.\nGovernors are entitled to various privileges by virtue of holding the office. These include the right to live in Government House, the largest and grandest vice-regal residence in the Commonwealth of Nations. The state's first lieutenant-governor, Charles La Trobe continued to live in La Trobe's Cottage, which he had built for himself as Superintendent of Port Phillip District. The colonial government then rented Toorak House from 1854 for use as Government House until the construction of the permanent building in King's Domain was completed in 1876. However, lease negotiations broke down and Sir George Bowen resided at Bishopscourt, the official residence of the Anglican Archbishop of Melbourne, during the final months before Government House was completed.\nBeginning in 1901, the now-state government provided the use of Government House to the Governor-General of Australia as Melbourne was the capital city of Australia prior to the construction of Canberra. The governor-general remained resident in Melbourne outside of parliamentary sitting periods after the capital moved in 1927, not moving to Yarralumla full-time until Sir Issac Issacs took up the post. During this period, the state government rented Stonnington Mansion for use by the state governor, eventually purchasing the building and its contents in 1928. After the governors returned to live at Government House, Stonnington was used as a school.\nThe governor's official vehicles use a representation of St Edward's Crown in place of a standard registration plate and fly the governor's personal standard.\nSalary.\nThe salary of the governor was initially set by the \"Australian Constitutions Act 1850\" at \u00a32,000, which also required any bill that altered the governor's salary to be reserved for her majesty's pleasure. As of 2025, the governor is paid the same salary as a justice of the supreme court (currently $517,650)\nOfficial dress.\nGovernors before the 1970s wore traditional court uniforms, based on the uniform of the Lord Lieutenants of English counties with the colours reversed. It consisted of a dark navy wool double-breasted coatee with silver oak leaf and fern embroidery on the collar and cuffs trimmed with silver buttons embossed with the Royal Arms and with bullion edged epaulettes on the shoulders, dark navy trousers with a wide band of silver oak-leaf braid down the outside seam, silver sword belt with ceremonial sword, bicorne cocked hat with plume of ostrich feathers, black patent leather Wellington boots with spurs, etc., that is worn on ceremonial occasions. However, that custom fell into disuse and governors now dress in informal wear day-to-day.\nTitles and honours.\nGovernors have during their tenure the style \"His or Her Excellency the Honourable\" and their spouses have the style \"His or Her Excellency\". The style used by a former governor is \"the Honourable\".\nSince the creation of the Order of Australia in 1975, governors have been routinely invested as Companions of the Order of Australia immediately prior to being commissioned as governor, and several governors including Linda Dessau, Sir James Gobbo, have been appointed Commanders of the Royal Victorian Order for their service to the sovereign as vice-regal representatives. Prior to 1986, Victoria still utilised the imperial honours system, and it was customary for governors to be recognised with awards of Knight Grand Cross or Knight Commander of the Order of St Michael and St George for their service as colonial officials as well as Knight Grand Cross or Knight Commander of the Royal Victorian Order for their services to the sovereign.\nSpouses of governors have no official duties but carry out the role of a vice-regal consort. They are entitled to the courtesy style \"Her Excellency\" or \"His Excellency\" during the office-holder's term of office. Most spouses of governors have been content to be quietly supportive. Some, however, have been notable in their own right, such as Lady Brooks, Margaret, Baroness Huntingfield, and Glyn Davis\nGovernor's personal standard.\nThe personal standard of the governor of Victoria is the same design as the state flag of Victoria, but with the blue background replaced by gold, and red stars depicting the Southern Cross. The gold is said to represent \"Victoria\u2019s golden past and its promise of a golden future\".\nThe current standard has been in place since 1984. Previously, the standard used by Victorian governors after 1870 had been the Union Jack with the Badge of the State of Victoria emblazoned in the centre.\nThe governor's standard is flown at Government House and on vehicles conveying the governor. The standard is lowered over Government House when the governor is absent from Victoria.\nOffice of the Governor of Victoria.\nThe Office of the Governor provides support to the governor to fulfill their constitutional and ceremonial duties, community and international engagements and maintains Government House, including its collections, as a heritage and community asset of national importance.\nThe Office of the Governor is currently constituted as an administrative office within the Department of Premier and Cabinet under the \"Public Administration Act 2004\". It employed 47 Full-time equivalent staff in 2024 and is headed by the Official Secretary to the Governor.\nThe official secretary to the governor is Victoria's nominee on the Council of the Order of Australia As of 2025, the official secretary is Jonathan Burke.\nHistory.\nCharles La Trobe, superintendent of the Port Phillip District of the Colony of New South Wales was appointed the inaugural lieutenant-governor of the new Colony of Victoria on its separation from New South Wales on 1 July 1851. However, he remained subject to Sir Charles FitzRoy who was raised to the position of Governor-General of New South Wales in an early attempt at federalism among the Australian colonies. FitzRoy exercised little authority over the other colonies, particularly after Henry Grey, 3rd Earl Grey resigned as Secretary of State for War and the Colonies in February 1852. \nLa Trobe had extensive power as lieutenant-governor, able to veto bills passed by the Legislative Council and was responsible for initiating all financial legislation. Within weeks of the new colony being proclaimed, gold was discovered in Ballarat. At the same time as he was called upon to establish the institutions of the new colony, La Trobe also needed to rapidly and drastically expand the area controlled by the new government. Like La Trobe, the other officials of the new government were inexperienced and there were many missteps in the early days of the government as they attempted to manage they tens of thousands of people arriving in the colony in search of gold. The new colony was well-funded from the start, and invested significantly in developing the still-new towns in Melbourne, Ballarat, and the rest of the colony. However, infrastructure remained lacking throughout the gold rush period, and the government was running a budget deficit by the time La Trove returned to the UK.\nDespite a last-minute attempt to instead obtain command of a ship when the Crimean War broke out, Captain Sir Charles Hotham relieved La Trobe as lieutenant-governor in June 1854. He attempted to increase government revenue and get the government out of debt by enforcing the mining licences that had been instituted on the goldfields, but at the same time extended political rights to the miners. Hotham was an extremely authoritarian governor for a Crown Colony that was about to be granted responsible government, perhaps influenced by the Eureka Rebellion breaking out within months of his arrival in the colony. \nAfter the nascent rebellion was put down by elements of the 12th Regiment of Foot, the 40th Regiment of Foot and Victoria Police, Hotham had 13 of the miners tried for high treason, however the jury refused to convict them. and he was rebuked by the new colonial secretary, Lord John Russell for mishandling the prosecutions.\nResponsible Government.\nHotham was appointed as Victoria's first governor following passage of the \"Victoria Constitution Act 1855\" by the imperial parliament. This act formally approved the constitution that had been written by the Legislative Council early in 1854 and established the Legislative Assembly of Victoria, which would begin its first sitting in 1856. When the dispatches returned the approved constitution, they included a provision that the new constitution would not take effect for three months after arrival. Hotham declared that there would be no change to the governance of the state until that time, putting himself and his executive council in conflict with the Legislative Council who believed that the new governor was accountable to legislative oversight. However, this disagreement was short-lived, with Hotham dying on 31 December 1855.\nFollowing the unexpected death of Hotham, the government of Victoria was administered by Major-General Sir Edward Macarthur for most of 1856. The eldest son of the infamous John Macarthur commanded the British Army forces in the colony and had been appointed administrator. Macarthur oversaw the first elections for the Legislative Assembly during the 11 months before the new governor arrived and was well-regarded by the people of Melbourne for his administration.\n1865 Supply Crisis.\nIn 1865, the government led by James McCulloch announced, and then immediately started collecting, a new tariff. After several months of the Legislative Council refusing to pass the tariff, it was added to a supply bill. Under the colonial constitution, the Legislative Council had no power to amend supply bills and so refused to pass it in its entirety. The first Australian supply crisis begun. Treasurer George Verdon attempted to secure loans to fund the government, but was rejected by all except the London Chartered Bank of Australia. The other banks in the colony published their concerns about the power of the governor and ministry to obtain new loans in the absence of supply, however the influence of their only Victorian director, premier James McCulloch meant that the London Chartered Bank immediately extended a loan of \u00a340,000. \nWhen the government was unable to service the loan the next month, the bank sued for the debt in the Supreme Court and the government offered no defence. After receiving the judgement of the court, the government advised governor Sir Charles Darling to authorise payment for the loan and the bank's costs from the consolidated revenue fund without parliamentary approval, a process that was repeated on a monthly basis. McCulloch took the issue to the electorate by dissolving the Legislative Assembly, and after reelection he continued to try and force the Legislative Council to endorse the new tariff. Various attempts to pass the tariff were rejected by the Legislative Council until the ministry resigned in March 1866, however the Protectionist party held a majority of seat in the Assembly and McCulloch was soon asked to form a new ministry.\nGovernor Darling's handling of the situation was poorly received by the people of Victoria, newspapers across Australia, and by the colonial office in London. He was recalled in April 1866 and Major General George Carey assumed the administration of the colony until the new governor arrived in August. Darling was widely condemned for allowing the colonial government to so grievously exceed the bounds of constitutional propriety for so long, however, his recall led to a compromise that saw the deadlock resolved, supply restored, and a new tariff bill passed. However, the crisis was not yet quite over. \nThe Victorian government attempted to gift \u00a320,000 to Lady Darling as compensation for the early termination of Sir Charles' appointment. It was not considered appropriate that the payment be made to Sir Charles directly, however the colonial office was not of a mind to allow the obviously blind and the Secretary of State for the Colonies, Henry Herbert, 4th Earl of Carnarvon sent messages to both the Darlings and the Assembly that the would not be permitted so long as he remained in the Colonial Service. The new governor, Sir John Manners-Sutton, had directions from colonial secretary Henry Pelham-Clinton, 5th Duke of Newcastle not to approve any such payment, so Sir Charles submitted his resignation, but Manners-Sutton was able to convince Newcastle to allow Sir Charles to withdraw it the following year, and he received a pension from the imperial government until he died in 1870.\n1878 Supply Crisis.\nAt the May 1877 election, with the powerful backing of the Melbourne \"Age\", Graham Berry's liberals won a huge majority in the Assembly and he returned to office at the head of a radical ministry. Berry promised that if the Legislative Council, which was elected on a limited property-based franchise, blocked his program, it would be \"dealt with according to its deserts.\" Given that there was no mechanism in the Victorian Constitution to override the Council, this was taken by conservatives to be a threat of revolutionary violence.\nAmong other priorities, Berry's government sought to pay members of the Legislative Assembly, a proposal borne of the desire to facilitate middle and working class representation. It was rejected by the Legislative Council, and then tacked to the annual appropriations bill, which was again rejected. After unlawfully sacking over 400 public servants, including magistrates, judges, goldfields commissioners and coroners on what became known as Black Wednesday, Berry's government plunged the state into financial trouble. In an attempt to restore stability, Berry advised governor Sir George Bowen to authorise payments based solely on the approval of the Legislative Council. Bowen authorised these payments after obtaining advice from the attorney-general, but he was reprimanded by the colonial office for approving the payments and allowing other illegal actions of Berry and his ministers.\nThe Black Wednesday sackings were cancelled, and Bowen was recalled to be assigned as the new Governor of Mauritius, an unimportant backwater Crown Colony that did not have responsible government. Bowen, who had expected to be appointed governor of New South Wales following his time in Victoria, regretted his involvement in the crisis, writing the following year:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPost-Federation.\nFollowing Federation in 1901, the Victorian governors spent the next several decades in a peculiar position. With Melbourne the new nation's temporary capital, John Hope, 7th Earl of Hopetoun and former governor of Victoria, returned to Government House as Governor-General of Australia. His successors remained in residence until Sir Issac Issacs, the first Australian appointed to the position began to live in Canberra full-time in 1930. During this time, the now-state governors resided at Stonnington Mansion.\nIn 1903, the Victorian parliament first debated abolishing the governor's office on grounds of duplication and economy. Further debates occurred in 1904, 1917, and 1920; the last including a motion that fell only four votes short of calling for the abolition of the office. Governor Sir Arthur Stanley shared their views, requesting an early recall to allow the appointment of a replacement who believed in the utility of his office in 1917. He was convinced by the state government to remain in place until 1920, as ministers feared that public opinion could force them to leave the administration of the state in the hands of an Australian lieutenant-governor.\nBetween 1931 and 1934, the state was administered by the lieutenant-governor, chief justice Sir William Irvine. During this time, Irvine did not sit as a justice of the supreme court. Irvine was called upon to act as governor for an extended period due to the financial position of the state during the Great Depression. When planning the move, ministers claimed that \u00a37,000 would be saved annually by leaving the post of governor vacant and decommissioning Stonnington as the state's Government House.\nWorld War 2 Confidence and Supply Crises.\nIn September 1943, the Country Party government of Sir Albert Dunstan was defeated by a motion of no confidence. When this occurs, the convention is that either the government resigns or a new election is called. Arguing that the 1943 Victorian state election had just been held and no other party had the numbers to form a government, Dunstan attempted to pursuade governor Sir Winston Dugan to allow him to remain in office while he negotiated support from the United Australia Party. Dugan instead exercised his reserve powers, requiring the premier to submit his resignation. He then appointed the leader of the opposition, John Cain as premier. \nThere had been an understanding between Labour and the United Australia Party that UAP leader Thomas Hollway would be the one to be appointed premier. Feeling no loyalty to Cain, the UAP voted with the Country Party to bring down his new government the following day. Instead of submitting his resignation, Cain advised the governor to call for a fresh election, but this advice was refused.\nIn September 1945, Cain was able to block a supply bill on the floor of the Legislative Assembly. Dunstan's government attempted to pass the bill again, but when it became clear that it did not have the votes to do so, the governor dissolved the assembly and called for an election in November, when the new electoral rolls would be prepared. The proclamation dissolving the legislative assembly did not take affect until the following week, allowing time for an interim supply bill to be passed to fund the election and other aspects of the state government in the meantime. \nCain retained his supporters, and passing a motion explicitly calling on Dunstan to resign, citing the illegal payments made by governments in the 1865 and 1878 supply crises as rationale. Dunstan asked the governor for an immediate dissolution of parliament, but was denied, with Dugan retorting that he was refusing to sanction illegal payments as his 18th-century predecessors had and required the premier's resignation. Both Cain and Holloway were unable to secure the passage of supply to provide for the state's finances until the election, with the deadlock eventually being broken by the appointment of attorney-general Ian Macfarlan as premier to lead a caretaker ministry until the 1945 Victorian state election. After the election John Cain secured a majority and was commissioned as premier, while Dugan was raised to the peerage at the conclusion of his term as governor, becoming Baron Dugan of Victoria.\n1952 Supply Crisis.\nThe 1950 Victorian state election produced a hung parliament, with the new governor, Sir Dallas Brooks, mediating a minority Country Party government supported on confidence and supply by the Labor Party. This government under premier John McDonald remained in office for two years, before John Cain's Labor Party blocked supply in the Legislative Council in October 1952 in an effort to bring Thomas Holloway to power to lead a caretaker government and institute electoral reform. \nFollowing his defeat on supply, McDonald requested a dissolution but was denied by the governor who appointed Thomas Holloway as premier. Holloway swiftly passed the supply bill through the Legislative Council, funding the government until December. In the Legislative Assembly, Holloway lost a confidence motion, and requested a dissolution of parliament on the grounds that he had achieved his promise of obtaining supply until the election.\nHowever, McDonald argued that Holloway had never achieved the backing of the Legislative Assembly, as he had retained the confidence of the Assembly throughout the incident and was entitled to campaign as premier. After seeking the advice of the chief justices of the supreme court (Edmund Herring) and the high court (Victorian Owen Dixon), Brooks recommissioned McDonald as premier and McDonald immediately requested a fresh election. After this election, John Cain was again commissioned as premier, leading a Labor government.\n1955 Confidence and Supply Crisis.\nCain's third government lasted until the Australian Labor Party split of 1955. After the 1955 Australian federal election, opposition leader H. V. Evatt blamed disloyal elements of the Victorian party for his loss, and set about purging those elements from the party.\nWith 4 of his ministers amongst the exiled members, Cain requested a dissolution of parliament from the governor. Sir Dallas Brooks again consulted with Herring and Dixon, determining that there was insufficient supply to fund the government until the election, refused to grant a dissolution until supply was passed.\nWhen state parliament was finally summoned, 11 of the ousted Labor MLAs, who would soon establish the virulently anti-communist Democratic Labor Party, joined with Henry Bolte's Liberal and Country Party and the Country Party to pass a motion of no confidence, and as there was sufficient supply to cover the state's expenses through the election, the writs for the 1955 Victorian state election were issued.\nLater 20th Century.\nIn 1967, governor Sir Rohan Delacombe was petitioned to exercise the royal prerogative of mercy to commute the execution of Ronald Ryan by four of the jurors in the case who had submitted a guilty verdict in the belief that capital punishment had been abolished in Victoria, and thought Ryan's sentence would be commuted to life imprisonment. Premier Henry Bolte was determined Ryan should hang. Delacombe called a meeting with the Victorian cabinet, at which it was unanimously agreed that the execution should proceed. Ryan was hanged on 3 February 1967, the last person in Australia to be executed.\nIn 1985, as the \"Australia Acts 1986\" were being developed, Victorian Governor Rear Admiral Sir Brian Murray was embroiled in a scandal. Against the advice of Premier John Cain, Murray had accepted free travel for himself and his wife and was caught up in a police investigation into the use of free airfares by police officers and other state officials. The Premier sought for Elizabeth II to remove Murray, but the British Government was unwilling to act, fearing to appear anachronistic on the eve of the \"Australia Acts 1986\". Cain's attempts to communicate with the Foreign Office were also complicated by the Governor being the traditional channel of communication. Sir John Leahy, the British High Commissioner, declined to carry messages on the grounds that he was not accredited to the state governments. Instead, messages were conveyed by the Australian High Commissioner in the United Kingdom, and deputy premier Robert Fordham travelled to London to meet with British ministers. The Foreign Secretary requested legal advice from his department as to the mechanisms of dismissing an Australian state governor, but was ultimately not required to act on the state government's request when Murray submitted his resignation under pressure from the state and Commonwealth governments. There was some enthusiasm amongst the state government for appointing Charles, Prince of Wales to replace Murray as governor, but this was quietly discouraged before a formal request could be made.\nList of governors of Victoria.\nLieutenant-governors.\nPrior to the separation of the Colony of Victoria from New South Wales in 1851, the area was called the Port Phillip District of New South Wales. The governor of New South Wales appointed superintendents of the district. In 1839, Charles La Trobe was appointed superintendent. La Trobe became lieutenant-governor of the new colony of Victoria on separation on 1 July 1851.\nFrom 1850 to 1861, the governor of New South Wales was titled Governor-general of New South Wales in an attempt to form a federal structure. Until Victoria obtained responsible government in 1855, the governor-general of New South Wales appointed lieutenant-governors to Victoria. On Victoria obtaining responsible government in May 1855, the title of the then incumbent lieutenant-governor, Captain Sir Charles Hotham, became governor.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12852", "revid": "16752040", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12852", "title": "List of Governors of Tasmania", "text": ""}
{"id": "12855", "revid": "724850", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12855", "title": "George Bernard Shaw", "text": "Irish playwright, critic, and polemicist (1856\u20131950)\nGeorge Bernard Shaw (26 July 1856 \u2013 2 November 1950), known at his insistence as Bernard Shaw, was an Irish playwright, critic, polemicist and political activist. His influence on Western theatre, culture and politics extended from the 1880s to his death and beyond. He wrote more than sixty plays, including major works such as \"Man and Superman\" (1902), \"Pygmalion\" (1913) and \"Saint Joan\" (1923). With a range incorporating both contemporary satire and historical allegory, Shaw became the leading dramatist of his generation, and in 1925 was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature.\nBorn in Dublin, Shaw moved to London in 1876; he struggled to establish himself as a writer and novelist, and embarked on a rigorous process of self-education. By the mid-1880s he had become a respected theatre and music critic. Following a political awakening, he joined the gradualist Fabian Society and became its most prominent pamphleteer. Shaw had been writing plays for years before his first public success, \"Arms and the Man\" in 1894. Influenced by Henrik Ibsen, he sought to introduce a new realism into English-language drama, using his plays as vehicles to disseminate his political, social and religious ideas. By the early twentieth century his reputation as a dramatist was secured with a series of critical and popular successes that included \"Major Barbara\", \"The Doctor's Dilemma\", and \"Caesar and Cleopatra\".\nShaw's expressed views were often contentious; he promoted eugenics and alphabet reform, and opposed vaccination and organised religion. He courted unpopularity by denouncing both sides in the First World War as equally culpable, and although not a republican, castigated British policy on Ireland in the postwar period. These stances had no lasting effect on his standing or productivity as a dramatist; the inter-war years saw a series of often ambitious plays, which achieved varying degrees of popular success. In 1938 he provided the screenplay for a filmed version of \"Pygmalion\" for which he received an Academy Award. His appetite for politics and controversy remained undiminished; by the late 1920s, he had largely renounced Fabian Society gradualism, and often wrote and spoke favourably of dictatorships of the right and left\u2014he expressed admiration for both Mussolini and Stalin. In the final decade of his life, he made fewer public statements but continued to write prolifically until shortly before his death, aged ninety-four, having refused all state honours, including the Order of Merit in 1946.\nSince Shaw's death scholarly and critical opinion about his works has varied, but he has regularly been rated among British dramatists as second only to Shakespeare; analysts recognise his extensive influence on generations of English-language playwrights. The word \"Shavian\" has entered the language as encapsulating Shaw's ideas and his means of expressing them.\nLife.\nEarly years.\nShaw was born at 3 Upper Synge Street in Portobello, a lower-middle-class part of Dublin. He was the youngest child and only son of George Carr Shaw and Lucinda Elizabeth (Bessie) Shaw (\"n\u00e9e\" Gurly). His elder siblings were Lucinda (Lucy) Frances and Elinor Agnes. The Shaw family was of English descent and belonged to the dominant Protestant Ascendancy in Ireland; George Carr Shaw, an ineffectual alcoholic, was among the family's less successful members. His relatives secured him a sinecure in the civil service, from which he was pensioned off in the early 1850s; thereafter he worked irregularly as a corn merchant. In 1852 he married Bessie Gurly; in the view of Shaw's biographer Michael Holroyd she married to escape a tyrannical great-aunt. If, as Holroyd and others surmise, George's motives were mercenary, then he was disappointed, as Bessie brought him little of her family's money. She came to despise her ineffectual and often drunken husband, with whom she shared what their son later described as a life of \"shabby-genteel poverty\".\nBy the time of Shaw's birth his mother had become close to George John Lee, a flamboyant figure well known in Dublin's musical circles. Shaw retained a lifelong obsession that Lee might have been his biological father; there is no consensus among Shavian scholars on the likelihood of this. The young Shaw suffered no harshness from his mother, but he later recalled that her indifference and lack of affection hurt him deeply. He found solace in the music that abounded in the house. Lee was a conductor and teacher of singing; Bessie had a fine mezzo-soprano voice and was much influenced by Lee's unorthodox method of vocal production. The Shaws' house was often filled with music, with frequent gatherings of singers and players.\nIn 1862 Lee and the Shaws agreed to share a house, No. 1 Hatch Street, in an affluent part of Dublin, and a country cottage on Dalkey Hill, overlooking Killiney Bay. Shaw, a sensitive boy, found the less salubrious parts of Dublin shocking and distressing, and was happier at the cottage. Lee's students often gave him books, which the young Shaw read avidly; thus, as well as gaining a thorough musical knowledge of choral and operatic works, he became familiar with a wide spectrum of literature.\nBetween 1865 and 1871 Shaw attended four schools, all of which he hated. His experiences as a schoolboy left him disillusioned with formal education: \"Schools and schoolmasters\", he later wrote, were \"prisons and turnkeys in which children are kept to prevent them disturbing and chaperoning their parents.\" In October 1871 he left school to become a junior clerk in a Dublin firm of land agents, where he worked hard, and quickly rose to become head cashier. During this period, Shaw was known as \"George Shaw\"; after 1876, he dropped the \"George\" and styled himself \"Bernard Shaw\".\nIn June 1873 Lee left Dublin for London and never returned. A fortnight later, Bessie followed him; the two girls joined her. Shaw's explanation of why his mother followed Lee was that without the latter's financial contribution the joint household had to be broken up. Left in Dublin with his father, Shaw compensated for the absence of music in the house by teaching himself to play the piano.\nLondon.\nEarly in 1876 Shaw learned from his mother that Agnes was dying of tuberculosis. He resigned from the land agents, and in March travelled to England to join his mother and Lucy at Agnes's funeral. He never again lived in Ireland, and did not visit it for twenty-nine years.\nInitially, Shaw refused to seek clerical employment in London. His mother allowed him to live free of charge in her house in South Kensington, but he nevertheless needed an income. He had abandoned a teenage ambition to become a painter, and had not yet thought of writing for a living, but Lee found a little work for him, ghost-writing a musical column printed under Lee's name in a satirical weekly, \"The Hornet\". Lee's relations with Bessie deteriorated after their move to London. Shaw maintained contact with Lee, who found him work as a rehearsal pianist and occasional singer.\nEventually Shaw was driven to applying for office jobs. In the interim he secured a reader's pass for the British Museum Reading Room (the forerunner of the British Library) and spent most weekdays there, reading and writing. His first attempt at drama, begun in 1878, was a blank-verse satirical piece on a religious theme. It was abandoned unfinished, as was his first try at a novel. His first completed novel, \"Immaturity\" (1879), was too grim to appeal to publishers and did not appear until the 1930s. He was employed briefly by the newly formed Edison Telephone Company in 1879\u201380 and, as in Dublin, achieved rapid promotion. Nonetheless, when the Edison firm merged with the rival Bell Telephone Company, Shaw chose not to seek a place in the new organisation. Thereafter he pursued a full-time career as an author.\nFor the next four years Shaw made a negligible income from writing, and was subsidised by his mother. In 1881, for the sake of economy, and increasingly as a matter of principle, he became a vegetarian. In the same year he suffered an attack of smallpox; eventually he grew a beard to hide the resultant facial scar. In rapid succession he wrote two more novels: \"The Irrational Knot\" (1880) and \"Love Among the Artists\" (1881), but neither found a publisher; each was serialised a few years later in the socialist magazine \"Our Corner\".\nIn 1880 Shaw began attending meetings of the Zetetical Society, whose objective was to \"search for truth in all matters affecting the interests of the human race\". Here he met Sidney Webb, a junior civil servant who, like Shaw, was busy educating himself. Despite difference of style and temperament, the two quickly recognised qualities in each other and developed a lifelong friendship. Shaw later reflected: \"You knew everything that I didn't know and I knew everything you didn't know\u00a0... We had everything to learn from one another and brains enough to do it\".\nShaw's next attempt at drama was a one-act playlet in French, \"Un Petit Drame\", written in 1884 but not published in his lifetime. In the same year the critic William Archer suggested a collaboration, with a plot by Archer and dialogue by Shaw. The project foundered, but Shaw returned to the draft as the basis of \"Widowers' Houses\" in 1892, and the connection with Archer proved of immense value to Shaw's career.\nPolitical awakening: Marxism, socialism, Fabian Society.\nOn 5 September 1882 Shaw attended a meeting at the Memorial Hall, Farringdon, addressed by the political economist Henry George. Shaw then read George's book \"Progress and Poverty\", which awakened his interest in economics. He began attending meetings of the Social Democratic Federation (SDF), where he discovered the writings of Karl Marx, and thereafter spent much of 1883 reading \"Das Kapital\". He was not impressed by the SDF's founder, H. M. Hyndman, whom he found autocratic, ill-tempered and lacking leadership qualities. Shaw doubted the ability of the SDF to harness the working classes into an effective radical movement and did not join it\u2014he preferred, he said, to work with his intellectual equals.\nAfter reading a tract, \"Why Are The Many Poor?\", issued by the recently formed Fabian Society, Shaw went to the society's next advertised meeting, on 16 May 1884. He became a member in September, and before the year's end had provided the society with its first manifesto, published as Fabian Tract No. 2. He joined the society's executive committee in January 1885, and later that year recruited Webb and also Annie Besant, a fine orator.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"The most striking result of our present system of farming out the national Land and capital to private individuals has been the division of society into hostile classes, with large appetites and no dinners at one extreme, and large dinners and no appetites at the other\"\nShaw, Fabian Tract No. 2: \"A Manifesto\" (1884).\nFrom 1885 to 1889 Shaw attended the fortnightly meetings of the British Economic Association; it was, Holroyd observes, \"the closest Shaw had ever come to university education\". This experience changed his political ideas; he moved away from Marxism and became an apostle of gradualism. When in 1886\u201387 the Fabians debated whether to embrace anarchism, as advocated by Charlotte Wilson, Besant and others, Shaw joined the majority in rejecting this approach. After a rally in Trafalgar Square addressed by Besant was violently broken up by the authorities on 13 November 1887 (\"Bloody Sunday\"), Shaw became convinced of the folly of attempting to challenge police power. Thereafter he largely accepted the principle of \"permeation\" as advocated by Webb: the notion whereby socialism could best be achieved by infiltration of people and ideas into existing political parties.\nThroughout the 1880s the Fabian Society remained small, its message of moderation frequently unheard among more strident voices. Its profile was raised in 1889 with the publication of \"Fabian Essays in Socialism\", edited by Shaw who also provided two of the essays. The second of these, \"Transition\", details the case for gradualism and permeation, asserting that \"the necessity for cautious and gradual change must be obvious to everyone\". In 1890 Shaw produced Tract No. 13, \"What Socialism Is\", a revision of an earlier tract in which Charlotte Wilson had defined socialism in anarchistic terms. In Shaw's new version, readers were assured that \"socialism can be brought about in a perfectly constitutional manner by democratic institutions\".\nNovelist and critic.\nThe mid-1880s marked a turning point in Shaw's life, both personally and professionally: he lost his virginity, had two novels published, and began a career as a critic. He had been celibate until his twenty-ninth birthday, when his shyness was overcome by Jane (Jenny) Patterson, a widow some years his senior. Their affair continued, not always smoothly, for eight years. Shaw's sex life has caused much speculation and debate among his biographers, but there is a consensus that the relationship with Patterson was one of his few non-platonic romantic liaisons.\nThe published novels, neither commercially successful, were his two final efforts in this genre: \"Cashel Byron's Profession\" written in 1882\u201383, and \"An Unsocial Socialist\", begun and finished in 1883. The latter was published as a serial in \"To-Day\" magazine in 1884, although it did not appear in book form until 1887. \"Cashel Byron\" appeared in magazine and book form in 1886.\nIn 1884 and 1885, through the influence of Archer, Shaw was engaged to write book and music criticism for London papers. When Archer resigned as art critic of \"The World\" in 1886, he secured the succession for Shaw. The two figures in the contemporary art world whose views Shaw most admired were William Morris and John Ruskin, and he sought to follow their precepts in his criticisms. Their emphasis on morality appealed to Shaw, who rejected the idea of art for art's sake, and insisted that all great art must be didactic.\nOf Shaw's various reviewing activities in the 1880s and 1890s it was as a music critic that he was best known. After serving as deputy in 1888, he became musical critic of \"The Star\" in February 1889, writing under the pen-name Corno di Bassetto. In May 1890 he moved back to \"The World\", where he wrote a weekly column as \"G.B.S.\" for more than four years. In the 2016 version of the \"Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians\", Robert Anderson writes, \"Shaw's collected writings on music stand alone in their mastery of English and compulsive readability.\" Shaw ceased to be a salaried music critic in August 1894, but published occasional articles on the subject throughout his career, his last in 1950.\nFrom 1895 to 1898, Shaw was the theatre critic for \"The Saturday Review\", edited by his friend Frank Harris. As at \"The World\", he used the by-line \"G.B.S.\" He campaigned against the artificial conventions and hypocrisies of the Victorian theatre and called for plays of real ideas and true characters. By this time he had embarked in earnest on a career as a playwright: \"I had rashly taken up the case; and rather than let it collapse I manufactured the evidence\".\nPlaywright and politician: 1890s.\nAfter using the plot of the aborted 1884 collaboration with Archer to complete \"Widowers' Houses\" (it was staged twice in London, in December 1892), Shaw continued writing plays. At first he made slow progress; \"The Philanderer\", written in 1893 but not published until 1898, had to wait until 1905 for a stage production. Similarly, \"Mrs Warren's Profession\" (1893) was written five years before publication and nine years before reaching the stage.\nShaw's first play to bring him financial success was \"Arms and the Man\" (1894), a mock-Ruritanian comedy satirising conventions of love, military honour and class. The press found the play overlong, and accused Shaw of mediocrity, sneering at heroism and patriotism, heartless cleverness, and copying W.S.Gilbert's style. The public took a different view, and the management of the theatre staged extra matin\u00e9e performances to meet the demand. The play ran from April to July, toured the provinces and was staged in New York. It earned him \u00a3341 in royalties in its first year, a sufficient sum to enable him to give up his salaried post as a music critic. Among the cast of the London production was Florence Farr, with whom Shaw had a romantic relationship between 1890 and 1894, much resented by Jenny Patterson.\nThe success of \"Arms and the Man\" was not immediately replicated. \"Candida\", which presented a young woman making a conventional romantic choice for unconventional reasons, received a single performance in South Shields in 1895; in 1897 a playlet about Napoleon called \"The Man of Destiny\" had a single staging at Croydon. In the 1890s Shaw's plays were better known in print than on the West End stage; his biggest success of the decade was in New York in 1897, when Richard Mansfield's production of the historical melodrama \"The Devil's Disciple\" earned the author more than \u00a32,000 in royalties.\nIn January 1893, as a Fabian delegate, Shaw attended the Bradford conference which led to the foundation of the Independent Labour Party. He was sceptical about the new party, and scorned the likelihood that it could switch the allegiance of the working class from sport to politics. He persuaded the conference to adopt resolutions abolishing indirect taxation, and taxing unearned income \"to extinction\". Back in London, Shaw produced what Margaret Cole, in her Fabian history, terms a \"grand philippic\" against the minority Liberal administration that had taken power in 1892. \"To Your Tents, O Israel!\" excoriated the government for ignoring social issues and concentrating solely on Irish Home Rule, a matter Shaw declared of no relevance to socialism. In 1894 the Fabian Society received a substantial bequest from a sympathiser, Henry Hunt Hutchinson\u2014Holroyd mentions \u00a310,000. Webb, who chaired the board of trustees appointed to supervise the legacy, proposed to use most of it to found a school of economics and politics. Shaw demurred; he thought such a venture was contrary to the specified purpose of the legacy. He was eventually persuaded to support the proposal, and the London School of Economics and Political Science (LSE) opened in the summer of 1895.\nBy the later 1890s Shaw's political activities lessened as he concentrated on making his name as a dramatist. In 1897 he was persuaded to fill an uncontested vacancy for a \"vestryman\" (parish councillor) in London's St Pancras district. At least initially, Shaw took to his municipal responsibilities seriously; when London government was reformed in 1899 and the St Pancras vestry became the Metropolitan Borough of St Pancras, he was elected to the newly formed borough council.\nIn 1898, as a result of overwork, Shaw's health broke down. He was nursed by Charlotte Payne-Townshend, a rich Anglo-Irish woman whom he had met through the Webbs. The previous year she had proposed that she and Shaw should marry. He had declined, but when she insisted on nursing him in a house in the country, Shaw, concerned that this might cause scandal, agreed to their marriage. The ceremony took place on 1 June 1898, in the register office in Covent Garden. The bride and bridegroom were both aged forty-one. In the view of the biographer and critic St John Ervine, \"their life together was entirely felicitous\". There were no children of the marriage, which it is generally believed was never consummated; whether this was wholly at Charlotte's wish, as Shaw liked to suggest, is less widely credited. In the early weeks of the marriage Shaw was much occupied writing his Marxist analysis of Wagner's \"Ring\" cycle, published as \"The Perfect Wagnerite\" late in 1898. In 1906 the Shaws found a country home in Ayot St Lawrence, Hertfordshire; they renamed the house \"Shaw's Corner\", and lived there for the rest of their lives. They retained a London flat in the Adelphi and later at Whitehall Court.\nStage success: 1900\u20131914.\nDuring the first decade of the twentieth century, Shaw secured a firm reputation as a playwright. In 1904 J. E. Vedrenne and Harley Granville-Barker established a company at the Royal Court Theatre in Sloane Square, Chelsea to present modern drama. Over the next five years they staged fourteen of Shaw's plays. The first, \"John Bull's Other Island\", a comedy about an Englishman in Ireland, attracted leading politicians and was seen by Edward VII, who laughed so much that he broke his chair. The play was withheld from Dublin's Abbey Theatre, for fear of the affront it might provoke, although it was shown at the city's Royal Theatre in November 1907. Shaw later wrote that William Butler Yeats, who had requested the play, \"got rather more than he bargained for... It was uncongenial to the whole spirit of the neo-Gaelic movement, which is bent on creating a new Ireland after its own ideal, whereas my play is a very uncompromising presentment of the real old Ireland.\" Nonetheless, Shaw and Yeats were close friends; Yeats and Lady Gregory tried unsuccessfully to persuade Shaw to take up the vacant co-directorship of the Abbey Theatre after J. M. Synge's death in 1909. Shaw admired other figures in the Irish Literary Revival, including George Russell and James Joyce, and was a close friend of Se\u00e1n O'Casey, who was inspired to become a playwright after reading \"John Bull's Other Island\".\n\"Man and Superman\", completed in 1902, was a success both at the Royal Court in 1905 and in Robert Loraine's New York production in the same year. Among the other Shaw works presented by Vedrenne and Granville-Barker were \"Major Barbara\" (1905), depicting the contrasting morality of arms manufacturers and the Salvation Army; \"The Doctor's Dilemma\" (1906), a mostly serious piece about professional ethics; and \"Caesar and Cleopatra\", Shaw's counterblast to Shakespeare's \"Antony and Cleopatra\", seen in New York in 1906 and in London the following year.\nNow prosperous and established, Shaw experimented with unorthodox theatrical forms described by his biographer Stanley Weintraub as \"discussion drama\" and \"serious farce\". These plays included \"Getting Married\" (premiered 1908), \"The Shewing-Up of Blanco Posnet\" (1909), \"Misalliance\" (1910), and \"Fanny's First Play\" (1911). \"Blanco Posnet\" was banned on religious grounds by the Lord Chamberlain (the official theatre censor in England), and was produced instead in Dublin; it filled the Abbey Theatre to capacity. \"Fanny's First Play\", a comedy about suffragettes, had the longest initial run of any Shaw play\u2014622 performances.\n\"Androcles and the Lion\" (1912), a less heretical study of true and false religious attitudes than \"Blanco Posnet\", ran for eight weeks in September and October 1913. It was followed by one of Shaw's most successful plays, \"Pygmalion\", written in 1912 and staged in Vienna the following year, and in Berlin shortly afterwards. Shaw commented, \"It is the custom of the English press when a play of mine is produced, to inform the world that it is not a play\u2014that it is dull, blasphemous, unpopular, and financially unsuccessful.\u00a0... Hence arose an urgent demand on the part of the managers of Vienna and Berlin that I should have my plays performed by them first.\" The British production opened in April 1914, starring Sir Herbert Tree and Mrs Patrick Campbell as, respectively, a professor of phonetics and a cockney flower-girl. There had earlier been a romantic liaison between Shaw and Campbell that caused Charlotte Shaw considerable concern, but by the time of the London premiere it had ended. The play attracted capacity audiences until July, when Tree insisted on going on holiday, and the production closed. His co-star then toured with the piece in the US.\nFabian years: 1900\u20131913.\nIn 1899, when the Boer War began, Shaw wished the Fabians to take a neutral stance on what he deemed, like Home Rule, to be a \"non-Socialist\" issue. Others, including the future Labour prime minister Ramsay MacDonald, wanted unequivocal opposition, and resigned from the society when it followed Shaw. In the Fabians' war manifesto, \"Fabianism and the Empire\" (1900), Shaw declared that \"until the Federation of the World becomes an accomplished fact we must accept the most responsible Imperial federations available as a substitute for it\".\nAs the new century began, Shaw became increasingly disillusioned by the limited impact of the Fabians on national politics. Thus, although a nominated Fabian delegate, he did not attend the London conference at the Memorial Hall, Farringdon Street in February 1900, that created the Labour Representation Committee\u2014precursor of the modern Labour Party. By 1903, when his term as borough councillor expired, he had lost his earlier enthusiasm, writing: \"After six years of Borough Councilling I am convinced that the borough councils should be abolished\". Nevertheless, in 1904 he stood in the London County Council elections. After an eccentric campaign, which Holroyd characterises as \"[making] absolutely certain of not getting in\", he was duly defeated. It was Shaw's final foray into electoral politics. Nationally, the 1906 general election produced a huge Liberal majority and an intake of 29 Labour members. Shaw viewed this outcome with scepticism; he had a low opinion of the new prime minister, Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman, and saw the Labour members as inconsequential: \"I apologise to the Universe for my connection with such a body\".\nIn the years after the 1906 election, Shaw felt that the Fabians needed fresh leadership, and saw this in the form of his fellow-writer H. G. Wells, who had joined the society in February 1903. Wells's ideas for reform\u2014particularly his proposals for closer cooperation with the Independent Labour Party\u2014placed him at odds with the society's \"Old Gang\", led by Shaw. According to Cole, Wells \"had minimal capacity for putting [his ideas] across in public meetings against Shaw's trained and practised virtuosity\". In Shaw's view, \"the Old Gang did not extinguish Mr Wells, he annihilated himself\". Wells resigned from the society in September 1908; Shaw remained a member, but left the executive in April 1911. He later wondered whether the Old Gang should have given way to Wells some years earlier: \"God only knows whether the Society had not better have done it\". Although less active\u2014he blamed his advancing years\u2014Shaw remained a Fabian.\nIn 1912 Shaw invested \u00a31,000 for a one-fifth share in the Webbs' new publishing venture, a socialist weekly magazine called \"The New Statesman\", which appeared in April 1913. He became a founding director, publicist, and in due course a contributor, mostly anonymously. He was soon at odds with the magazine's editor, Clifford Sharp, who by 1916 was rejecting his contributions\u2014\"the only paper in the world that refuses to print anything by me\", according to Shaw.\nFirst World War.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"I see the Junkers and Militarists of England and Germany jumping at the chance they have longed for in vain for many years of smashing one another and establishing their own oligarchy as the dominant military power of the world.\"\nShaw: \"Common Sense About the War\" (1914).\nAfter the First World War began in August 1914, Shaw produced his tract \"Common Sense About the War\", which argued that the warring nations were equally culpable. Such a view was anathema in an atmosphere of fervent patriotism, and offended many of Shaw's friends; Ervine records that \"[h]is appearance at any public function caused the instant departure of many of those present.\"\nDespite his errant reputation, Shaw's propagandist skills were recognised by the British authorities, and early in 1917 he was invited by Field Marshal Haig to visit the Western Front battlefields. Shaw's 10,000-word report, which emphasised the human aspects of the soldier's life, was well received, and he became less of a lone voice. In April 1917 he joined the national consensus in welcoming America's entry into the war: \"a first class moral asset to the common cause against junkerism\".\nThree short plays by Shaw were premiered during the war. \"The Inca of Perusalem\", written in 1915, encountered problems with the censor for burlesquing not only the enemy but the British military command; it was performed in 1916 at the Birmingham Repertory Theatre. \"O'Flaherty V.C.\", satirising the government's attitude to Irish recruits, was banned in the UK and was presented at a Royal Flying Corps base in Belgium in 1917. \"Augustus Does His Bit\", a genial farce, was granted a licence; it opened at the Royal Court in January 1917.\nIreland.\nShaw had long supported the principle of Irish Home Rule within the British Empire (which he thought should become the British Commonwealth). In April 1916 he wrote scathingly in \"The New York Times\" about militant Irish nationalism: \"In point of learning nothing and forgetting nothing these fellow-patriots of mine leave the Bourbons nowhere.\" Total independence, he asserted, was impractical; alliance with a bigger power (preferably England) was essential. The Dublin Easter Rising later that month took him by surprise. After its suppression by British forces, he expressed horror at the summary execution of the rebel leaders, but continued to believe in some form of Anglo-Irish union. In \"How to Settle the Irish Question\" (1917), he envisaged a federal arrangement, with national and imperial parliaments. Holroyd records that by this time the separatist party Sinn F\u00e9in was in the ascendency, and Shaw's and other moderate schemes were forgotten.\nIn the postwar period, Shaw despaired of the British government's coercive policies towards Ireland, and joined his fellow-writers Hilaire Belloc and G. K. Chesterton in publicly condemning these actions. The Anglo-Irish Treaty of December 1921 led to the partition of Ireland between north and south, a provision that dismayed Shaw. In 1922 civil war broke out in the south between its pro-treaty and anti-treaty factions, the former of whom had established the Irish Free State. Shaw visited Dublin in August, and met Michael Collins, then head of the Free State's Provisional Government. Shaw was much impressed by Collins, and was saddened when, three days later, the Irish leader was ambushed and killed by anti-treaty forces. In a letter to Collins's sister, Shaw wrote: \"I met Michael for the first and last time on Saturday last, and am very glad I did. I rejoice in his memory, and will not be so disloyal to it as to snivel over his valiant death\". Shaw remained a British subject all his life, but took dual British-Irish nationality in 1934.\n1920s.\nShaw's first major work to appear after the war was \"Heartbreak House\", written in 1916\u201317 and performed in 1920. It was produced on Broadway in November, and was coolly received; according to \"The Times\": \"Mr Shaw on this occasion has more than usual to say and takes twice as long as usual to say it\". After the London premiere in October 1921 \"The Times\" concurred with the American critics: \"As usual with Mr Shaw, the play is about an hour too long\", although containing \"much entertainment and some profitable reflection\". Ervine in \"The Observer\" thought the play brilliant but ponderously acted, except for Edith Evans as Lady Utterword.\nShaw's largest-scale theatrical work was \"Back to Methuselah\", written in 1918\u201320 and staged in 1922. Weintraub describes it as \"Shaw's attempt to fend off 'the bottomless pit of an utterly discouraging pessimism'\". This cycle of five interrelated plays depicts evolution, and the effects of longevity, from the Garden of Eden to the year 31,920 AD. Critics found the five plays strikingly uneven in quality and invention. The original run was brief, and the work has been revived infrequently. Shaw felt he had exhausted his remaining creative powers in the huge span of this \"Metabiological Pentateuch\". He was now sixty-seven, and expected to write no more plays.\nThis mood was short-lived. In 1920 Joan of Arc was proclaimed a saint by Pope Benedict XV; Shaw had long found Joan an interesting historical character, and his view of her veered between \"half-witted genius\" and someone of \"exceptional sanity\". He had considered writing a play about her in 1913, and the canonisation prompted him to return to the subject. He wrote \"Saint Joan\" in the middle months of 1923, and the play was premiered on Broadway in December. It was enthusiastically received there, and at its London premiere the following March. In Weintraub's phrase, \"even the Nobel prize committee could no longer ignore Shaw after Saint Joan\". The citation for the literature prize for 1925 praised his work as \"...\u00a0marked by both idealism and humanity, its stimulating satire often being infused with a singular poetic beauty\". He accepted the award, but rejected the monetary prize that went with it, on the grounds that \"My readers and my audiences provide me with more than sufficient money for my needs\".\nAfter \"Saint Joan\", it was five years before Shaw wrote a play. From 1924, he spent four years writing what he described as his \"magnum opus\", a political treatise entitled \"The Intelligent Woman's Guide to Socialism and Capitalism\". The book was published in 1928 and sold well. At the end of the decade Shaw produced his final Fabian tract, a commentary on the League of Nations. He described the League as \"a school for the new international statesmanship as against the old Foreign Office diplomacy\", but thought that it had not yet become the \"Federation of the World\".\nShaw returned to the theatre with what he called \"a political extravaganza\", \"The Apple Cart\", written in late 1928. It was, in Ervine's view, unexpectedly popular, taking a conservative, monarchist, anti-democratic line that appealed to contemporary audiences. The premiere was in Warsaw in June 1928, and the first British production was two months later, at Sir Barry Jackson's inaugural Malvern Festival. The other eminent creative artist most closely associated with the festival was Sir Edward Elgar, with whom Shaw enjoyed a deep friendship and mutual regard. He described \"The Apple Cart\" to Elgar as \"a scandalous Aristophanic burlesque of democratic politics, with a brief but shocking sex interlude\".\nDuring the 1920s Shaw began to lose faith in the idea that society could be changed through Fabian gradualism, and became increasingly fascinated with dictatorial methods. In 1922 he had welcomed Mussolini's accession to power in Italy, observing that amid the \"indiscipline and muddle and Parliamentary deadlock\", Mussolini was \"the right kind of tyrant\". Shaw was prepared to tolerate certain dictatorial excesses; Weintraub in his ODNB biographical sketch comments that Shaw's \"flirtation with authoritarian inter-war regimes\" took a long time to fade, and Beatrice Webb thought he was \"obsessed\" about Mussolini.\n1930s.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"We the undersigned are recent visitors to the USSR\u00a0... We desire to record that we saw nowhere evidence of economic slavery, privation, unemployment and cynical despair of betterment.\u00a0... Everywhere we saw [a] hopeful and enthusiastic working-class\u00a0... setting an example of industry and conduct which would greatly enrich us if our systems supplied our workers with any incentive to follow it.\"\nLetter to \"The Manchester Guardian\", 2 March 1933, signed by Shaw and 20 others.\nShaw's enthusiasm for the Soviet Union dated to the early 1920s when he had hailed Lenin as \"the one really interesting statesman in Europe\". Having turned down several chances to visit, in 1931 he joined a party led by Nancy Astor. The carefully managed trip culminated in a lengthy meeting with Stalin, whom Shaw later described as \"a Georgian gentleman\" with no malice in him. At a dinner given in his honour, Shaw told the gathering: \"I have seen all the 'terrors' and I was terribly pleased by them\". In March 1933, he was a co-signatory to a letter in \"The Manchester Guardian\" protesting at the continuing misrepresentation of Soviet achievements: \"No lie is too fantastic, no slander is too stale\u00a0... for employment by the more reckless elements of the British press.\"\nShaw's admiration for Mussolini and Stalin demonstrated his growing belief that dictatorship was the only viable political arrangement. When the Nazi Party came to power in Germany in January 1933, Shaw described Hitler as \"a very remarkable man, a very able man\", and professed himself proud to be the only writer in England who was \"scrupulously polite and just to Hitler\"; though his principal admiration was for Stalin, whose regime he championed uncritically throughout the decade. Shaw saw the 1939 Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact as a triumph for Stalin who, he said, now had Hitler under his thumb.\nShaw's first play of the decade was \"Too True to Be Good\", written in 1931 and premiered in Boston in February 1932. The reception was unenthusiastic. Brooks Atkinson of \"The New York Times\" commenting that Shaw had \"yielded to the impulse to write without having a subject\", judged the play a \"rambling and indifferently tedious conversation\". The correspondent of the \"New York Herald Tribune\" said that most of the play was \"discourse, unbelievably long lectures\" and that although the audience enjoyed the play it was bewildered by it.\nDuring the decade Shaw travelled widely and frequently. Most of his journeys were with Charlotte; she enjoyed voyages on ocean liners, and he found peace to write during the long spells at sea. Shaw met an enthusiastic welcome in South Africa in 1932, despite his strong remarks about the racial divisions of the country. In December 1932 the couple embarked on a round-the-world cruise. In March 1933 they arrived at San Francisco, to begin Shaw's first visit to the US. He had earlier refused to go to \"that awful country, that uncivilized place\", \"unfit to govern itself... illiberal, superstitious, crude, violent, anarchic and arbitrary\". He visited Hollywood, with which he was unimpressed, and New York, where he lectured to a capacity audience in the Metropolitan Opera House. Harried by the intrusive attentions of the press, Shaw was glad when his ship sailed from New York harbour. New Zealand, which he and Charlotte visited the following year, struck him as \"the best country I've been in\"; he urged its people to be more confident and loosen their dependence on trade with Britain. He used the weeks at sea to complete two plays\u2014\"The Simpleton of the Unexpected Isles\" and \"The Six of Calais\"\u2014and begin work on a third, \"The Millionairess\".\nDespite his contempt for Hollywood and its aesthetic values, Shaw was enthusiastic about cinema, and in the middle of the decade wrote screenplays for prospective film versions of \"Pygmalion\" and \"Saint Joan\". The latter was never made, but Shaw entrusted the rights to the former to the unknown Gabriel Pascal, who produced it at Pinewood Studios in 1938. Shaw was determined that Hollywood should have nothing to do with the film, but was powerless to keep it from winning one Academy Award (\"Oscar\"); he described his award for \"best-written screenplay\" as an insult, coming from such a source. He became the first person to have been awarded both a Nobel Prize and an Oscar. In a 1993 study of the Oscars, Anthony Holden observes that \"Pygmalion\" was soon spoken of as having \"lifted movie-making from illiteracy to literacy\".\nShaw's final plays of the 1930s were \"Cymbeline Refinished\" (1936), \"Geneva\" (1936) and \"In Good King Charles's Golden Days\" (1939). The first, a fantasy reworking of Shakespeare, made little impression, but the second, a satire on European dictators, attracted more notice, much of it unfavourable. In particular, Shaw's parody of Hitler as \"Herr Battler\" was considered mild, almost sympathetic. The third play, an historical conversation piece first seen at Malvern, ran briefly in London in May 1940. James Agate commented that the play contained nothing to which even the most conservative audiences could take exception, and though it was long and lacking in dramatic action only \"witless and idle\" theatregoers would object. After their first runs none of the three plays were seen again in the West End during Shaw's lifetime.\nTowards the end of the decade, both Shaws began to suffer ill health. Charlotte was increasingly incapacitated by Paget's disease of bone, and he developed pernicious anaemia. His treatment, involving injections of concentrated animal liver, was successful, but this breach of his vegetarian creed distressed him and brought down condemnation from militant vegetarians.\nSecond World War and final years.\nAlthough Shaw's works since \"The Apple Cart\" had been received without great enthusiasm, his earlier plays were revived in the West End throughout the Second World War, starring such actors as Edith Evans, John Gielgud, Deborah Kerr and Robert Donat. In 1944 nine Shaw plays were staged in London, including \"Arms and the Man\" with Ralph Richardson, Laurence Olivier, Sybil Thorndike and Margaret Leighton in the leading roles. Two touring companies took his plays all round Britain. The revival in his popularity did not tempt Shaw to write a new play, and he concentrated on prolific journalism. A second Shaw film produced by Pascal, \"Major Barbara\" (1941), was less successful both artistically and commercially than \"Pygmalion\", partly because of Pascal's insistence on directing, to which he was unsuited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"The rest of Shaw's life was quiet and solitary. The loss of his wife was more profoundly felt than he had ever imagined any loss could be: for he prided himself on a stoical fortitude in all loss and misfortune.\"\nSt John Ervine on Shaw, 1959\nFollowing the outbreak of war on 3 September 1939 and the rapid conquest of Poland, Shaw was accused of defeatism when, in a \"New Statesman\" article, he declared the war over and demanded a peace conference. Nevertheless, when he became convinced that a negotiated peace was impossible, he publicly urged the neutral United States to join the fight. The London blitz of 1940\u201341 led the Shaws, both in their mid-eighties, to live full-time at Ayot St Lawrence. Even there they were not immune from enemy air raids, and stayed on occasion with Nancy Astor at her country house, Cliveden. In 1943, the worst of the London bombing over, the Shaws moved back to Whitehall Court, where medical help for Charlotte was more easily arranged. Her condition deteriorated, and she died in September.\nShaw's final political treatise, \"Everybody's Political What's What\", was published in 1944. Holroyd describes this as \"a rambling narrative\u00a0... that repeats ideas he had given better elsewhere and then repeats itself\". The book sold well\u201485,000 copies by the end of the year. After Hitler's suicide in May 1945, Shaw approved of the formal condolences offered by the Irish Taoiseach, \u00c9amon de Valera, at the German embassy in Dublin. Shaw disapproved of the postwar trials of the defeated German leaders, as an act of self-righteousness: \"We are all potential criminals\".\nPascal was given a third opportunity to film Shaw's work with \"Caesar and Cleopatra\" (1945). It cost three times its original budget and was rated \"the biggest financial failure in the history of British cinema\". The film was poorly received by British critics, although American reviews were friendlier. Shaw thought its lavishness nullified the drama, and he considered the film \"a poor imitation of Cecil B. de Mille\".\nIn 1946, the year of Shaw's ninetieth birthday, he accepted the freedom of Dublin and became the first honorary freeman of the borough of St Pancras, London. In the same year the British government asked Shaw informally whether he would accept the Order of Merit. He declined, believing that an author's merit could only be determined by the posthumous verdict of history. 1946 saw the publication, as \"The Crime of Imprisonment\", of the preface Shaw had written 20 years previously to a study of prison conditions. It was widely praised; a reviewer in the \"American Journal of Public Health\" considered it essential reading for any student of the American criminal justice system.\nShaw continued to write into his nineties. His last plays were \"Buoyant Billions\" (1947), his final full-length work; \"Farfetched Fables\" (1948) a set of six short plays revisiting several of his earlier themes such as evolution; a comic play for puppets, \"Shakes versus Shav\" (1949), a ten-minute piece in which Shakespeare and Shaw trade insults; and \"Why She Would Not\" (1950), which Shaw described as \"a little comedy\", written in one week shortly before his ninety-fourth birthday.\nDuring his later years, Shaw enjoyed tending the gardens at Shaw's Corner. He died at the age of 94 of renal failure precipitated by injuries incurred when falling while pruning a tree. He was cremated at Golders Green Crematorium on 6 November 1950. His ashes, mixed with those of Charlotte, were scattered along footpaths and around the statue of Saint Joan in their garden.\nWorks.\nPlays.\nShaw published a collected edition of his plays in 1934, comprising forty-two works. He wrote a further twelve in the remaining sixteen years of his life, mostly one-act pieces. Including eight earlier plays that he chose to omit from his published works, the total is sixty-two.\nEarly works.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n1890s\nFull-length plays\n*\"The Devil's Disciple\"\n*\"Caesar and Cleopatra\"\n*\"Captain Brassbound's Conversion\"\nAdaptation\nShort play\nShaw's first three full-length plays dealt with social issues. He later grouped them as \"Plays Unpleasant\". \"Widowers' Houses\" (1892) concerns the landlords of slum properties, and introduces the first of Shaw's New Women\u2014a recurring feature of later plays. \"The Philanderer\" (1893) develops the theme of the New Woman, draws on Ibsen, and has elements of Shaw's personal relationships, the character of Julia being based on Jenny Patterson. In a 2003 study Judith Evans describes \"Mrs Warren's Profession\" (1893) as \"undoubtedly the most challenging\" of the three Plays Unpleasant, taking Mrs Warren's profession\u2014prostitute and, later, brothel-owner\u2014as a metaphor for a prostituted society.\nShaw followed the first trilogy with a second, published as \"Plays Pleasant\". \"Arms and the Man\" (1894) conceals beneath a mock-Ruritanian comic romance a Fabian parable contrasting impractical idealism with pragmatic socialism. The central theme of \"Candida\" (1894) is a woman's choice between two men; the play contrasts the outlook and aspirations of a Christian Socialist and a poetic idealist. The third of the Pleasant group, \"You Never Can Tell\" (1896), portrays social mobility, and the gap between generations, particularly in how they approach social relations in general and mating in particular.\nThe \"Three Plays for Puritans\"\u2014comprising \"The Devil's Disciple\" (1896), \"Caesar and Cleopatra\" (1898) and \"Captain Brassbound's Conversion\" (1899)\u2014all centre on questions of empire and imperialism, a major topic of political discourse in the 1890s. The three are set, respectively, in 1770s America, Ancient Egypt, and 1890s Morocco. \"The Gadfly\", an adaptation of the popular novel by Ethel Voynich, was unfinished and unperformed. \"The Man of Destiny\" (1895) is a short curtain raiser about Napoleon.\n1900\u20131909.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n1900\u20131909\nFull-length plays\nShort plays\nShaw's major plays of the first decade of the twentieth century address individual social, political or ethical issues. \"Man and Superman\" (1902) stands apart from the others in both its subject and its treatment, giving Shaw's interpretation of creative evolution in a combination of drama and associated printed text. \"The Admirable Bashville\" (1901), a blank verse dramatisation of Shaw's novel \"Cashel Byron's Profession\", focuses on the imperial relationship between Britain and Africa. \"John Bull's Other Island\" (1904), comically depicting the prevailing relationship between Britain and Ireland, was popular at the time but fell out of the general repertoire in later years. \"Major Barbara\" (1905) presents ethical questions in an unconventional way, confounding expectations that in the depiction of an armaments manufacturer on the one hand and the Salvation Army on the other the moral high ground must invariably be held by the latter. \"The Doctor's Dilemma\" (1906), a play about medical ethics and moral choices in allocating scarce treatment, was described by Shaw as a tragedy. With a reputation for presenting characters who did not resemble real flesh and blood, he was challenged by Archer to present an on-stage death, and here did so, with a deathbed scene for the anti-hero.\n\"Getting Married\" (1908) and \"Misalliance\" (1909)\u2014the latter seen by Judith Evans as a companion piece to the former\u2014are both in what Shaw called his \"disquisitionary\" vein, with the emphasis on discussion of ideas rather than on dramatic events or vivid characterisation. Shaw wrote seven short plays during the decade; they are all comedies, ranging from the deliberately absurd \"Passion, Poison, and Petrifaction\" (1905) to the satirical \"Press Cuttings\" (1909).\n1910\u20131919.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n1910\u20131919\nFull-length plays\nShort plays\nIn the decade from 1910 to the aftermath of the First World War Shaw wrote four full-length plays, the third and fourth of which are among his most frequently staged works. \"Fanny's First Play\" (1911) continues his earlier examinations of middle-class British society from a Fabian viewpoint, with additional touches of melodrama and an epilogue in which theatre critics discuss the play. \"Androcles and the Lion\" (1912), which Shaw began writing as a play for children, became a study of the nature of religion and how to put Christian precepts into practice. \"Pygmalion\" (1912) is a Shavian study of language and speech and their importance in society and in personal relationships. To correct the impression left by the original performers that the play portrayed a romantic relationship between the two main characters Shaw rewrote the ending to make it clear that the heroine will marry another, minor character. Shaw's only full-length play from the war years is \"Heartbreak House\" (1917), which in his words depicts \"cultured, leisured Europe before the war\" drifting towards disaster. Shaw named Shakespeare (\"King Lear\") and Chekhov (\"The Cherry Orchard\") as important influences on the piece, and critics have found elements drawing on Congreve (\"The Way of the World\") and Ibsen (\"The Master Builder\").\nThe short plays range from genial historical drama in \"The Dark Lady of the Sonnets\" and \"Great Catherine\" (1910 and 1913) to a study of polygamy in \"Overruled\"; three satirical works about the war (\"The Inca of Perusalem\", \"O'Flaherty V.C.\" and \"Augustus Does His Bit\", 1915\u201316); a piece that Shaw called \"utter nonsense\" (\"The Music Cure\", 1914) and a brief sketch about a \"Bolshevik empress\" (\"Annajanska\", 1917).\n1920\u20131950.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n1920\u20131950\nFull-length plays\nShort plays\n\"Saint Joan\" (1923) drew widespread praise both for Shaw and for Sybil Thorndike, for whom he wrote the title role and who created the part in Britain. In the view of the commentator Nicholas Grene, Shaw's Joan, a \"no-nonsense mystic, Protestant and nationalist before her time\" is among the 20th century's classic leading female roles. \"The Apple Cart\" (1929) was Shaw's last popular success. He gave both that play and its successor, \"Too True to Be Good\" (1931), the subtitle \"A political extravaganza\", although the two works differ greatly in their themes; the first presents the politics of a nation (with a brief royal love-scene as an interlude) and the second, in Judith Evans's words, \"is concerned with the social mores of the individual, and is nebulous.\" Shaw's plays of the 1930s were written in the shadow of worsening national and international political events. Once again, with \"On the Rocks\" (1933) and \"The Simpleton of the Unexpected Isles\" (1934), a political comedy with a clear plot was followed by an introspective drama. The first play portrays a British prime minister considering, but finally rejecting, the establishment of a dictatorship; the second is concerned with polygamy and eugenics and ends with the Day of Judgement.\n\"The Millionairess\" (1934) is a farcical depiction of the commercial and social affairs of a successful businesswoman. \"Geneva\" (1936) lampoons the feebleness of the League of Nations compared with the dictators of Europe. \"In Good King Charles's Golden Days\" (1939), described by Weintraub as a warm, discursive high comedy, also depicts authoritarianism, but less satirically than \"Geneva\". As in earlier decades, the shorter plays were generally comedies, some historical and others addressing various political and social preoccupations of the author. Ervine writes of Shaw's later work that although it was still \"astonishingly vigorous and vivacious\" it showed unmistakable signs of his age. \"The best of his work in this period, however, was full of wisdom and the beauty of mind often displayed by old men who keep their wits about them.\"\nMusic and drama reviews.\nMusic.\nShaw's collected musical criticism, published in three volumes, runs to more than 2,700 pages. It covers the British musical scene from 1876 to 1950, but the core of the collection dates from his six years as music critic of \"The Star\" and \"The World\" in the late 1880s and early 1890s. In his view music criticism should be interesting to everyone rather than just the musical \u00e9lite, and he wrote for the non-specialist, avoiding technical jargon\u2014\"Mesopotamian words like 'the dominant of D major'\". He was fiercely partisan in his columns, promoting the music of Wagner and decrying that of Brahms and those British composers such as Stanford and Parry whom he saw as Brahmsian. He campaigned against the prevailing fashion for performances of Handel oratorios with huge amateur choirs and inflated orchestration, calling for \"a chorus of twenty capable artists\". He railed against opera productions unrealistically staged or sung in languages the audience did not speak.\nDrama.\nIn Shaw's view, the London theatres of the 1890s presented too many revivals of old plays and not enough new work. He campaigned against \"melodrama, sentimentality, stereotypes and worn-out conventions\". As a music critic he had frequently been able to concentrate on analysing new works, but in the theatre he was often obliged to fall back on discussing how various performers tackled well-known plays. In a study of Shaw's work as a theatre critic, E. J. West writes that Shaw \"ceaselessly compared and contrasted artists in interpretation and in technique\". Shaw contributed more than 150 articles as theatre critic for \"The Saturday Review\", in which he assessed more than 212 productions. He championed Ibsen's plays when many theatregoers regarded them as outrageous, and his 1891 book \"Quintessence of Ibsenism\" remained a classic throughout the twentieth century. Of contemporary dramatists writing for the West End stage he rated Oscar Wilde above the rest: \"...\u00a0our only thorough playwright. He plays with everything: with wit, with philosophy, with drama, with actors and audience, with the whole theatre\". Shaw's collected criticisms were published as \"Our Theatres in the Nineties\" in 1932.\nShaw maintained a provocative and frequently self-contradictory attitude to Shakespeare (whose name he insisted on spelling \"Shakespear\"). Many found him difficult to take seriously on the subject; Duff Cooper observed that by attacking Shakespeare, \"it is Shaw who appears a ridiculous pigmy shaking his fist at a mountain.\" Shaw was, nevertheless, a knowledgeable Shakespearian, and in an article in which he wrote, \"With the single exception of Homer, there is no eminent writer, not even Sir Walter Scott, whom I can despise so entirely as I despise Shakespear when I measure my mind against his,\" he also said, \"But I am bound to add that I pity the man who cannot enjoy Shakespear. He has outlasted thousands of abler thinkers, and will outlast a thousand more\". Shaw had two regular targets for his more extreme comments about Shakespeare: undiscriminating \"Bardolaters\", and actors and directors who presented insensitively cut texts in over-elaborate productions. He was continually drawn back to Shakespeare, and wrote three plays with Shakespearean themes: \"The Dark Lady of the Sonnets\", \"Cymbeline Refinished\" and \"Shakes versus Shav\". In a 2001 analysis of Shaw's Shakespearian criticisms, Robert Pierce concludes that Shaw, who was no academic, saw Shakespeare's plays\u2014like all theatre\u2014from an author's practical point of view: \"Shaw helps us to get away from the Romantics' picture of Shakespeare as a titanic genius, one whose art cannot be analyzed or connected with the mundane considerations of theatrical conditions and profit and loss, or with a specific staging and cast of actors.\"\nPolitical and social writings.\nShaw's political and social commentaries were published variously in Fabian tracts, in essays, in two full-length books, in innumerable newspaper and journal articles and in prefaces to his plays. The majority of Shaw's Fabian tracts were published anonymously, representing the voice of the society rather than of Shaw, although the society's secretary Edward Pease later confirmed Shaw's authorship. According to Holroyd, the business of the early Fabians, mainly under the influence of Shaw, was to \"alter history by rewriting it\". Shaw's talent as a pamphleteer was put to immediate use in the production of the society's manifesto\u2014after which, says Holroyd, he was never again so succinct.\nAfter the turn of the twentieth century, Shaw increasingly propagated his ideas through the medium of his plays. An early critic, writing in 1904, observed that Shaw's dramas provided \"a pleasant means\" of proselytising his socialism, adding that \"Mr Shaw's views are to be sought especially in the prefaces to his plays\". After loosening his ties with the Fabian movement in 1911, Shaw's writings were more personal and often provocative; his response to the furore following the issue of \"Common Sense About the War\" in 1914, was to prepare a sequel, \"More Common Sense About the War\". In this, he denounced the pacifist line espoused by Ramsay MacDonald and other socialist leaders, and proclaimed his readiness to shoot all pacifists rather than cede them power and influence. On the advice of Beatrice Webb, this pamphlet remained unpublished.\n\"The Intelligent Woman's Guide\", Shaw's main political treatise of the 1920s, attracted both admiration and criticism. MacDonald considered it the world's most important book since the Bible; Harold Laski thought its arguments outdated and lacking in concern for individual freedoms. Shaw's increasing flirtation with dictatorial methods is evident in many of his subsequent pronouncements. A \"New York Times\" report dated 10 December 1933 quoted a recent Fabian Society lecture in which Shaw had praised Hitler, Mussolini and Stalin: \"[T]hey are trying to get something done, [and] are adopting methods by which it is possible to get something done\". As late as the Second World War, in \"Everybody's Political What's What\", Shaw blamed the Allies' \"abuse\" of their 1918 victory for the rise of Hitler, and hoped that, after defeat, the F\u00fchrer would escape retribution \"to enjoy a comfortable retirement in Ireland or some other neutral country\". These sentiments, according to the Irish philosopher-poet Thomas Duddy, \"rendered much of the Shavian outlook pass\u00e9 and contemptible\".\n\"Creative evolution\", Shaw's version of the new science of eugenics, became an increasing theme in his political writing after 1900. He introduced his theories in \"The Revolutionist's Handbook\" (1903), an appendix to \"Man and Superman\", and developed them further during the 1920s in \"Back to Methuselah\". A 1946 \"Life\" magazine article observed that Shaw had \"always tended to look at people more as a biologist than as an artist\". By 1933, in the preface to \"On the Rocks\", he was writing that \"if we desire a certain type of civilization and culture we must exterminate the sort of people who do not fit into it\"; critical opinion is divided on whether this was intended as irony. In an article in the American magazine \"Liberty\" in September 1938, Shaw included the statement: \"There are many people in the world who ought to be liquidated\". Many commentators assumed that such comments were intended as a joke, although in the worst possible taste. Otherwise, \"Life\" magazine concluded, \"this silliness can be classed with his more innocent bad guesses\".\nFiction.\nShaw's fiction-writing was largely confined to the five unsuccessful novels written in the period 1879\u20131885. \"Immaturity\" (1879) is a semi-autobiographical portrayal of mid-Victorian England, Shaw's \"own \"David Copperfield\"\" according to Weintraub. \"The Irrational Knot\" (1880) is a critique of conventional marriage, in which Weintraub finds the characterisations lifeless, \"hardly more than animated theories\". Shaw was pleased with his third novel, \"Love Among the Artists\" (1881), feeling that it marked a turning point in his development as a thinker, although he had no more success with it than with its predecessors. \"Cashel Byron's Profession\" (1882) is, says Weintraub, an indictment of society which anticipates Shaw's first full-length play, \"Mrs Warren's Profession\". Shaw later explained that he had intended \"An Unsocial Socialist\" as the first section of a monumental depiction of the downfall of capitalism. Gareth Griffith, in a study of Shaw's political thought, sees the novel as an interesting record of conditions, both in society at large and in the nascent socialist movement of the 1880s.\nShaw's only subsequent fiction of any substance was his 1932 novella \"The Adventures of the Black Girl in Her Search for God\", written during a visit to South Africa in 1932. The eponymous girl, intelligent, inquisitive, and converted to Christianity by insubstantial missionary teaching, sets out to find God, on a journey that after many adventures and encounters, leads her to a secular conclusion. The story, on publication, offended some Christians and was banned in Ireland by the Board of Censors.\nLetters and diaries.\nShaw was a prolific correspondent throughout his life. His letters, edited by Dan H. Laurence, were published between 1965 and 1988. Shaw once estimated his letters would occupy twenty volumes; Laurence commented that, unedited, they would fill many more. Shaw wrote more than a quarter of a million letters, of which about ten per cent have survived; 2,653 letters are printed in Laurence's four volumes. Among Shaw's many regular correspondents were his childhood friend Edward McNulty; his theatrical colleagues (and \"amiti\u00e9s amoureuses\") Mrs Patrick Campbell and Ellen Terry; writers including Lord Alfred Douglas, H. G. Wells and G. K. Chesterton; the boxer Gene Tunney; the nun Laurentia McLachlan; and the art expert Sydney Cockerell. In 2007 a 316-page volume consisting entirely of Shaw's letters to \"The Times\" was published.\nShaw's diaries for 1885\u20131897, edited by Weintraub, were published in two volumes, with a total of 1,241 pages, in 1986. Reviewing them, the Shaw scholar Fred Crawford wrote: \"Although the primary interest for Shavians is the material that supplements what we already know about Shaw's life and work, the diaries are also valuable as a historical and sociological document of English life at the end of the Victorian age.\" After 1897, pressure of other writing led Shaw to give up keeping a diary.\nMiscellaneous and autobiographical.\nThrough his journalism, pamphlets and occasional longer works, Shaw wrote on many subjects. His range of interest and enquiry included vivisection, vegetarianism, religion, language, cinema and photography, on all of which he wrote and spoke copiously. Collections of his writings on these and other subjects were published, mainly after his death, together with volumes of \"wit and wisdom\" and general journalism.\nDespite the many books written about him (Holroyd counts 80 by 1939) Shaw's autobiographical output, apart from his diaries, was relatively slight. He gave interviews to newspapers\u2014\"GBS Confesses\", to \"The Daily Mail\" in 1904 is an example\u2014and provided sketches to would-be biographers whose work was rejected by Shaw and never published. In 1939 Shaw drew on these materials to produce \"Shaw Gives Himself Away\", a miscellany which, a year before his death, he revised and republished as \"Sixteen Self Sketches\" (there were seventeen). He made it clear to his publishers that this slim book was in no sense a full autobiography.\nBeliefs and opinions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nShaw was a poseur and a puritan; he was similarly a bourgeois and an antibourgeois writer, working for Hearst and posterity; his didacticism is entertaining and his pranks are purposeful; he supports socialism and is tempted by fascism.\n\u2014Leonard Feinberg, \"The Satirist\" (2006)\nThroughout his lifetime Shaw professed many beliefs, often contradictory. This inconsistency was partly an intentional provocation\u2014the Spanish scholar-statesman Salvador de Madariaga describes Shaw as \"a pole of negative electricity set in a people of positive electricity\". In one area at least Shaw was constant: in his lifelong refusal to follow normal English forms of spelling and punctuation. He favoured archaic spellings such as \"shew\" for \"show\"; he dropped the \"u\" in words like \"honour\" and \"favour\"; and wherever possible he rejected the apostrophe in contractions such as \"won't\" or \"that's\". In his will, Shaw ordered that, after some specified legacies, his remaining assets were to form a trust to pay for fundamental reform of the English alphabet into a phonetic version of forty letters. Though Shaw's intentions were clear, his drafting was flawed, and the courts initially ruled the intended trust void. A later out-of-court agreement provided a sum of \u00a38,300 for spelling reform; the bulk of his fortune went to the residuary legatees\u2014the British Museum, the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art and the National Gallery of Ireland. Most of the \u00a38,300 went on a special phonetic edition of \"Androcles and the Lion\" in the Shavian alphabet, published in 1962 to a largely indifferent reception.\nShaw's views on religion and Christianity were less consistent. Having in his youth proclaimed himself an atheist, in middle age he explained this as a reaction against the Old Testament image of a vengeful Jehovah. By the early twentieth century, he termed himself a \"mystic\", although Gary Sloan, in an essay on Shaw's beliefs, disputes his credentials as such. In 1913 Shaw declared that he was not religious \"in the sectarian sense\", aligning himself with Jesus as \"a person of no religion\". In the preface (1915) to \"Androcles and the Lion\", Shaw asks \"Why not give Christianity a chance?\" contending that Britain's social order resulted from the continuing choice of Barabbas over Christ. In a broadcast just before the Second World War, Shaw invoked the Sermon on the Mount, \"a very moving exhortation, and it gives you one first-rate tip, which is to do good to those who despitefully use you and persecute you\". In his will, Shaw stated that his \"religious convictions and scientific views cannot at present be more specifically defined than as those of a believer in creative revolution\". He requested that no one should imply that he accepted the beliefs of any specific religious organisation, and that no memorial to him should \"take the form of a cross or any other instrument of torture or symbol of blood sacrifice\".\nShaw espoused racial equality, and inter-marriage between people of different races. Despite his expressed wish to be fair to Hitler, he called anti-Semitism \"the hatred of the lazy, ignorant fat-headed Gentile for the pertinacious Jew who, schooled by adversity to use his brains to the utmost, outdoes him in business\". In \"The Jewish Chronicle\" he wrote in 1932, \"In every country you can find rabid people who have a phobia against Jews, Jesuits, Armenians, Negroes, Freemasons, Irishmen, or simply foreigners as such. Political parties are not above exploiting these fears and jealousies.\"\nIn 1903 Shaw joined in a controversy about vaccination against smallpox. He called vaccination \"a peculiarly filthy piece of witchcraft\"; in his view immunisation campaigns were a cheap and inadequate substitute for a decent programme of housing for the poor, which would, he declared, be the means of eradicating smallpox and other infectious diseases. Less contentiously, Shaw was keenly interested in transport; Laurence observed in 1992 a need for a published study of Shaw's interest in \"bicycling, motorbikes, automobiles, and planes, climaxing in his joining the Interplanetary Society in his nineties\". Shaw published articles on travel, took photographs of his journeys, and submitted notes to the Royal Automobile Club.\nShaw strove throughout his adult life to be referred to as \"Bernard Shaw\" rather than \"George Bernard Shaw\", but confused matters by continuing to use his full initials\u2014G.B.S.\u2014as a by-line, and often signed himself \"G.Bernard Shaw\". He left instructions in his will that his executor (the Public Trustee) was to license publication of his works only under the name Bernard Shaw. Shaw scholars including Ervine, Judith Evans, Holroyd, Laurence and Weintraub, and many publishers have respected Shaw's preference, although the Cambridge University Press was among the exceptions with its 1988 \"Cambridge Companion to George Bernard Shaw\".\nLegacy and influence.\nTheatrical.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nShaw, arguably the most important English-language playwright after Shakespeare, produced an immense \"oeuvre\", of which at least half a dozen plays remain part of the world repertoire... Academically unfashionable, of limited influence even in areas such as Irish drama and British political theatre where influence might be expected, Shaw's unique and unmistakable plays keep escaping from the safely dated category of period piece to which they have often been consigned.\n\"Oxford Encyclopedia of Theatre\" (2003)\nShaw did not found a school of dramatists as such, but Crawford asserts that today \"we recognise [him] as second only to Shakespeare in the British theatrical tradition\u00a0... the proponent of the theater of ideas\" who struck a death-blow to 19th-century melodrama. According to Laurence, Shaw pioneered \"intelligent\" theatre, in which the audience was required to think, thereby paving the way for the new breeds of twentieth-century playwrights from Galsworthy to Pinter.\nCrawford lists numerous playwrights whose work owes something to that of Shaw. Among those active in Shaw's lifetime he includes No\u00ebl Coward, who based his early comedy \"The Young Idea\" on \"You Never Can Tell\" and continued to draw on the older man's works in later plays. T. S. Eliot, by no means an admirer of Shaw, admitted that the epilogue of \"Murder in the Cathedral\", in which Becket's slayers explain their actions to the audience, might have been influenced by \"Saint Joan\". The critic Eric Bentley comments that Eliot's later play \"The Confidential Clerk\" \"had all the earmarks of Shavianism\u00a0... without the merits of the real Bernard Shaw\". Among more recent British dramatists, Crawford marks Tom Stoppard as \"the most Shavian of contemporary playwrights\"; Shaw's \"serious farce\" is continued in the works of Stoppard's contemporaries Alan Ayckbourn, Henry Livings and Peter Nichols.\nShaw's influence crossed the Atlantic at an early stage. Bernard Dukore notes that he was successful as a dramatist in America ten years before achieving comparable success in Britain. Among many American writers professing a direct debt to Shaw, Eugene O'Neill became an admirer at the age of seventeen, after reading \"The Quintessence of Ibsenism\". Other Shaw-influenced American playwrights mentioned by Dukore are Elmer Rice, for whom Shaw \"opened doors, turned on lights, and expanded horizons\"; William Saroyan, who empathised with Shaw as \"the embattled individualist against the philistines\"; and S. N. Behrman, who was inspired to write for the theatre after attending a performance of \"Caesar and Cleopatra\": \"I thought it would be agreeable to write plays like that\".\nAssessing Shaw's reputation in a 1976 critical study, T. F. Evans described Shaw as unchallenged in his lifetime and since as the leading English-language dramatist of the (twentieth) century, and as a master of prose style. The following year, in a contrary assessment, the playwright John Osborne castigated \"The Guardian\"'s theatre critic Michael Billington for referring to Shaw as \"the greatest British dramatist since Shakespeare\". Osborne responded that Shaw \"is the most fraudulent, inept writer of Victorian melodramas ever to gull a timid critic or fool a dull public\". Despite this hostility, Crawford sees the influence of Shaw in some of Osborne's plays, and concludes that though the latter's work is neither imitative nor derivative, these affinities are sufficient to classify Osborne as an inheritor of Shaw.\nIn a 1983 study, R. J. Kaufmann suggests that Shaw was a key forerunner\u2014\"godfather, if not actually finicky paterfamilias\"\u2014of the Theatre of the Absurd. Two further aspects of Shaw's theatrical legacy are noted by Crawford: his opposition to stage censorship, which was finally ended in 1968, and his efforts which extended over many years to establish a National Theatre. Shaw's short 1910 play \"The Dark Lady of the Sonnets\", in which Shakespeare pleads with Queen Elizabeth I for the endowment of a state theatre, was part of this campaign.\nWriting in \"The New Statesman\" in 2012 Daniel Janes commented that Shaw's reputation had declined by the time of his 150th anniversary in 2006 but had recovered considerably. In Janes's view, the many current revivals of Shaw's major works showed the playwright's \"almost unlimited relevance to our times\". In the same year, Mark Lawson wrote in \"The Guardian\" that Shaw's moral concerns engaged present-day audiences, and made him\u2014like his model, Ibsen\u2014one of the most popular playwrights in contemporary British theatre.\nThe Shaw Festival in Niagara-on-the-Lake, Ontario, Canada is the second largest repertory theatre company in North America. It produces plays by or written during the lifetime of Shaw as well as some contemporary works. The Gingold Theatrical Group, founded in 2006, presents works by Shaw and others in New York City that feature the humanitarian ideals that his work promoted. It became the first theatre group to present all of Shaw's stage work through its monthly concert series \"Project Shaw\".\nGeneral.\nIn the 1940s the author Harold Nicolson advised the National Trust not to accept the bequest of Shaw's Corner, predicting that Shaw would be totally forgotten within fifty years. In the event, Shaw's broad cultural legacy, embodied in the widely used term \"Shavian\", has endured and is nurtured by Shaw Societies in various parts of the world. The original society was founded in London in 1941 and survives; it organises meetings and events, and publishes a regular bulletin \"The Shavian\". The Shaw Society of America began in June 1950; it foundered in the 1970s but its journal, adopted by Penn State University Press, continued to be published as \"Shaw: The Annual of Bernard Shaw Studies\" until 2004. A second American organisation, founded in 1951 as \"The Bernard Shaw Society\", remains active as of 2016[ [update]]. More recent societies have been established in Japan and India.\nBesides his collected music criticism, Shaw has left a varied musical legacy, not all of it of his choosing. Despite his dislike of having his work adapted for the musical theatre (\"my plays set themselves to a verbal music of their own\") two of his plays were turned into musical comedies: \"Arms and the Man\" was the basis of \"The Chocolate Soldier\" in 1908, with music by Oscar Straus, and \"Pygmalion\" was adapted in 1956 as \"My Fair Lady\" with book and lyrics by Alan Jay Lerner and music by Frederick Loewe. Although he had a high regard for Elgar, Shaw turned down the composer's request for an opera libretto, but played a major part in persuading the BBC to commission Elgar's Third Symphony, and was the dedicatee of \"The Severn Suite\" (1930).\nThe substance of Shaw's political legacy is uncertain. In 1921 Shaw's erstwhile collaborator William Archer, in a letter to the playwright, wrote: \"I doubt if there is any case of a man so widely read, heard, seen, and known as yourself, who has produced so little effect on his generation.\" Margaret Cole, who considered Shaw the greatest writer of his age, professed never to have understood him. She thought he worked \"immensely hard\" at politics, but essentially, she surmises, it was for fun\u2014\"the fun of a brilliant artist\". After Shaw's death, Pearson wrote: \"No one since the time of Tom Paine has had so definite an influence on the social and political life of his time and country as Bernard Shaw.\"\nIn its obituary tribute to Shaw, \"The Times Literary Supplement\" concluded:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He was no originator of ideas. He was an insatiable adopter and adapter, an incomparable prestidigitator with the thoughts of the forerunners. Nietzsche, Samuel Butler (\"Erewhon\"), Marx, Shelley, Blake, Dickens, William Morris, Ruskin, Beethoven and Wagner all had their applications and misapplications. By bending to their service all the faculties of a powerful mind, by inextinguishable wit, and by every artifice of argument, he carried their thoughts as far as they would reach\u2014so far beyond their sources that they came to us with the vitality of the newly created.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nBooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nShaw's writings.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nJournals.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNewspapers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOnline.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12858", "revid": "50014652", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12858", "title": "Galvanization", "text": "Process of layering steel or iron with zinc to prevent rusting\nGalvanization (also spelled galvanisation) is the process of applying a protective zinc coating to steel or iron, to prevent rusting. The most common method is hot-dip galvanizing, in which the parts are coated by submerging them in a bath of hot, molten zinc. \nGalvanized steel is widely used in applications where corrosion resistance is needed without the cost of stainless steel, and is considered superior in terms of cost and life-cycle. It can be identified by the crystallization patterning on the surface (often called a \"spangle\").\nGalvanized steel can be welded; however, welding gives off toxic zinc fumes. Galvanized fumes are released when the galvanized metal reaches a certain temperature. This temperature varies by the galvanization process used. In long-term, continuous exposure, the recommended maximum temperature for hot-dip galvanized steel is , according to the American Galvanizers Association. The use of galvanized steel at temperatures above this will result in peeling of the zinc at the \"inter-metallic\" layer.\nLike other corrosion protection systems, galvanizing protects steel by acting as a barrier between steel and the atmosphere. However, zinc is a more electropositive (active) metal in comparison to steel. This is a unique characteristic for galvanizing, which means that when a galvanized coating is damaged and steel is exposed to the atmosphere, zinc can continue to protect steel through galvanic corrosion (often within an annulus of 5\u00a0mm, above which electron transfer rate decreases).\nHistory and etymology.\nThe process is named after the Italian physician, physicist, biologist and philosopher Luigi Galvani (9 September 1737 \u2013 4 December 1798). The earliest known example of galvanized iron was discovered on an Indian armour in the Royal Armouries Museum collection in the United Kingdom, known from inscriptions to be earlier than the 1680s\nThe term \"galvanized\" can also be used metaphorically of any stimulus which results in activity by a person or group of people. \nIn modern usage, the term \"galvanizing\" has largely come to be associated with zinc coatings, to the exclusion of other metals. Galvanic paint, a precursor to hot-dip galvanizing, was patented by Stanislas Sorel, of Paris, on June 10, 1837, as an adoption of a term from a highly fashionable field of contemporary science, despite having no evident relation to it.\nPrinciple.\nThe zinc coating, when intact, prevents corrosive substances from reaching the underlying iron. Its main function is to act as a sacrificial anode to prevent the iron from rusting by cathodic protection. Zinc is more reactive than iron, so the zinc coating preferentially oxidizes to zinc carbonate, preventing the iron from corroding, even if there are gaps in the zinc coating. Additional electroplating such as a chromate conversion coating may be applied to provide further surface passivation to the substrate material.\nCorrosion.\nGalvanized steel can last for many decades if other supplementary measures are maintained, such as paint coatings and additional sacrificial anodes. Corrosion in non-salty environments is caused mainly by levels of sulfur dioxide in the air.\nMethods.\nHot-dip galvanizing deposits a thick, robust layer of zinc iron alloys on the surface of a steel item. The hot-dip process generally does not reduce strength to a measurable degree, with the exception of high-strength steels where hydrogen embrittlement can become a problem.\nGalvanization can be done using electricity in electrogalvanization.\nSherardizing provides a zinc diffusion coating on iron- or copper-based materials.\nCommon use.\nConstruction steel.\nThis is the most common use for galvanized metal; hundreds of thousands of tons of steel products are galvanized annually worldwide. In developed countries, most larger cities have several galvanizing factories, and many items of steel manufacture are galvanized for protection. Typically these include street furniture, building frameworks, balconies, verandahs, staircases, ladders, walkways, and more. Hot dip galvanized steel is also used for making steel frames as a basic construction material for steel frame buildings.\nPiping.\nIn the early 20th century, galvanized piping swiftly took the place of previously used cast iron and lead in cold-water plumbing. Galvanized piping rusts from the inside out, building up layers of plaque on the inside of the piping, causing both water pressure problems and eventual pipe failure. These plaques can flake off, leading to visible impurities in water and a slight metallic taste. The life expectancy of galvanized piping is about 40\u201350 years, but it may vary on how well the pipes were built and installed. Pipe longevity also depends on the thickness of zinc in the original galvanizing, which ranges on a scale from G01 to G360.\nAutomotive.\nIn the case of automobile bodies, where additional decorative coatings of paint will be applied, a thinner form of galvanizing is applied by electrogalvanizing. Electrogalvanized sheet steel is often used in automotive manufacturing to enhance the corrosion performance of exterior body panels; this tends to achieve lower coating thicknesses of zinc compared to hot-dip galvanization.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12859", "revid": "9795500", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12859", "title": "Golden Rule", "text": "Principle of treating others\nThe Golden Rule is the principle of treating others as one would want to be treated by them. It is sometimes called an ethics of reciprocity, meaning that one should reciprocate to others how one would like them to treat the person (not necessarily how they actually treat them). Various expressions of this rule can be found in the tenets of most religions and creeds through the ages.\nThe maxim may appear as a positive or negative injunction governing conduct:\nEtymology.\nThe term \"Golden Rule\", or \"Golden law\", began to be used widely in the early 17th century in Britain by Anglican theologians and preachers; the earliest known usage is that of Anglicans Charles Gibbon and Thomas Jackson in 1604.\nAncient history.\nAncient Arabia.\nThere is evidence that pre-Islamic Arab ethics contained principles similar to the Golden Rule, even if they weren\u2019t formally codified like in later religious texts. The idea was embedded in tribal honor, poetry, and customary law (\u02bfurf).\nUrf refers to the traditional customs and practices that were widely accepted and followed within Arab tribes. These customs were not codified in written laws but were deeply embedded in the social fabric and were passed down through generations. The adherence to \u02bfurf was considered essential for maintaining social harmony and tribal cohesion.\nAntara Ibn Shaddad, a pre-Islamic poet, is quoted saying in his poetry \u201cHe who witnessed the battle informs you that I charge into combat and remain chaste at the spoils.\u201d\"(Showing integrity\u2014he does not take more than is rightfully his.)\", whilst Imru Al-Qais is quoted saying \"On that day I killed my riding camel for food for the maidens - How merry was their dividing my camel's trappings to be carried on their camels..\"\nAncient Egypt.\nPossibly the earliest affirmation of the maxim of reciprocity, reflecting the ancient Egyptian goddess Ma'at, appears in the story of \"The Eloquent Peasant\", which dates to the Middle Kingdom (c.\u20092040\u20131650 BCE): \"Now this is the command: Do to the doer to make him do.\"121 This proverb embodies the \"do ut des\" principle. A Late Period (c.\u2009664\u2013323 BCE) papyrus contains an early negative affirmation of the Golden Rule: \"That which you hate to be done to you, do not do to another.\"\nAncient India.\nSanskrit tradition.\nIn \"Mah\u0101bh\u0101rata\", the ancient epic of India, Vyasa says:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Do not to others what you do not wish done to yourself; and wish for others too what you desire and long for for yourself\u2013this is the whole of Dharma; heed it well\u2014\u200a\nThe Mah\u0101bh\u0101rata is usually dated to the period between 400 BCE and 400 CE.\nTamil tradition.\nIn Chapter 32 in the Book of Virtue of the Tirukku\u1e5ba\u1e37 (c.\u20091st century BCE to 5th century CE), Valluvar says:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Do not do to others what you know has hurt yourself.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Why does one hurt others knowing what it is to be hurt?\u2014\u200a\nFurthermore, in verse 312, Valluvar says that it is the determination or code of the spotless (virtuous) not to do evil, even in return, to those who have cherished enmity and done them evil. According to him, the proper punishment to those who have done evil is to put them to shame by showing them kindness, in return and to forget both the evil and the good done on both sides (verse 314).\nAncient Greece.\nThe Golden Rule in its prohibitive (negative) form was a common principle in ancient Greek philosophy. Examples of the general concept include:\nAncient Persia.\nThe Pahlavi Texts of Zoroastrianism (c.\u2009300 BCE \u2013 1000 CE) were an early source for the Golden Rule: \"That nature alone is good which refrains from doing to another whatsoever is not good for itself.\" Dadestan-I-denig, 94,5, and \"Whatever is disagreeable to yourself do not do unto others.\" Shayast-na-Shayast 13:29\nAncient Rome.\nSeneca the Younger (c.\u20094 BCE \u2013 65 CE), a practitioner of Stoicism (c.\u2009300 BCE \u2013 200 CE), expressed a hierarchical variation of the Golden Rule in his Letter 47, an essay regarding the treatment of slaves: \"Treat your inferior as you would wish your superior to treat you.\"\nReligious context.\nAccording to Simon Blackburn, the Golden Rule \"can be found in some form in almost every ethical tradition\". A multi-faith poster showing the Golden Rule in sacred writings from 13 faith traditions (designed by Paul McKenna of Scarboro Missions, 2000) has been on permanent display at the Headquarters of the United Nations since 4 January 2002. Creating the poster \"took five years of research that included consultations with experts in each of the 13 faith groups.\" (See also the section on Global Ethic.)\nAbrahamic religions.\nJudaism.\nA rule of reciprocal altruism was stated positively in a well-known Torah verse (Hebrew: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05d5\u05d0\u05d4\u05d1\u05ea \u05dc\u05e8\u05e2\u05da \u05db\u05de\u05d5\u05da\u200e):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Leviticus 19:18\nAccording to John J. Collins of Yale Divinity School, most modern scholars, with Richard Elliott Friedman as a prominent exception, view the command as applicable to fellow Israelites.\nRashi commented what constitutes revenge and grudge, using the example of two men. One man would not lend the other his ax, then the next day, the same man asks the other for his ax. If the second man should say, \"'I will not lend it to you, just as you did not lend to me,' it constitutes revenge; if 'Here it is for you; I am not like you, who did not lend me,' it constitutes a grudge. Rashi concludes his commentary by quoting Rabbi Akiva on love of neighbor: 'This is a fundamental [all-inclusive] principle of the Torah.'\"\nHillel the Elder (c.\u2009110 BCE \u2013 10 CE) used this verse as a most important message of the Torah for his teachings. Once, he was challenged by a gentile who asked to be converted under the condition that the Torah be explained to him while he stood on one foot. Hillel accepted him as a candidate for conversion to Judaism but, drawing on Leviticus 19:18, briefed the man:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;What is hateful to you, do not do to your fellow: this is the whole Torah; the rest is the explanation; go and learn.\u2014\u200a\nHillel recognized brotherly love as the fundamental principle of Jewish ethics. Rabbi Akiva agreed, while Simeon ben Azzai suggested that the principle of love must have its foundation in Genesis chapter 1, which teaches that all men are the offspring of Adam, who was made in the image of God. According to Jewish rabbinic literature, the first man Adam represents the \"unity of mankind\". This is echoed in the modern preamble of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. It is also taught that Adam is last in order according to the evolutionary character of God's creation:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Jewish Publication Society's edition of Leviticus states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis Torah verse represents one of several versions of the \"Golden Rule\", which itself appears in various forms, positive and negative. It is the earliest written version of that concept in a positive form.\nAt the turn of the era, the Jewish rabbis were discussing the scope of the meaning of Leviticus 19:18 and 19:34 extensively:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Leviticus 19:34\nCommentators interpret that this applies to foreigners (e.g. Samaritans), proselytes ('strangers who reside with you') and Jews.\nOn the verse, \"Love your fellow as yourself\", the classic commentator Rashi quotes from Torat Kohanim, an early Midrashic text regarding the famous dictum of Rabbi Akiva: \"Love your fellow as yourself\u00a0\u2013 Rabbi Akiva says this is a great principle of the Torah.\"\nIn 1935, Rabbi Eliezer Berkovits explained in his work \"What is the Talmud?\" that Leviticus 19:34 disallowed xenophobia by Jews.\nIsrael's postal service quoted from the previous Leviticus verse when it commemorated the Universal Declaration of Human Rights on a 1958 postage stamp.\nChristianity.\nNew Testament.\nThe Golden Rule was proclaimed by Jesus of Nazareth during his Sermon on the Mount and described by him as the second great commandment. The common English phrasing is \"Do unto others as you would have them do unto you\". Various applications of the Golden Rule are stated positively numerous times in the Old Testament: \"You shall not take vengeance or bear a grudge against any of your people, but you shall love your neighbor as yourself: I am the LORD.\" Or, in Leviticus 19:34: \"The alien who resides with you shall be to you as the native-born among you; you shall love the alien as yourself, for you were aliens in the land of Egypt: I am the LORD your God.\" These two examples are given in the Septuagint as follows: \"And thy hand shall not avenge thee; and thou shalt not be angry with the children of thy people; and thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself; I am the Lord.\" and \"The stranger that comes to you shall be among you as the native, and thou shalt love him as thyself; for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt: I am the Lord your God.\"\nTwo passages in the New Testament quote Jesus of Nazareth espousing the positive form of the Golden rule:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"In everything do to others as you would have them do to you, for this is the Law and the Prophets.\"\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Do to others as you would have them do to you.\u2014\u200a\nA similar passage, a parallel to the Great Commandment, is to be found later in the Gospel of Luke.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;An expert in the law stood up to test him [Jesus]. \"Teacher,\" he said, \"what must I do to inherit eternal life?\"\nHe said to him, \"What is written in the law? What do you read there?\"\nHe answered, \"You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your strength and with all your mind and your neighbor as yourself.\"\nAnd he said to him, \"You have given the right answer; do this, and you will live.\"\u2014\u200a\nThe passage in the book of Luke then continues with Jesus answering the question, \"Who is my neighbor?\", by telling the parable of the Good Samaritan, which John Wesley interprets as meaning that \"your neighbor\" is anyone in need.\nJesus' teaching goes beyond the negative formulation of not doing what one would not like done to themselves, to the positive formulation of actively doing good to another that, if the situations were reversed, one would desire that the other would do for them. This formulation, as indicated in the parable of the Good Samaritan, emphasizes the needs for positive action that brings benefit to another, not simply restraining oneself from negative activities that hurt another.\nIn one passage of the New Testament, Paul the Apostle refers to the golden rule, restating Jesus' second commandment:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For the whole law is summed up in a single commandment, \"You shall love your neighbor as yourself.\"\u2014\u200a\nSt. Paul also comments on the golden rule in the Epistle to the Romans:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Owe no one anything, except to love one another, for the one who loves another has fulfilled the law.\nThe commandments, \"You shall not commit adultery; you shall not murder; you shall not steal; you shall not covet,\" and any other commandment, are summed up in this word, \"You shall love your neighbor as yourself.\"\u2014\u200a\nDeuterocanon.\nThe Old Testament Deuterocanonical books of Tobit and Sirach, accepted as part of the Scriptural canon by Catholic Church, Eastern Orthodoxy, and the non-Chalcedonian churches, express a negative form of the golden rule:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And what you hate, do not do to anyone. May no evil go with you on any of your way.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Judge your neighbor\u2019s feelings by your own, and in every matter be thoughtful.\u2014\u200a\nChurch Fathers.\nEarly Christian authors wrote on the Golden Rule. The early Christian treatise the Didache included the Golden Rule in saying \"in everything, do not do to another what you would not want done to you.\"\nClement of Alexandria, commenting on the Golden Rule in Luke 6:31, calls the concept \"all embracing\" for how one acts in life. Clement further pointed to the phrasing in the book of Tobit as part of the ethics between husbands and wives. Tertullian stated that the rule taught \"love, respect, consolation, protection, and benefits\".\nWhile many Church Fathers framed the Golden Rule as part of Jewish and Christian Ethics, Theophilus of Antioch stated that it had universal application for all of humanity. Origen connected the Golden Rule with the law written on the hearts of Gentiles mentioned by Paul in his letter to the Romans, and had universal application to Christian and non-Christian alike.\nBasil of Caesarea commented that the negative form of the Golden Rule was for avoiding evil while the positive form was for doing good.\nIslam.\nThe Arabian peninsula was said to not practice the golden rule prior to the advent of Islam. However, in some instances it is clear that the pre-Islamic Arabs, did to some extent understand the Golden Rule, such as after the Battle of Autas where the companions of Mohammed refused to have intercourse with married women taken as captives before a verse allowing them to do so was revealed, they would also not take bounties/spoils of war as Antara Ibn Shaddad is quoted saying in his poetry \u201cHe who witnessed the battle informs you that I charge into combat and remain chaste at the spoils.\u201d\"(Showing integrity\u2014he does not take more than is rightfully his.)\", which Mohammed allowed for himself, furthermore, Imru' Al-Qays (pre-Islamic poet) emphasizes similarly in his poetry, reflecting an early form of the Golden Rule.\nAccording to Th. Emil Homerin: \"Pre-Islamic Arabs regarded the survival of the tribe, as most essential and to be ensured by the ancient rite of blood vengeance.\" Homerin goes on to say:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Similar examples of the golden rule are found in the hadiths. The hadith recount what the prophet is claimed to have said and done, and generally Muslims regard the hadith as second to only the Qur'an as a guide to correct belief and action.\nFrom the hadith:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A Bedouin came to the prophet, grabbed the stirrup of his camel and said: O the messenger of God! Teach me something to go to heaven with it. Prophet said: \"As you would have people do to you, do to them; and what you dislike to be done to you, don't do to them. Now let the stirrup go! [This maxim is enough for you; go and act in accordance with it!]\"\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;None of you [truly] believes until he wishes for his brother what he wishes for himself.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Seek for mankind that of which you are desirous for yourself, that you may be a believer.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAli ibn Abi Talib (4th Caliph in Sunni Islam, and first Imam in Shia Islam) says:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;O my child, make yourself the measure (for dealings) between you and others. Thus, you should desire for others what you desire for yourself and hate for others what you hate for yourself. Do not oppress as you do not like to be oppressed. Do good to others as you would like good to be done to you. Regard bad for yourself whatever you regard bad for others. Accept that (treatment) from others which you would like others to accept from you\u00a0... Do not say to others what you do not like to be said to you.\u2014\u200a Muslim scholar Al-Qurtubi looked at the Golden Rule of loving one's neighbor and treating them as one wishes to be treated as having universal application to believers and unbelievers alike. Relying upon a Hadith, exegist Ibn Kathir listed those \"who judge people the way they judge themselves\" as people who will be among the first to be Resurrected.\nHussein bin Ali bin Awn al-Hashemi (102nd Caliph in Sunni Islam), repeated the Golden Rule in the context of the Armenian genocide, thus, in 1917, he states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Winter is ahead of us. Refugees from the Armenian Jacobite Community will probably need warmth. Help them how you would help your brothers. Pray for these people who have been expelled from their homes and left homeless and devoid of livestock and all their property.\nMandaeism.\nIn Mandaean scriptures, the Ginza Rabba and Mandaean Book of John contain a prohibitive form of the Golden Rule that is virtually identical to the one used by Hillel.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u2014Mandaic transliteration\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Screen reader-only/styles.css\" /&gt;Translation:\u2014Right Ginza Book 1, section 150, p. 32 (Gelbert 2011)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;O you perfect and faithful ones! Everything that is hateful and detestable to you \u2013 do not do it to your neighbours. Everything that seems good to you \u2013 do it if you are capable of doing it, and support each other.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;My sons! Everything that is hateful to you, do not do it to thy comrade, for in the world to which you are going, there is a judgment and a great summing up.\nBah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith.\nThe writings of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith encourage everyone to treat others as they would treat themselves and even prefer others over oneself:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;O SON OF MAN! Deny not My servant should he ask anything from thee, for his face is My face; be then abashed before Me.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Blessed is he who preferreth his brother before himself.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And if thine eyes be turned towards justice, choose thou for thy neighbour that which thou choosest for thyself.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Ascribe not to any soul that which thou wouldst not have ascribed to thee, and say not that which thou doest not.\u2014\u200a\nIndian religions.\nHinduism.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;One should never do that to another which one regards as injurious to one's own self. This, in brief, is the rule of dharma. Other behavior is due to selfish desires.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;By making \"dharma\" your main focus, treat others as you treat yourself\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12861", "revid": "14383484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12861", "title": "Governor of New York", "text": "Head of government of the U.S. state of New York\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe governor of New York is the head of government of the U.S. state of New York. The governor is the head of the executive branch of New York's state government and the commander-in-chief of the state's military forces. The governor has a duty to enforce state laws and the power to either approve or veto bills passed by the New York Legislature, to convene the legislature and grant pardons, except in cases of impeachment and treason. The governor of New York is the highest paid governor in the country.\nThe current governor is Kathy Hochul, a member of the Democratic Party who took office on August 24, 2021, following the resignation of Andrew Cuomo. She was elected to a full term in 2022.\nHistory.\nThe position of governor in New York dates back to the British takeover of New Amsterdam, when the position replaced the former Dutch offices of director or director-general.\nThe \"New York State Constitution\", section XVII originates the role, reading: \"And this convention doth further, in the name and by the authority of the good people of this State, ordain, determine, and declare that the supreme executive power and authority of this State shall be vested in a governor; and that statedly, once in every three years, and as often as the seat of government shall become vacant, a wise and descreet freeholder of this State shall be, by ballot, elected governor...\"\nElection.\nThe governor is directly elected every four years, in even-numbered years when there is no presidential election. The governor is required to be a United States citizen and a resident of New York for five years preceding their election. No person can be elected as governor under the age of thirty.\nPowers and duties.\nThe governor has a duty to enforce state laws, and the power to either approve or veto bills passed by the New York State Legislature, to convene the legislature, and to grant pardons, except in cases of treason and impeachment. Unlike the other government departments that compose the executive branch of government, the governor is the head of the state Executive Department. The officeholder is afforded the courtesy style of \"His/Her Excellency\" while in office.\nOften considered a potential candidate for U.S. president, ten New York governors have been selected as presidential candidates by a major party, four of whom (Martin Van Buren, Grover Cleveland, Theodore Roosevelt, and Franklin D. Roosevelt) were elected as President of the United States. Meanwhile, six New York governors have gone on to serve as vice president. Additionally, two New York governors, John Jay and Charles Evans Hughes, have served as chief justice.\nIn 2024\u20132025, Governor Kathy Hochul prioritized record investments in climate initiatives, major infrastructure projects like the new Hudson Tunnel, and tax cuts for middle-class New Yorkers, demonstrating the office\u2019s evolving impact on environmental policy and state economic planning.\nAppointments.\nThe governor is responsible for appointing their Executive Chamber. These appointments do not require the confirmation of the New York State Senate. Most political advisors report to the secretary to the governor, while most policy advisors report to the director of state operations, who also answers to the secretary to the governor, making that position, in practice, the true chief of staff and most powerful position in the Cabinet. The actual \"chief of staff\" is in charge of the Office of Scheduling and holds no authority over other cabinet officials.\nThe governor is also charged with naming the heads of the various departments, divisions, boards, and offices within the state government. These nominees require confirmation by the state Senate. While some appointees may share the title of \"commissioner\", \"director\", etc., only department level-heads are considered members of the actual state cabinet, although the heads of the various divisions, boards, and offices may attend cabinet-level meetings from time to time.\nLine of succession.\nThe Constitution of New York has provided since 1777 for the election of a lieutenant governor of New York, who also acts as president of the State Senate, to the same term (keeping the same term lengths as the governor throughout all the constitutional revisions). Originally, in the event of the death, resignation or impeachment of the governor, or absence from the state, the lieutenant governor would take on the governor's duties and powers. Since the 1938 constitution, the lieutenant governor explicitly becomes governor upon such vacancy in the office.\nShould the office of lieutenant governor become vacant, the temporary president of the state senate performs the duties of a lieutenant governor until the governor can take back the duties of the office, or the next election; likewise, should both offices become vacant, the temporary president acts as governor, with the office of lieutenant governor remaining vacant. Although no provision exists in the constitution for it, precedent set in 2009 allows the governor to appoint a lieutenant governor should a vacancy occur. Should the temporary president be unable to fulfill the duties, the speaker of the assembly is next in the line of succession. The lieutenant governor is elected on the same ticket as the governor, but nominated separately.\nLine of succession:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12862", "revid": "43843819", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12862", "title": "Glasnevin", "text": "Northern suburb of Dublin, Ireland\n \nGlasnevin (, meaning 'stream of the infants', also known as \"Glas Naedhe\", meaning \"stream of O'Naeidhe\" after a local stream and an ancient chieftain) is a neighbourhood of Dublin, Ireland, situated on the River Tolka. While primarily residential, Glasnevin is also home to the National Botanic Gardens, Glasnevin Cemetery, the National Meteorological Office, and a range of other state bodies, and Dublin City University has its main campus and other facilities in and near the area. Glasnevin is also a civil parish in the ancient barony of Coolock.\nGeography.\nA mainly residential neighbourhood, Glasnevin is located on the Northside of the city of Dublin (about 3\u00a0km north of Dublin city centre). It was established on the northern bank of the River Tolka where the stream for which it may be named joins, and now extends north and south of the river. Three watercourses flow into the Tolka in the area. Two streams can be seen near the Catholic \"pyramid church\", the Claremont Stream or Nevin Stream, flowing south from Poppintree and Jamestown Industrial Estate branches, and what is sometimes called the \"Cemetery Drain\" coming north from the southern edge of Glasnevin Cemetery. In addition, a major diversion from the Wad River comes from the Ballymun area, joining near the Claremont Stream.\nThe boundaries of Glasnevin stretch from the Royal Canal to Griffith Avenue and from the Finglas Road to the edges of Drumcondra. It spans the postal districts of Dublin 9 and 11, and is bordered to the northwest by Finglas, northeast by Ballymun and Santry, Whitehall to the east, Phibsborough and Drumcondra to the south and Cabra to the southwest.\nHistory.\nFoundation.\nGlasnevin was reputedly founded by Saint Mobhi (sometimes known as St Berchan) in the sixth (or perhaps fifth) century as a monastery. His monastery continued to be used for many years afterwards \u2013 St. Colman is recorded as having paid homage to its founder when he returned from abroad to visit Ireland a century after St Mobhi's death in 544. St. Columba of Iona is thought to have studied under St. Mobhi, but left Glasnevin following an outbreak of plague and journeyed north to open the House at Derry; there is a long street (Iona Road) in Glasnevin named in his honour and the church on Iona Road is called Saint Columba's.\nMiddle Ages.\nA settlement grew up around the monastery, which survived until the Viking invasions in the eighth century. After raids on monasteries at Glendalough and Clondalkin, the monasteries at Glasnevin and Finglas were attacked and destroyed.\nBy 822 Glasnevin, along with Grangegorman and Clonken or Clonkene (now known as Deansgrange), had become parts of the grange (farm) of Christ Church Cathedral and it seems to have maintained this connection up to the time of the Reformation.\nThe Battle of Clontarf was fought on the banks of the River Tolka in 1014 (a field called the \"bloody acre\" is supposed to be part of the site). The Irish defeated the Danes in a battle, in which 7,000 Danes and 4,000 Irish died.\nThe 12th century saw the Normans (who had conquered England and Wales in the eleventh century) invade Ireland. As local rulers continued fighting amongst themselves the Norman King of England Henry II was invited to intervene. He arrived in 1171, took control of much land, and then parcelled it out amongst his supporters. Glasnevin ended up under the jurisdiction of Finglas Abbey. Later, Laurence O'Toole, Archbishop of Dublin, took responsibility for Glasnevin and it became the property of the Priory of the Most Holy Trinity (Christ Church Cathedral).\nIn 1240 a church and tower were reconstructed on the site of the Church of St. Mobhi in the monastery. The returns of the church for 1326 stated that 28 tenants resided in Glasnevin. The church was enlarged in 1346, along with a small hall known as the Manor Hall.\nLate Middle Ages.\nWhen King Henry VIII broke from Rome an era of religious repression began. During the Dissolution of the Monasteries, Catholic Church property and land were appropriated to the new Church of Ireland, and monasteries (including the one at Glasnevin) were forcibly closed, later falling into ruin. Glasnevin had at this stage developed as a village, with its principal landmark and focal point being its \"bull-ring\" noted in 1542.\nBy 1667 Glasnevin had expanded \u2013 but not by very much; it is recorded as containing 24 houses. The development of the village was given a fresh impetus when Sir John Rogerson built his country residence \u2013 \"The Glen\" or \"Glasnevin House\" \u2013 outside the village.\nThe plantations of Ireland saw the settlement of Protestant English families on land previously held by Catholics. Lands at Glasnevin were leased to such families and a Protestant church was erected there in 1707. It was built on the site of the old Catholic Church and was named after St. Mobhi. The church was largely rebuilt in the mid-18th century. The attached churchyard became a graveyard for both Protestants and Catholics. It is said that Robert Emmet is buried there, this claim being made because once somebody working in the graveyard there dug up a headless body.\nEarly modern times.\nBy now Glasnevin was an area for \"families of distinction\" \u2013 in spite of a comment attributed to the Protestant Archbishop of Dublin, William King that \"\"when any couple had a mind to be wicked, they would retire to Glasnevin\". In a letter, dated 1725 he described Glasnevin as \"the receptacle for thieves and rogues [..] The first search when anything was stolen, was there, and when any couple had a mind to retire to be wicked there was their harbour. But since the church was built, and service regularly settled, all these evils are banished. Good houses are built in it, and the place civilised.\"\" Glasnevin National School was also built during this period.\n19th and 20th centuries.\nIn the 1830s, the civil parish population was recorded as 1,001, of whom 559 resided in the village. Glasnevin was described as a parish in the barony of Coolock, pleasantly situated and the residence of many families of distinction.\nOn 1 June 1832, Charles Lindsay, Bishop of Kildare, and William John released their holdings of Sir John Rogerson's lands at Glasnevin, (including Glasnevin House) to George Hayward Lindsay. This transfer included the sum of 1,500 Pounds Sterling. Although this does not specifically cite the marriage of George Hayward Lindsay to Lady Mary Catherine Gore, George Lindsay almost certainly came into possession of the lands at Glasnevin as a result of his marriage.\nWhen Drumcondra began to rapidly expand in the 1870s, the residents of Glasnevin sought to protect their district and opposed being merged with the neighbouring suburb. One of the objectors was the property owner, Dr Henry Gogarty, the father of the Irish poet, Oliver St. John Gogarty. The combined areas of Drumcondra, Clonliffe and Glasnevin became a separate administrative unit, a township, in 1878. The township was merged into the City of Dublin in 1900, under the Dublin Corporation Act 1900 (63 &amp; 64 Vict. c. cclxiv).\nGeorge Hayward Lindsay's eldest son, Lieutenant Colonel Henry Gore Lindsay, was in possession of his father's lands at Glasnevin when the area began to be developed at the beginning of the twentieth century. Gradual development of his lands began in 1903/04 but Glasnevin remained relatively undeveloped until the opening up of the Carroll Estate in 1914, which saw the creation of the redbrick residential roads running down towards Drumcondra. The process was accelerated by Dublin Corporation in the 1920s and the present shape of the suburb was in place by 1930. Among the developers who built estates in the area were Alexander Strain and his son-in-law George Linzell. Linzell built the first individual house built in the international style in Ireland, Balnagowan House, on St. Mobhi Boithrin in the late 1920s.\nThe start of the 20th century also saw the opening of a short-lived railway station on the Drumcondra and North Dublin Link Railway line from Glasnevin Junction to Connolly Station (then Amiens Street). Glasnevin railway station opened on 1 April 1901 and closed on 1 December 1910.\nFeatures.\nThe village has changed a lot over the years, and is now fully part of Dublin city.\nAs well as the amenities of the National Botanic Gardens (Ireland) and local parks, the national meteorological office Met \u00c9ireann, the Central Fisheries Board, the National Standards Authority of Ireland, Sustainable Energy Authority of Ireland, the Department of Defence and the national enterprise and trade board Enterprise Ireland are all located in the area.\nNational Botanic Gardens.\nThe house and lands of the poet Thomas Tickell were sold in 1790 to the Irish Parliament and given to the Royal Dublin Society for them to establish Ireland's first Botanic Gardens. The gardens were the first location in Ireland where the infection responsible for the 1845\u20131847 Great Famine was identified. Throughout the famine, research to stop the infection was undertaken at the gardens.\nThe which border the River Tolka also adjoin the Prospect Cemetery. In 2002 the Botanic Gardens gained a new two-storey complex which included a new cafe and a large lecture theatre. The Irish National Herbarium is also located at the botanic gardens.\nGlasnevin (Prospect) Cemetery.\nProspect Cemetery is located in Glasnevin, although better known as Glasnevin Cemetery, the most historically notable burial place in the country and the last resting place, among a host of historical figures, of Michael Collins, \u00c9amon de Valera, Charles Stewart Parnell and also Arthur Griffith. This graveyard led to Glasnevin being known as \"the dead centre of Dublin\". It opened in 1832 and is the final resting place for thousands of ordinary citizens, as well as many Irish patriots.\nHart's Corner.\nApproaching Glasnevin via Phibsboro is what is known as \"Hart's Corner\" but which about 200 years ago was called Glasmanogue, and was then a well-known stage on the way to Finglas. At an earlier date, the name possessed a wider signification and was applied to a considerable portion of the adjoining district.\nDelville.\nAt the start of the 18th century a large house, known variously as The Glen and later as Delville, was built on the site of the present Bon Secours Hospital, Dublin. Its name, Delville, was an amalgamation of the surnames of two tenants, Dr. Helsam and Dr. Patrick Delany (as Heldeville), both fellows of Trinity College.\nWhen Delany married his first wife he acquired sole ownership, but it became more well known as the home of Delany and his second wife, Mary Pendarves. She was a widow whom Delany married in 1743, and was an accomplished letter writer.\nThe couple were friends of Dean Jonathan Swift and, through him, of Alexander Pope. Pope encouraged the Delaneys to develop a garden in a style then becoming popular in England \u2013 moving away from the very formal, geometric layout that was common. He redesigned the house in the style of a villa and had the gardens laid out in the latest Dutch fashion creating what was almost certainly Ireland's first naturalistic garden.\nThe house was, under Mrs Delany, a centre of Dublin's intellectual life. Swift is said to have composed a number of his campaigning pamphlets while staying there. He and his lifelong companion Stella were both in the habit of visiting, and Swift satirised the grounds which he considered too small for the size of the house. Through her correspondence with her sister, Mrs Dewes, Mary wrote of Swift in 1733: \"he calls himself my master and corrects me when I speak bad English or do not pronounce my words distinctly\".\nPatrick Delany died in 1768 at the age of 82, prompting his widow to sell Delville and return to her native England until her death twenty years later.\nThe Pyramid Church.\nGlasnevin is also a parish in the Fingal South West deanery of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Dublin. It is served by the Church of Lady of Dolours on the banks of the River Tolka.\nA timber church, which originally stood on Berkeley Road, was moved to a riverside site on Botanic Avenue early in the twentieth century; the altar in this church was from Newgate prison in Dublin. It served as the parish church until it was replaced, in 1972, by a structure resembling a pyramid when viewed from Botanic Avenue. The previous church was known locally as \"The Woodener\" or \"The Wooden\" and the new building is still known to older residents as \"The new Woodener\" or \"The Wigwam\". The church underwent some refurbishment work inside and in its grounds and car park during the first half of 2011.\nMet \u00c9ireann.\nIn 1975 the new headquarters of Met \u00c9ireann, the Irish Meteorological Office, designed by Liam McCormick, opened on Glasnevin Hill, on the site of a former juvenile detention centre, Marlborough House. The Met \u00c9ireann building is a pyramidal shape and was originally to be covered in Welsh Slate, however, an indigenous material was deemed more appropriate, and the selected Irish stone curled and had to be replaced by metal sheeting. It is recognised as one of the most significant buildings to be erected in Dublin in the 1970s.\nGriffith Avenue.\nThe tree-lined Griffith Avenue runs through Glasnevin, Drumcondra and Marino, and spans three electoral constituencies. Like nearby Griffith Park, it was named after Arthur Griffith, who was the founder and third leader of Sinn F\u00e9in, served as President of D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann and is buried in Glasnevin Cemetery. The naming has been attributed to politician and property developer Patrick Belton.\nA double-row of mature lime trees runs along both sides of Griffith Avenue from its junction with St Mobhi Road (in the west) to its junction with Malahide Road (in the east), a distance of 2.81\u00a0km. It is reputed to be the longest tree-lined purely residential avenue in the Northern Hemisphere.\nAmenities.\nScouting is represented in Glasnevin by the 1st Dublin (L.H.O) Scout Troop located on the corner of Griffith Avenue and Ballygall Road East.\nSport.\nThe Gaelic games of Gaelic football, hurling, camogie and Gaelic handball are all organised locally by Na Fianna CLG, while soccer is played by local clubs Tolka Rovers, Glasnevin FC, and Glasnaion FC. Basketball is organised by Tolka Rovers. Tennis is played in Charleville Lawn Tennis Club which was founded in 1894 and took its name from the original location at the corner of the Charleville and Cabra Roads. The move to its present location on Whitworth Road took place in 1904. Hockey is also played in Botanic Hockey club on the Old Finglas Road. Glasnevin Boxing Club and football (soccer) club have a clubhouse on Mobhi road.\nBilly Whelan, one of the eight Manchester United players who lost their lives in the Munich air disaster of 6 February 1958, was born locally and is buried in Glasnevin Cemetery.\nEducation.\nThere are several primary schools in Glasnevin. These include Lindsay Road National School (Presbyterian patronage) and Glasnevin National School (Church of Ireland patronage), founded by Dean Swift and constructed in a round shape; known as 'The Ink Bottle' this building was replaced in 1911. Also present are Glasnevin Educate Together National school, North Dublin National School Project, Scoil Mobhi, St. Brigid's GNS, St. Columba's NS and St.Vincent's CBS.\nThere are several Roman Catholic secondary schools in the area St Vincent's (Christian Brothers) School, Scoil Chaitr\u00edona and St Mary's (Holy Faith) Secondary School.\nThe main campus of Dublin City University lies on the border between Glasnevin, Whitehall and Santry, and the DCU Alpha centre is in central Glasnevin. Teagasc also run horticultural education courses from the College of Amenity Horticulture in the Botanic Gardens.\nRepresentation.\nGlasnevin is part of the D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann constituency of Dublin Central.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12863", "revid": "46469420", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12863", "title": "George Abbot (author)", "text": "English religious writer and politician (1604\u20131649)\nGeorge Abbot or Abbott (1604 \u2013 2 February 1649) was an English lay writer, known as \"The Puritan\", and a politician who sat in the House of Commons in two periods between 1640 and 1649. He is known also for his part in defending Caldecote House against royalist forces in the early days of the English Civil War.\nLife.\nAbbott was the son of George Abbott of York (died 1607) and his wife Joan Penkeston. While \"Alumni Cantabrigienses\" states that he matriculated at King's College, Cambridge in 1622, the \"Oxford Dictionary of National Biography\" discounts the identification, for lack of evidence. He owned property in Baddesley Clinton, Warwickshire, and was a good friend of Richard Vines, minister at Caldecote some way to the east. In April 1640, he was elected as a member of parliament (MP) for Tamworth in the Short Parliament. \nIn the English Civil War, Abbot worked closely in Warwickshire with his stepfather William Purefoy, and made a notable defence, with his mother Joan, of the Purefoy house at Caldecote, Warwickshire, gaining the family coverage in the London press. On 15 August 1642, with eight men, his mother and maids, he held out for a time against Prince Rupert of the Rhine, with about 18 troops of horses and dragoons. In the aftermath of the Battle of Edgehill, in October of the same year, Richard Baxter moved to Coventry, and Abbot was one of those hearing him preach there. Baxter in writing on the Sabbath referred to \"my dear friend Mr. George Abbot\". In his memoirs \"Reliqui\u00e6 Baxterian\u00e6\", Baxter placed Abbot's defence of Caldecote House, where barns were burnt, in local context: royalists under Spencer Compton, 2nd Earl of Northampton were attacking Warwick Castle, defended by John Bridges, and Coventry, defended by John Barker.\nAbbot was re-elected MP for Tamworth in 1645 for the Long Parliament and held the seat until his death in 1649. He died unmarried in his 44th year, and was buried in Caldecote church where his monument describes his defence of Caldecote.\nLegacy.\nBy his will, Abbot endowed a free school at Caldecote. It was supported by land left to it at Baddesley Ensor.\nWorks.\nAbbot was a lay theologian and scholar. His \"Whole Booke of Job Paraphrased, or made easy for any to understand\" (1640), was written in a terse style, and his \"Vindiciae Sabbathi\" (1641) influenced the Sabbatarian controversy. His \"The Whole Book of Psalms Paraphrased\" (1650) was published posthumously by Richard Vines, and dedicated to Joan Purefoy, his mother.\nMistaken identifications.\nAbbot has been confused with others of the same name and has been described as a clergyman, which he never was. His writings have been incorrectly attributed in some bibliographical authorities to a relation of George Abbot the archbishop of Canterbury. One of the sons of Sir Morris Abbot called George was also an MP in the Long Parliament but for the constituency of Guildford.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12866", "revid": "1319852172", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12866", "title": "Globular cluster", "text": "Spherical collection of stars\nA globular cluster is a spheroidal conglomeration of stars that is bound together by gravity, with a higher concentration of stars towards its center. It can contain anywhere from tens of thousands to many millions of member stars, all orbiting in a stable, compact formation. Globular clusters are similar in form to dwarf spheroidal galaxies, and though globular clusters were long held to be the more luminous of the two, discoveries of outliers had made the distinction between the two less clear by the early 21st century. Their name is derived from Latin (small sphere). Globular clusters are occasionally known simply as \"globulars\".\nAlthough one globular cluster, Omega Centauri, was observed in antiquity and long thought to be a star, recognition of the clusters' true nature came with the advent of telescopes in the 17th century. In early telescopic observations, globular clusters appeared as fuzzy blobs, leading French astronomer Charles Messier to include many of them in his catalog of astronomical objects that he thought could be mistaken for comets. Using larger telescopes, 18th-century astronomers recognized that globular clusters are groups of many individual stars. Early in the 20th century the distribution of globular clusters in the sky was some of the first evidence that the Sun is far from the center of the Milky Way.\nGlobular clusters are found in nearly all galaxies. In spiral galaxies like the Milky Way, they are mostly found in the outer spheroidal part of the galaxy\u00a0\u2013 the galactic halo. They are the largest and most massive type of star cluster, tending to be older, denser, and composed of lower abundances of heavy elements than open clusters, which are generally found in the disks of spiral galaxies. The Milky Way has more than 150 known globulars, and there may be many more.\nBoth the origin of globular clusters and their role in galactic evolution are unclear. Some are among the oldest objects in their galaxies and even the universe, constraining estimates of the universe's age. Star clusters were formerly thought to consist of stars that all formed at the same time from one star-forming nebula, but nearly all globular clusters contain stars that formed at different times, or that have differing compositions. Some clusters may have had multiple episodes of star formation, and some may be remnants of smaller galaxies captured by larger galaxies.\nHistory of observations.\nThe first known globular cluster, now called M\u202f22, was discovered in 1665 by Abraham Ihle, a German amateur astronomer. The cluster Omega Centauri, easily visible in the southern sky with the naked eye, was known to ancient astronomers like Ptolemy as a star, but was reclassified as a nebula by Edmond Halley in 1677, then finally as a globular cluster in the early 19th century by John Herschel. The French astronomer Abb\u00e9 Lacaille listed NGC\u00a0104, NGC 4833, M\u202f55, M\u202f69, and NGC 6397 in his 1751\u20131752 catalogue. The low resolution of early telescopes prevented individual stars in a cluster from being visually separated until Charles Messier observed M\u202f4 in 1764.\nWhen William Herschel began his comprehensive survey of the sky using large telescopes in 1782, there were 34\u00a0known globular clusters. Herschel discovered another\u00a036 and was the first to resolve virtually all of them into stars. He coined the term \"globular cluster\" in his \"Catalogue of a Second Thousand New Nebulae and Clusters of Stars\" (1789). In 1914, Harlow Shapley began a series of studies of globular clusters, published across about forty scientific papers. He examined the clusters' RR\u00a0Lyrae variables (stars which he assumed were Cepheid variables) and used their luminosity and period of variability to estimate the distances to the clusters. RR\u00a0Lyrae variables were later found to be fainter than Cepheid variables, causing Shapley to overestimate the distances.\nA large majority of the Milky Way's globular clusters are found in the halo around the galactic core. In 1918, Shapley used this strongly asymmetrical distribution to determine the overall dimensions of the galaxy. Assuming a roughly spherical distribution of globular clusters around the galaxy's center, he used the positions of the clusters to estimate the position of the Sun relative to the Galactic Center. He correctly concluded that the Milky Way's center is in the Sagittarius constellation and not near the Earth. He overestimated the distance, finding typical globular cluster distances of ; the modern distance to the Galactic Center is roughly . Shapley's measurements indicated the Sun is relatively far from the center of the galaxy, contrary to what had been inferred from the observed uniform distribution of ordinary stars. In reality most ordinary stars lie within the galaxy's disk and are thus obscured by gas and dust in the disk, whereas globular clusters lie outside the disk and can be seen at much greater distances.\nThe count of known globular clusters in the Milky Way has continued to increase, reaching 83 in 1915, 93 in 1930, 97 by 1947, and 157 in 2010. The number of known globular clusters in the Milky Way reached 158 by the end of 2010, according to the European Southern Observatory, before two new globular clusters were discovered as part of the ESO's VISTA (Visible and Infrared Survey Telescope for Astronomy) infrared survey, known as Variables in the V\u00eda L\u00e1ctea (VVV) survey, bringing the total to 160 known globular clusters. The two discovered by VISTA in 2011 are named VVV CL001 and VVV CL002.\nAdditional, undiscovered globular clusters are believed to be in the galactic bulge or hidden by the gas and dust of the Milky Way. For example, most of the Palomar Globular Clusters have only been discovered in the 1950s, with some located relatively close-by yet obscured by dust, while others reside in the very far reaches of the Milky Way halo. The Andromeda Galaxy, which is comparable in size to the Milky Way, may have as many as five hundred globulars. Every galaxy of sufficient mass in the Local Group has an associated system of globular clusters, as does almost every large galaxy surveyed. Some giant elliptical galaxies (particularly those at the centers of galaxy clusters), such as M\u202f87, have as many as 13,000\u00a0globular clusters.\nClassification.\nShapley was later assisted in his studies of clusters by Henrietta Swope and Helen Sawyer Hogg. In 1927\u20131929, Shapley and Sawyer categorized clusters by the degree of concentration of stars toward each core. Their system, known as the Shapley\u2013Sawyer Concentration Class, identifies the most concentrated clusters as Class\u00a0I and ranges to the most diffuse Class\u00a0XII. Astronomers from the Pontifical Catholic University of Chile proposed a new type of globular cluster on the basis of observational data in 2015: Dark globular clusters.\nFormation.\nThe formation of globular clusters is poorly understood. Globular clusters have traditionally been described as a simple star population formed from a single giant molecular cloud, and thus with roughly uniform age and metallicity (proportion of heavy elements in their composition). Modern observations show that nearly all globular clusters contain multiple populations; the globular clusters in the Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC) exhibit a bimodal population, for example. During their youth, these LMC clusters may have encountered giant molecular clouds that triggered a second round of star formation. This star-forming period is relatively brief, compared with the age of many globular clusters. It has been proposed that this multiplicity in stellar populations could have a dynamical origin. In the Antennae Galaxy, for example, the Hubble Space Telescope has observed clusters of clusters\u00a0\u2013 regions in the galaxy that span hundreds of parsecs, in which many of the clusters will eventually collide and merge. Their overall range of ages and (possibly) metallicities could lead to clusters with a bimodal, or even multimodal, distribution of populations.\nObservations of globular clusters show that their stars primarily come from regions of more efficient star formation, and from where the interstellar medium is at a higher density, as compared to normal star-forming regions. Globular cluster formation is prevalent in starburst regions and in interacting galaxies. Some globular clusters likely formed in dwarf galaxies and were removed by tidal forces to join the Milky Way. In elliptical and lenticular galaxies there is a correlation between the mass of the supermassive black holes (SMBHs) at their centers and the extent of their globular cluster systems. The mass of the SMBH in such a galaxy is often close to the combined mass of the galaxy's globular clusters.\nNo known globular clusters display active star formation, consistent with the hypothesis that globular clusters are typically the oldest objects in their galaxy and were among the first collections of stars to form. Very large regions of star formation known as super star clusters, such as Westerlund\u00a01 in the Milky Way, may be the precursors of globular clusters.\nMany of the Milky Way's globular clusters have a retrograde orbit (meaning that they revolve around the galaxy in the reverse of the direction the galaxy is rotating), including the most massive, Omega Centauri. Its retrograde orbit suggests it may be a remnant of a dwarf galaxy captured by the Milky Way.\nComposition.\nGlobular clusters are generally composed of hundreds of thousands of low-metal, old stars. The stars found in a globular cluster are similar to those in the bulge of a spiral galaxy but confined to a spheroid in which half the light is emitted within a radius of only a few to a few tens of parsecs. They are free of gas and dust, and it is presumed that all the gas and dust was long ago either turned into stars or blown out of the cluster by the massive first-generation stars.\nGlobular clusters can contain a high density of stars; on average about 0.4stars per cubic parsec, increasing to 100 or 1000stars/pc3 in the core of the cluster. In comparison, the stellar density around the Sun is roughly 0.1\u00a0stars/pc3. The typical distance between stars in a globular cluster is about one light year, but at its core the separation between stars averages about a third of a light year\u00a0\u2013 thirteen times closer than the Sun is to its nearest neighbor, Proxima Centauri.\nGlobular clusters are thought to be unfavorable locations for planetary systems. Planetary orbits are dynamically unstable within the cores of dense clusters because of the gravitational perturbations of passing stars. A planet orbiting at one astronomical unit around a star that is within the core of a dense cluster, such as 47\u00a0Tucanae, would survive only on the order of a hundred million years. There is a planetary system orbiting a pulsar (PSRB1620\u221226) that belongs to the globular cluster M4, but these planets likely formed after the event that created the pulsar.\nSome globular clusters, like Omega Centauri in the Milky Way and Mayall\u00a0II in the Andromeda Galaxy, are extraordinarily massive, measuring several million solar masses (M\u2609) and having multiple stellar populations. Both are evidence that supermassive globular clusters formed from the cores of dwarf galaxies that have been consumed by larger galaxies. About a quarter of the globular cluster population in the Milky Way may have been accreted this way, as with more than 60% of the globular clusters in the outer halo of Andromeda.\nHeavy element content.\nGlobular clusters normally consist of Population\u00a0II stars which, compared with Population\u00a0I stars such as the Sun, have a higher proportion of hydrogen and helium and a lower proportion of heavier elements. Astronomers refer to these heavier elements as \"metals\" (distinct from the material concept) and to the proportions of these elements as the metallicity. Produced by stellar nucleosynthesis, the metals are recycled into the interstellar medium and enter a new generation of stars. The proportion of metals can thus be an indication of the age of a star in simple models, with older stars typically having a lower metallicity.\nThe Dutch astronomer Pieter Oosterhoff observed two special populations of globular clusters, which became known as \"Oosterhoff groups\". The second group has a slightly longer period of RR Lyrae variable stars. While both groups have a low proportion of metallic elements as measured by spectroscopy, the metal spectral lines in the stars of Oosterhoff typeI (OoI) cluster are not quite as weak as those in typeII (OoII), and so typeI stars are referred to as \"metal-rich\" (e.g. Terzan\u00a07), while typeII stars are \"metal-poor\" (e.g. ESO\u00a0280-SC06). These two distinct populations have been observed in many galaxies, especially massive elliptical galaxies. Both groups are nearly as old as the universe itself and are of similar ages. Suggested scenarios to explain these subpopulations include violent gas-rich galaxy mergers, the accretion of dwarf galaxies, and multiple phases of star formation in a single galaxy. In the Milky Way, the metal-poor clusters are associated with the halo and the metal-rich clusters with the bulge.\nA large majority of the metal-poor clusters in the Milky Way are aligned on a plane in the outer part of the galaxy's halo. This observation supports the view that typeII clusters were captured from a satellite galaxy, rather than being the oldest members of the Milky Way's globular cluster system as was previously thought. The difference between the two cluster types would then be explained by a time delay between when the two galaxies formed their cluster systems.\nExotic components.\nClose interactions and near-collisions of stars occur relatively often in globular clusters because of their high star density. These chance encounters give rise to some exotic classes of stars\u00a0\u2013 such as blue stragglers, millisecond pulsars, and low-mass X-ray binaries\u00a0\u2013 which are much more common in globular clusters. How blue stragglers form remains unclear, but most models attribute them to interactions between stars, such as stellar mergers, the transfer of material from one star to another, or even an encounter between two binary systems. The resulting star has a higher temperature than other stars in the cluster with comparable luminosity and thus differs from the main-sequence stars formed early in the cluster's existence. Some clusters have two distinct sequences of blue stragglers, one bluer than the other.\nAstronomers have searched for black holes within globular clusters since the 1970s. The required resolution for this task is exacting; it is only with the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) that the first claimed discoveries were made, in 2002 and 2003. Based on HST observations, other researchers suggested the existence of a 4,000\u00a0M\u2609(solar masses) intermediate-mass black hole in the globular cluster M15 and a 20,000\u00a0M\u2609 black hole in the Mayall\u00a0II cluster of the Andromeda Galaxy. Both X-ray and radio emissions from MayallII appear consistent with an intermediate-mass black hole; however, these claimed detections are controversial.\nThe heaviest objects in globular clusters are expected to migrate to the cluster center due to mass segregation. One research group pointed out that the mass-to-light ratio should rise sharply towards the center of the cluster, even without a black hole, in both M15 and Mayall II. Observations from 2018 find no evidence for an intermediate-mass black hole in any globular cluster, including M15, but cannot definitively rule out one with a mass of 500\u20131000\u00a0M\u2609. Finally, in 2023, an analysis of HST and the Gaia spacecraft data from the closest globular cluster, Messier 4, revealed an excess mass of roughly 800\u00a0M\u2609 in the center of this cluster, which appears to not be extended. This could thus be considered as kinematic evidence for an intermediate-mass black hole (even if an unusually compact cluster of compact objects like white dwarfs, neutron stars or stellar-mass black holes cannot be completely discounted).\nThe confirmation of intermediate-mass black holes in globular clusters would have important ramifications for theories of galaxy development as being possible sources for the supermassive black holes at their centers. The mass of these supposed intermediate-mass black holes is proportional to the mass of their surrounding clusters, following a pattern previously discovered between supermassive black holes and their surrounding galaxies.\nHertzsprung\u2013Russell diagrams.\nHertzsprung\u2013Russell diagrams (H\u2013R diagrams) of globular clusters allow astronomers to determine many of the properties of their populations of stars. A H\u2013R diagram is a graph of a large sample of stars plotting their absolute magnitude (their luminosity, or brightness measured from a standard distance), as a function of their color index. The color index, roughly speaking, measures the color of the star; positive color indices indicate a reddish star with a cool surface temperature, while negative values indicate a bluer star with a hotter surface. Stars on a H\u2013R diagram mostly lie along a roughly diagonal line sloping from hot, luminous stars in the upper left to cool, faint stars in the lower right. This line is known as the main sequence and represents the primary stage of stellar evolution. The diagram also includes stars in later evolutionary stages such as the cool but luminous red giants.\nConstructing a H\u2013R diagram requires knowing the distance to the observed stars to convert apparent into absolute magnitude. Because all the stars in a globular cluster have about the same distance from Earth, a color\u2013magnitude diagram using their observed magnitudes looks like a shifted H\u2013R diagram (because of the roughly constant difference between their apparent and absolute magnitudes). This shift is called the distance modulus and can be used to calculate the distance to the cluster. The modulus is determined by comparing features (like the main sequence) of the cluster's color\u2013magnitude diagram to corresponding features in a H\u2013R diagram of another set of stars, a method known as spectroscopic parallax or main-sequence fitting.\nProperties.\nSince globular clusters form at once from a single giant molecular cloud, a cluster's stars have roughly the same age and composition. A star's evolution is primarily determined by its initial mass, so the positions of stars in a cluster's H\u2013R or color\u2013magnitude diagram mostly reflect their initial masses. A cluster's H\u2013R diagram, therefore, appears quite different from H\u2013R diagrams containing stars of a wide variety of ages. Almost all stars fall on a well-defined curve in globular cluster H\u2013R diagrams, and that curve's shape indicates the age of the cluster. A more detailed H\u2013R diagram often reveals multiple stellar populations as indicated by the presence of closely separated curves, each corresponding to a distinct population of stars with a slightly different age or composition. Observations with the Wide Field Camera 3, installed in 2009 on the Hubble Space Telescope, made it possible to distinguish these slightly different curves.\nThe most massive main-sequence stars have the highest luminosity and will be the first to evolve into the giant star stage. As the cluster ages, stars of successively lower masses will do the same. Therefore, the age of a single-population cluster can be measured by looking for those stars just beginning to enter the giant star stage, which form a \"knee\" in the H\u2013R diagram called the main-sequence turnoff, bending to the upper right from the main-sequence line. The absolute magnitude at this bend is directly a function of the cluster's age; an age scale can be plotted on an axis parallel to the magnitude.\nThe morphology and luminosity of globular cluster stars in H\u2013R diagrams are influenced by numerous parameters, many of which are still actively researched. Recent observations have overturned the historical paradigm that all globular clusters consist of stars born at exactly the same time, or sharing exactly the same chemical abundance. Some clusters feature multiple populations, slightly differing in composition and age; for example, high-precision imagery of cluster NGC 2808 discerned three close, but distinct, main sequences. Further, the placements of the cluster stars in a H\u2013R diagram (including the brightnesses of distance indicators) can be influenced by observational biases. One such effect, called blending, arises when the cores of globular clusters are so dense that observations see multiple stars as a single target. The brightness measured for that seemingly single star is thus incorrect\u00a0\u2013 too bright, given that multiple stars contributed. In turn, the computed distance is incorrect, so the blending effect can introduce a systematic uncertainty into the cosmic distance ladder and may bias the estimated age of the universe and the Hubble constant.\nConsequences.\nThe blue stragglers appear on the H\u2013R diagram as a series diverging from the main sequence in the direction of brighter, bluer stars. White dwarfs (the final remnants of some Sun-like stars), which are much fainter and somewhat hotter than the main-sequence stars, lie on the bottom-left of a H\u2013R diagram. Globular clusters can be dated by looking at the temperatures of the coolest white dwarfs, often giving results as old as 12.7 billion years. In comparison, open clusters are rarely older than about half a billion years. The ages of globular clusters place a lower bound on the age of the entire universe, presenting a significant constraint in cosmology. Astronomers were historically faced with age estimates of clusters older than their cosmological models would allow, but better measurements of cosmological parameters, through deep sky surveys and satellites, appear to have resolved this issue.\nStudying globular clusters sheds light on how the composition of the formational gas and dust affects stellar evolution; the stars' evolutionary tracks vary depending on the abundance of heavy elements. Data obtained from these studies are then used to study the evolution of the Milky Way as a whole.\nMorphology.\nIn contrast to open clusters, most globular clusters remain gravitationally bound together for time periods comparable to the lifespans of most of their stars. Strong tidal interactions with other large masses result in the dispersal of some stars, leaving behind \"tidal tails\" of stars removed from the cluster.\nAfter formation, the stars in the globular cluster begin to interact gravitationally with each other. The velocities of the stars steadily change, and the stars lose any history of their original velocity. The characteristic interval for this to occur is the relaxation time, related to the characteristic length of time a star needs to cross the cluster and the number of stellar masses. The relaxation time varies by cluster, but a typical value is on the order of one billion years.\nAlthough globular clusters are generally spherical in form, ellipticity can form via tidal interactions. Clusters within the Milky Way and the Andromeda Galaxy are typically oblate spheroids in shape, while those in the Large Magellanic Cloud are more elliptical.\nRadii.\nAstronomers characterize the morphology (shape) of a globular cluster by means of standard radii: the core radius (\"r\"\"c\"), the half-light radius (\"r\"\"h\"), and the tidal or Jacobi radius (\"r\"\"t\"). The radius can be expressed as a physical distance or as a subtended angle in the sky. Considering a radius around the core, the surface luminosity of the cluster steadily decreases with distance, and the core radius is the distance at which the apparent surface luminosity has dropped by half. A comparable quantity is the half-light radius, or the distance from the core containing half the total luminosity of the cluster; the half-light radius is typically larger than the core radius.\nMost globular clusters have a half-light radius of less than ten parsecs (pc), although some globular clusters have very large radii, like NGC 2419 (rh\u00a0= 18\u00a0pc) and Palomar 14 (rh\u00a0= 25\u00a0pc). The half-light radius includes stars in the outer part of the cluster that happen to lie along the line of sight, so theorists also use the half-mass radius (\"r\"\"m\")\u00a0\u2013 the radius from the core that contains half the total mass of the cluster. A small half-mass radius, relative to the overall size, indicates a dense core. Messier\u00a03 (M3), for example, has an overall visible dimension of about 18 arc minutes, but a half-mass radius of only 1.12\u00a0arc minutes.\nThe tidal radius, or Hill sphere, is the distance from the center of the globular cluster at which the external gravitation of the galaxy has more influence over the stars in the cluster than does the cluster itself. This is the distance at which the individual stars belonging to a cluster can unbound by the galaxy. The tidal radius of M3, for example, is about forty arc minutes, or about 113\u00a0pc.\nMass segregation, luminosity and core collapse.\nIn most Milky Way clusters, the surface brightness of a globular cluster as a function of decreasing distance to the core first increases, then levels off at a distance typically 1\u20132 parsecs from the core. About 20% of the globular clusters have undergone a process termed \"core collapse\". The luminosity in such a cluster increases steadily all the way to the core region.\nModels of globular clusters predict that core collapse occurs when the more massive stars in a globular cluster encounter their less massive counterparts. Over time, dynamic processes cause individual stars to migrate from the center of the cluster to the outside, resulting in a net loss of kinetic energy from the core region and leading the region's remaining stars to occupy a more compact volume. When this gravothermal instability occurs, the central region of the cluster becomes densely crowded with stars, and the surface brightness of the cluster forms a power-law cusp. A massive black hole at the core could also result in a luminosity cusp. Over a long time, this leads to a concentration of massive stars near the core, a phenomenon called mass segregation.\nThe dynamical heating effect of binary star systems works to prevent an initial core collapse of the cluster. When a star passes near a binary system, the orbit of the latter pair tends to contract, releasing energy. Only after this primordial supply of energy is exhausted can a deeper core collapse proceed. In contrast, the effect of tidal shocks as a globular cluster repeatedly passes through the plane of a spiral galaxy tends to significantly accelerate core collapse.\nCore collapse may be divided into three phases. During a cluster's adolescence, core collapse begins with stars nearest the core. Interactions between binary star systems prevents further collapse as the cluster approaches middle age. The central binaries are either disrupted or ejected, resulting in a tighter concentration at the core. The interaction of stars in the collapsed core region causes tight binary systems to form. As other stars interact with these tight binaries they increase the energy at the core, causing the cluster to re-expand. As the average time for a core collapse is typically less than the age of the galaxy, many of a galaxy's globular clusters may have passed through a core collapse stage, then re-expanded.\nThe HST has provided convincing observational evidence of this stellar mass-sorting process in globular clusters. Heavier stars slow down and crowd at the cluster's core, while lighter stars pick up speed and tend to spend more time at the cluster's periphery. The cluster 47\u00a0Tucanae, made up of about one million stars, is one of the densest globular clusters in the Southern Hemisphere. This cluster was subjected to an intensive photographic survey that obtained precise velocities for nearly fifteen thousand stars in this cluster.\nThe overall luminosities of the globular clusters within the Milky Way and the Andromeda Galaxy each have a roughly Gaussian distribution, with an average magnitude Mv and a variance \u03c32. This distribution of globular cluster luminosities is called the Globular Cluster Luminosity Function (GCLF). For the Milky Way, Mv\u00a0= \u22127.29 \u00b1 0.13, \u03c3\u00a0= 1.1 \u00b1 0.1. The GCLF has been used as a \"standard candle\" for measuring the distance to other galaxies, under the assumption that globular clusters in remote galaxies behave similarly to those in the Milky Way.\nN-body simulations.\nComputing the gravitational interactions between stars within a globular cluster requires solving the N-body problem. The naive computational cost for a dynamic simulation increases in proportion to \"N\" 2 (where N is the number of objects), so the computing requirements to accurately simulate a cluster of thousands of stars can be enormous. A more efficient method of simulating the N-body dynamics of a globular cluster is done by subdivision into small volumes and velocity ranges, and using \"probabilities\" to describe the locations of the stars. Their motions are described by means of the Fokker\u2013Planck equation, often using a model describing the mass density as a function of radius, such as a Plummer model. The simulation becomes more difficult when the effects of binaries and the interaction with external gravitation forces (such as from the Milky Way galaxy) must also be included. In 2010 a low-density globular cluster's lifetime evolution was able to be directly computed, star-by-star.\nCompleted N-body simulations have shown that stars can follow unusual paths through the cluster, often forming loops and falling more directly toward the core than would a single star orbiting a central mass. Additionally, some stars gain sufficient energy to escape the cluster due to gravitational interactions that result in a sufficient increase in velocity. Over long periods of time this process leads to the dissipation of the cluster, a process termed evaporation. The typical time scale for the evaporation of a globular cluster is 1010 years. The ultimate fate of a globular cluster must be either to accrete stars at its core, causing its steady contraction, or gradual shedding of stars from its outer layers.\nBinary stars form a significant portion of stellar systems, with up to half of all field stars and open cluster stars occurring in binary systems. The present-day binary fraction in globular clusters is difficult to measure, and any information about their initial binary fraction is lost by subsequent dynamical evolution. Numerical simulations of globular clusters have demonstrated that binaries can hinder and even reverse the process of core collapse in globular clusters. When a star in a cluster has a gravitational encounter with a binary system, a possible result is that the binary becomes more tightly bound and kinetic energy is added to the solitary star. When the massive stars in the cluster are sped up by this process, it reduces the contraction at the core and limits core collapse.\nIntermediate forms.\nCluster classification is not always definitive; objects have been found that can be classified in more than one category. For example, BH 176 in the southern part of the Milky Way has properties of both an open and a globular cluster.\nIn 2005 astronomers discovered a new, \"extended\" type of star cluster in the Andromeda Galaxy's halo, similar to the globular cluster. The three new-found clusters have a similar star count to globular clusters and share other characteristics, such as stellar populations and metallicity, but are distinguished by their larger size\u00a0\u2013 several hundred light years across\u00a0\u2013 and some hundred times lower density. Their stars are separated by larger distances; parametrically, these clusters lie somewhere between a globular cluster and a dwarf spheroidal galaxy.\nThe formation of these extended clusters is likely related to accretion. It is unclear why the Milky Way lacks such clusters; Andromeda is unlikely to be the sole galaxy with them, but their presence in other galaxies remains unknown.\nTidal encounters.\nWhen a globular cluster comes close to a large mass, such as the core region of a galaxy, it undergoes a tidal interaction. The difference in gravitational strength between the nearer and further parts of the cluster results in an asymmetric tidal force. A \"tidal shock\" occurs whenever the orbit of a cluster takes it through the plane of a galaxy.\nTidal shocks can pull stars away from the cluster halo, leaving only the core part of the cluster; these trails of stars can extend several degrees away from the cluster. These tails typically both precede and follow the cluster along its orbit and can accumulate significant portions of the original mass of the cluster, forming clump-like features. The globular cluster Palomar 5, for example, is near the apogalactic point of its orbit after passing through the Milky Way. Streams of stars extend outward toward the front and rear of the orbital path of this cluster, stretching to distances of 13,000 light years. Tidal interactions have stripped away much of Palomar5's mass; further interactions with the galactic core are expected to transform it into a long stream of stars orbiting the Milky Way in its halo.\nThe Milky Way is in the process of tidally stripping the Sagittarius Dwarf Spheroidal Galaxy of stars and globular clusters through the Sagittarius Stream. As many as 20% of the globular clusters in the Milky Way's outer halo may have originated in that galaxy. Palomar 12, for example, most likely originated in the Sagittarius Dwarf Spheroidal but is now associated with the Milky Way. Tidal interactions like these add kinetic energy into a globular cluster, dramatically increasing the evaporation rate and shrinking the size of the cluster. The increased evaporation accelerates the process of core collapse.\nPlanets.\nAstronomers are searching for exoplanets of stars in globular star clusters. A search in 2000 for giant planets in the globular cluster 47 Tucanae came up negative, suggesting that the abundance of heavier elements\u00a0\u2013 low in globular clusters\u00a0\u2013 necessary to build these planets may need to be at least 40% of the Sun's abundance. Because terrestrial planets are built from heavier elements such as silicon, iron and magnesium, member stars have a far lower likelihood of hosting Earth-mass planets than stars in the solar neighborhood. Globular clusters are thus unlikely to host habitable terrestrial planets.\nA giant planet was found in the globular cluster Messier 4, orbiting a pulsar in the binary star system PSR B1620-26. The planet's eccentric and highly inclined orbit suggests it may have been formed around another star in the cluster, then \"exchanged\" into its current arrangement. The likelihood of close encounters between stars in a globular cluster can disrupt planetary systems; some planets break free to become rogue planets, orbiting the galaxy. Planets orbiting close to their star can become disrupted, potentially leading to orbital decay and an increase in orbital eccentricity and tidal effects. In 2024, a gas giant or brown dwarf was found to closely orbit the pulsar \"M62H\", where the name indicates that the planetary system belongs to the globular cluster Messier 62.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12867", "revid": "40781349", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12867", "title": "George Vancouver", "text": "Royal Navy officer and explorer (1757\u20131798)\nCaptain George Vancouver (; 22 June 1757 \u2013 10 May 1798) was a Royal Navy officer and explorer best known for leading the Vancouver Expedition, which explored and charted North America's northwestern Pacific Coast regions, including the coasts of what became the Canadian province of British Columbia and the U.S. states of Alaska, Washington, Oregon and California. The expedition also explored the Hawaiian Islands and the southwest coast of Australia.\nVarious places named for Vancouver include Vancouver Island, the city of Vancouver in British Columbia, Vancouver River on the Sunshine Coast of British Columbia, Vancouver, Washington, in the United States, Mount Vancouver on the Canadian\u2013US border between Yukon and Alaska, and New Zealand's fourth-highest mountain, also Mount Vancouver.\nEarly life.\nVancouver was born on 22 June 1757 in the seaport town of King's Lynn in Norfolk, England. He was the sixth and youngest child of John Jasper Vancouver, a Dutch-born deputy collector of customs, and Bridget Berners. The surname Vancouver comes from Coevorden, Drenthe province, Netherlands (Koevern in Dutch Low Saxon).\nCareer.\nRoyal Navy.\nIn 1771, at age 13, Vancouver entered the Royal Navy as a \"young gentleman\", a future candidate for midshipman. He was nominally classified as an able seaman (AB), but sailed as one of the midshipmen aboard , on James Cook's second voyage (1772\u20131775) searching for \"Terra Australis\". He also sailed with Cook's third voyage (1776\u20131780), this time aboard \"Resolution\"'s companion ship, , and was present during the first European sighting and exploration of the Hawaiian Islands.\nUpon his return to Britain in October 1780, Vancouver was commissioned as a lieutenant and posted aboard the sloop , initially on escort and patrol duty in the English Channel and North Sea. He accompanied the ship when it left Plymouth on 11 February 1782 for the West Indies. On 7 May 1782 he was appointed fourth lieutenant of the 74-gun ship of the line , which was at the time part of the British West Indies Fleet and assigned to patrolling the French-held Leeward Islands. Vancouver subsequently saw action at the Battle of the Saintes (April 1782), wherein he distinguished himself. Vancouver returned to England in June 1783.\nNootka Crisis.\nIn the late 1780s, the Spanish Empire commissioned an expedition to the Pacific Northwest. In 1789, the Nootka Crisis developed, and Spain and Britain came close to war over ownership of Nootka Sound on contemporary Vancouver Island, and \u2013 of greater importance \u2013 over the right to colonise and settle the Pacific Northwest coast. Henry Roberts had recently taken command of the survey ship (a new vessel named in honour of the ship on Cook's voyage) with the prospect of another round-the-world voyage, and Roberts selected Vancouver as his first lieutenant, but they both were then posted to other warships due to the crisis. Vancouver went with Joseph Whidbey to the 74-gun ship of the line . When the first Nootka Convention ended the crisis in 1790, Vancouver was given command of \"Discovery\" to take possession of Nootka Sound and to survey the coasts.\nExplorations.\nVancouver Expedition.\nDeparting England with two ships, HMS \"Discovery\" and , on 1 April 1791, Vancouver commanded an expedition charged with exploring the Pacific region. In its first year the expedition travelled to Cape Town, Australia, New Zealand, Tahiti, and Hawaii (then known as the Sandwich Islands), collecting botanical samples and surveying coastlines along the way. He formally claimed at Possession Point, King George Sound Western Australia, which became the town of Albany, Western Australia, for the British. Proceeding to North America, Vancouver followed the coasts of modern-day Oregon and Washington northward. In April 1792 he encountered American Captain Robert Gray off the coast of Oregon just prior to Gray's sailing up the Columbia River.\nVancouver entered the Strait of Juan de Fuca, between Vancouver Island and the modern Washington state mainland, on 29 April 1792. His orders included a survey of every inlet and outlet on the west coast of the mainland, all the way north to Alaska. Most of this work was in small craft propelled by both sail and oar; manoeuvring larger sail-powered vessels in uncharted waters was generally impractical and dangerous.\nVancouver named many features for his officers, friends, associates, and his ship \"Discovery\", including:\nAfter a Spanish expedition in 1791, Vancouver was the second European to enter Burrard Inlet on 13 June 1792, naming it for his friend Sir Harry Burrard. It is the modern-day main harbour area of the City of Vancouver beyond Stanley Park. He surveyed Howe Sound and Jervis Inlet over the next nine days. Then, on his 35th birthday on 22 June 1792, he returned to Point Grey, the present-day location of the University of British Columbia. Here he unexpectedly met a Spanish expedition led by Dionisio Alcal\u00e1 Galiano and Cayetano Vald\u00e9s y Flores. Vancouver was \"mortified\" (\"his word\") to learn they already had a crude chart of the Strait of Georgia based on the 1791 exploratory voyage of Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Narv\u00e1ez the year before, under command of Francisco de Eliza. For three weeks they cooperatively explored the Georgia Strait and the Discovery Islands area before sailing separately towards Nootka Sound.\nAfter the summer surveying season ended, in August 1792, Vancouver went to Nootka, then the region's most important harbour, on contemporary Vancouver Island. Here he was to receive any British buildings and lands returned by the Spanish from claims by Francisco de Eliza for the Spanish crown. The Spanish commander, Juan Francisco Bodega y Quadra, was very cordial and he and Vancouver exchanged the maps they had made, but no agreement was reached; they decided to await further instructions. At this time, they decided to name the large island on which Nootka was proven to be located as \"Quadra and Vancouver Island\". Years later, as Spanish influence declined, the name was shortened to simply Vancouver Island.\nWhile at Nootka Sound Vancouver acquired Robert Gray's chart of the lower Columbia River. Gray had entered the river during the summer before sailing to Nootka Sound for repairs. Vancouver realised the importance of verifying Gray's information and conducting a more thorough survey. In October 1792, he sent Lieutenant William Robert Broughton with several boats up the Columbia River. Broughton got as far as the Columbia River Gorge, sighting and naming Mount Hood.\nVancouver sailed south along the coast of Spanish Alta California, entered San Francisco Bay, later visiting Monterey; in both places, he was warmly received by the Spanish. Later he visited Chumash villages at Point Conception and near Mission San Buenaventura. Vancouver spent the winter in continuing exploration of the Sandwich Islands, the contemporary name of the islands of Hawaii.\nFurther explorations.\nThe next year, 1793, he returned to British Columbia and proceeded further north, unknowingly missing the overland explorer Alexander Mackenzie by only 48 days. He got to 56\u00b030'N, having explored north from Point Menzies in Burke Channel to the northwest coast of Prince of Wales Island. He sailed around the latter island, as well as circumnavigating Revillagigedo Island and charting parts of the coasts of Mitkof, Zarembo, Etolin, Wrangell, Kuiu and Kupreanof Islands. With worsening weather, he sailed south to Alta California, hoping to find Bodega y Quadra and fulfil his territorial mission, but the Spaniard was not there. The Spanish governor refused to let a foreign official into the interior. Vancouver noted that the region's \"only defenses against foreign attack are a few poor cannons\". He again spent the winter in the Sandwich Islands.\nIn 1794, he first went to Cook Inlet, the northernmost point of his exploration, and from there followed the coast south. Boat parties charted the east coasts of Chichagof and Baranof Islands, circumnavigated Admiralty Island, explored to the head of Lynn Canal, and charted the rest of Kuiu Island and nearly all of Kupreanof Island. He then set sail for Great Britain by way of Cape Horn, returning in September 1795, thus completing a circumnavigation of South America.\nLater life.\nImpressed by the view from Richmond Hill, Vancouver retired to Petersham, then in Surrey and part of modern London.\nVancouver faced difficulties when he returned home to England. The accomplished and politically well-connected naturalist Archibald Menzies complained that his servant had been pressed into service during a shipboard emergency; sailing master Joseph Whidbey had a competing claim for pay as expedition astronomer; and Thomas Pitt, 2nd Baron Camelford, whom Vancouver had disciplined for numerous infractions and eventually sent home in disgrace, proceeded to harass him publicly and privately.\nPitt's allies, including his cousin, Prime Minister William Pitt the Younger, attacked Vancouver in the press. Thomas Pitt took a more direct approach; on 29 August 1796 he sent Vancouver a letter heaping many insults on the head of his former captain, and challenging him to a duel. Vancouver gravely replied that he was unable \"in a private capacity to answer for his public conduct in his official duty\", and offered instead to submit to formal examination by flag officers. Pitt chose instead to stalk Vancouver, ultimately assaulting him on a London street corner. The terms of their subsequent legal dispute required both parties to keep the peace, but nothing stopped Vancouver's civilian brother Charles from interposing and giving Pitt blow after blow until onlookers restrained the attacker. Charges and counter-charges flew in the press, with the wealthy Camelford faction having the greater firepower until Vancouver, ailing from his long naval service, died.\nDeath.\nVancouver, at one time amongst Britain's greatest explorers and navigators, died in obscurity on 10 May 1798 at the age of 40, less than three years after completing his voyages and expeditions. No official cause of death was stated, as the medical records pertaining to Vancouver were destroyed; one doctor named John Naish claimed Vancouver died from kidney failure, while others believed it was a hyperthyroid condition.\nVancouver's grave is in the churchyard of St Peter's Church, Petersham, in the London Borough of Richmond upon Thames, England. The Hudson's Bay Company placed a memorial plaque in the church in 1841. His grave in Portland stone, renovated in the 1960s, is now Grade II listed in view of its historical associations.\nLegacy.\nNavigation.\nVancouver determined that the Northwest Passage did not exist at the latitudes that had long been suggested. His charts of the North American northwest coast were so extremely accurate that they served as the key reference for coastal navigation for generations. Robin Fisher, the academic vice-president of Mount Royal University in Calgary and author of two books on Vancouver, states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He put the northwest coast on the map...He drew up a map of the north-west coast that was accurate to the 9th degree, to the point it was still being used into the modern day as a navigational aid. That's unusual for a map from that early a time.\nHowever, Vancouver failed to discover two of the largest and most important rivers on the Pacific coast, the Fraser River and the Columbia River. He also missed the Skeena River near Prince Rupert in northern British Columbia. Vancouver did eventually learn of the Columbia River before he finished his survey\u2014from Robert Gray, captain of the American merchant ship that conducted the first Euroamerican sailing of the Columbia River on 11 May 1792, after first sighting it on an earlier voyage in 1788. However, neither the Columbia River nor the Fraser River were included on any of Vancouver's charts.\nStephen R. Bown noted in \"Mercator's World\" magazine's November/December 1999 issue that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;How Vancouver could have missed these rivers while accurately charting hundreds of comparatively insignificant inlets, islands, and streams is hard to fathom. What is certain is that his failure to spot the Columbia had great implications for the future political development of the Pacific Northwest...\nWhile it is difficult to comprehend how Vancouver missed the Fraser River, much of this river's delta was subject to flooding and summer freshet which prevented the captain from spotting any of its great channels as he sailed the entire shoreline from Point Roberts, Washington, to Point Grey in 1792. The Spanish expeditions to the Pacific Northwest, with the 1791 Francisco de Eliza expedition preceding Vancouver by a year, had also missed the Fraser River although they knew from its muddy plume that there was a major river located nearby.\nIndigenous peoples.\nVancouver generally established a rapport with both Indigenous peoples and European trappers. Historical records show that Vancouver enjoyed good relations with native leaders\u2014in Hawaii with King Kamehameha I, as well as in the Pacific Northwest and California. Vancouver's journals exhibit a high degree of sensitivity to the indigenous populations he encountered. He wrote of meeting the Chumash people, and of his exploration of a small island on the Californian coast on which an important burial site was marked by a sepulchre of \"peculiar character\" lined with boards and fragments of military instruments lying near a square box covered with mats. Vancouver states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nVancouver also displayed contempt in his journals towards unscrupulous western traders who provided guns to natives, writing:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nRobin Fisher notes that Vancouver's \"relationships with aboriginal groups were generally peaceful; indeed, his detailed survey would not have been possible if they had been hostile.\" While there were hostile incidents at the end of Vancouver's last season\u2014the most serious of which involved a clash with the Tlingit people at Behm Canal in southeast Alaska in 1794\u2014these were the exceptions in Vancouver's exploration of the US and Canadian Northwest coast.\nDespite a long history of warfare between Britain and Spain, Vancouver maintained excellent relations with his Spanish counterparts and even f\u00eated a Spanish sea captain aboard his ship during his 1792 trip to the Vancouver region.\nNamesakes.\nPlaces.\nMany places around the world have been named after George Vancouver, including:\nMemorials.\nMany collections were made on the voyage: one was donated by Archibald Menzies to the British Museum 1796; another made by surgeon George Goodman Hewett (1765\u20131834) was donated by Augustus Wollaston Franks to the British Museum in 1891. An account of these has been published.\n250th birthday commemorations.\n Canada Post issued a $1.55 postage stamp to commemorate the 250th anniversary of Vancouver's birth, on 22 June 2007. The stamp has an embossed image of Vancouver seen from behind as he gazes forward towards a mountainous coastline. This may be the first Canadian stamp not to show the subject's face.\nThe City of Vancouver in Canada organised a celebration to commemorate the 250th anniversary of Vancouver's birth, in June 2007 at the Vancouver Maritime Museum. The one-hour festivities included the presentation of a massive 63 by 114 centimetre carrot cake, the firing of a gun salute by the Royal Canadian Artillery's 15th Field Regiment and a performance by the Vancouver Firefighter's Band.\nVancouver's then-mayor, Sam Sullivan, officially declared 22 June 2007 to be \"George Day\".\nThe Musqueam (x\u02b7m\u0259\u03b8k\u02b7\u0259y\u0313\u0259m) Elder s\u0241\u0259ye\u026c\u0259q (Larry Grant) attended the festivities and acknowledged that some of his people might disapprove of his presence, but also noted:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Many people don't feel aboriginal people should be celebrating this occasion...I believe it has helped the world and that's part of who we are. That's the legacy of our people. We're generous to a fault. The legacy is strong and a good one, in the sense that without the first nations working with the colonials, it [B.C.] wouldn't have been part of Canada to begin with and Britain would be the poorer for it.\nOrigins of the family name.\nThere has been some debate about the origins of the Vancouver name. It is now commonly accepted that the name Vancouver derives from the expression \"van Coevorden\", meaning \"(originating) from Coevorden\", a city in the northeast of the Netherlands. This city is apparently named after the \"Coeverden\" family of the 13th\u201315th century.\nIn the 16th century, a number of businessmen from the Coevorden area (and the rest of the Netherlands) moved to England. Some of them were known as \"Van Coeverden\". Others adopted the surname Oxford, as in oxen fording (a river), which is approximately the English translation of \"Coevorden\". However, it is not the exact name of the noble family mentioned in the history books that claim Vancouver's noble lineage: that name was Coeverden not Coevorden.\nIn the 1970s, Adrien Mansvelt, a former consul-general of the Netherlands based in Vancouver, published a collation of information in both historical and genealogical journals and in the \"Vancouver Sun\" newspaper. Mansvelt's theory was later presented by the city during the Expo 86 World's Fair, as historical fact. The information was then used by historian W. Kaye Lamb in his book \"A Voyage of Discovery to the North Pacific Ocean and Round the World, 1791\u20131795\" (1984).\nW. Kaye Lamb, in summarising Mansvelt's 1973 research, observes evidence of close family ties between the Vancouver family of Britain and the Van Coeverden family of the Netherlands as well as George Vancouver's own words from his diaries in referring to his Dutch ancestry:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As the name Vancouver suggests, the Vancouvers were of Dutch origin. They were descended from the titled van Coeverden family, one of the oldest in the Netherlands. By the twelfth century, and for many years thereafter, their castle at Coevorden, in the Province of Drenthe, was an important fortress on the eastern frontier. George Vancouver was aware of this. In July 1794, he named the Lynn Canal \"after the place of my nativity\" and Point Couverden (which he spelt incorrectly) \"after the seat of my ancestors\". Vancouver's great grandfather, Reint Wolter van Couverden, was probably the first of the line to establish an English connection. While serving as a squire at one of the German courts he met Johanna (Jane) Lilingston, an English girl who was one of the ladies in waiting. They were married in 1699. Their son, Lucas Hendrik van Couverden, married Vancouver's grandmother, Sarah. In his later years he \"probably\" anglicized his name and spent most of his time in England. By the eighteenth century, the estates of the van Couverdens were mostly in the Province of Overijssel, and some of the family were living in Vollenhove, on the Zuider Zee. The English and Dutch branches kept in touch, and in 1798 (the date of Vancouver's death) George Vancouver's brother Charles would marry a kinswoman, Louise Josephine van Couverden, of Vollenhove. Both were great-grandchildren of Reint Wolter van Couverden.\"\nIn 2006 John Robson, a librarian at the University of Waikato, conducted his own research into George Vancouver's ancestry, which he published in an article in the \"British Columbia History\" journal. Robson theorises that Vancouver's forebears may have been Flemish rather than Dutch; he believes that Vancouver is descended from the Vangover family of Ipswich in Suffolk and Colchester in Essex. Those towns had a significant Flemish population in the 16th and 17th centuries.\nGeorge Vancouver named the south point of what is now Couverden Island, Alaska, \"Point Couverden\" during his exploration of the North American Pacific coast, in honour of his family's hometown of Coevorden. It is located at the western point of entry to Lynn Canal in southeastern Alaska.\nWorks by George Vancouver.\nThe Admiralty instructed Vancouver to publish a narrative of his voyage which he started to write in early 1796 in Petersham. At the time of his death the manuscript covered the period up to mid-1795. The work, \"A Voyage of Discovery to the North Pacific Ocean, and Round the World\", was completed by his brother John and published in three volumes in the autumn of 1798. A second edition was published in 1801 in six volumes. \nA modern annotated edition (1984) by W. Kaye Lamb was renamed \"The Voyage of George Vancouver 1791\u20131795\", and published in four volumes by the Hakluyt Society of London, England.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12868", "revid": "6150386", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12868", "title": "Ghaggar River", "text": ""}
{"id": "12871", "revid": "4293477", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12871", "title": "Genitalia", "text": ""}
{"id": "12872", "revid": "1071745", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12872", "title": "Great Vowel Shift", "text": "Pronunciation change in English between 1350 and 1700\nThe Great Vowel Shift was a series of pronunciation changes in the vowels of the English language that took place primarily between the 1400s and 1600s (the transition period from Middle English to Early Modern English), beginning in southern England and having influenced effectively all dialects of English today. Through this extensive vowel shift, the pronunciation of all Middle English long vowels altered. Some consonant sounds also changed, specifically becoming silent; the term \"Great Vowel Shift\" is occasionally used to include these consonantal changes.\nThe standardization of English spelling began in the 15th and 16th centuries; the Great Vowel Shift is the major reason English spellings now often deviate considerably from how they represent pronunciations. \nNotable early researchers of the Great Vowel Shift include Alexander J. Ellis, in \"On Early English Pronunciation, with Especial Reference to Shakspere and Chaucer\" (1869\u20131889); Henry Sweet, in \"A History of English Sounds\" (1874, revised edition 1888); Karl Luick from Vienna, in a series of works dating from 1892 and \"Untersuchungen zur englischen Lautgeschichte\" (1896); and Otto Jespersen (a Danish linguist and Anglicist) who first produced a diagram for it and who in Part\u00a0I (1909) of \"A Modern English Grammar on Historical Principles\" coined the term.\nCauses.\nThe causes of the Great Vowel Shift are unknown and have been a source of intense scholarly debate; as yet, there is no firm consensus. The greatest changes occurred during the 15th and 16th centuries, and their origins are at least partly phonetic.\nOverall changes.\nThe main difference between the pronunciation of Middle English in the year 1400 and Modern English (Received Pronunciation) is in the value of the long vowels.\nLong vowels in Middle English had \"continental\" values, much like those in Italian and Standard German; in standard Modern English, they have entirely different pronunciations. The differing pronunciations of English vowel letters do not stem from the Great Shift as such but rather because English spelling did not adapt to the changes.\nGerman had undergone vowel changes quite similar to the Great Shift slightly earlier. Still, the spelling was changed accordingly (e.g., Middle High German \u2192 modern German \"to bite\").\nThis timeline uses representative words to show the main vowel changes between late Middle English in the year 1400 and Received Pronunciation in the mid-20th century. The Great Vowel Shift occurred in the lower half of the table, between 1400 and 1600\u20131700.\nThe changes after 1700 are not considered part of the Great Vowel Shift. Pronunciation is given in the International Phonetic Alphabet:\nDetails.\nMiddle English vowel system.\nBefore the Great Vowel Shift, Middle English in Southern England had seven long vowels, . The vowels occurred in, for example, the words \"mite\", \"meet\", \"meat\", \"mate\", \"boat\", \"boot\", and \"bout\", respectively.\nThe words had very different pronunciations in Middle English from those in Modern English:\nIn addition, Middle English had: \nChanges.\nAfter around 1300, the long vowels of Middle English began changing in pronunciation as follows:\nThese changes occurred over several centuries and can be divided into two phases. The first phase affected the close vowels and the close-mid vowels : were raised to , and became the diphthongs or . The second phase affected the open vowel and the open-mid vowels : were raised, in most cases changing to .\nThe Great Vowel Shift changed vowels without merger, so Middle English before the vowel shift had the same number of vowel phonemes as Early Modern English after the vowel shift.\nAfter the Great Vowel Shift, some vowel phonemes began merging. Immediately after the Great Vowel Shift, the vowels of \"meet\" and \"meat\" were different, but they are merged in Modern English, and both words are pronounced as .\nHowever, during the 16th and the 17th centuries, there were many different mergers, and some mergers can be seen in individual Modern English words like \"great\", which is pronounced with the vowel as in \"mate\" rather than the vowel as in \"meat\".\nThis is a simplified picture of the changes that happened between late Middle English (late ME), Early Modern English (EModE), and today's English (ModE). Pronunciations in 1400, 1500, 1600, and 1900 are shown. To hear recordings of the sounds, click the phonetic symbols.\nBefore labial consonants and also after , did not shift, and remains as in \"soup\".\nFirst phase.\nThe first phase of the Great Vowel Shift affected the Middle English close-mid vowels , as in \"beet\" and \"boot\", and the close vowels , as in \"bite\" and \"out\". The close-mid vowels became close , and the close vowels became diphthongs. The first phase was completed in 1500, meaning that by that time, words like \"beet\" and \"boot\" had lost their Middle English pronunciation and were pronounced with the same vowels as in Modern English. The words \"bite\" and \"out\" were pronounced with diphthongs, but not the same diphthongs as in Modern English.\nScholars agree that the Middle English close vowels became diphthongs around 1500, but disagree about what diphthongs they changed to. According to Lass, the words \"bite\" and \"out\" after diphthongisation were pronounced as and , similar to American English \"bait\" and \"oat\" . Later, the diphthongs shifted to , then , and finally to Modern English . This sequence of events is supported by the testimony of orthoepists before Hodges in 1644.\nHowever, many scholars such as , , and argue for theoretical reasons that, contrary to what 16th-century witnesses report, the vowels were immediately centralised and lowered to .\nEvidence from Northern English and Scots (see below) suggests that the close-mid vowels were the first to shift. As the Middle English vowels were raised towards , they forced the original Middle English out of place and caused them to become diphthongs . This type of sound change, in which one vowel's pronunciation shifts so that it is pronounced like a second vowel, and the second vowel is forced to change its pronunciation, is called a push chain.\nHowever, according to professor J\u00fcrgen Handke, for some time, there was a phonetic split between words with the vowel and the diphthong , in words where the Middle English shifted to the Modern English . For an example, \"high\" was pronounced with the vowel , and \"like\" and \"my\" were pronounced with the diphthong . Therefore, for logical reasons, the close vowels could have diphthongised before the close-mid vowels raised. Otherwise, \"high\" would probably rhyme with \"thee\" rather than \"my\". This type of chain is called a drag chain.\nSecond phase.\nThe second phase of the Great Vowel Shift affected the Middle English open vowel , as in \"mate\", and the Middle English open-mid vowels , as in \"meat\" and \"boat\". Around 1550, Middle English was raised to . Then, after 1600, the new was raised to , with the Middle English open-mid vowels raised to close-mid .\nLater mergers.\nDuring the first and the second phases of the Great Vowel Shift, long vowels were shifted without merging with other vowels, but after the second phase, several vowels merged. The later changes also involved the Middle English diphthong , as in \"day\", which often (but not always, see the \"pane-pain\" merger) monophthongised to , and merged with Middle English as in \"mate\" or as in \"meat\".\nDuring the 16th and 17th centuries, several different pronunciation variants existed among different parts of the population for words like \"meet\", \"meat\", \"mate\", and \"day\". Different pairs or trios of words were merged in pronunciation in each pronunciation variant. Four different pronunciation variants are shown in the table below. The fourth pronunciation variant gave rise to Modern English pronunciation. In Modern English, \"meet\" and \"meat\" are merged in pronunciation and both have the vowel , and \"mate\" and \"day\" are merged with the diphthong , which developed from the 16th-century long vowel .\nModern English typically has the \"meet\"\u2013\"meat\" merger: both \"meet\" and \"meat\" are pronounced with the vowel . Words like \"great\" and \"steak\", however, have merged with \"mate\" and are pronounced with the vowel , which developed from the shown in the table above. Before historic some of these vowels merged with , , , \nNorthern English and Scots.\nThe Great Vowel Shift affected other dialects and the standard English of southern England but in different ways. In Northern England, the shift did not operate on the long back vowels because they had undergone an earlier shift. Similarly, the dialect in Scotland had a different vowel system before the Great Vowel Shift, as had shifted to in Early Scots. In the Scots equivalent of the Great Vowel Shift, the long vowels , and shifted to , and by the Middle Scots period and remained unaffected.\nThe first step in the Great Vowel Shift in Northern and Southern English is shown in the table below. The Northern English developments of Middle English and were different from Southern English. In particular, the Northern English vowels in \"bite\", in \"feet\", and in \"boot\" shifted, while the vowel in \"house\" did not. These developments below fall under the label \"older\" to refer to Scots and a more conservative and increasingly rural Northern sound, while \"younger\" refers to a more mainstream Northern sound largely emerging just since the twentieth century.\nThe vowel systems of Northern and Southern Middle English immediately before the Great Vowel Shift were different in one way. In Northern Middle English, the back close-mid vowel in \"boot\" had already shifted to front (a sound change known as fronting), like the long \"\" in German \"hear\". Thus, Southern English had a back close-mid vowel , but Northern English did not:\nIn Northern and Southern English, the first step of the Great Vowel Shift raised the close-mid vowels to become close. Northern Middle English had two close-mid vowels \u2013 in \"feet\" and in \"boot\" \u2013 which were raised to and . Later on, Northern English changed to in many dialects (though not in all, see ), so that \"boot\" has the same vowel as \"feet\". Southern Middle English had two close-mid vowels \u2013 in \"feet\" and in \"boot\" \u2013 which were raised to and .\nIn Southern English, the close vowels in \"bite\" and in \"house\" shifted to become diphthongs, but in Northern English, in \"bite\" shifted but in \"house\" did not.\nIf the vowel systems at the time of the Great Vowel Shift caused the difference between the Northern and Southern vowel shifts, did not shift because there was no back mid vowel in Northern English. In Southern English, shifting of to could have caused diphthongisation of original , but because Northern English had no back close-mid vowel to shift, the back close vowel did not diphthongise.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12873", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12873", "title": "Gilbert Abbott a Beckett", "text": ""}
{"id": "12874", "revid": "7436027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12874", "title": "Gilbert Arthur \u00e0 Beckett", "text": "English writer\nGilbert Arthur \u00e0 Beckett (April 7, 1837 \u2013 October 15, 1891) was an English writer.\nBiography.\nBeckett was born at Portland House Hammersmith, on 7 April 1837, the eldest son of the civil servant and humorist Gilbert Abbott \u00e0 Beckett and the composer Mary Anne \u00e0 Beckett, daughter of Joseph Glossop, clerk of the cheque to the hon. corps of gentlemen-at-arms.\nHis brother was Arthur William \u00e0 Beckett. \nHe graduated from Christ Church, Oxford, as a Westminster scholar in 1860.\nHe was entered at Lincoln's Inn on 15 October 1857, but gave his attention chiefly to drama, producing \"Diamonds and Hearts\" at the Haymarket Theatre in 1867; this was followed by other light comedies. \nHis adaptation of a French operetta by \u00c9mile Jonas called \"The Two Harlequins\" opened the new Gaiety Theatre, London in 1868, together with his distant cousin, W. S. Gilbert's, \"Robert the Devil\" and another piece.\nBeckett's pieces include numerous burlesques and pantomimes, the libretti of \"Savonarola\" (Hamburg, 1884) and \"The Canterbury Pilgrims\" (Drury Lane, 1884) for the music of Dr. C. V. Stanford.\nWith the composer Alfred Cellier, Beckett wrote the operetta \"Two Foster Brothers\" (St. George's Hall, 1877).\nIn 1879, he had been asked by Tom Taylor, the editor of \"Punch\", to follow the example of his younger brother Arthur, and become a regular member of the staff of \"Punch.\" \nThree years later he was 'appointed to the Table.' \nThe \"Punch\" dinners 'were his greatest pleasure, and he attended them with regularity, although the paralysis of the legs, the result of falling down the stairway of Gower Street station, rendered his locomotion, and especially the mounting of Mr. Punch's staircase, a matter of painful exertion'. \nTo \"Punch\" he contributed both prose and verse; he wrote, in greater part, the admirable parody of a boy's sensational shocker (March 1882), and he developed Jerrold's idea of humorous bogus advertisements under the heading 'How we advertise now.' \nThe idea of one of Sir John Tenniel's best cartoons for \"Punch,\" entitled 'Dropping the Pilot,' illustrative of Bismarck's resignation in 1889, was due to him.\nApart from his work on 'Punch,' he wrote songs and music for the German Reeds' entertainment, while in 1873 and 1874 he was collaborator in two dramatic productions which evoked a considerable amount of public attention.\nOn 3 March 1873, \"The Happy Land\" was given at the Court Theatre, 1873, a daring political satire and burlesque of W. S. Gilbert's \"The Wicked World\". \nIn this amusing piece of banter three statesmen (Gladstone, Lowe, and Ayrton) were represented as visiting Fairyland in order to impart to the inhabitants the secrets of popular government. The actors representing 'Mr. G.,' 'Mr. L.,' and 'Mr. A.' were dressed so as to resemble the ministers satirised, and the representation elicited a question in the House of Commons and an official visit of the Lord Chamberlain to the theatre, with the result that the actors had to change their 'make-up.'\nIn the following year, he furnished the 'legend' to Herman Merivale's tragedy 'The White Pilgrim,' first given at the Court in February 1874. \nAt the close of his life he furnished the 'lyrics' and most of the book for the operetta \"La Cigale\", which at the time of his death was nearing its four hundredth performance at the Lyric Theatre.\nIn 1889, he suffered a great shock from the death by drowning of his only son, and he died in London on 15 October 1891, and was buried in Mortlake cemetery.\nLegacy.\n\"Punch\" devoted some appreciative stanzas to his memory, bearing the epigraph 'Wearing the white flower of a blameless life' (24 Oct. 1891). His portrait appeared in the well-known drawing of 'The Mahogany Tree' (\"Punch\", Jubilee Number, 18 July 1887), and likenesses were also given in the 'Illustrated London News' and in Spielmann's 'History of Punch' (1895).\nFamily.\nHe married Emily, eldest daughter of William Hunt, J.P., of Bath, and his only daughter Minna married in 1896 Mr. Hugh Clifford, C.M.G., governor of Labuan and British North Borneo.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12875", "revid": "2844289", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12875", "title": "Glaucus (disambiguation)", "text": "In Greek mythology, Glaucus was a Greek prophetic sea-god.\nGlaucus, often transliterated to Glafkos, may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "12878", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12878", "title": "George Gordon, 1st Earl of Aberdeen", "text": "Lord Chancellor of Scotland\nGeorge Gordon, 1st Earl of Aberdeen (3 October 1637\u00a0\u2013 20 April 1720), was a Lord Chancellor of Scotland.\nEarly life.\nGordon, born on 3 October 1637, the second son of Sir John Gordon, 1st Baronet, of Haddo, Aberdeenshire, (executed in 1644);\n and his wife, Mary Forbes. He graduated MA, and was chosen professor at King's College, Aberdeen, in 1658. Subsequently, he travelled and studied civil law abroad.\nCareer.\nAt the Restoration the sequestration of his father's lands was annulled, and in 1665 he succeeded by the death of his elder brother as the \"3rd Baronet Gordon, of Haddo\" and to the family estates. He returned home in 1667, was admitted advocate in 1668 and gained a high legal reputation. He represented Aberdeenshire in the Parliament of Scotland of 1669 to 1674, the Convention of Estates of 1678 and the following parliamentary assembly of 1681/82. During his first session he strongly opposed the projected union of England and Scotland. In November 1678 he was made a Privy Counsellor for Scotland, and in 1680 was raised to the bench as Lord Haddo. He was a leading member of the Duke of York's administration, was created a Lord of the Articles in June and in November 1681 Lord President of the Privy Council. The same year he is reported as moving in the council for the torture of witnesses.\nIn 1682 he was made Lord Chancellor of Scotland, and was created, on 13 November, Earl of Aberdeen, Viscount Formartine, and Lord Haddo, Methlick, Tarves and Kellie, in the Scottish peerage, being appointed also Sheriff of Aberdeen and Sheriff of Edinburgh later the same year.\nBurnet reflected unfavourably upon him, writing of him, \"...a proud and covetous man ... the new chancellor exceeded all that had gone before him.\nHe executed the laws enforcing religious conformity with severity, and filled the parish churches, but resisted the excessive measures of tyranny prescribed by the English government; and in consequence of an intrigue of the Duke of Queensberry and Lord Perth, who gained the duchess of Portsmouth with a present of \u00a327,000, he was dismissed in 1684.\nAfter his fall he was subjected to various petty prosecutions by his victorious rivals with the view of discovering some act of maladministration on which to found a charge against him, but the investigations only served to strengthen his credit. He took an active part in parliament in 1685 and 1686, but remained a non-juror during the whole of William's reign, being frequently fined for his non-attendance, and took the oaths for the first time after Anne's accession, on 11 May 1703.\nIn the great affair of the Union in 1707, while protesting against the completion of the treaty till the act declaring the Scots aliens should be repealed, he refused to support the opposition to the measure itself and refrained from attending parliament when the treaty was settled.\nHe is described by John Mackay as, \"...very knowing in the laws and constitution of his country and is believed to be the solidest statesman in Scotland, a fine orator, speaks slow but sure.\nHis person was said to be deformed, and his \"want of mine or deportment\" was alleged as a disqualification for the office of Lord Chancellor.\nFamily.\nHe married Anne Lockhart, daughter and (eventual) sole heiress of George Lockhart of Tarbrax and Anne Lockhart. They had several children:\nHis only surviving son, William, succeeded him as 2nd earl of Aberdeen. He died on 20 April 1720, having amassed a large fortune.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nAttribution"}
{"id": "12879", "revid": "48181213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12879", "title": "George Hamilton-Gordon, 4th Earl of Aberdeen", "text": "Prime Minister of the United Kingdom from 1852 to 1855\nGeorge Hamilton-Gordon, 4th Earl of Aberdeen (28 January 1784\u00a0\u2013 14 December 1860), styled Lord Haddo from 1791 to 1801, was a British statesman, diplomat and landowner, successively a Tory, Conservative and Peelite politician and specialist in foreign affairs. He served as Prime Minister from 1852 until 1855 in a coalition between the Whigs and Peelites, with Radical and Irish support. The Aberdeen ministry was filled with powerful and talented politicians, whom Aberdeen was largely unable to control and direct. Despite his efforts to avoid this happening, his ministry took Britain into the Crimean War, and fell when the war's conduct became unpopular. Subsequently, Aberdeen retired from politics.\nBorn into a wealthy family with the largest estates in Scotland, his personal life was marked by the loss of both parents by the time he was eleven, and of his first wife after only seven years of a happy marriage. His daughters died young, and his relations with his sons were difficult. He travelled extensively in Europe, including Greece, and he had a serious interest in the classical civilisations and their archaeology. Aberdeen inherited and subsequently modernized his father's Scottish estates.\nAfter 1812 he became a diplomat, and in 1813, at age 29, was given the critically important embassy to Vienna, where he organised and financed the sixth coalition that defeated Napoleon. His rise in politics was equally rapid and lucky, and \"two accidents \u2014 Canning's death and Wellington's impulsive acceptance of the Canningite resignations\" led to his becoming Foreign Secretary for Prime Minister Wellington in 1828 despite \"an almost ludicrous lack of official experience\"; he had been a minister for less than six months. After holding the position for two years, followed by another cabinet role, by 1841 his experience led to his appointment as Foreign Secretary again under Robert Peel for a longer term. His diplomatic successes include organizing the coalition against Napoleon in 1812\u20131814, normalizing relations with post-Napoleonic France, settling the old border dispute between Canada and the United States, and ending the First Opium War with China in 1842, whereby Hong Kong was obtained. Aberdeen was a poor speaker, but this scarcely mattered in the House of Lords. He exhibited a \"dour, awkward, occasionally sarcastic exterior\". His friend William Ewart Gladstone, said of him that he was \"the man in public life of all others whom I have \"loved\". I say emphatically \"loved\". I have \"loved\" others, but never like him\".\nEarly life.\nBorn in Edinburgh on 28 January 1784, he was the eldest son of George Gordon, Lord Haddo, son of George Gordon, 3rd Earl of Aberdeen. His mother was Charlotte, youngest daughter of William Baird of Newbyth. He lost his father on 18 October 1791 and his mother in 1795, and he was brought up by Henry Dundas, 1st Viscount Melville, and William Pitt the Younger. He was educated at Harrow, and St John's College, Cambridge, where he graduated with a Master of Arts in 1804. Before this, however, he had become Earl of Aberdeen on his grandfather's death in 1801, and had travelled all over Europe. On his return to Britain, he founded the Society of Athenian Travellers. In 1805, he married Lady Catherine Elizabeth, daughter of John Hamilton, 1st Marquess of Abercorn.\nPolitical and diplomatic career, 1805\u20131828.\nIn December 1805, Lord Aberdeen took his seat as a Tory Scottish representative peer in the House of Lords. In 1808, he was created a Knight of the Thistle. Following the death of his wife from tuberculosis in 1812 he joined the Foreign Service. He was appointed Ambassador Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary to Austria, and signed the Treaty of T\u00f6plitz between Britain and Austria in Vienna in October 1813. In the company of the Austrian Emperor, Francis II, he was an observer at the decisive Coalition victory of the Battle of Leipzig in October 1813; he had met Napoleon in his earlier travels. He became one of the central diplomatic figures in European diplomacy at this time, and he was one of the British representatives at the Congress of Ch\u00e2tillon in February 1814, and at the negotiations which led to the Treaty of Paris in May of that year.\nAberdeen was greatly affected by the aftermath of war which he witnessed at first hand. He wrote home:The near approach of war and its effects are horrible beyond what you can conceive. The whole road from Prague to [Teplitz] was covered with waggons full of wounded, dead, and dying. The shock and disgust and pity produced by such scenes are beyond what I could have supposed possible...the scenes of distress and misery have sunk deeper in my mind. I have been quite haunted by them.\nReturning home he was created a peer of the United Kingdom as Viscount Gordon, of Aberdeen in the County of Aberdeen (1814), and made a member of the Privy Council.\nIn July 1815, he married his former sister-in-law Harriet, daughter of John Douglas, and widow of James Hamilton, Viscount Hamilton; the marriage was much less happy than his first. During the ensuing thirteen years Aberdeen took a less prominent part in public affairs.\nPolitical career, 1828\u20131852.\nLord Aberdeen served as Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster between January and June 1828 and subsequently as Foreign Secretary until 1830 under the Duke of Wellington. He resigned with Wellington over the Reform Bill of 1832.\nHe was Secretary of State for War and the Colonies in the first Peel ministry (December 1834 - April 1835), and again Foreign Secretary between 1841 and 1846 under Sir Robert Peel (second Peel ministry). It was during his second stint as Foreign Secretary that he had the harbor settlement of 'Little Hong Kong', on the south side of Hong Kong Island, named after him. It was probably the most productive period of his career; he settled two disagreements with the US: the northeast boundary dispute by the Webster-Ashburton Treaty (1842), and the Oregon dispute by the Oregon Treaty of 1846. He enjoyed the trust of Queen Victoria, which was still important for a Foreign Secretary. He worked closely with Henry Bulwer, his ambassador to Madrid, to help arrange marriages for Queen Isabella and her younger sister the Infanta Luisa Fernanda. They helped stabilize Spain's internal and external relations. He sought better relations with France, relying on his friendship with Guizot, but Britain was annoyed with France on a series of issues, especially French colonial policies, the right to search slave ships, the French desire to control Belgium, disputes in the Pacific and the French intervention in Morocco.\nIn opposition.\nAberdeen again followed his leader and resigned with Peel over the issue of the Corn Laws. After Peel's death in July 1850 he became the recognised leader of the Peelites. In August 1847, a general election of Parliament had been held which resulted in the election of 325 Tory/Conservative party members to Parliament. This represented 42.7% of the seats in Parliament. The main opposition to the Tory/Conservative Party was the Whig Party, which had 292 seats.\nWhile the Peelites agreed with the Whigs on issues dealing with international trade, there were other issues on which the Peelites disagreed with the Whigs. Indeed, Lord Aberdeen's own dislike of the Ecclesiastical Titles Assumption Bill, the rejection of which he failed to secure in 1851, prevented him from joining the Whig government of Lord John Russell in that year. Additionally, 113 of the members of Parliament elected in 1847 were Free Traders. These members agreed with the Peelites on the repeal of the \"Corn Laws\", but they felt that the tariffs on \"all\" consumer products should be removed.\nFurthermore, 36 members of Parliament elected in 1847 were members of the \"Irish Brigade\", who voted with the Peelites and the Whigs for the repeal of the Corn Laws because they sought an end the Great Irish Famine by means of cheaper wheat and bread prices for the poor and middle classes in Ireland. Currently, however, the Free Traders and the Irish Brigade had disagreements with the Whigs that prevented them from joining with the Whigs to form a government. Accordingly, the Tory/Conservative Party leader the Earl of Derby was asked to form a \"minority government\". Derby appointed Benjamin Disraeli as the Chancellor of the Exchequer for the minority government. The general election in July 1852 had no clear winner.\nWhen in December 1852 Disraeli submitted his budget to Parliament on behalf of the minority government, the Peelites, the Free Traders, and the Irish Brigade were all alienated by the proposed budget. Accordingly, those groups suddenly forgot their differences with the Whig Party and voted with the Whigs against the proposed budget. The vote was 286 in favour of the budget and 305 votes against the budget. Because the leadership of the minority government had made the vote on the budget vote a vote of confidence, the defeat of the Disraeli budget was a \"vote of no confidence\" in the minority government and meant its downfall. Lord Aberdeen was asked to form a new government; Gladstone became his Chancellor.\nPrime Minister, 1852\u20131855.\n Following the downfall of the Tory/Conservative minority government under Lord Derby in December 1852, Lord Aberdeen formed a new government from the coalition of Free Traders, Peelites, and Whigs that had voted no confidence in the minority government. Lord Aberdeen was able to put together a coalition that held 53.8% of the seats of Parliament. Thus Lord Aberdeen, a Peelite, became Prime Minister and headed a coalition ministry of Whigs and Peelites.\nAlthough united on international trade issues and on questions of domestic reform, his cabinet also contained Lord Palmerston and Lord John Russell, who were certain to differ on questions of foreign policy. Charles Greville wrote in his \"Memoirs\", \"In the present cabinet are five or six first-rate men of equal, or nearly equal, pretensions, none of them likely to acknowledge the superiority or defer to the opinions of any other, and every one of these five or six considering himself abler and more important than their premier\"; and Sir James Graham wrote, \"It is a powerful team, but it will require good driving\", which Aberdeen was unable to provide. During the administration, much trouble was caused by the rivalry between Palmerston and Russell, and over the course of it Palmerston managed to out-manoeuvre Russell to emerge as the Whig heir apparent. The cabinet also included a single Radical, Sir William Molesworth, but much later, when justifying to the Queen his own new appointments, Gladstone told her: \"For instance, even in Ld Aberdeen's Govt, in 52, Sir William Molesworth had been selected, at that time, a very advanced Radical, but who was perfectly harmless, &amp; took little, or no part... He said these people generally became very moderate, when they were in office\", which she admitted had been the case.\nOne of the foreign policy issues on which Palmerston and Russell disagreed was the type of relationship that Britain should have with France and especially France's ruler, Louis-Napol\u00e9on Bonaparte. Bonaparte was the nephew of the famous Napoleon Bonaparte, who had become dictator and then Emperor of France from 1804 until 1814. The younger Bonaparte had been elected to a three-year term as President of the Second Republic of France on 20 December 1848. The Constitution of the Second Republic limited the President to a single term in office. Thus, Louis Bonaparte would be unable to succeed himself and after 20 December 1851 would no longer be president. Consequently, on 2 December 1851, shortly before the end of his single three-year term in office was to expire, Bonaparte staged a coup against the Second Republic in France, disbanded the elected Constituent Assembly, arrested some of the Republican leaders, and declared himself Emperor Napoleon III of France. This coup upset many democrats in England as well as in France. Some British government officials felt that Louis Bonaparte was seeking foreign adventure in the spirit of his uncle, Napoleon I. Consequently, these officials felt that any close association with Bonaparte would eventually lead Britain into another series of wars, like the wars with France and Napoleon dating from 1793 until 1815. British relations with France had scarcely improved since 1815. As prime minister, the Earl of Aberdeen was one of these officials who feared France and Bonaparte.\nHowever, other British government officials were beginning to worry more about the rising political dominance of the Russian Empire in eastern Europe and the corresponding decline of the Ottoman Empire. Lord Palmerston at the time of Louis Bonaparte's 2 December 1851 coup was serving as the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs in the Whig government of Prime Minister Lord John Russell. Without informing the rest of the cabinet or Queen Victoria, Palmerston had sent a private note to the French ambassador endorsing Louis Bonaparte's coup and congratulating Louis Bonaparte himself on the coup. Queen Victoria and members of the Russell government demanded that Palmerston be dismissed as Foreign Minister. Russell requested Palmerston's resignation and Palmerston reluctantly provided it.\nIn February 1852, Palmerston took revenge on Russell by voting with the Conservatives in a \"no confidence\" vote against the Russell government. This brought an end to the Russell Whig government and set the stage for a general election in July 1852 which eventually brought the Conservatives to power in a minority government under the Earl of Derby. Later in the year, another problem facing the Earl of Aberdeen in the formation of his own new government in December 1852 was Lord John Russell himself. Russell was the leader of the Whig Party, the largest group in the coalition government. Consequently, Lord Aberdeen, was required to appoint Russell as the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, which he had done on 29 December 1852. However, Russell sometimes liked to use this position to speak for the whole government, as if he were the prime minister. In 1832, Russell had been nicknamed \"Finality John\" because of his statement that the 1832 Reform Act had just been approved by both the House of Commons and the House of Lords would be the \"final\" expansion of the vote in Britain. There would be no further extension of the ballot to the common people of Britain. However, as political pressure in favour of further reform had risen over the twenty years since 1832, Russell had changed his mind. Russell had said, in January 1852, that he intended to introduce a new reform bill into the House of Commons which would equalise the populations of the districts from which members of Parliament were elected. Probably as a result of their continuing feud, Palmerston declared himself against this Reform Bill of 1852. As a result, support for the bill dwindled and Russell was forced to change his mind again and not introduce any Reform Bill in 1852.\nIn order to form the coalition government, the Earl of Aberdeen had been required to appoint both Palmerston and Russell to his cabinet. Because of the controversy surrounding Palmerston's removal as Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, Palmerston could not now be appointed Foreign Minister again so soon after his removal from that position. Accordingly, on 28 December 1852, Aberdeen appointed Palmerston as Home Secretary and appointed Russell as Foreign Minister.\nThe \"Eastern Question\".\nGiven the differences of opinion within the Lord Aberdeen cabinet over the direction of foreign policy with regard to relations between Britain and France under Napoleon III, it is not surprising that debate raged within the government as Louis Bonaparte, now assuming the title of Emperor Napoleon III. As Prime Minister of the Peelite/Whig coalition government, Aberdeen eventually led Britain into war on the side of the French and Ottomans against the Russian Empire. This war would eventually be called the Crimean War, but throughout the foreign policy negotiations surrounding the dismemberment of the Ottoman Empire, which would continue throughout the middle and end of nineteenth century, the problem would be referred to as the \"Eastern Question\".\nThe cabinet was bitterly divided. Palmerston stirred up anti-reform feeling in Parliament and pro-war public opinion to out-maneuver Russell. The result was that the weak Aberdeen government went to war with Russia as the result of internal British political rivalries. Aberdeen accepted Russian arguments at face value because he sympathised with Russian interests against French pressure and was not in favour of the Crimean War. However, he was unable to resist the pressure that was being exerted on him by Palmerston's faction. In the end, the Crimean War proved to be the downfall of his government.\nThe Eastern Question flared up on 2 December 1852, with the Napoleon's coup against the Second Republic. As Napoleon III was forming his new imperial government, he sent an ambassador to the Ottoman Empire with instructions to assert France's right to protect Christian sites in Jerusalem and the Holy Land. The Ottoman Empire agreed to this condition to avoid conflict or even war with France. Aberdeen, as Foreign Secretary in 1845, had himself tacitly authorised the construction of the first Anglican church in Jerusalem, following his predecessor's commission in 1838 of the first European Consul in Jerusalem on Britain's behalf, which lead to series of successive appointments by other nations. Both resulted from Lord Shaftesbury's canvassing with substantial public support.\nNevertheless, Britain became increasingly worried about the situation in Turkey, and Prime Minister Aberdeen sent Lord Stratford de Redcliffe, a diplomat with vast experience in Turkey, as a special envoy to the Ottoman Empire to guard British interests. Russia protested the Turkish agreement with the French as a violation of the Treaty of K\u00fc\u00e7\u00fck Kaynarca of 1778, which ended the Russo-Turkish War (1768\u20131774). Under the treaty, the Russians had been granted the exclusive right to protect the Christian sites in the Holy Land. Accordingly, on 7 May 1853, the Russians sent Prince Alexander Sergeyevich Menshikov, one their premier statesmen, to negotiate a settlement of the issue. Prince Menshikov called the attention of the Turks to the fact that during the Russo-Turkish War, the Russians had occupied the Turkish-controlled provinces of Wallachia and Moldavia on the north bank of the Danube River, and he reminded them that pursuant to the Treaty of K\u00fc\u00e7\u00fck Kaynarca, the Russians had returned these \"Danubian provinces\" to Ottoman control in exchange for the right to protect the Christian sites in the Holy Land. Accordingly, the Turks reversed themselves and agreed with the Russians.\nThe French sent one of their premier ships-of-the-line, the \"Charlemagne\", to the Black Sea as a show of force. In light of the French show of force, the Turks, again, reversed themselves and recognised the French right to protect the Christian sites. Lord Stratford de Redcliffe was advising the Ottomans during this time, and later it was alleged that he had been instrumental in persuading the Turks to reject the Russian arguments.\nAs war became inevitable, Aberdeen wrote to Russell:\nThe abstract justice of the cause, although indisputable, is but a poor consolation for the inevitable calamities of all war, or for a decision which I am not without fear may prove to have been impolitic and unwise. My conscience upbraids me the more, because seeing, as I did from the first, all that was to be apprehended, it is possible that by a little more energy and vigour, not on the Danube, but in Downing Street, it might have been prevented.\nCrimean War 1853\u20131856.\nIn response this latest change of mind by the Ottomans, the Russians on 2 July 1853 occupied the Turkish satellite states of Wallachia and Moldavia, as they had during the Russo-Turkish War of 1768\u20131774. Almost immediately, the Russian troops deployed along the northern banks of the Danube River, implying that they might cross the river. Aberdeen ordered the British Fleet to Constantinople and later into the Black Sea. On 23 October 1853, the Ottoman Empire declared war on Russia. A Russian naval raid on Sinope, on 30 November 1853, resulted in the destruction of the Turkish fleet in the battle of Sinope. When Russia ignored an Anglo-French ultimatum to abandon the Danubian provinces, Britain and France declared war on Russia on 28 March 1854. In September 1854, British and French troops landed on the Crimean peninsula at Eupatoria, north of Sevastopol. The Allied troops then moved across the Alma River on 20 September 1854 at the battle of Alma and set siege to the fort of Sevastopol.\nA Russian attack on the allied supply base at Balaclava on 25 October 1854 was rebuffed. The Battle of Balaclava is noted for its famous (or rather infamous) Charge of the Light Brigade. On 5 November 1854, Russian forces tried to relieve the siege at Sevastopol and defeat the Allied armies in the field in the Battle of Inkerman. However, this attempt failed. Dissatisfaction as to the course of the war grew in England. As reports returned detailing the mismanagement of the conflict, Parliament began to investigate. On 29 January 1855, John Arthur Roebuck introduced a motion for the appointment of a select committee to enquire into the conduct of the war. This motion was carried by the large majority of 305 in favour and 148 against.\nTreating this as a vote of no confidence in his government, Aberdeen resigned, and retired from active politics, speaking for the last time in the House of Lords in 1858. In visiting Windsor Castle to resign, he told the Queen: \"Nothing could have been better, he said than the feeling of the members towards each other. Had it not been for the incessant attempts of Ld John Russell to keep up party differences, it must be acknowledged that the experiment of a coalition had succeeded admirably. We discussed future possibilities &amp; agreed that nothing remained to be done, but to offer the Govt to Ld Derby...\". The Queen continued to criticise Lord John Russell for his behaviour for the rest of his life; on his death in 1878 her journal records that he was \"A man of much talent, who leaves a name behind him, kind, &amp; good, with a great knowledge of the constitution, who behaved very well, on many trying occasions; but he was impulsive, very selfish (as shown on many occasions, especially during Ld Aberdeen's administration) vain, &amp; often reckless &amp; imprudent\".\nRelations with the United States.\nBritish-American relations had been troublesome under Palmerston, but Aberdeen proved much more conciliatory, and worked well with Daniel Webster, the American Secretary of State who was himself an Anglophile. In 1842, Aberdeen sent Lord Ashburton to Washington to settle all disputes, especially the border between Canada and Maine, the boundary along the Great Lakes, the Oregon boundary, the African slave trade, the Caroline affair about boundaries in 1837 and the Creole case of 1841 involving a slave revolt on the high seas. The Webster\u2013Ashburton Treaty of 1842 solved most of the problems amicably. Thus Maine got most of the disputed land, but Canada obtained a vital, strategic strip of land connecting it to a warm water port. Aberdeen helped solve the Oregon dispute amicably in 1846. However, as prime minister, Aberdeen had trouble with the United States. In 1854, an American naval vessel bombarded the mosquito port of Greytown, Nicaragua in retaliation for an insult; Britain protested. Later in 1846, the United States announced its intention of annexing Hawaii, and Britain not only complained but sent a naval force to make the point. Negotiations for reciprocal trade agreement between the United States and Canada dragged on for eight years until a reciprocity treaty was reached in 1854.\nLegacy.\nAberdeen was generally successful as a hard-working diplomat, but his reputation has suffered greatly because of the lack of military success in the Crimean War and from the ridicule of enemies such as Disraeli who regarded him as weak, inefficient, and cold. Before the Crimean debacle that ended his career, Aberdeen scored numerous diplomatic triumphs, starting in 1813\u201314 when as ambassador to the Austrian Empire he negotiated the alliances and financing that led to the defeat of Napoleon. In Paris, he normalized relations with the newly restored Bourbon government and convinced London it could be trusted. He worked well with top European diplomats such as his friends Klemens von Metternich in Vienna and Fran\u00e7ois Guizot in Paris. He brought Britain into the center of Continental diplomacy on critical issues, such as the local wars in Greece, Portugal, and Belgium. Simmering troubles on numerous issues with the United States were ended by friendly compromises. He played a central role in winning the Opium Wars against China, gaining control of Hong Kong in the process.\nFamily.\nLord Aberdeen married Lady Catherine Elizabeth (10 January 1784 \u2013 29 February 1812; daughter of Lord Abercorn) on 28 July 1805. They had three daughters and a son, none of whom lived to be 21:\nAfter the death of his first wife, Aberdeen remarried Harriet Douglas (granddaughter of James Douglas, 14th Earl of Morton, and of Edward Lascelles, 1st Earl of Harewood) on 8 July 1815. They had five children:\nThe Countess of Aberdeen died in August 1833. Lord Aberdeen died at Argyll House, St. James's, London, on 14 December 1860, and was buried in the family vault at Stanmore church. In 1994 the novelist, columnist, and politician Ferdinand Mount used George Gordon's life as the basis for a historical novel, \"Umbrella\".\nApart from his political career, Aberdeen was also a scholar of the classical civilisations, who published \"An Inquiry into the Principles of Beauty in Grecian Architecture\" (London, 1822) and was referred to by his cousin Lord Byron in his \"English Bards and Scotch Reviewers\" (1809) as \"the travell'd thane, Athenian Aberdeen\". He was appointed Chancellor of the University of Aberdeen in 1827 and was President of the Society of Antiquaries of London.\nReligious interests.\nAberdeen's biographer Muriel Chamberlain summarises, \"Religion never came easy to him\". In his Scots landowning capacity \"North of the border, he considered himself \"ex officio\" a Presbyterian\". In England \"he privately considered himself an Anglican\"; as early as 1840 he told Gladstone he preferred what Aberdeen called \"the sister church [of England]\" and when in London worshipped at St James's Piccadilly. He was ultimately buried in the Anglican parish church at Stanmore, Middlesex.\nHe was a member of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland from 1818 to 1828 and exercised his existing rights to present ministers to parishes on his Scottish estates through a time when the right of churches to veto the appointment or 'call' of a minister became so contentious as to lead in 1843 to the schism known as \"the Disruption\" when a third of ministers broke away to form the Free Church of Scotland. In the House of Lords, in 1840 and 1843, he raised two Compromise Bills to allow presbyteries but not congregations the right of veto. The first failed to pass (and was voted against by the General Assembly) but the latter, raised post-schism, became law for Scotland and remained in force until patronage of Scots livings was abolished in 1874.\nIt was under his prime ministership that the revival of the Convocations of Canterbury and York began, though they did not obtain their potential power until 1859.\nHe is said in the last few months of his life, after the Crimean War, to have declined to contribute to building a church on his Scotland estates because of a sense of guilt in having \"shed much blood\", citing biblically King David's being forbidden to build the Temple in Jerusalem.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12880", "revid": "38318840", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12880", "title": "GnuCash", "text": "Personal and small-business financial-accounting software\nGnuCash is an accounting program that implements a double-entry bookkeeping system. It was initially aimed at developing capabilities similar to Intuit, Inc.'s Quicken application, but also has features for small business accounting. Recent development has been focused on adapting to modern desktop support-library requirements.\nGnuCash is part of the GNU Project, and runs on Linux, GNU, OpenBSD, FreeBSD, Solaris, macOS, and other Unix-like platforms. A Microsoft Windows (2000 or newer) port was made available starting with the 2.2.0 series.\nGnuCash includes scripting support via Scheme, mostly used for creating custom reports.\nHistory.\nProgramming on GnuCash began in 1997, and its first stable release was in 1998. Small Business Accounting was added in 2001. A Mac installer became available in 2004. A Windows port was released in 2007.\nGnuCash for Android and GnuCash Mobile.\nGnuCash for Android was initially developed as part of a Google Summer of Code Project. This was an expense-tracking companion app for GnuCash, as opposed to a stand-alone accounting package, and is now discontinued. Currently, there are more than 100,000 downloads on the Play Store. \nIn 2022 a companion version dubbed GnuCash Mobile is also available on the App Store and Play Store and unlike previous iterations was released under the MIT License. GnuCash Mobile is developed using Flutter. Beyond mentoring the original GnuCash for Android developer and providing some publicity there was no connection between Gnucash for Android and the GnuCash project, nor is there any for the current so-called GnuCash Mobile app.\nBackwards compatibility issues.\nGnuCash maintains the ability to read older data files between major releases, as long as major releases are not skipped. If a user wishes to access historical data saved in old GnuCash files, they must install intermediate versions of GnuCash. For example, upgrading from 2.2 to 4.1 may not be possible; the user should upgrade from 2.2.9 to 2.4.15, then to 2.6.21, then 3.11, then 4.1.\nThe other alternative is for users to export transactions files to a CSV format prior to upgrading GnuCash. Exporting of the account tree must be done as a separate step.\nTechnical design.\nGnuCash is written primarily in C, with a small fraction in Scheme. One of the available features is pure fixed-point arithmetic to avoid rounding errors which would arise with floating-point arithmetic. This feature was introduced with version 1.6.\nUsers.\nUsers on the GnuCash mailing list have reported using it for the United States 501(c)(3) non-profit organizations successfully. However, the reports need to be exported and edited.\nIn April 2011, the Minnesota State Bar Association made their GnuCash trust accounting guide freely available in PDF format.\nDownload statistics.\nAs of July 2018, SourceForge shows a count of over 6.3 million downloads of the stable releases starting from November 1999 Also, SourceForge shows that current downloads are running at ~7,000 per week. This does not include other software download sites as well as Linux distributions that provide download from their own repositories.\nProject status.\nOpen Hub's analysis based on commits up to May 2018 (noninclusive) concluded that the project has a mature, well-established code base with increasing year-over-year development activity. Moreover, \"Over the past twelve months, 51 developers contributed new code to GnuCash. This is one of the largest open-source teams in the world, and is in the top 2% of all project teams on Open Hub.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12881", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12881", "title": "George Robert Aberigh-Mackay", "text": "British author and educationalist resident (1848\u20131881)\nGeorge Robert Aberigh-Mackay (25 July 1848\u00a0\u2013 12 January 1881) was a British educationalist and writer resident in India during his short adult life.\nBiography.\nGeorge Robert Aberigh-Mackay was the son of the Reverend James Aberigh-Mackay D.D., B.D. and his first wife Lucretia Livingston n\u00e9e Reed. He was educated privately in Scotland, and then at Magdalen College School, Oxford and St Catharine's College, Cambridge. Entering the Indian education department in the North-Western Provinces in 1870, he became professor of English literature in Delhi College in 1873, tutor to the Raja of Rutlam in 1876, and principal of the Rajkumar College at Indore in 1877. He was appointed fellow of Calcutta University in 1880.\nHe wrote a number of educational works, and extensive manuals giving first-hand data about the princely states and their rulers. He also wrote, mainly for \"The Pioneer\" newspaper, but also for other English and Indian papers, including letters in the Bombay Gazette under the nom de plume \"The Political Orphan\".\nHe is best known for his book \"Twenty-one Days in India\" (1878\u20131879), a satire upon Anglo-Indian society and modes of thought. This book gave promise of a successful literary career, but the author died at the age of thirty-three.\nOn 8 January 1881 he developed symptoms of tetanus after playing polo and tennis on the previous 2 days, and died on 12 January 1881 in Indore.\nFamily.\nGeorge Robert Aberigh-Mackay married Mary Ann Louisa Cherry on 13 October 1873 at Simla, Bengal, India; their children were:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12882", "revid": "44655768", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12882", "title": "Gallon", "text": "Units of volume\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nThe gallon is a unit of volume in British imperial units and United States customary units.\nThe imperial gallon (imp gal) is defined as , and is or was used in the United Kingdom and its former colonies, including Ireland, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, India, South Africa, Malaysia and some Caribbean countries, while the US gallon (US gal) is defined as , and is used in the United States and some Latin American and Caribbean countries.\nThere are four gills in a pint, two pints in a quart, and four quarts (\"quarter\" gallons) in a gallon, with the imperial gill being divided into five imperial fluid ounces and the US gill being divided into four US fluid ounces: this, and a slight difference in the sizes of the imperial fluid ounce and the US fluid ounce, give different sizes for the imperial gallon and US gallon.\nThe IEEE standard symbol for both the imperial and US gallons is gal, not to be confused with the gal (symbol: Gal), a CGS unit of acceleration.\nDefinitions.\nThe gallon currently has two definitions, in the imperial system and in the US customary system. \nHistorically, there were many definitions and redefinitions: see for details.\nImperial gallon.\nThe British imperial gallon (frequently called simply \"gallon\") is defined as exactly 4.54609 litres. It is used in Britain and some other Commonwealth countries, and until 1976 was defined as the volume of water at whose mass is . \nThere are four imperial quarts in a gallon, two imperial pints in a quart, and 20 imperial fluid ounces in an imperial pint, making an imperial fluid ounce of an imperial gallon.\nUS gallon.\nThe US gallon (frequently called simply \"gallon\") is legally defined as exactly 231 cubic inches, i.e. .\nA US gallon contains of water at , making it % of an imperial gallon. There are four quarts in a gallon, two pints in a quart and 16 US fluid ounces in a US pint, making the US fluid ounce of a US gallon.\nIn order to overcome the effects of expansion and contraction with temperature when using a gallon to specify a quantity of material for purposes of trade, it is common to define the temperature at which the material will occupy the specified volume. For example, the volume of petroleum products and alcoholic beverages are both referenced to in government regulations.\nWorldwide usage.\nImperial gallon.\nAs of 2021, the imperial gallon continues to be used as the standard petrol unit on 10 Caribbean island groups, consisting of:\nAll 12 of the Caribbean islands use miles per hour for speed limits signage, and drive on the left side of the road.\nThe Dubai Electricity and Water Authority switched Dubai's water billing from imperial gallons to cubic metres in March 2025. \nThe United Arab Emirates ceased selling petrol by the imperial gallon in 2010 and switched to the litre, with Guyana following suit in 2013. In 2014, Myanmar switched from the imperial gallon to the litre.\nAntigua and Barbuda has proposed switching to selling petrol by litres since 2015.\nIn the European Union the gallon was removed from the list of legally defined primary units of measure catalogue in the EU directive 80/181/EEC for trading and official purposes, effective from 31 December 1994. Under the directive the gallon could still be used, but only as a supplementary or secondary unit. \nAs a result of the EU directive Ireland and the United Kingdom passed legislation to replace the gallon with the litre as a primary unit of measure in trade and in the conduct of public business, effective from 31 December 1993 and 30 September 1995, respectively. Though the gallon has ceased to be a primary unit of trade, it can still be legally used in both the UK and Ireland as a supplementary unit. However, barrels and large containers of beer, oil and other fluids are commonly measured in multiples of an imperial gallon. \nMiles per imperial gallon is used as the primary fuel economy unit in the United Kingdom and as a supplementary unit in Canada on official documentation.\nUS gallon.\nOther than the United States, petrol is sold by the US gallon in seven other countries and four US territories:\nBoth imperial and US gallon.\nBoth the imperial gallon and the US gallon are used in the Turks and Caicos Islands, due to an increase in tax duties which was disguised by levying the same duty on the US gallon (3.79 L) as was previously levied on the imperial gallon (4.55 L), and the Bahamas.\nLegacy.\nIn some parts of the Middle East, such as the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain, 18.9-litre water cooler bottles are marketed as five-gallon bottles.\nRelationship to other units.\nBoth the US gallon and imperial gallon are divided into four quarts (\"quarter\" gallons), which in turn are divided into two pints, which in turn are divided into two cups (not in customary use outside the US), which in turn are further divided into two gills. Thus, both gallons are equal to four quarts, eight pints, sixteen cups, or thirty-two gills.\nThere is a difference in that the imperial gill is divided into five fluid ounces, whereas the US gill is divided into four fluid ounces: this means that an imperial fluid ounce is of an imperial pint or of an imperial gallon, while a US fluid ounce is of a US pint or of a US gallon. \nAs an imperial fluid ounce is % of a US fluid ounce, this means that one imperial gallon, quart, pint, cup and gill are all equal to of their US counterparts.\nHistorically, a common bottle size for liquor in the US was the \"fifth\", i.e. one-fifth of a US gallon (or 0.08% more than a \"reputed quart\", one-sixth of an imperial gallon). While spirit sales in the US were switched to metric measures in 1976, a 750 mL bottle is still sometimes known as a \"fifth\".\nUS dry gallon.\nThe US dry gallon was defined as one-eighth of a US \"Winchester\" bushel of exactly cubic inches, i.e. 268.8025 cubic inches or . \nThe US dry gallon is no longer used, and is no longer included in the relevant statute, which goes from the dry quart to the peck.\nHistory.\nThe term derives most immediately from \"galun\", \"galon\" in Old Norman French, but the usage was common in several languages, for example in Old French and (bowl) in Old English. This suggests a common origin in Romance Latin, but the ultimate source of the word is unknown.\nThe gallon originated as the basis of systems for measuring wine and beer in England. The sizes of gallon used in these two systems were different from each other: the first was based on the wine gallon (equal in size to the US gallon), and the second was based on the ale gallon (1.65% larger than the imperial gallon).\nBy the end of the 18th century, there were three definitions of the gallon in common use:\nThe \"corn\" or \"dry gallon\" was used in the United States for grain and other dry commodities until the 1990s. It was one-eighth of the (Winchester) bushel, originally defined as a cylindrical measure of inches in diameter and 8\u00a0inches in depth, which made the bushel . The bushel was later redefined to be 2,150.42\u00a0cubic inches exactly, thus making its gallon exactly (); in previous centuries, there had been a corn gallon of between 271 and 272 cubic inches.\nThe \"wine gallon\" was legally adopted as the standard US gallon in 1836. Some sources relate this to the volume occupied by eight medieval merchants' pounds of wine: this was at one time defined as the volume of a cylinder 6 inches deep and 7 inches in diameter, i.e. . It was redefined in 1706 during the reign of Queen Anne as being exactly , the earlier definition with \u03c0 being approximated as .\nformula_1\nAlthough the wine gallon had been used for centuries for import duty purposes, there was no legal standard of it in the Exchequer, and a smaller gallon of () was actually in use, which required this statute to resolve these issues: remains the definition of a gallon in the US today.\nIn 1824, Britain adopted the \"imperial gallon\", and abolished all other gallons in favour of it. The imperial gallon was defined as the volume of 10 pounds of distilled water weighed in air with brass weights with the barometer standing at and at a temperature of , which was calculated as (or to ten significant figures).\nThis value lasted until 1889, when an Order in Council of November 28 of that year redefined the imperial gallon as (or to ten significant figures). \nIn 1963, the definition was again refined as the space occupied by 10 pounds of distilled water of density weighed in air of density against weights of density 8.136 g/mL (the original \"brass\" was refined as the densities of brass alloys vary depending on metallurgical composition), which was calculated as (\u2248\u00a0) to ten significant figures.\nThe definition of exactly cubic decimetres (also or \u2248\u00a0) came after the litre was redefined in 1964: this value was adopted shortly afterwards in Canada, and was adopted in 1976 in the United Kingdom.\nSizes of gallons.\nHistorically, gallons of various sizes were used in many parts of Western Europe. In these localities, it has been replaced as the unit of capacity by the litre.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12883", "revid": "17350134", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12883", "title": "Gini coefficient", "text": "Measure of inequality of a statistical distribution\nIn economics, the Gini coefficient ( ), also known as the Gini index or Gini ratio, is a measure of statistical dispersion intended to represent the income inequality, the wealth inequality, or the consumption inequality within a nation or a social group. It was developed by Italian statistician and sociologist Corrado Gini.\nThe Gini coefficient measures the inequality among the values of a frequency distribution, such as income levels. A Gini coefficient of 0 reflects perfect equality, where all income or wealth values are the same. In contrast, a Gini coefficient of 1 (or 100%) reflects maximal inequality among values, where a single individual has all the income while all others have none.\nCorrado Gini proposed the Gini coefficient as a measure of inequality of income or wealth. For OECD countries in the late 20th century, considering the effect of taxes and transfer payments, the income Gini coefficient ranged between 0.24 and 0.49, with Slovakia being the lowest and Mexico the highest. African countries had the highest pre-tax Gini coefficients in 2008\u20132009, with South Africa having the world's highest, estimated to be 0.63 to 0.7. However, this figure drops to 0.52 after social assistance is taken into account and drops again to 0.47 after taxation. Slovakia has the lowest Gini coefficient, with a Gini coefficient of 0.232. Various sources have estimated the Gini coefficient of the global income in 2005 to be between 0.61 and 0.68.\nThere are multiple issues in interpreting a Gini coefficient, as the same value may result from many different distribution curves. The demographic structure should be taken into account to mitigate this. Countries with an aging population or those with an increased birth rate experience an increasing pre-tax Gini coefficient even if real income distribution for working adults remains constant. Many scholars have devised over a dozen variants of the Gini coefficient.\nHistory.\nThe Italian statistician Corrado Gini developed the Gini coefficient and published it in his 1912 paper \"Variabilit\u00e0 e mutabilit\u00e0\" (). Building on the work of American economist Max Lorenz, Gini proposed using the difference between the hypothetical straight line depicting perfect equality and the actual line depicting people's incomes as a measure of inequality. In this paper, he introduced the concept of simple mean difference as a measure of variability.\nHe then applied the simple mean difference of observed variables to income and wealth inequality in his work \"On the measurement of concentration and variability of characters\" in 1914. Here, he presented the concentration ratio, which further developed into today's Gini coefficient. Secondly, Gini observed that improving methods introduced by Lorenz, Chatelain, or S\u00e9ailles could also achieve his proposed ratio.\nIn 1915, Gaetano Pietra introduced a geometrical interpretation between Gini's proposed ratio and between the observed area of concentration and maximum concentration. This altered version of the Gini coefficient became the most commonly used inequality index in upcoming years.\nAccording to data from the OECD, the Gini coefficient was first officially used country-wide in Canada in the 1970s. Canadian index of income inequality ranged from 0.303 to 0.284 from 1976 to the end of the 1980s. The OECD has published more data on countries since the start of the 21st century. The Central European countries of Slovenia, Czechia, and Slovakia have had the lowest inequality index of all OECD countries ever since the 2000s. Scandinavian countries also frequently appeared at the top of the equality list in recent decades.\nDefinition.\nThe Gini coefficient is an index for the degree of inequality in the distribution of income/wealth, used to estimate how far a country's wealth or income distribution deviates from an equal distribution.\nThe Gini coefficient is usually defined mathematically based on the Lorenz curve, which plots the proportion of the total income of the population (y-axis) that is cumulatively earned by the bottom \"x\" of the population (see diagram). The line at 45 degrees thus represents perfect equality of incomes. The Gini coefficient can then be thought of as the ratio of the area that lies between the line of equality and the Lorenz curve (marked \"A\" in the diagram) over the total area under the line of equality (marked \"A\" and \"B\" in the diagram); i.e., G \n \"A\"/(\"A\" + \"B\"). If there are no negative incomes, it is also equal to 2\"A\" and 1 \u2212 2\"B\" due to the fact that \"A\" + \"B\" \n 0.5.\nAssuming non-negative income or wealth for all, the Gini coefficient's theoretical range is from 0 (total equality) to 1 (absolute inequality). This measure is often rendered as a percentage, spanning 0 to 100. However, if negative values are factored in, as in cases of debt, the Gini index could exceed 1. Typically, we presuppose a positive mean or total, precluding a Gini coefficient below zero.\nAn alternative approach is to define the Gini coefficient as half of the relative mean absolute difference, which is equivalent to the definition based on the Lorenz curve. The mean absolute difference is the average absolute difference of all pairs of items of the population, and the relative mean absolute difference is the mean absolute difference divided by the average, formula_1, to normalize for scale. If \"x\"\"i\" is the wealth or income of person \"i\", and there are \"n\" persons, then the Gini coefficient \"G\" is given by:\nformula_2\nWhen the income (or wealth) distribution is given as a continuous probability density function \"p\"(\"x\"), the Gini coefficient is again half of the relative mean absolute difference:\nformula_3\nwhere formula_4 is the mean of the distribution, and the lower limits of integration may be replaced by zero when all incomes are positive.\nCalculation.\nWhile the income distribution of any particular country will not correspond perfectly to the theoretical models, these models can provide a qualitative explanation of the income distribution in a nation given the Gini coefficient.\nExample: Two levels of income.\nThe extreme cases are represented by the most equal possible society in which every person receives the same income (\"G\" \n 0), and the most unequal society (with \"N\" individuals) where a single person receives 100% of the total income and the remaining \"N\" \u2212 1 people receive none (\"G\" \n 1 \u2212 1/\"N\").\nA simple case assumes just two levels of income, low and high. If the high income group is a proportion \"u\" of the population and earns a proportion \"f\" of all income, then the Gini coefficient is \"f\" \u2212 \"u\". A more graded distribution with these same values \"u\" and \"f\" will always have a higher Gini coefficient than \"f\" \u2212 \"u\".\nFor example, if the wealthiest \"u =\" 20% of the population has \"f =\" 80% of all income (see Pareto principle), the income Gini coefficient is at least 60%. In another example, if \"u =\" 1% of the world's population owns \"f =\" 50% of all wealth, the wealth Gini coefficient is at least 49%.\nAlternative expressions.\nIn some cases, this equation can be applied to calculate the Gini coefficient without direct reference to the Lorenz curve. For example, (taking \"y\" to indicate the income or wealth of a person or household):\nformula_6\nThis may be simplified to:\nformula_7\nThe Gini coefficient can also be considered as half the relative mean absolute difference. For a random sample \"S\" with values formula_5, the sample Gini coefficient\nformula_9\nis a consistent estimator of the population Gini coefficient, but is not in general unbiased. In simplified form:\nformula_10\nThere does not exist a sample statistic that is always an unbiased estimator of the population Gini coefficient.\nDiscrete probability distribution.\nFor a discrete probability distribution with probability mass function formula_11 formula_12, where formula_13 is the fraction of the population with income or wealth formula_14, the Gini coefficient is:\nformula_15\nwhere\nformula_16\nIf the points with non-zero probabilities are indexed in increasing order formula_17, then:\nformula_18\nwhere\nformula_19 and formula_20 These formulas are also applicable in the limit, as formula_21\nContinuous probability distribution.\nWhen the population is large, the income distribution may be represented by a continuous probability density function \"f\"(\"x\") where \"f\"(\"x\") \"dx\" is the fraction of the population with wealth or income in the interval \"dx\" about \"x\". If \"F\"(\"x\") is the cumulative distribution function for \"f\"(\"x\"):\nformula_22\nand \"L\"(\"x\") is the Lorenz function:\nformula_23\nthen the Lorenz curve \"L\"(\"F\") may then be represented as a function parametric in \"L\"(\"x\") and \"F\"(\"x\") and the value of \"B\" can be found by integration:\nformula_24\nThe Gini coefficient can also be calculated directly from the cumulative distribution function of the distribution \"F\"(\"y\"). Defining \"\u03bc\" as the mean of the distribution, then specifying that \"F\"(\"y\") is zero for all negative values, the Gini coefficient is given by:\nformula_25\nThe latter result comes from integration by parts. \"(Note that this formula can be applied when there are negative values if the integration is taken from minus infinity to plus infinity.)\"\nThe Gini coefficient may be expressed in terms of the quantile function \"Q\"(\"F\") \"(inverse of the cumulative distribution function: Q(F(x)) = x)\"\n formula_26\nSince the Gini coefficient is independent of scale, if the distribution function can be expressed in the form \"f(x,\u03c6,a,b,c...)\" where \"\u03c6\" is a scale factor and \"a, b, c...\" are dimensionless parameters, then the Gini coefficient will be a function only of \"a, b, c...\". For example, for the exponential distribution, which is a function of only \"x\" and a scale parameter, the Gini coefficient is a constant, equal to 1/2.\nFor some functional forms, the Gini index can be calculated explicitly. For example, if \"y\" follows a log-normal distribution with the standard deviation of logs equal to formula_27, then formula_28 where formula_29 is the error function ( since formula_30, where formula_31 is the cumulative distribution function of a standard normal distribution). In the table below, some examples for probability density functions with support on formula_32 are shown. The Dirac delta distribution represents the case where everyone has the same wealth (or income); it implies no variations between incomes.\nOther approaches.\nSometimes the entire Lorenz curve is not known, and only values at certain intervals are given. In that case, the Gini coefficient can be approximated using various techniques for interpolating the missing values of the Lorenz curve. If (\"X\"\"k\", \"Y\"\"k\") are the known points on the Lorenz curve, with the \"X\"\"k\" indexed in increasing order (\"X\"\"k\" \u2013 1 &lt; \"X\"\"k\"), so that:\nIf the Lorenz curve is approximated on each interval as a line between consecutive points, then the area B can be approximated with trapezoids and:\nformula_36\nis the resulting approximation for G. More accurate results can be obtained using other methods to approximate the area B, such as approximating the Lorenz curve with a quadratic function across pairs of intervals or building an appropriately smooth approximation to the underlying distribution function that matches the known data. If the population mean and boundary values for each interval are also known, these can also often be used to improve the accuracy of the approximation.\nThe Gini coefficient calculated from a sample is a statistic, and its standard error, or confidence intervals for the population Gini coefficient, should be reported. These can be calculated using bootstrap techniques, mathematically complicated and computationally demanding even in an era of fast computers. Economist Tomson Ogwang made the process more efficient by setting up a \"trick regression model\" in which respective income variables in the sample are ranked, with the lowest income being allocated rank 1. The model then expresses the rank (dependent variable) as the sum of a constant \"A\" and a normal error term whose variance is inversely proportional to \"y\"\"k\":\nformula_37\nThus, \"G\" can be expressed as a function of the weighted least squares estimate of the constant \"A\" and that this can be used to speed up the calculation of the jackknife estimate for the standard error. Economist David Giles argued that the standard error of the estimate of \"A\" can be used to derive the estimate of \"G\" directly without using a jackknife. This method only requires using ordinary least squares regression after ordering the sample data. The results compare favorably with the estimates from the jackknife with agreement improving with increasing sample size.\nHowever, it has been argued that this depends on the model's assumptions about the error distributions and the independence of error terms. These assumptions are often not valid for real data sets. There is still ongoing debate surrounding this topic.\nGuillermina Jasso and Angus Deaton independently proposed the following formula for the Gini coefficient:\nformula_38\nwhere formula_39 is mean income of the population, Pi is the income rank P of person i, with income X, such that the richest person receives a rank of 1 and the poorest a rank of \"N\". This effectively gives higher weight to poorer people in the income distribution, which allows the Gini to meet the Transfer Principle. Note that the Jasso-Deaton formula rescales the coefficient so that its value is one if all the formula_40 are zero except one. Note however Allison's reply on the need to divide by N\u00b2 instead.\nFAO explains another version of the formula.\nGeneralized inequality indices.\nThe Gini coefficient and other standard inequality indices reduce to a common form. Perfect equality\u2014the absence of inequality\u2014exists when and only when the inequality ratio, formula_41, equals 1 for all j units in some population (for example, there is perfect income equality when everyone's income formula_42 equals the mean income formula_43, so that formula_44 for everyone). Measures of inequality, then, are measures of the average deviations of the formula_44 from 1; the greater the average deviation, the greater the inequality. Based on these observations the inequality indices have this common form:\nformula_46\nwhere \"p\"\"j\" weights the units by their population share, and \"f\"(\"r\"\"j\") is a function of the deviation of each unit's \"r\"\"j\" from 1, the point of equality. The insight of this generalized inequality index is that inequality indices differ because they employ different functions of the distance of the inequality ratios (the \"r\"\"j\") from 1.\nOf income distributions.\nGini coefficients of income are calculated on a market income and a disposable income basis. The Gini coefficient on market income\u2014sometimes referred to as a pre-tax Gini coefficient\u2014is calculated on income before taxes and transfers. It measures inequality in income without considering the effect of taxes and social spending already in place in a country. The Gini coefficient on disposable income\u2014sometimes referred to as the after-tax Gini coefficient\u2014is calculated on income after taxes and transfers. It measures inequality in income after considering the effect of taxes and social spending already in place in a country.\nFor OECD countries over the 2008\u20132009 period, the Gini coefficient (pre-taxes and transfers) for a total population ranged between 0.34 and 0.53, with South Korea the lowest and Italy the highest. The Gini coefficient (after-taxes and transfers) for a total population ranged between 0.25 and 0.48, with Denmark the lowest and Mexico the highest. For the United States, the country with the largest population among OECD countries, the pre-tax Gini index was 0.49, and the after-tax Gini index was 0.38 in 2008\u20132009. The OECD average for total populations in OECD countries was 0.46 for the pre-tax income Gini index and 0.31 for the after-tax income Gini index. Taxes and social spending that were in place in 2008\u20132009 period in OECD countries significantly lowered effective income inequality, and in general, \"European countries\u2014especially Nordic and Continental welfare states\u2014achieve lower levels of income inequality than other countries.\"\nUsing the Gini can help quantify differences in welfare and compensation policies and philosophies. However, it should be borne in mind that the Gini coefficient can be misleading when used to make political comparisons between large and small countries or those with different immigration policies (see limitations section).\nThe Gini coefficient for the entire world has been estimated by various parties to be between 0.61 and 0.68. The graph shows the values expressed as a percentage in their historical development for a number of countries.\nRegional income Gini indices.\nAccording to UNICEF, Latin America and the Caribbean region had the highest net income Gini index in the world at 48.3, on an unweighted average basis in 2008. The remaining regional averages were: sub-Saharan Africa (44.2), Asia (40.4), Middle East and North Africa (39.2), Eastern Europe and Central Asia (35.4), and High-income Countries (30.9). Using the same method, the United States is claimed to have a Gini index of 36, while South Africa had the highest income Gini index score of 67.8.\nWorld income Gini index since 1800s.\nTaking income distribution of all human beings, worldwide income inequality has been constantly increasing since the early 19th century (and will keep on increasing over the years) . There was a steady increase in the global income inequality Gini score from 1820 to 2002, with a significant increase between 1980 and 2002. This trend appears to have peaked and begun a reversal with rapid economic growth in emerging economies, particularly in the large populations of BRIC countries.\nThe table below presents the estimated world income Gini coefficients over the last 200 years, as calculated by Milanovic. \nMore detailed data from similar sources plots a continuous decline since 1988. This is attributed to globalization increasing incomes for billions of poor people, mostly in countries like China and India. Developing countries like Brazil have also improved basic services like health care, education, and sanitation; others like Chile and Mexico have enacted more progressive tax policies.\nOf social development.\nThe Gini coefficient is widely used in fields as diverse as sociology, economics, health science, ecology, engineering, and agriculture. For example, in social sciences and economics, in addition to income Gini coefficients, scholars have published education Gini coefficients and opportunity Gini coefficients.\nEducation.\nEducation Gini index estimates the inequality in education for a given population. It is used to discern trends in social development through educational attainment over time. A study across 85 countries by three World Bank economists, Vinod Thomas, Yan Wang, and Xibo Fan, estimated Mali had the highest education Gini index of 0.92 in 1990 (implying very high inequality in educational attainment across the population), while the United States had the lowest education inequality Gini index of 0.14. Between 1960 and 1990, China, India and South Korea had the fastest drop in education inequality Gini Index. They also claim education Gini index for the United States slightly increased over the 1980\u20131990 period.\nThough India's education Gini Index has been falling from 1960 through 1990, most of the population still has not received any education, while 10 percent of the population received more than 40% of the total educational hours in the nation. This means that a large portion of capable children in the country are not receiving the support necessary to allow them to become positive contributors to society. This will lead to a deadweight loss to the national society because there are many people who are underdeveloped and underutilized.\nOpportunity.\nSimilar in concept to the Gini income coefficient, the Gini opportunity coefficient measures inequality in opportunities. The concept builds on Amartya Sen's suggestion that inequality coefficients of social development should be premised on the process of enlarging people's choices and enhancing their capabilities, rather than on the process of reducing income inequality. Kovacevic, in a review of the Gini opportunity coefficient, explained that the coefficient estimates how well a society enables its citizens to achieve success in life where the success is based on a person's choices, efforts and talents, not their background defined by a set of predetermined circumstances at birth, such as gender, race, place of birth, parent's income and circumstances beyond the control of that individual.\nIn 2003, Roemer reported Italy and Spain exhibited the largest opportunity inequality Gini index amongst advanced economies.\nIncome mobility.\nIn 1978, Anthony Shorrocks introduced a measure based on income Gini coefficients to estimate income mobility. This measure, generalized by Maasoumi and Zandvakili, is now generally referred to as Shorrocks index, sometimes as Shorrocks mobility index or Shorrocks rigidity index. It attempts to estimate whether the income inequality Gini coefficient is permanent or temporary and to what extent a country or region enables economic mobility to its people so that they can move from one (e.g., bottom 20%) income quantile to another (e.g., middle 20%) over time. In other words, the Shorrocks index compares inequality of short-term earnings, such as the annual income of households, to inequality of long-term earnings, such as 5-year or 10-year total income for the same households.\nShorrocks index is calculated in several different ways, a common approach being from the ratio of income Gini coefficients between short-term and long-term for the same region or country.\nA 2010 study using social security income data for the United States since 1937 and Gini-based Shorrock's indices concludes that income mobility in the United States has had a complicated history, primarily due to the mass influx of women into the American labor force after World War II. Income inequality and income mobility trends have been different for men and women workers between 1937 and the 2000s. When men and women are considered together, the Gini coefficient-based Shorrocks index trends imply long-term income inequality has been substantially reduced among all workers, in recent decades for the United States. Other scholars, using just 1990s data or other short periods have come to different conclusions. For example, Sastre and Ayala conclude from their study of income Gini coefficient data between 1993 and 1998 for six developed economies that France had the least income mobility, Italy the highest, and the United States and Germany intermediate levels of income mobility over those five years.\nFeatures.\nThe Gini coefficient has features that make it useful as a measure of dispersion in a population, and inequalities in particular. The coefficient ranges from 0, for perfect equality, to 1, indicating perfect inequality. The Gini is based on the comparison of cumulative proportions of the population against cumulative proportions of income they receive.\nLimitations.\nRelative, not absolute.\nThe Gini coefficient is a relative measure. The Gini coefficient of a developing country can rise (due to increasing inequality of income) even when the number of people in absolute poverty decreases. This is because the Gini coefficient measures relative, not absolute, wealth.\nGini coefficients are simple, and this simplicity can lead to oversights and can confuse the comparison of different populations; for example, while both Bangladesh (per capita income of $1,693) and the Netherlands (per capita income of $42,183) had an income Gini coefficient of 0.31 in 2010, the quality of life, economic opportunity and absolute income in these countries are very different, i.e. countries may have identical Gini coefficients, but differ greatly in wealth. Basic necessities may be available to all in a developed economy, while in an undeveloped economy with the same Gini coefficient, basic necessities may be unavailable to most or unequally available due to lower absolute wealth.\nMathematical limitations.\nGini has some mathematical limitations as well. It is not additive and different sets of people cannot be averaged to obtain the Gini coefficient of all the people in the sets.\nEven when the total income of a population is the same, in certain situations two countries with different income distributions can have the same Gini index (e.g. cases when income Lorenz Curves cross). Table A illustrates one such situation. Both countries have a Gini coefficient of 0.2, but the average income distributions for household groups are different. As another example, in a population where the lowest 50% of individuals have no income, and the other 50% have equal income, the Gini coefficient is 0.5; whereas for another population where the lowest 75% of people have 25% of income and the top 25% have 75% of the income, the Gini index is also 0.5. Economies with similar incomes and Gini coefficients can have very different income distributions. Bell\u00f9 and Liberati claim that ranking income inequality between two populations is not always possible based on their Gini indices. Similarly, computational social scientist Fabian Stephany illustrates that income inequality within the population, e.g., in specific socioeconomic groups of same age and education, also remains undetected by conventional Gini indices.\nIncome Gini can conceal wealth inequality.\nA Gini index does not contain information about absolute national or personal incomes. Populations can simultaneously have very low income Gini indices and very high wealth Gini indexes. By measuring inequality in income, the Gini ignores the differential efficiency of the use of household income. By ignoring wealth (except as it contributes to income), the Gini can create the appearance of inequality when the people compared are at different stages in their life. Wealthy countries such as Sweden can show a low Gini coefficient for the disposable income of 0.31, thereby appearing equal, yet have a very high Gini coefficient for wealth of 0.79 to 0.86, suggesting an extremely unequal wealth distribution in its society. These factors are not assessed in income-based Gini.\nCountry size and granularity bias.\nGini index has a downward-bias for small populations. Counties or states or countries with small populations and less diverse economies will tend to report small Gini coefficients. For economically diverse large population groups, a much higher coefficient is expected than for each of its regions. For example, taking the world economy as a whole and income distribution for all human beings, different scholars estimate the global Gini index to range between 0.61 and 0.68.\nAs with other inequality coefficients, the Gini coefficient is influenced by the granularity of the measurements. For example, five 20% quantiles (low granularity) will usually yield a lower Gini coefficient than twenty 5% quantiles (high granularity) for the same distribution. Philippe Monfort has shown that using inconsistent or unspecified granularity limits the usefulness of Gini coefficient measurements.\nChanges in population.\nChanging income inequality, measured by Gini coefficients, can be due to structural changes in a society such as growing population (increased birth rates, aging populations, emigration, immigration) and income mobility.\nAnother limitation of the Gini coefficient is that it is not a proper measure of egalitarianism, as it only measures income dispersion. For example, suppose two equally egalitarian countries pursue different immigration policies. In that case, the country accepting a higher proportion of low-income or impoverished migrants will report a higher Gini coefficient and, therefore, may exhibit more income inequality.\nHousehold vs individual.\nThe Gini coefficient measure gives different results when applied to individuals instead of households, for the same economy and same income distributions. If household data is used, the measured value of income Gini depends on how the household is defined. The comparison is not meaningful when different populations are not measured with consistent definitions. Furthermore, changes to the household income Gini can be driven by changes in household formation, such as increased divorce rates or extended family households splitting into nuclear families.\nDeininger and Squire (1996) show that the income Gini coefficient based on individual income rather than household income is different. For example, for the United States, they found that the individual income-based Gini index was 0.35, while for France, 0.43. According to their individual-focused method, in the 108 countries they studied, South Africa had the world's highest Gini coefficient at 0.62, Malaysia had Asia's highest Gini coefficient at 0.5, Brazil the highest at 0.57 in Latin America and the Caribbean region, and Turkey the highest at 0.5 in OECD countries.\nBillionaire Thomas Kwok claimed the income Gini coefficient for Hong Kong has been high (0.434 in 2010), in part because of structural changes in its population. Over recent decades, Hong Kong has witnessed increasing numbers of small households, elderly households, and elderly living alone. The combined income is now split into more households. Many older people live separately from their children in Hong Kong. These social changes have caused substantial changes in household income distribution. The income Gini coefficient, claims Kwok, does not discern these structural changes in its society. Household money income distribution for the United States, summarized in Table C of this section, confirms that this issue is not limited to just Hong Kong. According to the US Census Bureau, between 1979 and 2010, the population of the United States experienced structural changes in overall households; the income for all income brackets increased in inflation-adjusted terms, household income distributions shifted into higher income brackets over time, while the income Gini coefficient increased.\nInstantaneous inequality vs lifetime inequality.\nThe Gini coefficient is unable to discern the effects of structural changes in populations. Expanding on the importance of life-span measures, the Gini coefficient as a point-estimate of equality at a certain time ignores life-span changes in income. Typically, increases in the proportion of young or old members of a society will drive apparent changes in equality simply because people generally have lower incomes and wealth when they are young than when they are old. Because of this, factors such as age distribution within a population and mobility within income classes can create the appearance of inequality when none exist, taking into account demographic effects. Thus a given economy may have a higher Gini coefficient at any timepoint compared to another, while the Gini coefficient calculated over individuals' lifetime income is lower than the apparently more equal (at a given point in time) economy's. Essentially, what matters is not just inequality in any particular year but the distribution composition over time.\nBenefits and income in kind.\nInaccuracies in assign monetary value to income in kind reduce the accuracy of Gini as a measurement of true inequality.\nWhile taxes and cash transfers are relatively straightforward to account for, other government benefits can be difficult to value. Benefits such as subsidized housing, medical care, and education are difficult to value objectively, as it depends on the quality and extent of the benefit. In absence of a free market, valuing these income transfers as household income is subjective. The theoretical model of the Gini coefficient is limited to accepting correct or incorrect subjective assumptions.\nIn subsistence-driven and informal economies, people may have significant income in other forms than money, for example, through subsistence farming or bartering. These forms of income tend to accrue to poor segments of populations in emerging and transitional economy countries such as those in sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, Asia, and Eastern Europe. Informal economy accounts for over half of global employment and as much as 90 percent of employment in some of the poorer sub-Saharan countries with high official Gini inequality coefficients. Schneider et al., in their 2010 study of 162 countries, report about 31.2%, or about $20 trillion, of world's GDP is informal. In developing countries, the informal economy predominates for all income brackets except the richer, urban upper-income bracket populations. Even in developed economies, 8% (United States) to 27% (Italy) of each nation's GDP is informal. The resulting informal income predominates as a livelihood activity for those in the lowest income brackets. The value and distribution of the incomes from informal or underground economy is difficult to quantify, making true income Gini coefficients estimates difficult. Different assumptions and quantifications of these incomes will yield different Gini coefficients.\nAlternatives.\nGiven the limitations of the Gini coefficient, other statistical methods are used in combination or as an alternative measure of population dispersity. For example, \"entropy measures\" are frequently used (e.g. the Atkinson index or the Theil Index and Mean log deviation as special cases of the generalized entropy index). These measures attempt to compare the distribution of resources by intelligent agents in the market with a maximum entropy random distribution, which would occur if these agents acted like non-interacting particles in a closed system following the laws of statistical physics.\nThe Ortego two-parameter model may be superior to the GINI index.\nRelation to other statistical measures.\nThere is a summary measure of the diagnostic ability of a binary classifier system that is also called the \"Gini coefficient\", which is defined as twice the area between the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve and its diagonal. It is related to the AUC (Area Under the ROC Curve) measure of performance given by formula_47 and to Mann\u2013Whitney U. Although both Gini coefficients are defined as areas between certain curves and share certain properties, there is no simple direct relationship between the Gini coefficient of statistical dispersion and the Gini coefficient of a classifier.\nThe Gini index is also related to the Pietra index \u2014 both of which measure statistical heterogeneity and are derived from the Lorenz curve and the diagonal line.\nIn certain fields such as ecology, inverse Simpson's index formula_48 is used to quantify diversity, and this should not be confused with the Simpson index formula_49. These indicators are related to Gini. The inverse Simpson index increases with diversity, unlike the Simpson index and Gini coefficient, which decrease with diversity. The Simpson index is in the range [0, 1], where 0 means maximum and 1 means minimum diversity (or heterogeneity). Since diversity indices typically increase with increasing heterogeneity, the Simpson index is often transformed into inverse Simpson, or using the complement formula_50, known as the Gini-Simpson Index.\nThe Lorenz curve is another method of graphical representation of wealth distribution. It was developed 9 years before the Gini coefficient, which quantifies the extent to which the Lorenz curve deviates from the perfect equality line (with slope of 1). The Hoover index (also known as Robin Hood index) presents the percentage of total population's income that would have to be redistributed to make the Gini coefficient equal to 0 (perfect equality).\nGini coefficients for pre-modern societies.\nIn recent decades, researchers have attempted to estimate Gini coefficients for pre-20th century societies. In the absence of household income surveys and income taxes, scholars have relied on proxy variables. These include wealth taxes in medieval European city states, patterns of landownership in Roman Egypt, variation of the size of houses in societies from ancient Greece to Aztec Mexico, and inheritance and dowries in Babylonian society. Other data does not directly document variations in wealth or income but are known to reflect inequality, such as the ratio of rents to wages or of labor to capital.\nOther uses.\nAlthough the Gini coefficient is most popular in economics, it can, in theory, be applied in any field of science that studies a distribution. For example, in ecology, the Gini coefficient has been used as a measure of biodiversity, where the cumulative proportion of species is plotted against the cumulative proportion of individuals. In health, it has been used as a measure of the inequality of health-related quality of life in a population. In education, it has been used as a measure of the inequality of universities. In chemistry it has been used to express the selectivity of protein kinase inhibitors against a panel of kinases. In engineering, it has been used to evaluate the fairness achieved by Internet routers in scheduling packet transmissions from different flows of traffic. In machine learning, it has been used as a unified metric for evaluating many-versus-many (all-to-all) similarity in vector spaces across various data types, including images and text, and to show their effectiveness in guiding machine learning training sample selection, especially in sparse information settings.\nThe Gini coefficient is sometimes used for the measurement of the discriminatory power of rating systems in credit risk management.\nA 2005 study accessed US census data to measure home computer ownership and used the Gini coefficient to measure inequalities amongst whites and African Americans. Results indicated that although decreasing overall, home computer ownership inequality was substantially smaller among white households.\nA 2016 peer-reviewed study titled Employing the Gini coefficient to measure participation inequality in treatment-focused Digital Health Social Networks illustrated that the Gini coefficient was helpful and accurate in measuring shifts in inequality, however as a standalone metric it failed to incorporate overall network size.\nDiscriminatory power refers to a credit risk model's ability to differentiate between defaulting and non-defaulting clients. The formula formula_51, in the calculation section above, may be used for the final model and at the individual model factor level to quantify the discriminatory power of individual factors. It is related to the accuracy ratio in population assessment models.\nThe Gini coefficient has also been applied to analyze inequality in dating apps.\nKaminskiy and Krivtsov extended the concept of the Gini coefficient from economics to reliability theory and proposed a Gini-type coefficient that helps to assess the degree of aging of non-repairable systems or aging and rejuvenation of repairable systems. The coefficient is defined between \u22121 and 1 and can be used in both empirical and parametric life distributions. It takes negative values for the class of decreasing failure rate distributions and point processes with decreasing failure intensity rate and is positive for the increasing failure rate distributions and point processes with increasing failure intensity rate. The value of zero corresponds to the exponential life distribution or the Homogeneous Poisson Process.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12884", "revid": "40781349", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12884", "title": "GCHQ", "text": "British signals intelligence agency\nGovernment Communications Headquarters (GCHQ) is an intelligence and security organisation responsible for providing signals intelligence (SIGINT) and information assurance (IA) to the government and armed forces of the United Kingdom. Primarily based at The Doughnut in the suburbs of Cheltenham, GCHQ is the responsibility of the country's Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs (Foreign Secretary), but it is not a part of the Foreign Office and its director ranks as a Permanent Secretary.\nGCHQ was originally established after the First World War as the Government Code and Cypher School (GC&amp;CS) and was known under that name until 1946. During the Second World War it was located at Bletchley Park, where it was responsible for breaking the German Enigma codes. There are two main components of GCHQ, the Composite Signals Organisation (CSO), which is responsible for gathering information, and the National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC), which is responsible for securing the UK's own communications. The Joint Technical Language Service (JTLS) is a small department and cross-government resource responsible for mainly technical language support and translation and interpreting services across government departments. It is co-located with GCHQ for administrative purposes.\nIn 2013, GCHQ received considerable media attention when the former National Security Agency contractor Edward Snowden revealed that the agency was in the process of collecting all online and telephone data in the UK via the Tempora programme. Snowden's revelations began a spate of ongoing disclosures of global surveillance. \"The Guardian\" newspaper was forced to destroy computer hard drives with the files Snowden had given them because of the threats of a lawsuit under the Official Secrets Act. In June 2014, \"The Register\" reported that the information the government sought to suppress by destroying the hard drives related to the location of a \"beyond top secret\" GCHQ internet monitoring base in Seeb, Oman, and the close involvement of BT and Cable &amp; Wireless in intercepting internet communications.\nStructure.\nGCHQ is led by the director of GCHQ, Anne Keast-Butler, and a corporate board, made up of executive and non-executive directors. Reporting to the Corporate Board are:\nHistory.\nWorld War I.\nDuring the First World War, the British Army and Royal Navy had separate signals intelligence agencies, MI1b and NID25 (initially known as Room 40) respectively. \nInterwar period.\nIn 1919, the Cabinet's Secret Service Committee, chaired by Lord Curzon, recommended that a peacetime codebreaking agency should be created, a task which was given to the Director of Naval Intelligence, Hugh Sinclair. Sinclair merged staff from NID25 and MI1b into the new organisation, which initially consisted of around 25\u201330 officers and a similar number of clerical staff. It was titled the \"Government Code and Cypher School\" (GC&amp;CS), a cover-name which was chosen by Victor Forbes of the Foreign Office. Alastair Denniston, who had been a member of NID25, was appointed as its operational head. It was initially under the control of the Admiralty and located in Watergate House, Adelphi, London. Its public function was \"to advise as to the security of codes and cyphers used by all Government departments and to assist in their provision\", but also had a secret directive to \"study the methods of cypher communications used by foreign powers\". GC&amp;CS officially formed on 1 November 1919, and produced its first decrypt prior to that date, on 19 October.\nBefore the Second World War, GC&amp;CS was a relatively small department. By 1922, the main focus of GC&amp;CS was on diplomatic traffic, with \"no service traffic ever worth circulating\" and so, at the initiative of Lord Curzon, it was transferred from the Admiralty to the Foreign Office. GC&amp;CS came under the supervision of Hugh Sinclair, who by 1923 was both the Chief of SIS and Director of GC&amp;CS. In 1925, both organisations were co-located on different floors of Broadway Buildings, opposite St. James's Park. Messages decrypted by GC&amp;CS were distributed in blue-jacketed files that became known as \"BJs\". In the 1920s, GC&amp;CS was successfully reading Soviet Union diplomatic cyphers. However, in May 1927, during a row over clandestine Soviet support for the General Strike and the distribution of subversive propaganda, Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin made details from the decrypts public.\nWorld War II.\nDuring the Second World War, GC&amp;CS was based largely at Bletchley Park, in present-day Milton Keynes, working on understanding the German Enigma machine and Lorenz ciphers. In 1940, GC&amp;CS was working on the diplomatic codes and ciphers of 26 countries, tackling over 150 diplomatic cryptosystems. Senior staff included Alastair Denniston, Oliver Strachey, Dilly Knox, John Tiltman, Edward Travis, Ernst Fetterlein, Josh Cooper, Donald Michie, Alan Turing, Gordon Welchman, Joan Clarke, Max Newman, William Tutte, I. J. (Jack) Good, Peter Calvocoressi and Hugh Foss. The 1943 British\u2013US Communication Intelligence Agreement, BRUSA, connected the signal intercept networks of the GC&amp;CS and the US National Security Agency (NSA). Equipment used to break enemy codes included the Colossus computer. Colossus consisted of ten networked computers.\nAn outstation in the Far East, the Far East Combined Bureau, was set up in Hong Kong in 1935 and moved to Singapore in 1939. Subsequently, with the Japanese advance down the Malay Peninsula, the Army and RAF codebreakers went to the Wireless Experimental Centre in Delhi, India. The Navy codebreakers in FECB went to Colombo, Ceylon, then to Kilindini, near Mombasa, Kenya.\nPost Second World War.\nGC&amp;CS was renamed the Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ) in June 1946.\nThe organisation was at first based in Eastcote in northwest London, then in 1951 moved to the outskirts of Cheltenham, setting up two sites at Oakley and Benhall. One of the major reasons for selecting Cheltenham was that the town had been the location of the headquarters of the United States Army Services of Supply for the European Theater during the War, which built up a telecommunications infrastructure in the region to carry out its logistics tasks.\nFollowing the Second World War, US and British intelligence have shared information as part of the UKUSA Agreement. The principal aspect of this is that GCHQ and its US equivalent, the National Security Agency (NSA), share technologies, infrastructure and information.\nGCHQ ran many signals intelligence (SIGINT) monitoring stations abroad. During the early Cold War, the remnants of the British Empire provided a global network of ground stations which were a major contribution to the UKUSA Agreement; the US regarded RAF Little Sai Wan in Hong Kong as the most valuable of these. The monitoring stations were largely run by inexpensive National Service recruits, but when this ended in the early 1960s, the increased cost of civilian employees caused budgetary problems. In 1965 a Foreign Office review found that 11,500 staff were involved in SIGINT collection (8,000 GCHQ staff and 3,500 military personnel), exceeding the size of the Diplomatic Service. Reaction to the Suez War led to the eviction of GCHQ from several of its best foreign SIGINT collection sites, including the new Perkar, Ceylon site and RAF Habbaniya, Iraq. The staff largely moved to tented encampments on military bases in Cyprus, which later became the Sovereign Base Area.\nDuring the Cuban Missile Crisis, GCHQ Scarborough intercepted radio communications from Soviet ships reporting their positions and used that to establish where they were heading. A copy of the report was sent directly to the White House Situation Room, providing initial indications of Soviet intentions with regards the US naval blockade of Cuba.\nDuncan Campbell and Mark Hosenball revealed the existence of GCHQ in 1976 in an article for \"Time Out\"; as a result, Hosenball was deported from the UK. GCHQ had a very low profile in the media until 1983 when the trial of Geoffrey Prime, a KGB mole within it, created considerable media interest.\nTrade union disputes.\nIn 1984, GCHQ was the centre of a political row when, in the wake of strikes which affected Sigint collection, the Conservative government of Margaret Thatcher prohibited its employees from belonging to a trade union, asserting that membership of a union was in conflict with national security. The government offered \u00a31,000 to each employee who agreed to give up their right to union membership. Following the breakdown of talks and the failure to negotiate a no-strike agreement, a number of mass national one-day strikes were held to protest against this decision, believed by some to be the first step to wider bans on trade unions. Appeals to British courts and the European Commission of Human Rights were unsuccessful. An appeal to the International Labour Organization resulted in a decision that the government's actions were in violation of Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to Organise Convention.\nA no-strike agreement was eventually negotiated and the ban lifted by the incoming Labour government in 1997, with the Government Communications Group of the Public and Commercial Services Union (PCS) being formed to represent interested employees at all grades. In 2000, a group of 14 former GCHQ employees, who had been dismissed after refusing to give up their union membership, were offered re-employment, which three of them accepted.\nThe legal case \"Council of Civil Service Unions v Minister for the Civil Service\" is significant beyond the dispute, and even beyond trade union law, in that it held for the first time that the royal prerogative is generally subject to judicial review, although the House of Lords ruled in favour of the Crown in this instance on grounds of national security.\nPost Cold War.\n1990s: Post\u2013Cold War restructuring.\nThe Intelligence Services Act 1994 formalised the activities of the intelligence agencies for the first time, defining their purpose, and the British Parliament's Intelligence and Security Committee was given a remit to examine the expenditure, administration and policy of the three intelligence agencies. The objectives of GCHQ were defined as working as \"in the interests of national security, with particular reference to the defence and foreign policies of Her Majesty's government; in the interests of the economic wellbeing of the United Kingdom; and in support of the prevention and the detection of serious crime\". During the introduction of the Intelligence Agency Act in late 1993, the former Prime Minister Jim Callaghan had described GCHQ as a \"full-blown bureaucracy\", adding that future bodies created to provide oversight of the intelligence agencies should \"investigate whether all the functions that GCHQ carries out today are still necessary.\"\nIn late 1993 civil servant Michael Quinlan advised a deep review of the work of GCHQ following the conclusion of his \"Review of Intelligence Requirements and Resources\", which had imposed a 3% cut on the agency. The Chief Secretary to the Treasury, Jonathan Aitken, subsequently held face to face discussions with the intelligence agency directors to assess further savings in the wake of Quinlan's review. Aldrich (2010) suggests that Sir John Adye, the then Director of GCHQ performed badly in meetings with Aitken, leading Aitken to conclude that GCHQ was \"suffering from out-of-date methods of management and out-of-date methods for assessing priorities\". GCHQ's budget was \u00a3850\u00a0million in 1993 (\u00a3 as of 2023) compared to \u00a3125\u00a0million for the Security Service and SIS (MI5 and MI6). In December 1994 the businessman Roger Hurn was commissioned to begin a review of GCHQ, which was concluded in March 1995. Hurn's report recommended a cut of \u00a3100\u00a0 million in GCHQ's budget; such a large reduction had not been suffered by any British intelligence agency since the end of World War II. The J Division of GCHQ, which had collected SIGINT on Russia, disappeared as a result of the cuts. The cuts had been mostly reversed by 2000 in the wake of threats from violent non-state actors, and risks from increased terrorism, organised crime and illegal access to nuclear, chemical and biological weapons.\nDavid Omand became the Director of GCHQ in 1996, and greatly restructured the agency in the face of new and changing targets and rapid technological change. Omand introduced the concept of \"Sinews\" (or \"SIGINT New Systems\") which allowed more flexible working methods, avoiding overlaps in work by creating fourteen domains, each with a well-defined working scope. The tenure of Omand also saw the construction of a modern new headquarters, intended to consolidate the two old sites at Oakley and Benhall into a single, more open-plan work environment. Located on a 176-acre site in Benhall, it would be the largest building constructed for secret intelligence operations outside the United States.\nOperations at GCHQ's Chung Hom Kok listening station in Hong Kong ended in 1994. GCHQ's Hong Kong operations were extremely important to their relationship with the NSA, who contributed investment and equipment to the station. In anticipation of the transfer of Hong Kong to the Chinese government in 1997, the Hong Kong stations operations were moved to Australian Defence Satellite Communications Station in Geraldton in Western Australia.\nOperations that used GCHQ's intelligence-gathering capabilities in the 1990s included the monitoring of communications of Iraqi soldiers in the Gulf War, of dissident republican terrorists and the Real IRA, of the various factions involved in the Yugoslav Wars, and of the criminal Kenneth Noye. In the mid-1990s GCHQ began to assist in the investigation of cybercrime.\n2000s: Coping with the Internet.\nAt the end of 2003, GCHQ moved in to its new building. Built on a circular plan around a large central courtyard, it quickly became known as the Doughnut. At the time, it was one of the largest public-sector building projects in Europe, with an estimated cost of \u00a3337 million. The new building, which was designed by Gensler and constructed by Carillion, became the base for all of GCHQ's Cheltenham operations.\nThe public spotlight fell on GCHQ in late 2003 and early 2004 following the sacking of Katharine Gun after she leaked to \"The Observer\" a confidential email from agents at the United States' National Security Agency addressed to GCHQ officers about the wiretapping of UN delegates in the run-up to the 2003 Iraq war.\nGCHQ gains its intelligence by monitoring a wide variety of communications and other electronic signals. For this, a number of stations have been established in the UK and overseas. The listening stations are at Cheltenham itself, Bude, Scarborough, Ascension Island, and with the United States at RAF Menwith Hill. Ayios Nikolaos Station in Cyprus is run by the British Army for GCHQ.\nIn March 2010, GCHQ was criticised by the Intelligence and Security Committee for problems with its IT security practices and failing to meet its targets for work targeted against cyber attacks.\nAs revealed by Edward Snowden in \"The Guardian\", GCHQ spied on foreign politicians visiting the 2009 G-20 London Summit by eavesdropping phonecalls and emails and monitoring their computers, and in some cases even ongoing after the summit via keystroke logging that had been undertaken during the summit.\nAccording to Edward Snowden, at that time GCHQ had two principal umbrella programs for collecting communications:\nGCHQ has also had access to the US internet monitoring programme PRISM from at least as far back as June 2010. PRISM is said to give the National Security Agency and FBI easy access to the systems of nine of the world's top internet companies, including Google, Facebook, Microsoft, Apple, Yahoo, and Skype.\nFrom 2013, GCHQ realised that public attitudes to Sigint had changed and its former unquestioned secrecy was no longer appropriate or acceptable. The growing use of the Internet, together with its inherent insecurities, meant that the communications traffic of private citizens were becoming inextricably mixed with those of their targets and openness in the handling of this issue was becoming essential to their credibility as an organisation. The Internet had become a \"cyber commons\", with its dominance creating a \"second age of Sigint\". GCHQ transformed itself accordingly, including greatly expanded Public Relations and Legal departments, and adopting public education in cyber security as an important part of its remit.\n2010s: Disinformation, discord and division.\nIn February 2014, \"The Guardian\", based on documents provided by Snowden, revealed that GCHQ had indiscriminately collected 1.8\u00a0million private Yahoo webcam images from users across the world. In the same month NBC and The Intercept, based on documents released by Snowden, revealed the Joint Threat Research Intelligence Group and the Computer Network Exploitation units within GCHQ. Their mission was cyber operations based on \"dirty tricks\" to shut down enemy communications, discredit, and plant misinformation on enemies. These operations were 5% of all GCHQ operations according to a conference slideshow presented by the GCHQ.\nSoon after becoming Director of GCHQ in 2014, Robert Hannigan wrote an article in the \"Financial Times\" on the topic of internet surveillance, stating that \"however much [large US technology companies] may dislike it, they have become the command and control networks of choice for terrorists and criminals\" and that GCHQ and its sister agencies \"cannot tackle these challenges at scale without greater support from the private sector\", arguing that most internet users \"would be comfortable with a better and more sustainable relationship between the [intelligence] agencies and the tech companies\". Since the 2013 global surveillance disclosures, large US technology companies have improved security and become less co-operative with foreign intelligence agencies, including those of the UK, generally requiring a US court order before disclosing data. However the head of the UK technology industry group techUK rejected these claims, stating that they understood the issues but that disclosure obligations \"must be based upon a clear and transparent legal framework and effective oversight rather than, as suggested, a deal between the industry and government\".\nIn 2015, documents obtained by \"The Intercept\" from US National Security Agency whistleblower Edward Snowden revealed that GCHQ had carried out a mass-surveillance operation, codenamed KARMA POLICE, since about 2008. The operation swept up the IP address of Internet users visiting websites, and was established with no public scrutiny or oversight. KARMA POLICE is a powerful spying tool in conjunction with other GCHQ programs because IP addresses could be cross-referenced with other data. The goal of the program, according to the documents, was \"either (a) a web browsing profile for every visible user on the internet, or (b) a user profile for every visible website on the internet.\"\nIn 2015, GCHQ admitted for the first time in court that it conducts computer hacking.\nIn 2017, US Press Secretary Sean Spicer made allegations that GCHQ had conducted surveillance on US President Donald Trump. These unfounded claims were based on statements made during an opinion piece in a FOX media segment. The US government formally apologised for the unfounded allegations and promised they would not be repeated.\nBritish intelligence did gather information relating to Russian contacts made by Trump's campaign team in the run-up to his election, which were passed on to US intelligence agencies.\nOn 31 October 2018, GCHQ joined Instagram.\nPersonnel awards.\nGCHQ personnel are recognised annually by King Charles III (formerly the Prince of Wales) at the Prince of Wales's Intelligence Community Awards at St James's Palace or Clarence House alongside members of the Security Service (MI5), and Secret Intelligence Service (MI6). Awards and citations are given to teams within the agencies as well as individuals.\nSecurity mission.\nAs well as a mission to gather intelligence, GCHQ has for a long time had a corresponding mission to assist in the protection of the British government's own communications. When the Government Code and Cypher School (GC&amp;CS) was created in 1919, its overt task was providing security advice. GC&amp;CS's Security section was located in Mansfield College, Oxford during the Second World War.\nIn April 1946, GC&amp;CS became GCHQ, and the now GCHQ Security section moved from Oxford to join the rest of the organisation at Eastcote later that year.\nLCSA.\nFrom 1952 to 1954, the intelligence mission of GCHQ relocated to Cheltenham; the Security section remained at Eastcote, and in March 1954 became a separate, independent organisation: the London Communications Security Agency (LCSA), which in 1958 was renamed to the London Communications-Electronic Security Agency (LCESA).\nIn April 1965, GPO and MOD units merged with LCESA to become the Communications-Electronic Security Department (CESD).\nCESG.\nIn October 1969, CESD was merged into GCHQ and becoming Communications-Electronic Security Group (CESG).\nIn 1977 CESG relocated from Eastcote to Cheltenham.\nCESG continued as the UK National Technical Authority for information assurance, including cryptography. CESG did not manufacture security equipment, but worked with industry to ensure the availability of suitable products and services, while GCHQ itself funded research into such areas, for example to the Centre for Quantum Computation at Oxford University and the Heilbronn Institute for Mathematical Research at the University of Bristol.\nIn the 21st century, CESG ran a number of assurance schemes such as CHECK, CLAS, Commercial Product Assurance (CPA) and CESG Assisted Products Service (CAPS).\nPublic key encryption.\nIn 1970 the concept for public-key encryption (public key infrastructure) was developed and proven by GCHQ's James H. Ellis. Ellis lacked the number theory skills required to build a workable system. In 1974 GCHQ mathematician Clifford Cocks had developed a workable public key cryptography algorithm and a workable PKI system. Cocks's system was not available in the public domain until it was declassified in 1997.\nBy 1997 broader public key cryptography commercial technologies had been independently developed and had become well established, in areas such as email security, digital signatures, and TLS (a fundamental TCP/IP security component) etc. Most notably in 1977 the RSA algorithm had been developed (equivalent to Cocks's system) and by 1997 was extremely well established.\nNCSC.\nIn 2016, the National Cyber Security Centre was established under GCHQ but located in London, as the UK's authority on cybersecurity. It absorbed and replaced CESG as well as activities that had previously existed outside GCHQ: the Centre for Cyber Assessment (CCA), Computer Emergency Response Team UK (CERT UK) and the cyber-related responsibilities of the Centre for the Protection of National Infrastructure (CPNI).\nJoint Technical Language Service.\nThe Joint Technical Language Service (JTLS) was established in 1955, drawing on members of the small Ministry of Defence technical language team and others, initially to provide standard English translations for organisational expressions in any foreign language, discover the correct English equivalents of technical terms in foreign languages and discover the correct expansions of abbreviations in any language. The remit of the JTLS has expanded in the ensuing years to cover technical language support and interpreting and translation services across the UK Government and to local public sector services in Gloucestershire and surrounding counties. The JTLS also produces and publishes foreign language working aids under crown copyright and conducts research into machine translation and on-line dictionaries and glossaries. The JTLS is co-located with GCHQ for administrative purposes.\nInternational relationships.\nGCHQ operates in partnership with equivalent agencies worldwide in a number of bi-lateral and multi-lateral relationships. The principal of these is with the United States (National Security Agency), Canada (Communications Security Establishment), Australia (Australian Signals Directorate) and New Zealand (Government Communications Security Bureau), through the mechanism of the UK-US Security Agreement, a broad intelligence-sharing agreement encompassing a range of intelligence collection methods. Relationships are alleged to include shared collection methods, such as the system described in the popular media as ECHELON, as well as analysed product.\nLegal basis.\nGCHQ's legal basis is established by the Intelligence Services Act 1994 Section 3 as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nActivities that involve interception of communications are permitted under the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000; this kind of interception can only be carried out after a warrant has been issued by a Secretary of State. The Human Rights Act 1998 requires the intelligence agencies, including GCHQ, to respect citizens' rights as described in the European Convention on Human Rights.\nOversight.\nThe Prime Minister nominates cross-party Members of Parliament to an Intelligence and Security Committee. The remit of the Committee includes oversight of intelligence and security activities and reports are made directly to Parliament. Its functions were increased under the Justice and Security Act 2013 to provide for further access and investigatory powers.\nJudicial oversight of GCHQ's conduct is exercised by the Investigatory Powers Tribunal. The UK also has an independent Intelligence Services Commissioner and Interception of Communications Commissioner, both of whom are former senior judges.\nThe Investigatory Powers Tribunal ruled in December 2014 that GCHQ does not breach the European Convention on Human Rights, and that its activities are compliant with Articles 8 (right to privacy) and 10 (freedom of expression) of the European Convention on Human Rights. However, the Tribunal stated in February 2015 that one particular aspect, the data-sharing arrangement that allowed UK Intelligence services to request data from the US surveillance programmes Prism and Upstream, had been in contravention of human rights law prior to this until two paragraphs of additional information, providing details about the procedures and safeguards, were disclosed to the public in December 2014.\nFurthermore, the IPT ruled that the legislative framework in the United Kingdom does not permit mass surveillance and that while GCHQ collects and analyses data in bulk, it does not practice mass surveillance. This complements independent reports by the Interception of Communications Commissioner, and a special report made by the Intelligence and Security Committee of Parliament; although several shortcomings and potential improvements to both oversight and the legislative framework were highlighted.\nAbuses.\nDespite the inherent secrecy around much of GCHQ's work, investigations carried out by the UK government after the Snowden disclosures have admitted various abuses by the security services. A report by the Intelligence and Security Committee (ISC) in 2015 revealed that a small number of staff at UK intelligence agencies had been found to misuse their surveillance powers, in one case leading to the dismissal of a member of staff at GCHQ, although there were no laws in place at the time to make these abuses a criminal offence.\nLater that year, a ruling by the Investigatory Powers Tribunal found that GCHQ acted unlawfully in conducting surveillance on two human rights organisations. The closed hearing found the government in breach of its internal surveillance policies in accessing and retaining the communications of the Egyptian Initiative for Personal Rights and the Legal Resources Centre in South Africa. This was only the second time in the IPT's history that it had made a positive determination in favour of applicants after a closed session.\nAt another IPT case in 2015, GCHQ conceded that \"from January 2010, the regime for the interception/obtaining, analysis, use, disclosure and destruction of legally privileged material has not been in accordance with the law for the purposes of Article 8(2) of the European convention on human rights and was accordingly unlawful\". This admission was made in connection with a case brought against them by Abdelhakim Belhaj, a Libyan opponent of the Gaddafi regime, and his wife Fatima Bouchard. The couple had accused the British government of participating in the regime's abduction of them to Libya in March 2004.\nOn 25 May 2021, the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) ruled that the GCHQ is guilty of violating data privacy rules through their bulk interception of communications, and does not provide sufficient protections for confidential journalistic material because it gathers communications in bulk.\nSurveillance of parliamentarians.\nIn 2015 there was a complaint by Green Party MP Caroline Lucas that British intelligence services, including GCHQ, had been spying on MPs allegedly \"in defiance of laws prohibiting it.\"\nThen-Home Secretary, Theresa May, had told Parliament in 2014 that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Obviously, the Wilson Doctrine applies to parliamentarians. It does not absolutely exclude the use of these powers against parliamentarians, but it sets certain requirements for those powers to be used in relation to a parliamentarian. It is not the case that parliamentarians are excluded and nobody else in the country is, but there is a certain set of rules and protocols that have to be met if there is a requirement to use any of these powers against a parliamentarian.\nThe Investigatory Powers Tribunal investigated the complaint, and ruled that contrary to the allegation, there was no law that gave the communications of Parliament any special protection. The Wilson Doctrine merely acts as a political convention.\nConstitutional legal case.\nA controversial GCHQ case determined the scope of judicial review of prerogative powers (the Crown's residual powers under common law). This was \"Council of Civil Service Unions v Minister for the Civil Service\" [1985] AC 374 (often known simply as the \"GCHQ case\"). In this case, a prerogative Order in Council had been used by the prime minister (who is the Minister for the Civil Service) to ban trade union activities by civil servants working at GCHQ. This order was issued without consultation. The House of Lords had to decide whether this was reviewable by judicial review. It was held that executive action is not immune from judicial review simply because it uses powers derived from common law rather than statute (thus the prerogative is reviewable).\nLeadership.\nThe following is a list of the heads and operational heads of GCHQ and GC&amp;CS:\nStations and former stations.\nThe following are stations and former stations that have operated since the Cold War.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn popular culture.\nIn the historical drama film \"The Imitation Game\" (2014) Benedict Cumberbatch portrays Alan Turing in his efforts to break the Enigma code while employed by the Government Code and Cypher School.\nGCHQ have set a number of cryptic online challenges to the public, used to attract interest and for recruitment, starting in late 1999. The response to the 2004 challenge was described as \"excellent\", and the challenge set in 2015 had over 600,000 attempts. It also published the \"GCHQ Puzzle Book\" in 2016 which sold more than 300,000 copies, with the proceeds going to charity. A second book was published in October 2018.\nGCHQ appeared in the \"Doctor Who\" 2019 special \"Resolution\" where the Reconnaissance Scout Dalek storms the facility and exterminates the staff in order to use the organisation's resources to summon a Dalek fleet.\nGCHQ is the setting of the 2020 Sky One sitcom \"Intelligence\", featuring David Schwimmer as an incompetent American NSA officer liaising with GCHQ's Cyber Crimes unit.\nIn October 2020, intelligence and security expert John Ferris published \"Behind the Enigma: The Authorised History of GCHQ, Britain's Secret Cyber-Intelligence Agency\".\nGCHQ is the setting of the 2022 Channel 4 drama \"The Undeclared War\". Set in the near future, it depicts a work experience student at the government agency during a cyberattack on the UK and the implications.\nSee also.\nGCHQ units:\nGCHQ specifics:\nUK agencies:\nElsewhere:\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12885", "revid": "22651524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12885", "title": "Government Communications Headquarters", "text": ""}
{"id": "12888", "revid": "4754841", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12888", "title": "Francis Gary Powers", "text": "American pilot (1929\u20131977)\nFrancis Gary Powers (August 17, 1929\u00a0\u2013 August 1, 1977) was an American pilot who served as a United States Air Force officer and a CIA employee. Powers is best known for his involvement in the 1960 U-2 incident, when he was shot down while flying a secret CIA spying mission over the Soviet Union. Powers survived, but was captured and sentenced to 10 years in a Soviet prison for espionage. He served 21 months of his sentence before being released in a prisoner swap in 1962.\nAfter returning to the US, he worked at Lockheed as a test pilot for the U-2, and later as a helicopter pilot for Los Angeles news station KNBC. He died in 1977, when the KNBC helicopter he was flying crashed.\nEarly life and education.\nPowers was born August 17, 1929, in Jenkins, Kentucky, the son of Oliver, a coal miner, and his wife Ida. Powers was the only boy among the family's six children. Oliver, who often struggled to make ends meet, wanted his son to be a physician. When Powers was fourteen, he rode in a Piper Cub airplane at a state fair in West Virginia, sparking his fascination with aviation.\nDuring World War II, the Powers family briefly moved to Detroit, where Oliver had taken a job at a defense plant, before returning to Grundy, Virginia, where Powers finished high school. Powers then entered Milligan College as a pre-med student, but switched majors to biology and chemistry in his third year. He graduated with a Bachelor of Science degree in 1950. Powers married Barbara Gay Moore in Newnan, Georgia, on April 2, 1955.\nUnited States Air Force.\nPowers enlisted in the United States Air Force in October 1950, initially working as a photo lab technician. He was accepted for flight training in November 1951, and was commissioned as a second lieutenant in December 1952 after completing advanced training on T-33 and F-80 aircraft at Williams Air Force Base in Arizona. While assigned to gunnery school at Luke Air Force Base, a bout of appendicitis delayed his training, and the Korean War ended by the time he graduated.\nPowers was then assigned to the 468th Strategic Fighter Squadron at Turner Air Force Base, Georgia, as a Republic F-84 Thunderjet pilot. In October 1953, Powers was trained at Sandia Base in loading and dropping nuclear weapons from fighter aircraft, and in July 1954 was promoted to first lieutenant. Powers hoped to become a commercial airline pilot when his enlistment ended in December 1955, but decided to stay in the Air Force when he discovered he was, at the age of 26-and-a-half, at the age limit for commercial training.\nU-2 incident.\nIn January 1956, Powers was recruited by the CIA, and on May 13, 1956, he was discharged from the Air Force at the rank of captain, becoming a civilian employee of the CIA with the grade of GS-13.\nIn May 1956, Powers began U-2 training at Watertown Strip, Nevada. His training was complete by August 1956 and his unit, the Second Weather Observational Squadron (Provisional) or Detachment 10-10, was deployed to Incirlik Air Base, Turkey.\nPowers then joined the CIA's U-2 program. U-2 pilots flew espionage missions at altitudes above , above the reach of Soviet air defenses until 1960. The U-2 was equipped with a state-of-the-art camera designed to take high-resolution photos from the stratosphere over hostile countries, including the Soviet Union. U-2 missions systematically photographed military installations and other important sites. By 1960, Powers was already a veteran of many covert aerial reconnaissance missions. Family members believed he was a NASA weather reconnaissance pilot.\nReconnaissance mission.\nThe primary mission of the U-2s was to overfly the Soviet Union. Soviet intelligence had been aware of encroaching U-2 flights at least since 1958 if not earlier but lacked effective countermeasures until 1960. On May 1, 1960, Powers' U-2A, \"56-6693\", departed from a military airbase in Peshawar, Pakistan, with support from the U.S. Air Station at Badaber (Peshawar Air Station). This was to be the first attempt \"to fly all the way across the Soviet Union ... but it was considered worth the gamble. The planned route would take us deeper into Russia than we had ever gone, while traversing important targets never before photographed.\" - Francis Gary Powers\nShot down.\nOn 1 May 1960, Powers was shot down by an S-75 Dvina (SA-2 \"Guideline\") surface-to-air missile over Sverdlovsk. A total of 14 Dvinas were launched, one of which hit a MiG-19 jet fighter which was sent to intercept the U-2 but could not reach a high enough altitude. Its pilot, Sergei Safronov, ejected but died of his injuries. Another Soviet aircraft, a newly manufactured Su-9 on a transit flight, also attempted to intercept Powers' U-2. The unarmed Su-9 was directed to ram the U-2 but missed because of the large differences in speed.\nAs Powers flew near Kosulino in the Ural Region, three S-75 Dvinas were launched at his U-2, with the first one hitting the aircraft. \"What was left of the plane began spinning, only upside down, the nose pointing upward toward the sky, the tail down toward the ground.\" According to his book \"Operation Overflight\", Powers delayed activating the camera's self-destruct mechanism until he made sure he could exit the cockpit before the charges detonated. When \"g\"-forces unexpectedly threw him from the spinning aircraft, he could no longer reach the destruct switches. While descending under his parachute, Powers had time to scatter his escape map, and rid himself of part of his suicide device, a silver dollar coin suspended around his neck containing a poison-laced injection pin, though he kept the poison pin. \"Yet I was still hopeful of escape.\" He hit the ground hard, was immediately captured, and taken to Lubyanka Prison in Moscow. Powers did note seeing a second chute after landing on the ground, \"some distance away and very high, a lone red and white parachute\".\nAttempted deception by the U.S. government.\nWhen the U.S. government learned of Powers' disappearance over the Soviet Union, they lied that a \"weather plane\" had strayed off course after its pilot had \"difficulties with his oxygen equipment\". What CIA officials did not realize was that the plane crashed almost fully intact and that the Soviets had recovered its pilot and much of the plane's equipment, including its new top-secret high-altitude camera. Powers was interrogated extensively by the KGB for months before he made a confession and a public apology for his part in espionage.\nPortrayal in U.S. media.\nFollowing admission by the White House that Powers had been captured alive, American media depicted Powers as an all-American pilot hero, who never smoked or touched alcohol. In fact, Powers smoked and drank socially. The CIA urged that his wife Barbara be given sedatives before speaking to the press and gave her talking points that she repeated to the press to portray her as a devoted wife. Her broken leg, according to the CIA disinformation, was the result of a water-skiing accident, when in fact it happened after she had had too much to drink and was dancing with another man.\nIn the course of his trial for espionage in the Soviet Union, Powers confessed to the charges against him and apologized for violating Soviet airspace to spy on the Soviets. In the wake of his apology, American media often depicted Powers as a coward and even as a symptom of the decay of the United States' \"moral character.\"\nPilot testimony compromised by newspaper reports.\nPowers tried to limit the information he shared with the KGB to that which could be determined from the remains of his plane's wreckage. He was hampered by information appearing in the western press. A KGB major stated \"there's no reason for you to withhold information. We'll find it out anyway. Your Press will give it to us.\" However, he limited his divulging of CIA contacts to one individual, with a pseudonym of \"Collins\". At the same time, he repeatedly stated the maximum altitude for the U-2 was , lower than its actual flight ceiling.\nPolitical consequence.\nThe incident set back talks between Khrushchev and Eisenhower. Powers' interrogations ended on June 30, and his solitary confinement ended on July 9. On August 17, 1960, his trial began for espionage before the military division of the Supreme Court of the Soviet Union. Lieutenant General Borisoglebsky, Major General Vorobyev, and Major General Zakharov presided. Roman Rudenko acted as prosecutor in his capacity of Procurator General of the Soviet Union. Mikhail I. Grinev served as Powers' defense counsel in the trial. In attendance were his parents and sister, and his wife Barbara and her mother. His father brought along his attorney Carl McAfee, while the CIA provided two additional attorneys.\nConviction.\nOn August 19, 1960, Powers was convicted of espionage, \"a grave crime covered by Article 2 of the Soviet Union's law 'On Criminality Responsibility for State Crimes'\". His sentence consisted of 10 years' confinement, three of which were to be in a prison, with the remainder in a labor camp. The US Embassy \"News Bulletin\" stated, according to Powers, \"as far as the government was concerned, I had acted in accordance with the instructions given [to] me and would receive my full salary while imprisoned\".\nHe was held in Vladimir Central Prison, about east of Moscow, in building number 2 from September 9, 1960, until February 8, 1962. His cellmate was Zigurds Kr\u016bmi\u0146\u0161, a Latvian political prisoner. Powers kept a diary and a journal while confined. Additionally, he learned carpet weaving from his cellmate to pass the time. He could send and receive a limited number of letters to and from his family. The prison now contains a small museum with an exhibit on Powers, who allegedly developed a good rapport with Soviet prisoners there. Some pieces of the plane and Powers's uniform are on display at the Monino Airbase museum near Moscow.\nPrisoner exchange.\nCIA opposition to exchange.\nThe CIA, in particular chief of CIA Counterintelligence James Jesus Angleton, opposed exchanging Powers for Soviet KGB Colonel William Fisher, known as \"Rudolf Abel\", who had been caught by the FBI in the Hollow Nickel Case and tried and jailed for espionage. First, Angleton believed that Powers might have deliberately defected to the Soviet side. CIA documents released in 2010 indicate that U.S. officials did not believe Powers's account of the incident at the time, because it was contradicted by a classified National Security Agency (NSA) report which alleged that the U-2 had descended from before changing course and disappearing from radar. The NSA report remained classified as of 2022.\nIn any event, Angleton suspected that Powers had already revealed all he knew to the Soviets and therefore reasoned that Powers was worthless to the U.S. On the other hand, according to Angleton, William Fisher had revealed little to the CIA, refusing to disclose even his real name, and for this reason, William Fisher was still of potential value.\nHowever, Barbara Powers, Gary Powers's wife, was allegedly often drinking and having affairs. On June 22, 1961, she was pulled over by the police after driving erratically and was caught driving under the influence. To avoid bad publicity for the wife of the well-known CIA operative, doctors tasked by the CIA to keep Barbara out of the limelight arranged to have her committed to a psychiatric ward in Augusta, Georgia, under strict supervision. She was eventually released to the care of her mother. However, the CIA feared that Gary Powers languishing in Soviet prison might learn of Barbara's plight and as a result reach a state of desperation causing him to reveal to the Soviets whatever secrets he had not already revealed. Thus, Barbara unwittingly may have aided the cause of the approval of the prisoner exchange involving her husband and William Fisher. Angleton and others at the CIA still opposed the exchange but President John F. Kennedy approved it.\nThe exchange.\nOn February 10, 1962, Powers was exchanged, along with U.S. student Frederic Pryor, for Soviet KGB Colonel Rudolf Abel. Due to political differences between the Soviet Union and the German Democratic Republic at the time, Pryor was turned over to American authorities at Checkpoint Charlie, before the exchange of Powers for Abel was allowed to proceed on the Glienicke Bridge.\nPowers credited his father with the swap idea. When released, Powers' total time in captivity was 1 year, 9 months, and 10 days.\nAftermath.\nPowers initially received a cold reception on his return home. He was criticized for not activating his aircraft's self-destruct charge to destroy the camera, photographic film, and related classified parts. He was also criticized for not using an optional CIA-issued \"suicide pin\" to kill himself. Powers wore a hollowed-out silver dollar on a chain around his neck that disguised within it a grooved needle embedded with deadly shellfish toxin designed to kill by pricking the skin. Powers decided against doing so.\nHe was debriefed extensively by the CIA, Lockheed Corporation, and the Air Force, after which a statement was issued by CIA director John McCone that \"Mr. Powers lived up to the terms of his employment and instructions in connection with his mission and in his obligations as an American.\" On March 6, 1962, he appeared before a Senate Armed Services Select Committee hearing chaired by Senator Richard Russell Jr. which included Senators Prescott Bush, Leverett Saltonstall, Robert Byrd, Margaret Chase Smith, John Stennis, Strom Thurmond, and Barry Goldwater. During the hearing, Senator Saltonstall stated, \"I commend you as a courageous, fine young American citizen who lived up to your instructions and who did the best you could under very difficult circumstances.\" Senator Bush declared, \"I am satisfied he has conducted himself in exemplary fashion and in accordance with the highest traditions of service to one's country, and I congratulate him upon his conduct in captivity.\" Senator Goldwater sent him a handwritten note: \"You did a good job for your country.\"\nIn \"Operation Overflight\", Powers wrote that upon joining the CIA in 1956, he had cosigned a document with Secretary of the Air Force Donald A. Quarles, guaranteeing Powers could return to the Air Force at his previous rank after his CIA service ended, with his CIA service time counting toward his Air Force retirement. Powers, who did not retain a copy of this document, wrote that his six-and-a-half years of CIA service time was not honored because of the bad publicity surrounding his case and was a major factor in his decision not to rejoin the Air Force.\nDivorce and remarriage.\nPowers sued his wife for divorce on August 14, 1962, claiming she cursed and abused him for no reason. Powers stated that the reasons for the divorce included her infidelity and alcoholism, adding that she constantly threw tantrums and overdosed on pills shortly after his return. He started a relationship with Claudia Edwards \"Sue\" Downey, whom he had met while working briefly at CIA Headquarters. Downey had a child, Dee, from her previous marriage. They were married on October 26, 1963. Their son Francis Gary Powers Jr. was born on June 5, 1965. The marriage proved to be a very happy one, and Sue worked hard to preserve her husband's legacy after his death.\nPraise.\nDuring a speech in March 1964, former CIA Director Allen Dulles said of Powers, \"He performed his duty in a very dangerous mission and he performed it well, and I think I know more about that than some of his detractors and critics know, and I am glad to say that to him tonight.\"\nLater career.\nPowers worked for Lockheed as a test pilot from 1962 to 1970, though the CIA paid his salary. In 1970, he wrote the book \"Operation Overflight\" with co-author Curt Gentry. Lockheed fired him, because \"the book's publication had ruffled some feathers at Langley.\" Powers then became a traffic reporting airplane pilot for Los Angeles radio station KGIL. After that he became a helicopter news reporter for KNBC television.\nDeath.\nPowers was piloting a helicopter for Los Angeles TV station KNBC Channel 4 over the San Fernando Valley on August 1, 1977, when the Bell 206 JetRanger crashed, killing him and his cameraman George Spears.\nThe duo had been recording video after brush fires in Santa Barbara County and were heading back to Burbank Airport.\nThe aircraft ran out of fuel and crashed at the Sepulveda Dam recreational area in Encino, California, several miles short of the airport. It is surmised that, at the last moment, he noticed children playing in the area and directed the helicopter elsewhere to avoid landing on them. He might have landed safely if not for the last-second deviation, which compromised his autorotative descent.\nThe National Transportation Safety Board report said pilot error probably caused the crash. Powers' son later said an aviation mechanic had repaired a faulty fuel gauge without informing Powers, who subsequently misread it.\nPowers was survived by his wife, children (Claudia Dee and Francis Gary Powers Jr.), and five sisters. He is buried in Arlington National Cemetery as an Air Force veteran.\nDecorations.\nPowers was awarded the CIA's Intelligence Star on April 20, 1965. On May 1, 2000, he was posthumously awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross, the Prisoner of War Medal, the National Defense Service Medal, and the CIA Director's Award. On June 15, 2012, he was also awarded the Silver Star for demonstrating \"exceptional loyalty\" while enduring nearly two years of harsh interrogation and imprisonment in Moscow. Air Force Chief of Staff General Norton Schwartz presented the decoration to Powers' grandchildren, Trey Powers, 9, and Lindsey Berry, 29, in a Pentagon ceremony.\nLegacy.\nPowers' son, Francis Gary Powers Jr., founded The Cold War Museum in 1996. Originally affiliated with the Smithsonian Institution, it began as a traveling exhibit on the U-2 Incident until it found a permanent home in 2011 at Vint Hill Farm Station, a former Army communications base outside Washington, D.C., in Warrenton, Virginia.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12889", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12889", "title": "Gastrointestinal Tract", "text": ""}
{"id": "12890", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12890", "title": "Gospel of James", "text": "Pseudepigraphic gospel\nThe Gospel of James (or the Protoevangelium of James) is a second-century infancy gospel telling of the miraculous conception of Mary, the mother of Jesus, her upbringing and marriage to Joseph, the journey of the couple to Bethlehem, the birth of Jesus, and events immediately following. It is the earliest surviving assertion of the perpetual virginity of Mary, meaning her virginity not just prior to the birth of Jesus, but during and afterwards, and despite being condemned by Pope Innocent I in 405 and classified as apocryphal by the Gelasian Decree around AD 500, became a widely influential source for Mariology.\nComposition.\nDating.\nThe Gospel of James was well known to Origen in the early third century and probably to Clement of Alexandria at the end of the second, so is assumed to have been in circulation soon after \"circa\" 150 AD. The earliest manuscript of the text (Papyrus Bodmer 5) dates to the third or fourth century.\nThe author claims to be James the brother of Jesus by an earlier marriage of Joseph, but his identity is unknown.\nHistorical context.\nEarly studies assumed a Jewish milieu, largely because of its frequent use and knowledge of the Septuagint (a Greek translation of the Jewish scriptures); further investigation demonstrated that it misunderstands and/or misrepresents many Jewish practices, but Judaism at this time was highly diverse, and recent trends in scholarship do not entirely dismiss a Jewish connection. In fact, it has been argued that Mary\u2019s temple service reflects real practices allowing women such access, such as accused adulteresses, veil-weavers, and Nazirites. The \u201cweavers of the veil,\u201d known from Jewish sources like the \"Apocalypse of Baruch\" (\u201cthe virgins who spin fine linen\u201d), were virgin girls, matching Mary\u2019s role in the text. There is Scriptural evidence of young women working at the tabernacle and each of the temples (1 Samuel 2:22, Exodus 8:38, 2 Ezra 2:65), certainly living nearby if not on premises. It is likely that they were unmarried.\nIts origin is probably Syrian, and it possibly derives from a sect called the Encratites, whose founder, Tatian, taught that sex and marriage were symptoms of original sin.\nSources.\nThe gospel is a \"midrash\" (an elaboration) on the birth narratives found in the gospels of Matthew and Luke, and many of its elements, notably its very physical description of Mary's pregnancy and the examination of her hymen by the midwife Salome, suggest strongly that it was attempting to deny the arguments of docetists, Christians who held that Jesus was entirely supernatural. It also draws heavily on the Septuagint for historical analogies, turns of phrase, and details of Jewish life. Ronald Hock and Mary F. Foskett have drawn attention to the influence of Greco-Roman literature on its themes of virginity and purity.\nManuscripts.\nScholars generally accept that the Gospel of James was originally composed in Greek. Over 100 Greek manuscripts have survived, and translations were made into Syriac, Ethiopic, Sahidic Coptic, Georgian, Old Church Slavonic, Armenian, Arabic, and presumably Latin, given that it was apparently known to the compiler of the Gelasian Decree. The oldest is Papyrus Bodmer 5 from the fourth or possibly third century, discovered in 1952 and now in the Bodmer Library, Geneva, while the fullest is a 10th-century Greek codex in the Biblioth\u00e8que Nationale, Paris.\nPrint editions.\nThe first widely printed edition (as opposed to hand-copied manuscripts) was a 1552 edition printed in Basel, Switzerland, by Guillaume Postel, who printed his Latin translation of a Greek version of the work. Postel also gave the work the Latin name (Proto-Gospel of James) because he believed (incorrectly) that the work antedated the main gospels of the New Testament (proto- for first, evangelion for gospel). Emile de Stryker published the standard modern critical edition in 1961, and in 1995 Ronald Hock published an English translation based on de Stryker.\nStructure and content.\nThe narrative is made up of three distinct sections with only slight ties to each other:\nMary is presented as an extraordinary child destined for great things from the moment of her conception. Her parents, the wealthy Joachim and his wife Anna (or Anne), are distressed that they have no children, and Joachim goes into the wilderness to pray, leaving Anna to lament her childless state. God hears Anna's prayer, angels announce the coming child, and in the seventh month of Anna's pregnancy (underlining the exceptional nature of Mary's future life), she is born. Anna dedicates the child to God and vows that she shall be raised in the Temple. Joachim and Anna name the child Mary, and when she is three years old, they send her to the Temple, where she is fed each day by an angel.\nWhen Mary approaches her 12th year, the priests decide that she can no longer stay in the Temple lest her menstrual blood render it unclean, and God finds a widower, Joseph, to act as her guardian: Joseph is depicted as elderly and the father of grown sons; he has no desire for sexual relations with Mary. He leaves on business, and Mary is called to the Temple to help weave the temple curtain. One day while Mary is spinning thread for the curtain, the angel Gabriel appears and tells her that she has been chosen to conceive Jesus the Saviour, but that she will not give birth as other women do. Joseph returns and finds Mary six months pregnant, and rebukes her, fearing that the priests will assume that he is the guilty party. They do, but the chastity of both is proven through the \"test of bitter waters\".\nThe Roman census forces the holy couple to travel to Bethlehem, but Mary's time comes before they can reach the village. Joseph settles Mary in a cave, where she is guarded by his sons, while he goes in search of a midwife, and for an apocalyptic moment as he searches all creation stands still. He returns with a midwife, and as they stand at the mouth of the cave, a cloud overshadows it, an intense light fills it, and suddenly a baby is at Mary's breast. Joseph and the midwife marvel at the miracle, but a second midwife named Salome (the first is not given a name) insists on examining Mary, upon which her hand withers as a sign of her lack of faith; Salome prays to God for forgiveness and an angel appears and tells her to touch the Christ Child, upon which her hand is healed.\nThe gospel concludes with the visit of the Three Magi, the Massacre of the Innocents in Bethlehem, the martyrdom of the High Priest Zechariah (father of John the Baptist), the election of his successor Simeon, and an epilogue telling the circumstances under which the work was supposedly composed.\nInfluence.\nChristianity.\nThe Gospel of James was a widely influential source for Christian doctrine regarding Mary. According to Bernhard Lohse, it is the earliest assertion of her perpetual virginity, meaning her virginity not just prior to the birth of Jesus, but during the birth and afterwards. Its explanation of the gospels' \"brothers of Jesus\" (the \"adelphoi\") as the offspring of Joseph by an earlier marriage remains the position of the Eastern church. Richard Bauckham noted that \"It is possible that the brothers of Jesus were correctly remembered not to have been sons of Mary and that this made possible the development of the idea of Mary's perpetual virginity as a result. Good historical tradition certainly was still available in the early second century, even if mixed with much legendary material.\" In the West, influential theologian Jerome asserted that Joseph himself had been a perpetual virgin, and that the\" adelphoi \"were cousins of the Lord. Jerome's opposition to the Protevangelium led to a diminished influence and circulation in the western, Latin church. It was condemned by Pope Innocent I in 405 and rejected by the Gelasian Decree around 500. It was completely unknown in the West, and it was taken over by the widely read Gospel of Pseudo-Matthew, which popularized most of its stories.\nThe Gospel of James was the first to give the name Anne to the mother of Mary, taking it probably from Hannah, the mother of the prophet Samuel, and Mary, like Samuel, is taken to spend her childhood in the temple. Anne's pregnancy was the result of normal intercourse with her husband, and the Gospel of James does not advance the idea of Mary's Immaculate Conception.\nVarious manuscripts place the birth of Mary in the sixth, seventh, eighth, or ninth month, with the oldest having the seventh; this was in keeping with both the Judaism of the period, which had similar seventh-month births for significant individuals such as Samuel, Isaac, and Moses, as the sign of a miraculous or divine conception. Further signs of Mary's supremely holy nature follow, including Anne's vow that the infant would never walk on the earth (her bedroom is made a \"sanctuary\" where she is attended by \"undefiled daughters of the Hebrews\"), her blessing \"with the ultimate blessing\" by the priests on her first birthday with the declaration that because of her God will bring redemption to Israel, and the angels who bring her food in the Temple, where she is attended by the priests and engages herself in weaving the temple curtain.\nThe ordeal of the bitter water serves to defend Jesus against accusation of illegitimacy levied in the second century by pagan and Jewish opponents of Christianity. Christian sensitivity to these charges made them eager to defend both the virgin birth of Jesus and the immaculate conception of Mary (i.e., her freedom from sin at the moment of her conception).\nThe Gospel of James influenced art for centuries being the source for various depictions of figures and scenes mentioned in the text.\nIslam.\nThe Quranic stories of the Virgin Mary and the birth of Jesus are similar to those of the Protoevangelium, which was widely known in the Near East. These include its mention of Mary fed by angels, the choice of her guardian (Joseph) through the casting of lots, and her occupation making a curtain for the Temple immediately before the Annunciation. Nevertheless, while the Quran holds Mary in high esteem and modern Muslims agree with Christians that she was a virgin when she conceived Jesus, some modern Muslims would see the idea of her perpetual virginity (which is the central idea of James) as contrary to the Islamic ideal of women as wives and mothers.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12891", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12891", "title": "Gene therapy", "text": "Medical technology\nGene therapy is medical technology that aims to produce a therapeutic effect through the manipulation of gene expression or through altering the biological properties of living cells.\nThe first attempt at modifying human DNA was performed in 1980, by Martin Cline, but the first successful nuclear gene transfer in humans, approved by the National Institutes of Health, was performed in May 1989. The first therapeutic use of gene transfer as well as the first direct insertion of human DNA into the nuclear genome was performed by French Anderson in a trial starting in September 1990. Between 1989 and December 2018, over 2,900 clinical trials were conducted, with more than half of them in phase I. In 2003, Gendicine became the first gene therapy to receive regulatory approval. Since that time, further gene therapy drugs were approved, such as alipogene tiparvovec (2012), Strimvelis (2016), tisagenlecleucel (2017), voretigene neparvovec (2017), patisiran (2018), onasemnogene abeparvovec (2019), idecabtagene vicleucel (2021), nadofaragene firadenovec, valoctocogene roxaparvovec and etranacogene dezaparvovec (all 2022). Most of these approaches utilize adeno-associated viruses (AAVs) and lentiviruses for performing gene insertions, \"in vivo\" and \"ex vivo\", respectively. AAVs are characterized by stabilizing the viral capsid, lower immunogenicity, ability to transduce both dividing and nondividing cells, the potential to integrate site specifically and to achieve long-term expression in the in-vivo treatment. ASO / siRNA approaches such as those conducted by Alnylam and Ionis Pharmaceuticals require non-viral delivery systems, and utilize alternative mechanisms for trafficking to liver cells by way of GalNAc transporters.\nNot all medical procedures that introduce alterations to a patient's genetic makeup can be considered gene therapy. Bone marrow transplantation and organ transplants in general have been found to introduce foreign DNA into patients.\nBackground.\nGene therapy was first conceptualized in the 1960s, when the feasibility of adding new genetic functions to mammalian cells began to be researched. Several methods to do so were tested, including injecting genes with a micropipette directly into a living mammalian cell, and exposing cells to a precipitate of DNA that contained the desired genes. Scientists theorized that a virus could also be used as a vehicle, or vector, to deliver new genes into cells.\nOne of the first scientists to report the successful direct incorporation of functional DNA into a mammalian cell was biochemist Dr. Lorraine Marquardt Kraus (6 September 1922 \u2013 1 July 2016) at the University of Tennessee Health Science Center in Memphis, Tennessee. In 1961, she managed to genetically alter the hemoglobin of cells from bone marrow taken from a patient with sickle cell anaemia. She did this by incubating the patient's cells in tissue culture with DNA extracted from a donor with normal hemoglobin. In 1968, researchers Theodore Friedmann, Jay Seegmiller, and John Subak-Sharpe at the National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, in the United States successfully corrected genetic defects associated with Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, a debilitating neurological disease, by adding foreign DNA to cultured cells collected from patients suffering from the disease.\nThe first attempt, an unsuccessful one, at gene therapy (as well as the first case of medical transfer of foreign genes into humans not counting organ transplantation) was performed by geneticist Martin Cline of the University of California, Los Angeles in California, United States on 10 July 1980. Cline claimed that one of the genes in his patients was active six months later, though he never published this data or had it verified.\nAfter extensive research on animals throughout the 1980s and a 1989 bacterial gene tagging trial on humans, the first gene therapy widely accepted as a success was demonstrated in a trial that started on 14 September 1990, when Ashanthi DeSilva was treated for ADA-SCID.\nThe first somatic treatment that produced a permanent genetic change was initiated in 1993. The goal was to cure malignant brain tumors by using recombinant DNA to transfer a gene making the tumor cells sensitive to a drug that in turn would cause the tumor cells to die.\nThe polymers are either translated into proteins, interfere with target gene expression, or possibly correct genetic mutations. The most common form uses DNA that encodes a functional, therapeutic gene to replace a mutated gene. The polymer molecule is packaged within a \"vector\", which carries the molecule inside cells.\nEarly clinical failures led to dismissals of gene therapy. Clinical successes since 2006 regained researchers' attention, although as of 2014[ [update]], it was still largely an experimental technique. These include treatment of retinal diseases Leber's congenital amaurosis and choroideremia, X-linked SCID, ADA-SCID, adrenoleukodystrophy, chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL), multiple myeloma, haemophilia, and Parkinson's disease. Between 2013 and April 2014, US companies invested over $600 million in the field.\nThe first commercial gene therapy, Gendicine, was approved in China in 2003, for the treatment of certain cancers. In 2011, Neovasculgen was registered in Russia as the first-in-class gene-therapy drug for treatment of peripheral artery disease, including critical limb ischemia.\nIn 2012, alipogene tiparvovec, a treatment for a rare inherited disorder, lipoprotein lipase deficiency, became the first treatment to be approved for clinical use in either the European Union or the United States after its endorsement by the European Commission.\nFollowing early advances in genetic engineering of bacteria, cells, and small animals, scientists started considering how to apply it to medicine. Two main approaches were considered \u2013 replacing or disrupting defective genes. Scientists focused on diseases caused by single-gene defects, such as cystic fibrosis, haemophilia, muscular dystrophy, thalassemia, and sickle cell anemia. alipogene tiparvovec treats one such disease, caused by a defect in lipoprotein lipase.\nDNA must be administered, reach the damaged cells, enter the cell and either express or disrupt a protein. Multiple delivery techniques have been explored. The initial approach incorporated DNA into an engineered virus to deliver the DNA into a chromosome. Naked DNA approaches have also been explored, especially in the context of vaccine development.\nGenerally, efforts focused on administering a gene that causes a needed protein to be expressed. More recently, increased understanding of nuclease function has led to more direct DNA editing, using techniques such as zinc finger nucleases and CRISPR. The vector incorporates genes into chromosomes. The expressed nucleases then knock out and replace genes in the chromosome. As of 2014[ [update]] these approaches involve removing cells from patients, editing a chromosome and returning the transformed cells to patients.\nGene editing is a potential approach to alter the human genome to treat genetic diseases, viral diseases, and cancer. As of 2020[ [update]] these approaches are being studied in clinical trials.\nClassification.\nBreadth of definition.\nIn 1986, a meeting at the Institute Of Medicine defined gene therapy as the addition or replacement of a gene in a targeted cell type. In the same year, the FDA announced that it had jurisdiction over approving \"gene therapy\" without defining the term. The FDA added a very broad definition in 1993 of any treatment that would 'modify or manipulate the expression of genetic material or to alter the biological properties of living cells'. In 2018 this was narrowed to 'products that mediate their effects by transcription or translation of transferred genetic material or by specifically altering host (human) genetic sequences'.\nWriting in 2018, in the Journal of Law and the Biosciences, Sherkow et al. argued for a narrower definition of gene therapy than the FDA's in light of new technology that would consist of any treatment that intentionally and permanently modified a cell's genome, with the definition of genome including episomes outside the nucleus but excluding changes due to episomes that are lost over time. This definition would also exclude introducing cells that did not derive from a patient themselves, but include ex vivo approaches, and would not depend on the vector used.\nDuring the COVID-19 pandemic, some academics insisted that the mRNA vaccines for COVID were not gene therapy to prevent the spread of incorrect information that the vaccine could alter DNA, other academics maintained that the vaccines were a gene therapy because they introduced genetic material into a cell. Fact-checkers, such as Full Fact, Reuters, PolitiFact, and FactCheck.org said that calling the vaccines a gene therapy was incorrect. Podcast host Joe Rogan was criticized for calling mRNA vaccines gene therapy as was British politician Andrew Bridgen, with fact checker Full Fact calling for Bridgen to be removed from the conservative party for this and other statements.\nGenes present or added.\nGene therapy encapsulates many forms of adding different nucleic acids to a cell. \"Gene augmentation\" adds a new protein coding gene to a cell. One form of gene augmentiation is \"gene replacement therapy\", a treatment for monogenic recessive disorders where a single gene is not functional; an additional functional gene is added. For diseases caused by multiple genes or a dominant gene, gene silencing or gene editing approaches are more appropriate but \"gene\" \"addition, a\" form of gene augmentation where new gene is added, may improve a cells function without modifying the genes that cause a disorder.117\nCell types.\nGene therapy may be classified into two types by the type of cell it affects: somatic cell and germline gene therapy.\nIn somatic cell gene therapy (SCGT), the therapeutic genes are transferred into any cell other than a gamete, germ cell, gametocyte, or undifferentiated stem cell. Any such modifications affect the individual patient only, and are not inherited by offspring. Somatic gene therapy represents mainstream basic and clinical research, in which therapeutic DNA (either integrated in the genome or as an external episome or plasmid) is used to treat disease. Over 600 clinical trials utilizing SCGT are underway in the US. Most focus on severe genetic disorders, including immunodeficiencies, haemophilia, thalassaemia, and cystic fibrosis. Such single gene disorders are good candidates for somatic cell therapy. The complete correction of a genetic disorder or the replacement of multiple genes is not yet possible. Only a few of the trials are in the advanced stages.\nIn germline gene therapy (GGT), germ cells (sperm or egg cells) are modified by the introduction of functional genes into their genomes. Modifying a germ cell causes all the organism's cells to contain the modified gene. The change is therefore heritable and passed on to later generations. Australia, Canada, Germany, Israel, Switzerland, and the Netherlands prohibit GGT for application in human beings, for technical and ethical reasons, including insufficient knowledge about possible risks to future generations and higher risks versus SCGT. The US has no federal controls specifically addressing human genetic modification (beyond FDA regulations for therapies in general).\nIn vivo versus ex vivo therapies.\nIn \"in vivo\" gene therapy, a vector (typically, a virus) is introduced to the patient, which then achieves the desired biological effect by passing the genetic material (e.g. for a missing protein) into the patient's cells. In \"ex vivo\" gene therapies, such as CAR-T therapeutics, the patient's own cells (autologous) or healthy donor cells (allogeneic) are modified outside the body (hence, \"ex vivo\") using a vector to express a particular protein, such as a chimeric antigen receptor.\n\"In vivo\" gene therapy is seen as simpler, since it does not require the harvesting of mitotic cells. However, \"ex vivo\" gene therapies are better tolerated and less associated with severe immune responses. The death of Jesse Gelsinger in a trial of an adenovirus-vectored treatment for ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency due to a systemic inflammatory reaction led to a temporary halt on gene therapy trials across the United States. As of 2021[ [update]], \"in vivo\" and \"ex vivo\" therapeutics are both seen as safe.\nGene editing.\nThe concept of gene therapy is to fix a genetic problem at its source. If, for instance, a mutation in a certain gene causes the production of a dysfunctional protein resulting (usually recessively) in an inherited disease, gene therapy could be used to deliver a copy of this gene that does not contain the deleterious mutation and thereby produces a functional protein. This strategy is referred to as gene replacement therapy and could be employed to treat inherited retinal diseases.\nWhile the concept of gene replacement therapy is mostly suitable for recessive diseases, novel strategies have been suggested that are capable of also treating conditions with a dominant pattern of inheritance.\nIn vivo, gene editing systems using CRISPR have been used in studies with mice to treat cancer and have been effective at reducing tumors.18 In vitro, the CRISPR system has been used to treat HPV cancer tumors. Adeno-associated virus, Lentivirus based vectors have been to introduce the genome for the CRISPR system.6\nVectors.\nThe delivery of DNA into cells can be accomplished by multiple methods. The two major classes are recombinant viruses (sometimes called biological nanoparticles or viral vectors) and naked DNA or DNA complexes (non-viral methods).\nViruses.\nIn order to replicate, viruses introduce their genetic material into the host cell, tricking the host's cellular machinery into using it as blueprints for viral proteins.39 Retroviruses go a stage further by having their genetic material copied into the nuclear genome of the host cell. Scientists exploit this by substituting part of a virus's genetic material with therapeutic DNA or RNA.40 Like the genetic material (DNA or RNA) in viruses, therapeutic genetic material can be designed to simply serve as a temporary blueprint that degrades naturally, as in a \"non-integrative vectors\", or to enter the host's nucleus becoming a permanent part of the host's nuclear DNA in infected cells.50\nA number of viruses have been used for human gene therapy, including viruses such as lentivirus, adenoviruses, herpes simplex, vaccinia, and adeno-associated virus.\nAdenovirus viral vectors (Ad) temporarily modify a cell's genetic expression with genetic material that is not integrated into the host cell's DNA.5 As of 2017, such vectors were used in 20% of trials for gene therapy.10 Adenovirus vectors are mostly used in cancer treatments and novel genetic vaccines such as the Ebola vaccine, vaccines used in clinical trials for HIV and SARS-CoV-2, or cancer vaccines.5\nLentiviral vectors based on lentivirus, a retrovirus, can modify a cell's nuclear genome to permanently express a gene, although vectors can be modified to prevent integration.40,50 Retroviruses were used in 18% of trials before 2018.10 Libmeldy is an ex vivo stem cell treatment for metachromatic leukodystrophy which uses a lentiviral vector and was authorized by the European medical agency in 2020.\nAdeno-associated virus (AAV) is a virus that is incapable of transmission between cells unless the cell is infected by another virus, a helper virus. Adenovirus and the herpes viruses act as helper viruses for AAV. AAV persists within the cell outside of the cell's nuclear genome for an extended period of time through the formation of concatemers mostly organized as episomes.4 Genetic material from AAV vectors is integrated into the host cell's nuclear genome at a low frequency and likely mediated by the DNA-modifying enzymes of the host cell.2647 Animal models suggest that integration of AAV genetic material into the host cell's nuclear genome may cause hepatocellular carcinoma, a form of liver cancer. Several AAV investigational agents have been explored in treatment of wet age related macular degeneration by both intravitreal and subretinal approaches as a potential application of AAV gene therapy for human disease.\nNon-viral.\nNon-viral vectors for gene therapy present certain advantages over viral methods, such as large scale production and low host immunogenicity. However, non-viral methods initially produced lower levels of transfection and gene expression, and thus lower therapeutic efficacy. Newer technologies offer promise of solving these problems, with the advent of increased cell-specific targeting and subcellular trafficking control.\nMethods for non-viral gene therapy include the injection of naked DNA, electroporation, the gene gun, sonoporation, magnetofection, the use of oligonucleotides, lipoplexes, dendrimers, and inorganic nanoparticles. These therapeutics can be administered directly or through scaffold enrichment.\nMore recent approaches, such as those performed by companies such as Ligandal, offer the possibility of creating cell-specific targeting technologies for a variety of gene therapy modalities, including RNA, DNA and gene editing tools such as CRISPR. Other companies, such as Arbutus Biopharma and Arcturus Therapeutics, offer non-viral, non-cell-targeted approaches that mainly exhibit liver trophism. In more recent years, startups such as Sixfold Bio, GenEdit, and Spotlight Therapeutics have begun to solve the non-viral gene delivery problem. Non-viral techniques offer the possibility of repeat dosing and greater tailorability of genetic payloads, which in the future will be more likely to take over viral-based delivery systems.\nCompanies such as Editas Medicine, Intellia Therapeutics, CRISPR Therapeutics, Casebia, Cellectis, Precision Biosciences, bluebird bio, Excision BioTherapeutics, and Sangamo have developed non-viral gene editing techniques, however frequently still use viruses for delivering gene insertion material following genomic cleavage by guided nucleases. These companies focus on gene editing, and still face major delivery hurdles.\nBioNTech, Moderna Therapeutics and CureVac focus on delivery of mRNA payloads, which are necessarily non-viral delivery problems.\nAlnylam, Dicerna Pharmaceuticals, and Ionis Pharmaceuticals focus on delivery of siRNA (antisense oligonucleotides) for gene suppression, which also necessitate non-viral delivery systems.\nIn academic contexts, a number of laboratories are working on delivery of PEGylated particles, which form serum protein coronas and chiefly exhibit LDL receptor mediated uptake in cells \"in vivo\".\nTreatment.\nCancer.\nThere have been attempts to treat cancer using gene therapy. As of 2017, 65% of gene therapy trials were for cancer treatment.7 \nIn 2025, a consortium of researchers, in partnership with the National Science Foundation of Iran, conducted an in vitro study to develop a novel formulation of an anti-breast cancer medication that employs gene therapy and intelligent nanocarriers for the first time. This approach enabled researchers to inhibit the proliferation of over 90% of breast cancer cells by concurrently silencing two critical genes (Integrin \u03b23 and IGF-1R) and initiating programmed cell death within 48 hours.\nAdenovirus vectors are useful for some cancer gene therapies because adenovirus can transiently insert genetic material into a cell without permanently altering the cell's nuclear genome. These vectors can be used to cause antigens to be added to cancers causing an immune response, or hinder angiogenesis by expressing certain proteins.5 An Adenovirus vector is used in the commercial products Gendicine and Oncorine.10 Another commercial product, Rexin G, uses a retrovirus-based vector and selectively binds to receptors that are more expressed in tumors.10\nOne approach, suicide gene therapy, works by introducing genes encoding enzymes that will cause a cancer cell to die. Another approach is the use oncolytic viruses, such as Oncorine,165 which are viruses that selectively reproduce in cancerous cells leaving other cells unaffected.6280\nmRNA has been suggested as a non-viral vector for cancer gene therapy that would temporarily change a cancerous cell's function to create antigens or kill the cancerous cells and there have been several trials.\nAfamitresgene autoleucel, sold under the brand name Tecelra, is an autologous T cell immunotherapy used for the treatment of synovial sarcoma. It is a T cell receptor (TCR) gene therapy. It is the first FDA-approved engineered cell therapy for a solid tumor. It uses a self-inactivating lentiviral vector to express a T-cell receptor specific for MAGE-A4, a melanoma-associated antigen.\nGenetic diseases.\nGene therapy approaches to replace a faulty gene with a healthy gene have been proposed and are being studied for treating some genetic diseases. As of 2017, 11.1% of gene therapy clinical trials targeted monogenic diseases.9\nDiseases such as sickle cell disease that are caused by autosomal recessive disorders for which a person's normal phenotype or cell function may be restored in cells that have the disease by a normal copy of the gene that is mutated, may be a good candidate for gene therapy treatment. The risks and benefits related to gene therapy for sickle cell disease are not known.\nGene therapy has been used in the eye. The eye is especially suitable for adeno-associated virus vectors. Voretigene neparvovec is an approved gene therapy to treat patients with vision impairment due to mutations in the RPE65 gene1354 alipogene tiparvovec, a treatment for familial lipoprotein lipase (LPL) deficiency, and Zolgensma for the treatment of spinal muscular atrophy both use an adeno-associated virus vector.2647\nInfectious diseases.\nAs of 2017, 7% of genetic therapy trials targeted infectious diseases. 69.2% of trials targeted HIV, 11% hepatitis B or C, and 7.1% malaria.\nList of gene therapies for treatment of disease.\nSome genetic therapies have been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the European Medicines Agency (EMA), and for use in Russia and China.\nAdverse effects, contraindications and hurdles for use.\nSome of the unsolved problems include:\nDeaths.\nThree patients' deaths have been reported in gene therapy trials, putting the field under close scrutiny. The first was that of Jesse Gelsinger, who died in 1999, because of immune rejection response. One X-SCID patient died of leukemia in 2003. In 2007, a rheumatoid arthritis patient died from an infection; the subsequent investigation concluded that the death was not related to gene therapy.\nRegulations.\nRegulations covering genetic modification are part of general guidelines about human-involved biomedical research. There are no international treaties which are legally binding in this area, but there are recommendations for national laws from various bodies.\nThe Helsinki Declaration (Ethical Principles for Medical Research Involving Human Subjects) was amended by the World Medical Association's General Assembly in 2008. This document provides principles physicians and researchers must consider when involving humans as research subjects. The Statement on Gene Therapy Research initiated by the Human Genome Organization (HUGO) in 2001, provides a legal baseline for all countries. HUGO's document emphasizes human freedom and adherence to human rights, and offers recommendations for somatic gene therapy, including the importance of recognizing public concerns about such research.\nUnited States.\nNo federal legislation lays out protocols or restrictions about human genetic engineering. This subject is governed by overlapping regulations from local and federal agencies, including the Department of Health and Human Services, the FDA and NIH's Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee. Researchers seeking federal funds for an investigational new drug application, (commonly the case for somatic human genetic engineering,) must obey international and federal guidelines for the protection of human subjects.\nNIH serves as the main gene therapy regulator for federally funded research. Privately funded research is advised to follow these regulations. NIH provides funding for research that develops or enhances genetic engineering techniques and to evaluate the ethics and quality in current research. The NIH maintains a mandatory registry of human genetic engineering research protocols that includes all federally funded projects.\nAn NIH advisory committee published a set of guidelines on gene manipulation. The guidelines discuss lab safety as well as human test subjects and various experimental types that involve genetic changes. Several sections specifically pertain to human genetic engineering, including Section III-C-1. This section describes required review processes and other aspects when seeking approval to begin clinical research involving genetic transfer into a human patient. The protocol for a gene therapy clinical trial must be approved by the NIH's Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee prior to any clinical trial beginning; this is different from any other kind of clinical trial.\nAs with other kinds of drugs, the FDA regulates the quality and safety of gene therapy products and supervises how these products are used clinically. Therapeutic alteration of the human genome falls under the same regulatory requirements as any other medical treatment. Research involving human subjects, such as clinical trials, must be reviewed and approved by the FDA and an Institutional Review Board.\nGene doping.\nAthletes may adopt gene therapy technologies to improve their performance. Gene doping is not known to occur, but multiple gene therapies may have such effects. Kayser et al. argue that gene doping could level the playing field if all athletes receive equal access. Critics claim that any therapeutic intervention for non-therapeutic/enhancement purposes compromises the ethical foundations of medicine and sports.\nGenetic enhancement.\nGenetic engineering could be used to cure diseases, but also to change physical appearance, metabolism, and even improve physical capabilities and mental faculties such as memory and intelligence. Ethical claims about germline engineering include beliefs that every fetus has a right to remain genetically unmodified, that parents hold the right to genetically modify their offspring, and that every child has the right to be born free of preventable diseases. For parents, genetic engineering could be seen as another child enhancement technique to add to diet, exercise, education, training, cosmetics, and plastic surgery. Another theorist claims that moral concerns limit but do not prohibit germline engineering.\nA 2020 issue of the journal \"Bioethics\" was devoted to moral issues surrounding germline genetic engineering in people.\nPossible regulatory schemes include a complete ban, provision to everyone, or professional self-regulation. The American Medical Association's Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs stated that \"genetic interventions to enhance traits should be considered permissible only in severely restricted situations: (1) clear and meaningful benefits to the fetus or child; (2) no trade-off with other characteristics or traits; and (3) equal access to the genetic technology, irrespective of income or other socioeconomic characteristics.\"\nAs early in the history of biotechnology as 1990, there have been scientists opposed to attempts to modify the human germline using these new tools, and such concerns have continued as technology progressed. With the advent of new techniques like CRISPR, in March 2015 a group of scientists urged a worldwide moratorium on clinical use of gene editing technologies to edit the human genome in a way that can be inherited. In April 2015, researchers sparked controversy when they reported results of basic research to edit the DNA of non-viable human embryos using CRISPR. A committee of the American National Academy of Sciences and National Academy of Medicine gave qualified support to human genome editing in 2017 once answers have been found to safety and efficiency problems \"but only for serious conditions under stringent oversight.\"\nHistory.\n1970s and earlier.\nIn 1972, Friedmann and Roblin authored a paper in \"Science\" titled \"Gene therapy for human genetic disease?\". Rogers (1970) was cited for proposing that \"exogenous good DNA\" be used to replace the defective DNA in those with genetic defects.\n1980s.\nIn 1984, a retrovirus vector system was designed that could efficiently insert foreign genes into mammalian chromosomes.\n1990s.\nThe first approved gene therapy clinical research in the US took place in September 1990, at the National Institutes of Health (NIH), under the direction of William French Anderson. Four-year-old Ashanti DeSilva received treatment for a genetic defect that left her with adenosine deaminase deficiency (ADA-SCID), a severe immune system deficiency. The defective gene of the patient's blood cells was replaced by the functional variant. Ashanti's immune system was partially restored by the therapy. Production of the missing enzyme was temporarily stimulated, but the new cells with functional genes were not generated. She led a normal life only with the regular injections performed every two months. The effects were successful, but temporary.\nCancer gene therapy was introduced in 1992/93 (Trojan et al. 1993). The treatment of glioblastoma multiforme, the malignant brain tumor whose outcome is always fatal, was done using a vector expressing antisense IGF-I RNA (clinical trial approved by NIH protocol no.1602 24 November 1993, and by the FDA in 1994). This therapy also represents the beginning of cancer immunogene therapy, a treatment which proves to be effective due to the anti-tumor mechanism of IGF-I antisense, which is related to strong immune and apoptotic phenomena.\nIn 1992, Claudio Bordignon, working at the Vita-Salute San Raffaele University, performed the first gene therapy procedure using hematopoietic stem cells as vectors to deliver genes intended to correct hereditary diseases. In 2002, this work led to the publication of the first successful gene therapy treatment for ADA-SCID. The success of a multi-center trial for treating children with SCID (severe combined immune deficiency or \"bubble boy\" disease) from 2000 and 2002, was questioned when two of the ten children treated at the trial's Paris center developed a leukemia-like condition. Clinical trials were halted temporarily in 2002, but resumed after regulatory review of the protocol in the US, the United Kingdom, France, Italy, and Germany.\nIn 1993, Andrew Gobea was born with SCID following prenatal genetic screening. Blood was removed from his mother's placenta and umbilical cord immediately after birth, to acquire stem cells. The allele that codes for adenosine deaminase (ADA) was obtained and inserted into a retrovirus. Retroviruses and stem cells were mixed, after which the viruses inserted the gene into the stem cell chromosomes. Stem cells containing the working ADA gene were injected into Andrew's blood. Injections of the ADA enzyme were also given weekly. For four years T cells (white blood cells), produced by stem cells, made ADA enzymes using the ADA gene. After four years more treatment was needed.\nIn 1996, Luigi Naldini and Didier Trono developed a new class of gene therapy vectors based on HIV capable of infecting non-dividing cells that have since then been widely used in clinical and research settings, pioneering lentivirals vector in gene therapy.\nJesse Gelsinger's death in 1999 impeded gene therapy research in the US. As a result, the FDA suspended several clinical trials pending the reevaluation of ethical and procedural practices.\n2000s.\nThe modified gene therapy strategy of antisense IGF-I RNA (NIH n\u02da 1602) using antisense / triple helix anti-IGF-I approach was registered in 2002, by Wiley gene therapy clinical trial - n\u02da 635 and 636. The approach has shown promising results in the treatment of six different malignant tumors: glioblastoma, cancers of liver, colon, prostate, uterus, and ovary (Collaborative NATO Science Programme on Gene Therapy USA, France, Poland n\u02da LST 980517 conducted by J. Trojan) (Trojan et al., 2012). This anti-gene antisense/triple helix therapy has proven to be efficient, due to the mechanism stopping simultaneously IGF-I expression on translation and transcription levels, strengthening anti-tumor immune and apoptotic phenomena.\n2002.\nSickle cell disease can be treated in mice. The mice \u2013 which have essentially the same defect that causes human cases \u2013 used a viral vector to induce production of fetal hemoglobin (HbF), which normally ceases to be produced shortly after birth. In humans, the use of hydroxyurea to stimulate the production of HbF temporarily alleviates sickle cell symptoms. The researchers demonstrated this treatment to be a more permanent means to increase therapeutic HbF production.\nA new gene therapy approach repaired errors in messenger RNA derived from defective genes. This technique has the potential to treat thalassaemia, cystic fibrosis and some cancers.\nResearchers created liposomes 25 nanometers across that can carry therapeutic DNA through pores in the nuclear membrane.\n2003.\nIn 2003, a research team inserted genes into the brain for the first time. They used liposomes coated in a polymer called polyethylene glycol, which unlike viral vectors, are small enough to cross the blood\u2013brain barrier.\nShort pieces of double-stranded RNA (short, interfering RNAs or siRNAs) are used by cells to degrade RNA of a particular sequence. If a siRNA is designed to match the RNA copied from a faulty gene, then the abnormal protein product of that gene will not be produced.\nGendicine is a cancer gene therapy that delivers the tumor suppressor gene p53 using an engineered adenovirus. In 2003, it was approved in China for the treatment of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.\n2006.\nIn March, researchers announced the successful use of gene therapy to treat two adult patients for X-linked chronic granulomatous disease, a disease which affects myeloid cells and damages the immune system. The study is the first to show that gene therapy can treat the myeloid system.\nIn May, a team reported a way to prevent the immune system from rejecting a newly delivered gene. Similar to organ transplantation, gene therapy has been plagued by this problem. The immune system normally recognizes the new gene as foreign and rejects the cells carrying it. The research utilized a newly uncovered network of genes regulated by molecules known as microRNAs. This natural function selectively obscured their therapeutic gene in immune system cells and protected it from discovery. Mice infected with the gene containing an immune-cell microRNA target sequence did not reject the gene.\nIn August, scientists successfully treated metastatic melanoma in two patients using killer T cells genetically retargeted to attack the cancer cells.\nIn November, researchers reported on the use of VRX496, a gene-based immunotherapy for the treatment of HIV that uses a lentiviral vector to deliver an antisense gene against the HIV envelope. In a phase I clinical trial, five subjects with chronic HIV infection who had failed to respond to at least two antiretroviral regimens were treated. A single intravenous infusion of autologous CD4 T cells genetically modified with VRX496 was well tolerated. All patients had stable or decreased viral load; four of the five patients had stable or increased CD4 T cell counts. All five patients had stable or increased immune response to HIV antigens and other pathogens. This was the first evaluation of a lentiviral vector administered in a US human clinical trial.\n2007.\nIn May 2007, researchers announced the first gene therapy trial for inherited retinal disease. The first operation was carried out on a 23-year-old British male, Robert Johnson, in early 2007.\n2008.\nLeber's congenital amaurosis is an inherited blinding disease caused by mutations in the RPE65 gene. The results of a small clinical trial in children were published in April. Delivery of recombinant adeno-associated virus (AAV) carrying RPE65 yielded positive results. In May, two more groups reported positive results in independent clinical trials using gene therapy to treat the condition. In all three clinical trials, patients recovered functional vision without apparent side-effects.\n2009.\nIn September researchers were able to give trichromatic vision to squirrel monkeys. In November 2009, researchers halted a fatal genetic disorder called adrenoleukodystrophy in two children using a lentivirus vector to deliver a functioning version of ABCD1, the gene that is mutated in the disorder.\n2010s.\n2010.\nAn April paper reported that gene therapy addressed achromatopsia (color blindness) in dogs by targeting cone photoreceptors. Cone function and day vision were restored for at least 33 months in two young specimens. The therapy was less efficient for older dogs.\nIn September it was announced that an 18-year-old male patient in France with beta thalassemia major had been successfully treated. Beta thalassemia major is an inherited blood disease in which beta haemoglobin is missing and patients are dependent on regular lifelong blood transfusions. The technique used a lentiviral vector to transduce the human \u03b2-globin gene into purified blood and marrow cells obtained from the patient in June 2007. The patient's haemoglobin levels were stable at 9 to 10 g/dL. About a third of the hemoglobin contained the form introduced by the viral vector and blood transfusions were not needed. Further clinical trials were planned. Bone marrow transplants are the only cure for thalassemia, but 75% of patients do not find a matching donor.\nCancer immunogene therapy using modified antigene, antisense/triple helix approach was introduced in South America in 2010/11 in La Sabana University, Bogota (Ethical Committee 14 December 2010, no P-004-10). Considering the ethical aspect of gene diagnostic and gene therapy targeting IGF-I, the IGF-I expressing tumors i.e. lung and epidermis cancers were treated (Trojan et al. 2016).\n2011.\nIn 2007 and 2008, a man (Timothy Ray Brown) was cured of HIV by repeated hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (see also allogeneic stem cell transplantation, allogeneic bone marrow transplantation, allotransplantation) with double-delta-32 mutation which disables the CCR5 receptor. This cure was accepted by the medical community in 2011. It required complete ablation of existing bone marrow, which is very debilitating.\nIn August two of three subjects of a pilot study were confirmed to have been cured from chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). The therapy used genetically modified T cells to attack cells that expressed the CD19 protein to fight the disease. In 2013, the researchers announced that 26 of 59 patients had achieved complete remission and the original patient had remained tumor-free.\nHuman HGF plasmid DNA therapy of cardiomyocytes is being examined as a potential treatment for coronary artery disease as well as treatment for the damage that occurs to the heart after myocardial infarction.\nIn 2011, Neovasculgen was registered in Russia as the first-in-class gene-therapy drug for treatment of peripheral artery disease, including critical limb ischemia; it delivers the gene encoding for VEGF. Neovasculogen is a plasmid encoding the CMV promoter and the 165 amino acid form of VEGF.\n2012.\nThe FDA approved Phase I clinical trials on thalassemia major patients in the US for 10 participants in July. The study was expected to continue until 2015.\nIn July 2012, the European Medicines Agency recommended approval of a gene therapy treatment for the first time in either Europe or the United States. The treatment used Alipogene tiparvovec (Glybera) to compensate for lipoprotein lipase deficiency, which can cause severe pancreatitis. The recommendation was endorsed by the European Commission in November 2012, and commercial rollout began in late 2014. Alipogene tiparvovec was expected to cost around $1.6 million per treatment in 2012, revised to $1 million in 2015, making it the most expensive medicine in the world at the time. As of 2016[ [update]], only the patients treated in clinical trials and a patient who paid the full price for treatment have received the drug.\nIn December 2012, it was reported that 10 of 13 patients with multiple myeloma were in remission \"or very close to it\" three months after being injected with a treatment involving genetically engineered T cells to target proteins NY-ESO-1 and LAGE-1, which exist only on cancerous myeloma cells.\n2013.\nIn March researchers reported that three of five adult subjects who had acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) had been in remission for five months to two years after being treated with genetically modified T cells which attacked cells with CD19 genes on their surface, i.e. all B cells, cancerous or not. The researchers believed that the patients' immune systems would make normal T cells and B cells after a couple of months. They were also given bone marrow. One patient relapsed and died and one died of a blood clot unrelated to the disease.\nFollowing encouraging Phase I trials, in April, researchers announced they were starting Phase II clinical trials (called CUPID2 and SERCA-LVAD) on 250 patients at several hospitals to combat heart disease. The therapy was designed to increase the levels of SERCA2, a protein in heart muscles, improving muscle function. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) granted this a breakthrough therapy designation to accelerate the trial and approval process. In 2016, it was reported that no improvement was found from the CUPID 2 trial.\nIn July researchers reported promising results for six children with two severe hereditary diseases had been treated with a partially deactivated lentivirus to replace a faulty gene and after 7\u201332 months. Three of the children had metachromatic leukodystrophy, which causes children to lose cognitive and motor skills. The other children had Wiskott\u2013Aldrich syndrome, which leaves them to open to infection, autoimmune diseases, and cancer. Follow up trials with gene therapy on another six children with Wiskott\u2013Aldrich syndrome were also reported as promising.\nIn October researchers reported that two children born with adenosine deaminase severe combined immunodeficiency disease (ADA-SCID) had been treated with genetically engineered stem cells 18 months previously and that their immune systems were showing signs of full recovery. Another three children were making progress. In 2014, a further 18 children with ADA-SCID were cured by gene therapy. ADA-SCID children have no functioning immune system and are sometimes known as \"bubble children\".\nAlso in October researchers reported that they had treated six people with haemophilia in early 2011 using an adeno-associated virus. Over two years later all six were producing clotting factor.\n2014.\nIn January researchers reported that six choroideremia patients had been treated with adeno-associated virus with a copy of REP1. Over a six-month to two-year period all had improved their sight. By 2016, 32 patients had been treated with positive results and researchers were hopeful the treatment would be long-lasting. Choroideremia is an inherited genetic eye disease with no approved treatment, leading to loss of sight.\nIn March researchers reported that 12 HIV patients had been treated since 2009 in a trial with a genetically engineered virus with a rare mutation (CCR5 deficiency) known to protect against HIV with promising results.\nClinical trials of gene therapy for sickle cell disease were started in 2014.\nIn February LentiGlobin BB305, a gene therapy treatment undergoing clinical trials for treatment of beta thalassemia gained FDA \"breakthrough\" status after several patients were able to forgo the frequent blood transfusions usually required to treat the disease.\nIn March researchers delivered a recombinant gene encoding a broadly neutralizing antibody into monkeys infected with simian HIV; the monkeys' cells produced the antibody, which cleared them of HIV. The technique is named immunoprophylaxis by gene transfer (IGT). Animal tests for antibodies to ebola, malaria, influenza, and hepatitis were underway.\nIn March, scientists, including an inventor of CRISPR, Jennifer Doudna, urged a worldwide moratorium on germline gene therapy, writing \"scientists should avoid even attempting, in lax jurisdictions, germline genome modification for clinical application in humans\" until the full implications \"are discussed among scientific and governmental organizations\".\nIn December, scientists of major world academies called for a moratorium on inheritable human genome edits, including those related to CRISPR-Cas9 technologies but that basic research including embryo gene editing should continue.\n2015.\nResearchers successfully treated a boy with epidermolysis bullosa using skin grafts grown from his own skin cells, genetically altered to repair the mutation that caused his disease.\nIn November, researchers announced that they had treated a baby girl, Layla Richards, with an experimental treatment using donor T cells genetically engineered using TALEN to attack cancer cells. One year after the treatment she was still free of her cancer (a highly aggressive form of acute lymphoblastic leukaemia [ALL]). Children with highly aggressive ALL normally have a very poor prognosis and Layla's disease had been regarded as terminal before the treatment.\n2016.\nIn April the Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use of the European Medicines Agency endorsed a gene therapy treatment called Strimvelis and the European Commission approved it in June. This treats children born with adenosine deaminase deficiency and who have no functioning immune system. This was the second gene therapy treatment to be approved in Europe.\nIn October, Chinese scientists reported they had started a trial to genetically modify T cells from 10 adult patients with lung cancer and reinject the modified T cells back into their bodies to attack the cancer cells. The T cells had the PD-1 protein (which stops or slows the immune response) removed using CRISPR-Cas9.\nA 2016 Cochrane systematic review looking at data from four trials on topical cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene therapy does not support its clinical use as a mist inhaled into the lungs to treat cystic fibrosis patients with lung infections. One of the four trials did find weak evidence that liposome-based CFTR gene transfer therapy may lead to a small respiratory improvement for people with CF. This weak evidence is not enough to make a clinical recommendation for routine CFTR gene therapy.\n2017.\nIn February Kite Pharma announced results from a clinical trial of CAR-T cells in around a hundred people with advanced non-Hodgkin lymphoma.\nIn March, French scientists reported on clinical research of gene therapy to treat sickle cell disease.\nIn August, the FDA approved tisagenlecleucel for acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Tisagenlecleucel is an adoptive cell transfer therapy for B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia; T cells from a person with cancer are removed, genetically engineered to make a specific T-cell receptor (a chimeric T cell receptor, or \"CAR-T\") that reacts to the cancer, and are administered back to the person. The T cells are engineered to target a protein called CD19 that is common on B cells. This is the first form of gene therapy to be approved in the United States. In October, a similar therapy called axicabtagene ciloleucel was approved for non-Hodgkin lymphoma.\nIn October, biophysicist and biohacker Josiah Zayner claimed to have performed the very first in-vivo human genome editing in the form of a self-administered therapy.\nOn 13 November, medical scientists working with Sangamo Therapeutics, headquartered in Richmond, California, announced the first ever in-body human gene editing therapy. The treatment, designed to permanently insert a healthy version of the flawed gene that causes Hunter syndrome, was given to 44-year-old Brian Madeux and is part of the world's first study to permanently edit DNA inside the human body. The success of the gene insertion was later confirmed. Clinical trials by Sangamo involving gene editing using zinc finger nuclease (ZFN) are ongoing.\nIn December the results of using an adeno-associated virus with blood clotting factor VIII to treat nine haemophilia A patients were published. Six of the seven patients on the high dose regime increased the level of the blood clotting VIII to normal levels. The low and medium dose regimes had no effect on the patient's blood clotting levels.\nIn December, the FDA approved voretigene neparvovec, the first \"in vivo\" gene therapy, for the treatment of blindness due to Leber's congenital amaurosis. The price of this treatment is US$ for both eyes.\n2019.\nIn May, the FDA approved onasemnogene abeparvovec (Zolgensma) for treating spinal muscular atrophy in children under two years of age. The list price of Zolgensma was set at US$ per dose, making it the most expensive drug ever.\nIn May, the EMA approved betibeglogene autotemcel (Zynteglo) for treating beta thalassemia for people twelve years of age and older.\nIn July, Allergan and Editas Medicine announced phase I/II clinical trial of AGN-151587 for the treatment of Leber congenital amaurosis 10. This is one of the first studies of a CRISPR-based \"in vivo\" human gene editing therapy, where the editing takes place inside the human body. The first injection of the CRISPR-Cas System was confirmed in March 2020.\nExagamglogene autotemcel, a CRISPR-based human gene editing therapy, was used for sickle cell and thalassemia in clinical trials.\n2020s.\n2020.\nIn May, onasemnogene abeparvovec (Zolgensma) was approved by the European Union for the treatment of spinal muscular atrophy in people who either have clinical symptoms of SMA type 1 or who have no more than three copies of the \"SMN2\" gene, irrespective of body weight or age.\nIn August, Audentes Therapeutics reported that three out of 17 children with X-linked myotubular myopathy participating the clinical trial of a AAV8-based gene therapy treatment AT132 have died. It was suggested that the treatment, whose dosage is based on body weight, exerts a disproportionately toxic effect on heavier patients, since the three patients who died were heavier than the others. The trial has been put on clinical hold.\nOn 15 October, the Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use (CHMP) of the European Medicines Agency (EMA) adopted a positive opinion, recommending the granting of a marketing authorisation for the medicinal product Libmeldy (autologous CD34+ cell enriched population that contains hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells transduced ex vivo using a lentiviral vector encoding the human arylsulfatase A gene), a gene therapy for the treatment of children with the \"late infantile\" (LI) or \"early juvenile\" (EJ) forms of metachromatic leukodystrophy (MLD). The active substance of Libmeldy consists of the child's own stem cells which have been modified to contain working copies of the ARSA gene. When the modified cells are injected back into the patient as a one-time infusion, the cells are expected to start producing the ARSA enzyme that breaks down the build-up of sulfatides in the nerve cells and other cells of the patient's body. Libmeldy was approved for medical use in the EU in December 2020.\nOn 15 October, Lysogene, a French biotechnological company, reported the death of a patient in who has received LYS-SAF302, an experimental gene therapy treatment for mucopolysaccharidosis type IIIA (Sanfilippo syndrome type A).\n2021.\nIn May, a new method using an altered version of HIV as a lentivirus vector was reported in the treatment of 50 children with ADA-SCID obtaining positive results in 48 of them, this method is expected to be safer than retroviruses vectors commonly used in previous studies of SCID where the development of leukemia was usually observed and had already been used in 2019, but in a smaller group with X-SCID.\nIn June a clinical trial on six patients affected with transthyretin amyloidosis reported a reduction the concentration of missfolded transthretin (TTR) protein in serum through CRISPR-based inactivation of the \"TTR\" gene in liver cells observing mean reductions of 52% and 87% among the lower and higher dose groups.This was done in vivo without taking cells out of the patient to edit them and reinfuse them later.\nIn July results of a small gene therapy phase I study was published reporting observation of dopamine restoration on seven patients between 4 and 9 years old affected by aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase deficiency (AADC deficiency).\n2022.\nIn February, the first ever gene therapy for Tay\u2013Sachs disease was announced, it uses an adeno-associated virus to deliver the correct instruction for the HEXA gene on brain cells which causes the disease. Only two children were part of a compassionate trial presenting improvements over the natural course of the disease and no vector-related adverse events.\nIn May, eladocagene exuparvovec is recommended for approval by the European Commission.\nIn July results of a gene therapy candidate for haemophilia B called FLT180 were announced, it works using an adeno-associated virus (AAV) to restore the clotting factor IX (FIX) protein, normal levels of the protein were observed with low doses of the therapy but immunosuppression was necessitated to decrease the risk of vector-related immune responses.\nIn December, a 13-year girl that had been diagnosed with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia was successfully treated at Great Ormond Street Hospital (GOSH) in the first documented use of therapeutic gene editing for this purpose, after undergoing six months of an experimental treatment, where all attempts of other treatments failed. The procedure included reprogramming a healthy T-cell to destroy the cancerous T-cells to first rid her of leukaemia, and then rebuilding her immune system using healthy immune cells. The GOSH team used BASE editing and had previously treated a case of acute lymphoblastic leukaemia in 2015 using TALENs.\n2023.\nIn May 2023, the FDA approved beremagene geperpavec for the treatment of wounds in people with dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (DEB) which is applied as a topical gel that delivers a herpes-simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) vector encoding the collagen type VII alpha 1 chain (COL7A1) gene that is dysfunctional on those affected by DEB . One trial found 65% of the Vyjuvek-treated wounds completely closed while only 26% of the placebo-treated at 24 weeks. It has been also reported its use as an eyedrop for a patient with DEB that had vision loss due to the widespread blistering with good results.\nIn June 2023, the FDA gave an accelerated approval to Elevidys for Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) only for boys 4 to 5 years old as they are more likely to benefit from the therapy which consists of one-time intravenous infusion of a virus (AAV rh74 vector) that delivers a functioning \"microdystrophin\" gene (138 kDa) into the muscle cells to act in place of the normal dystrophin (427 kDa) that is found mutated in this disease.\nIn July 2023, it was reported that it had been developed a new method to affect genetic expressions through direct current.\nIn December 2023, two gene therapies were approved for sickle cell disease, exagamglogene autotemcel and lovotibeglogene autotemcel.\n2024\nIn November 2024, FDA granted accelerated approval for eladocagene exuparvovec-tneq (Kebilidi, PTC Therapeutics), a direct-to-brain gene therapy for aromatic -amino acid decarboxylase deficiency. It uses a recombinant adeno-associated virus serotype 2 (rAAV2) to deliver a functioning DOPA decarboxylase (DDC) gene directly into the putamen, increasing the AADC enzyme and restoring dopamine production. It is administered through a stereotactic surgical procedure.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12893", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12893", "title": "Galatea", "text": "Galatea is an ancient Greek name meaning \"she who is milk-white\".\nGalatea, Galathea or Gallathea may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "12896", "revid": "33870361", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12896", "title": "Gulf of Oman", "text": "Arabian Sea link to the Indian Ocean\nThe Gulf of Oman or Sea of Oman ( \"khal\u012bj \u02bfum\u0101n\"; \"dary\u00e2-ye om\u00e2n\"), also known as Gulf of Makran or Sea of Makran ( \"khal\u012bj makr\u0101n\"; \"dary\u00e2-ye makr\u0101n\"), is a gulf in the Indian Ocean that connects the Arabian Sea with the Strait of Hormuz, which then runs to the Persian Gulf. It borders Iran and Pakistan on the north, Oman on the south, and the United Arab Emirates on the west.\nExtent.\nThe International Hydrographic Organization defines the limits of the Gulf of Oman as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExclusive economic zone.\nExclusive economic zones in Gulf of Oman:\nBordering countries.\nCoastline length of bordering countries:\nAlternative names.\nThe Gulf of Oman historically and geographically has been referred to by different names by Arabian, Iranian, Indian, Pakistani, and European geographers and travelers, including Makran Sea and Akhzar Sea.\nUntil the 18th century, it was known as Makran Sea and is also visible on historical maps and museums.\nInternational trade.\nThe Western side of the gulf connects to the Strait of Hormuz, a strategic route through which a third of the world's liquefied natural gas and 20% of global oil consumption passes from Middle East producers.\nEcology.\nIn 2018, scientists confirmed the Gulf of Oman contains one of the world's largest marine dead zones, where the ocean contains little or no oxygen and marine wildlife cannot exist. The dead zone encompasses nearly the entire Gulf of Oman and equivalent to the size of Florida, United States of America. The cause is a combination of increased ocean warming and increased runoff of nitrogen and phosphorus from fertilizers.\nInternational underwater rail tunnel.\nIn 2018, a rail tunnel under the sea was suggested to link the UAE with the western coast of India. The bullet train tunnel would be supported by pontoons and be nearly in length.\nIn popular culture.\nIn the \"Battlefield\" video game series, the Gulf of Oman is a map used in \"Battlefield 2\", \"Battlefield 3\", \"Battlefield Play4Free\" and \"Battlefield 4\" with the United States Marines Corps (USMC) invading the shore of Oman with the fictional Middle Eastern Coalition (MEC) defending it in Battlefield 2, and with Russian Ground Forces defending it in Play4Free, Battlefield 3 and Battlefield 4.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12898", "revid": "44271480", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12898", "title": "Grammatical case", "text": "Categorization of nouns and modifiers by function\nA grammatical case is a category of nouns and noun modifiers (determiners, adjectives, participles, and numerals) that corresponds to one or more potential grammatical functions for a nominal group in a wording. In various languages, nominal groups consisting of a noun and its modifiers belong to one of a few such categories. For instance, in English, one says \"I see them\" and \"they see me\": the nominative pronouns \"I / they\" represent the perceiver, and the accusative pronouns \"me/them\" represent the phenomenon perceived. Here, nominative and accusative are cases, that is, categories of pronouns corresponding to the functions they have in representation.\nEnglish has largely lost its inflected case system but personal pronouns still have three cases, which are simplified forms of the nominative, accusative (including functions formerly handled by the dative), and genitive cases. They are used with personal pronouns: subjective case (I, you, he, she, it, we, they, who, whoever), objective case (me, you, him, her, it, us, them, whom, whomever), and possessive case (my, mine; your, yours; his; her, hers; its; our, ours; their, theirs; whose; whosever). Forms such as \"I\", \"he\", and \"we\" are used for the subject (\"I kicked John\"), and forms such as \"me\", \"him\", and \"us\" are used for the object (\"John kicked me\").\nAs a language evolves, cases can merge (for instance, in Ancient Greek, the locative case merged with the dative), a phenomenon known as syncretism.\nLanguages such as Sanskrit, Latin, and Russian have extensive case systems, with nouns, pronouns, adjectives, and determiners all inflecting (usually by means of different suffixes) to indicate their case. The number of cases differs between languages: For example, modern Standard Arabic and modern English have three, but only for pronouns; Hungarian is among those with the most, with its 18\u00a0cases.\nCommonly encountered cases include nominative, accusative, dative and genitive. A role that one of those languages marks by case is often marked in English with a preposition. For example, the English prepositional phrase \"with (his) foot\" (as in \"John kicked the ball with his foot\") might be rendered in Russian using a single noun in the instrumental case, or in Ancient Greek as (, meaning \"the foot\") with both words \u2013 the definite article, and the noun () \"foot\" \u2013 changing to dative form.\nMore formally, case has been defined as \"a system of marking dependent nouns for the type of relationship they bear to their heads\".1 Cases should be distinguished from thematic roles such as \"agent\" and \"patient\". They are often closely related, and in languages such as Latin, several thematic roles are realised by a somewhat fixed case for deponent verbs, but cases are a syntagmatic / phrasal category, and thematic roles are the function of a syntagma / phrase in a larger structure. Languages having cases often exhibit free word order, as thematic roles are not required to be marked by position in the sentence.\nHistory.\nIt is widely accepted that the Ancient Greeks had a certain idea of the forms of a name in their own language. A fragment of Anacreon seems to prove this. Grammatical cases were first recognized by the Stoics and from some philosophers of the Peripatetic school. The advancements of those philosophers were later employed by the philologists of the Library of Alexandria.\nAristotle recognized the gender of nouns and their related endings, but it was with the Stoics and, subsequently, with the grammarians of the Hellenistic period that a systematic and complete grouping of the morphology of nouns and their declensions in Ancient Greek was achieved. Of particular importance is the work of Dionysius Thrax \"The Art of Grammar\" (2nd century BCE), which represents the first true grammar in the modern sense ever written about an Indo-European language and its structure. In addition to the definition of case and its structure, this work contains most of today's grammatical elements and structures.\nEtymology.\nThe English word \"case\" used in this sense comes from the Latin , which is derived from the verb , \"to fall\", from the Proto-Indo-European root . The Latin word is a calque of the Greek \u202f , , lit. \"falling, fall\".\nThe sense is that all other cases are considered to have \"fallen\" away from the nominative. This imagery is also reflected in the word \"declension\", from Latin , \"to lean\", from the PIE root .\nThe equivalent to \"case\" in several other European languages also derives from \"casus\", including in French, in Italian and in German. The Russian word (\"pady\u00e9zh\") is a calque from Greek and similarly contains a root meaning \"fall\", and the German and Czech simply mean \"fall\", and are used for both the concept of grammatical case and to refer to physical falls. The Dutch equivalent translates as 'noun case', in which 'noun' has the older meaning of both 'adjective (noun)' and '(substantive) noun'. The Finnish equivalent is , whose main meaning is \"position\" or \"place\". \nSimilar to Latin, Sanskrit uses the term \u0935\u093f\u092d\u0915\u094d\u0924\u093f \"(vibhakti)\" which may be interpreted as the specific or distinct \"bendings\" or \"experiences\" of a word, from the verb \u092d\u0941\u091c\u094d \"(bhuj)\" and the prefix \u0935\u093f \"(vi)\", and names the individual cases using ordinal numbers.\nIndo-European languages.\nAlthough not very prominent in modern English, cases featured much more saliently in Old English and other ancient Indo-European languages, such as Latin, Old Persian, Ancient Greek, and Sanskrit. Historically, the Indo-European languages had eight morphological cases, although modern languages typically have fewer, using prepositions and word order to convey information that had previously been conveyed using distinct noun forms. Among modern languages, cases still feature prominently in most of the Balto-Slavic languages (except Macedonian and Bulgarian), with most having six to eight cases, as well as Icelandic, German, Irish and Modern Greek, which have four. In German, cases are mostly marked on articles and adjectives, and less so on nouns. In Icelandic, articles, adjectives, personal names and nouns are all marked for case, making it the most conservative Germanic language.\nThe eight historical Indo-European cases are as follows, with examples either of the English case or of the English syntactic alternative to case:\nAll of the above are just rough descriptions; the precise distinctions vary significantly from language to language, and as such they are often more complex. Case is based fundamentally on changes to the noun to indicate the noun's role in the sentence \u2013 one of the defining features of so-called fusional languages. Old English was a fusional language, but Modern English does not work this way.\nModern English.\nModern English has largely abandoned the inflectional case system of Proto-Indo-European in favor of analytic constructions. The personal pronouns of Modern English retain morphological case more strongly than any other word class (a remnant of the more extensive case system of Old English). For other pronouns, and all nouns, adjectives, and articles, grammatical function is indicated only by word order, by prepositions, and by the \"Saxon genitive\" (\"-'s\").\nTaken as a whole, English personal pronouns are typically said to have three morphological cases:\nMost English personal pronouns have five forms: the nominative case form, the oblique case form, a distinct \"reflexive\" or \"intensive\" form (such as \"myself\", \"ourselves\") which is based upon the possessive determiner form but is coreferential to a preceding instance of nominative or oblique, and the possessive case forms, which include both a \"determiner\" form (such as \"my\", \"our\") and a predicatively used \"independent\" form (such as \"mine\", \"ours\") which is distinct (with two exceptions: the third person singular masculine \"he\" and the third person singular neuter \"it\", which use the same form for both determiner and independent [\"his car\", \"it is his\"]). The interrogative personal pronoun \"who\" exhibits the greatest diversity of forms within the modern English pronoun system, having definite nominative, oblique, and genitive forms (\"who\", \"whom\", \"whose\") and equivalently-coordinating indefinite forms (\"whoever\", \"whomever\", and \"whosever\"). The pronoun \"where\" has a corresponding set of derived forms (\"whither\", \"whence\"), but they're considered archaic.\nAlthough English \"pronouns\" can have subject and object forms (he/him, she/her), \"nouns\" show only a singular/plural and a possessive/non-possessive distinction (e.g. \"chair\", \"chairs\", \"chair's\", \"chairs\"'); there is no manifest difference in the form of \"chair\" between \"The chair is here.\" (subject) and \"I own the chair.\" (direct object), a distinction made instead by word order and context.\nHierarchy of cases.\nCases can be ranked in the following hierarchy, where a language that does not have a given case will tend not to have any cases to the right of the missing case:89\n nominative \"or\" absolutive \u2192 accusative \"or\" ergative \u2192 genitive \u2192 dative \u2192 locative \"or\" prepositional \u2192 ablative \"and/or\" instrumental \u2192 \"others\".\nThis is, however, only a general tendency. Many forms of Central German, such as Colognian and Luxembourgish, have a dative case but lack a genitive. In Irish nouns, the nominative and accusative have fallen together, whereas the dative\u2013locative, genitive, and vocative have remained separate. In many modern Indo-Aryan languages, the accusative, genitive, and dative have merged to an oblique case, but many of these languages still retain vocative, locative, and ablative cases. Old English had an instrumental case, but not a locative case.\nCase order.\nThe traditional case order (nom-gen-dat-acc) was expressed for the first time in \"The Art of Grammar\" in the 2nd\u00a0century BCE:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Screen reader-only/styles.css\" /&gt;Translation:\nLatin grammars, such as \"Ars grammatica\", followed the Greek tradition, but added the ablative case of Latin. Later other European languages also followed that Graeco-Roman tradition.\nHowever, for some languages, such as Latin, due to case syncretism the order may be changed for convenience, where the accusative or the vocative cases are placed after the nominative and before the genitive. For example:\nFor similar reasons, the customary order of the four cases in Icelandic is nominative\u2013accusative\u2013dative\u2013genitive, as illustrated below:\nSanskrit similarly arranges cases in the order nominative-accusative-instrumental-dative-ablative-genitive-locative-vocative. The cases are individually named as the \"first,\" \"second,\" \"third\", and so on. For example, a common grammatical construction is called the \u0938\u0924\u093f \u0938\u092a\u094d\u0924\u092e\u0940 (\"Sati Saptami\") or \"The Good Seventh\" because it uses the locative, which is the seventh case, in a fashion similar to the use of \"Upon\" in sequential English phrases. (E.g. Upon their arrival, the two were immediately accosted by creditors.)\nCase concord systems.\nIn the most common case concord system, only the head-word (the noun) in a phrase is marked for case. This system appears in many Papuan languages as well as in Turkic, Mongolian, Quechua, Dravidian, Indo-Aryan, and other languages. In Basque and various Amazonian and Australian languages, only the phrase-final word (not necessarily the noun) is marked for case. In many Indo-European, Finnic, and Semitic languages, case is marked on the noun, the determiner, and usually the adjective. Other systems are less common. In some languages, there is double-marking of a word as both genitive (to indicate semantic role) and another case such as accusative (to establish concord with the head noun).\nDeclension paradigms.\nDeclension is the process or result of altering nouns to the correct grammatical cases. Languages with rich nominal inflection (using grammatical cases for many purposes) typically have a number of identifiable declension classes, or groups of nouns with a similar pattern of case inflection or declension. Sanskrit has six declension classes, whereas Latin is traditionally considered to have five, and Ancient Greek three. For example, Slovak has fifteen noun declension classes, five for each gender (the number may vary depending on which paradigms are counted or omitted, this mainly concerns those that modify declension of foreign words; refer to article).\nIn Indo-European languages, declension patterns may depend on a variety of factors, such as gender, number, phonological environment, and irregular historical factors. Pronouns sometimes have separate paradigms. In some languages, particularly Slavic languages, a case may contain different groups of endings depending on whether the word is a noun or an adjective. A single case may contain many different endings, some of which may even be derived from different roots. For example, in Polish, the genitive case has \"-a, -u, -\u00f3w, -i/-y, -e-\" for nouns, and \"-ego, -ej, -ich/-ych\" for adjectives. To a lesser extent, a noun's animacy or humanness may add another layer of complexity. For example, in Russian:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nvs.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nand\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExamples.\nArabic.\nAn example of a Standard Arabic case inflection is given below, using the singular forms of the Arabic term for \"book\" :\nThe modern Arabic colloquial dialects have abandoned the grammatical cases of Classical Arabic, and they are only used nowadays in Modern Standard Arabic. Standard Arabic is the only living Semitic language that preserved the complete Proto-Semitic grammatical cases and declension (\u02beI\u02bfrab). In some dialects of Northern and Central Saudi Arabia, one encounters the nunation in the -in form, e.g. , \"a road\" (as in vs. the common colloquial ), apparently with the -i- of the former genitive, while -u &lt; -un is preserved in some Yemenite colloquials when the noun is indeterminate (e.g. , \"a house\", but al-bayt, \"the house\").\nAustralian Aboriginal languages.\nAustralian languages represent a diversity of case paradigms in terms of their alignment (i.e. nominative-accusative vs. ergative-absolutive) and the morpho-syntactic properties of case inflection including where/how many times across a noun phrase the case morphology will appear. For typical r-expression noun phrases, most Australian languages follow a basic ERG-ABS template with additional cases for peripheral arguments; however, many Australian languages, the function of case marking extends beyond the prototypical function of specifying the syntactic and semantic relation of an NP to a predicate. use a five-part system for categorizing the functional roles of case marking in Australian languages. They are enumerated below as they appear in :\nTo illustrate this paradigm in action, take the case-system of Wanyjirra for whose description Senge invokes this system. Each of the case markers functions in the prototypical relational sense, but many extend into these additional functions:\nWanyjirra is an example of a language in which case marking occurs on all sub-constituents of the NP; see the following example in which the demonstrative, head, and quantifier of the noun phrase all receive ergative marking:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHowever, this is by no means always the case or even the norm for Australian languages. For many, case-affixes are considered special-clitics (i.e. phrasal-affixes, see Anderson 2005) because they have a singular fixed position within the phrase. For Bardi, the case marker usually appears on the first phrasal constituent while the opposite is the case for Wangkatja (i.e. the case marker is attracted to the rightmost edge of the phrase). See the following examples respectively:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBasque.\nBasque has the following cases, with examples given in the indefinite, definite singular, definite plural, and definite close plural of the word \"etxe\", \"house\", \"home\":\nSome of them can be re-declined, even more than once, as if they were nouns (usually, from the genitive locative case), although they mainly work as noun modifiers before a noun clause:\nGerman.\nIn German, grammatical case is largely preserved in the articles and adjectives, but nouns have lost many of their original endings. Below is an example of case inflection in German using the masculine definite article and one of the German words for \"sailor\".\nAn example with the feminine definite article with the German word for \"woman\".\nAn example with the neuter definite article with the German word for \"book\".\nProper names for cities have two genitive nouns:\nHindi-Urdu.\nHindi-Urdu (Hindustani) has three noun cases, the \"nominative,\" \"oblique\", and \"vocative\" cases. The vocative case is now obsolete (but still used in certain regions) and the oblique case doubles as the vocative case. The pronoun cases in Hindi-Urdu are the \"nominative\", \"ergative\", \"accusative, dative\", and two \"oblique\" cases. The case forms which do not exist for certain pronouns are constructed using primary postpositions (or other grammatical particles) and the oblique case (shown in parentheses in the table below).\nThe other cases are constructed adpositionally using the case-marking postpositions using the nouns and pronouns in their oblique cases. The oblique case is used exclusively with these 8 case-marking postpositions of Hindi-Urdu forming 10 grammatical cases, which are: \"ergative\" \u0928\u0947 (ne), \"dative\" and \"accusative\" \u0915\u094b (ko), \"instrumental\" and \"ablative\" \u0938\u0947 (se), \"genitive\" \u0915\u093e (k\u0101), \"inessive\" \u092e\u0947\u0902 (m\u1ebd), \"adessive\" \u092a\u0947 (pe), \"terminative\" \u0924\u0915 (tak), \"semblative\" \u0938\u093e (s\u0101).\nLatin.\nAn example of a Latin case inflection is given below, using the singular forms of the Latin term for \"cook\", which belongs to Latin's second declension class.\nFor some toponyms, a seventh case, the locative, also exists, such as (in Mediolanum).\nThe Romance languages have largely abandoned or simplified the grammatical cases of Latin. Much like English, most Romance case markers survive only in pronouns.\nLithuanian.\nTypically in Lithuanian, only the inflection changes for the seven different grammatical cases:\nHungarian.\nHungarian declension is relatively simple with regular suffixes attached to the vast majority of nouns. The following table lists all of the cases used in Hungarian.\nRussian.\nAn example of a Russian case inflection is given below (with explicit stress marks), using the singular forms of the Russian term for \"sailor\", which belongs to Russian's first declension class.\nUp to ten additional cases are identified by linguists, although today all of them are either incomplete (do not apply to all nouns or do not form full word paradigm with all combinations of gender and number) or degenerate (appear identical to one of the main six cases). The most recognized additional cases are locative (), partitive (), and two forms of vocative \u2014 old () and neo-vocative (). Sometimes, so called count-form (for some countable nouns after numerals) is considered to be a sub-case.\nSanskrit.\nGrammatical case was analyzed extensively in Sanskrit. The grammarian P\u0101\u1e47ini identified six semantic roles or \"k\u0101raka\", which are related to the following eight Sanskrit cases in order:\nFor example, in the following sentence \"leaf\" is the agent (\"kart\u0101\", nominative case), \"tree\" is the source (\"ap\u0101d\u0101na\", ablative case), and \"ground\" is the locus (\"adhikara\u1e47a\", locative case). The declensions are reflected in the morphemes \"-\u0101t\", \"-am\", and \"-au\" respectively.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHowever, the cases may be deployed for other than the default thematic roles. A notable example is the passive construction. In the following sentence, \"Devadatta\" is the \"kart\u0101\", but appears in the instrumental case, and \"rice\", the \"karman\", object, is in the nominative case (as subject of the verb). The declensions are reflected in the morphemes \"-ena\" and \"-am\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTamil.\nThe Tamil case system is analyzed in native and missionary grammars as consisting of a finite number of cases. The usual treatment of Tamil case (Arden 1942) is one in which there are seven cases: nominative (first case), accusative (second case), instrumental (third), dative (fourth), ablative (fifth), genitive (sixth), and locative (seventh). In traditional analyses, there is always a clear distinction made between post-positional morphemes and case endings. The vocative is sometimes given a place in the case system as an eighth case, but vocative forms do not participate in usual morphophonemic alternations and do not govern the use of any postpositions. Modern grammarians, however, argue that this eight-case classification is coarse and artificial and that Tamil usage is best understood if each suffix or combination of suffixes is seen as marking a separate case.\nTurkish.\nModern Turkish has six cases (In Turkish \"\u0130smin H\u00e2lleri\").\nThe accusative can exist only in the noun(whether it is derived from a verb or not). For example, \"Arkada\u015flar bize gelmeyi d\u00fc\u015f\u00fcn\u00fcyorlar.\" (Friends are thinking of coming to us).\nThe dative can exist only in the noun (whether it is derived from a verb or not). For example, \"Bol bol kitap okumaya \u00e7al\u0131\u015f\u0131yorum.\" (I try to read a lot of books).\nEvolution.\nAs languages evolve, case systems change. In early Ancient Greek, for example, the genitive and ablative cases of given names became combined, giving five cases, rather than the six retained in Latin. In modern Hindi, the cases have been reduced to three: a direct case (for subjects and direct objects) and oblique case, and a vocative case. In English, apart from the pronouns discussed above, case has vanished altogether except for the possessive/non-possessive dichotomy in nouns.\nThe evolution of the treatment of case relationships can be circular. Postpositions can become unstressed and sound like they are an unstressed syllable of a neighboring word. A postposition can thus merge into the stem of a head noun, developing various forms depending on the phonological shape of the stem. Affixes are subject to various phonological processes such as assimilation, vowel centering to the schwa, phoneme loss, and fusion, and these processes can reduce or even eliminate the distinctions between cases. Languages can then compensate for the resulting loss of function by creating postpositions, thus coming full circle.\nRecent experiments in agent-based modeling have shown how case systems can emerge and evolve in a population of language users. The experiments demonstrate that language users may introduce new case markers to reduce the cognitive effort required for semantic interpretation, hence facilitating communication through language. Case markers then become generalized through analogical reasoning and reuse.\nLinguistic typology.\nMorphosyntactic alignment.\nLanguages are categorized into several case systems, based on their \"morphosyntactic alignment\"\u2014how they group verb agents and patients into cases:\nThe following are systems that some languages use to mark case instead of, or in addition to, declension:\nLanguage families.\nThe lemma form of words, which is the form chosen by convention as the canonical form of a word, is usually the most unmarked or basic case, which is typically the nominative, trigger, or absolutive case, whichever a language may have.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12899", "revid": "18162346", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12899", "title": "Gestapo", "text": "Secret police of Nazi Germany\nThe (, lit.\u2009'Secret State Police'), abbreviated Gestapo (), was the official secret police of Nazi Germany and in German-occupied Europe.\nThe force was created by Hermann G\u00f6ring in 1933 by combining the various political police agencies of Prussia into one organisation. On 20 April 1934, oversight of the Gestapo passed to the head of the \"Schutzstaffel\" (SS), Heinrich Himmler, who was also appointed Chief of German Police by Hitler in 1936. Instead of being exclusively a Prussian state agency, the Gestapo became a national one as a sub-office of the (SiPo; Security Police). From 27 September 1939, it was administered by the Reich Security Main Office (RSHA). It became known as (Dept) 4 of the RSHA and was considered a sister organisation to the (SD; Security Service).\nThe Gestapo committed widespread atrocities during its existence. The power of the Gestapo was used to focus upon political opponents, ideological dissenters (clergy and religious organisations), career criminals, the Sinti and Roma population, handicapped persons, homosexuals, and, above all, the Jews. Those arrested by the Gestapo were often held without judicial process, and political prisoners throughout Germany\u2014and from 1941, throughout the occupied territories under the Night and Fog Decree ()\u2014simply disappeared while in Gestapo custody. Contrary to popular perception, the Gestapo was actually a relatively small organization with limited surveillance capability; still it proved extremely effective due to the willingness of ordinary Germans to report on fellow citizens. During World War II, the Gestapo played a key role in the Holocaust. After the war ended, the Gestapo was declared a criminal organisation by the International Military Tribunal (IMT) at the Nuremberg trials, and several top Gestapo members were sentenced to death.\nHistory.\nAfter Adolf Hitler became Chancellor of Germany, Hermann G\u00f6ring\u2014future commander of the Luftwaffe and the number-two man in the Nazi Party\u2014was named Interior Minister of Prussia. This gave G\u00f6ring command of the largest police force in Germany. Soon afterward, G\u00f6ring detached the political and intelligence sections from the police and filled their ranks with Nazis. On 26 April 1933, G\u00f6ring merged the two units as the , which was abbreviated by a post office clerk for a franking stamp and became known as the \"Gestapo\". He originally wanted to name it the Secret Police Office (), but the German initials, \"GPA\", were too similar to those of the Soviet State Political Directorate (, or GPU).\nThe first commander of the Gestapo was Rudolf Diels, a prot\u00e9g\u00e9 of G\u00f6ring. Diels was appointed with the title of chief of (Department 1a) of the Prussian Secret Police. Diels was best known as the primary interrogator of Marinus van der Lubbe after the Reichstag fire. In late 1933, the Reich Interior Minister Wilhelm Frick wanted to integrate all the police forces of the German states under his control. G\u00f6ring outflanked him by removing the Prussian political and intelligence departments from the state interior ministry. G\u00f6ring took over the Gestapo in 1934 and urged Hitler to extend the agency's authority throughout Germany. This represented a radical departure from German tradition, which held that law enforcement was (mostly) a (state) and local matter. In this, he ran into conflict with (SS) chief Heinrich Himmler who was police chief of the second most powerful German state, Bavaria. Frick did not have the political power to take on G\u00f6ring by himself so he allied with Himmler. With Frick's support, Himmler (pushed on by his right-hand man, Reinhard Heydrich) took over the political police in state after state. Soon only Prussia was left.\nConcerned that Diels was not ruthless enough to effectively counteract the power of the (SA), G\u00f6ring handed over control of the Gestapo to Himmler on 20 April 1934. Also on that date, Hitler appointed Himmler chief of all German police outside Prussia. Heydrich, named chief of the Gestapo by Himmler on 22 April 1934, also continued as head of the SS Security Service (, SD). Himmler and Heydrich both immediately began installing their own personnel in select positions, several of whom were directly from the Bavarian Political Police, such as Heinrich M\u00fcller, Franz Josef Huber, and Josef Meisinger. Many of the Gestapo employees in the newly established offices were young and highly educated in a wide variety of academic fields and moreover, represented a new generation of National Socialist adherents, who were hard-working, efficient, and prepared to carry the Nazi state forward through the persecution of their political opponents.\nBy the spring of 1934, Himmler's SS controlled the SD and the Gestapo, but for him, there was still a problem, as technically the SS (and the Gestapo by proxy) was subordinated to the SA, which was under the command of Ernst R\u00f6hm. Himmler wanted to free himself entirely from R\u00f6hm, whom he viewed as an obstacle. R\u00f6hm's position was menacing as more than 4.5 million men fell under his command once the militias and veterans organisations were absorbed by the SA, a fact which fuelled R\u00f6hm's aspirations; his dream of fusing the SA and \"Reichswehr\" together was undermining Hitler's relationships with the leadership of Germany's armed forces. Several Nazi chieftains, among them G\u00f6ring, Joseph Goebbels, Rudolf Hess, and Himmler, began a concerted campaign to convince Hitler to take action against R\u00f6hm. Both the SD and Gestapo released information concerning an imminent putsch by the SA. Once persuaded, Hitler acted by setting Himmler's SS into action, who then proceeded to murder over 100 of Hitler's identified antagonists. The Gestapo supplied the information which implicated the SA and ultimately enabled Himmler and Heydrich to emancipate themselves entirely from the organisation. For the Gestapo, the next two years following the Night of the Long Knives, a term describing the putsch against R\u00f6hm and the SA, were characterised by \"behind-the-scenes political wrangling over policing\".\nOn 17 June 1936, Hitler decreed the unification of all police forces in Germany and named Himmler as Chief of German Police. This action effectively merged the police into the SS and removed it from Frick's control. Himmler was nominally subordinate to Frick as police chief, but as , he answered only to Hitler. This move also gave Himmler operational control over Germany's entire detective force. The Gestapo became a national state agency. Himmler also gained authority over all of Germany's uniformed law enforcement agencies, which were amalgamated into the new (Orpo; Order Police), which became a national agency under SS general Kurt Daluege. Shortly thereafter, Himmler created the (Kripo; Criminal Police), merging it with the Gestapo into the (SiPo; Security Police), under Heydrich's command. Heinrich M\u00fcller was at that time the Gestapo operations chief. He answered to Heydrich, Heydrich answered only to Himmler, and Himmler answered only to Hitler.\nThe Gestapo had the authority to investigate cases of treason, espionage, sabotage and criminal attacks on the Nazi Party and Germany. The basic Gestapo law passed by the government in 1936 gave the Gestapo to operate without judicial review\u2014in effect, putting it above the law. The Gestapo was specifically exempted from responsibility to administrative courts, where citizens normally could sue the state to conform to laws. As early as 1935, a Prussian administrative court had ruled that the Gestapo's actions were not subject to judicial review. The SS officer Werner Best, one-time head of legal affairs in the Gestapo, summed up this policy by saying, \"As long as the police carries out the will of the leadership, it is acting legally\".\nOn 27 September 1939, the security and police agencies of Nazi Germany\u2014with the exception of the Order Police\u2014were consolidated into the Reich Security Main Office (RSHA), headed by Heydrich. The Gestapo became (Department IV) of RSHA and M\u00fcller became the Gestapo Chief, with Heydrich as his immediate superior. After Heydrich's 1942 assassination, Himmler assumed the leadership of the RSHA until January 1943, when Ernst Kaltenbrunner was appointed chief. M\u00fcller remained the Gestapo Chief. His direct subordinate Adolf Eichmann headed the Gestapo's Office of Resettlement and then its Office of Jewish Affairs ( or Sub-Department IV, Section B4). During the Holocaust, Eichmann's department within the Gestapo coordinated the mass deportation of European Jews to the Nazis' extermination camps.\nThe power of the Gestapo included the use of what was called, \u2014\"protective custody\", a euphemism for the power to imprison people without judicial proceedings. An oddity of the system was that the prisoner had to sign his own , an order declaring that the person had requested imprisonment\u2014presumably out of fear of personal harm. In addition, political prisoners throughout Germany\u2014and from 1941, throughout the occupied territories under the Night and Fog Decree ()\u2014simply disappeared while in Gestapo custody. Up to 30 April 1944, at least 6,639 persons were arrested under orders. However, the total number of people who disappeared as a result of this decree is not known.\nCounterintelligence.\nThe Polish government-in-exile in London during World War II received sensitive military information about Nazi Germany from agents and informants throughout Europe. After Germany conquered Poland (in the autumn of 1939), Gestapo officials believed that they had neutralised Polish intelligence activities. However, certain Polish information about the movement of German police and SS units to the East during 1941 German invasion of the Soviet Union was similar to information British intelligence secretly obtained through intercepting and decoding German police and SS messages sent by radio telegraphy.\nIn 1942, the Gestapo discovered a cache of Polish intelligence documents in Prague and were surprised to see that Polish agents and informants had been gathering detailed military information and smuggling it out to London, via Budapest and Istanbul. The Poles identified and tracked German military trains to the Eastern front and identified four Order Police battalions sent to occupied areas of the Soviet Union in October 1941 that engaged in war crimes and mass murder.\nPolish agents also gathered detailed information about the morale of German soldiers in the East. After uncovering a sample of the information the Poles had reported, Gestapo officials concluded that Polish intelligence activity represented a very serious danger to Germany. As late as 6 June 1944, Heinrich M\u00fcller\u2014concerned about the leakage of information to the Allies\u2014set up a special unit called that was meant to root out the Polish intelligence network in western and southwestern Europe.\nIn Austria, there were groups still loyal to the Habsburgs, who unlike most across the Greater German Reich, remained determined to resist the Nazis. These groups became a special focus of the Gestapo because of their insurrectionist goals\u2014the overthrow of the Nazi regime, the re-establishment of an independent Austria under Habsburg leadership\u2014and Hitler's hatred of the Habsburg family. Hitler vehemently rejected the centuries' old Habsburg pluralist principles of \"live and let live\" with regard to ethnic groups, peoples, minorities, religions, cultures and languages. Habsburg loyalist Karl Burian's (who was later executed) plan to blow up the Gestapo headquarters in Vienna represented a unique attempt to act aggressively against the Gestapo. Burian's group had also set up a secret courier service to Otto von Habsburg in Belgium. Individuals in Austrian resistance groups led by Heinrich Maier also managed to pass along the plans and the location of production facilities for V-1, V-2 rockets, Tiger tanks, and aircraft (Messerschmitt Bf 109, Messerschmitt Me 163 Komet, etc.) to the Allies. The Maier group informed very early about the mass murder of Jews. The resistance group, later discovered by the Gestapo because of a double agent of the Abwehr, was in contact with Allen Dulles, the head of the US Office of Strategic Services in Switzerland. Although Maier and the other group members were severely tortured, the Gestapo did not uncover the essential involvement of the resistance group in Operation Crossbow and Operation Hydra.\nSuppression of resistance and persecution.\nEarly in the regime's existence, harsh measures were meted out to political opponents and those who resisted Nazi doctrine, such as members of the Communist Party of Germany (KPD); a role originally performed by the SA until the SD and Gestapo undermined their influence and took control of Reich security. Because the Gestapo seemed omniscient and omnipotent, the atmosphere of fear they created led to an overestimation of their reach and strength; a faulty assessment which hampered the operational effectiveness of underground resistance organisations.\nTrade unions.\nShortly after the Nazis came to power, they decided to dissolve the 28 federations of the General German Trade Union Confederation, because Hitler\u2014after noting their success in the works council elections\u2014intended to consolidate all German workers under the Nazi government's administration, a decision he made on 7 April 1933. As a preface to this action, Hitler decreed May 1 as National Labor Day to celebrate German workers, a move the trade union leaders welcomed. With their trade union flags waving, Hitler gave a rousing speech to the 1.5 million people assembled on Berlin's that was nationally broadcast, during which he extolled the nation's revival and working class solidarity. On the following day, the newly formed Gestapo officers, who had been shadowing some 58 trade union leaders, arrested them wherever they could find them\u2014many in their homes. Meanwhile, the SA and police occupied trade union headquarters, arrested functionaries, confiscated their property and assets; all by design so as to be replaced on 12 May by the German Labour Front (DAF), a Nazi organisation placed under the leadership of Robert Ley. For their part, this was the first time the Gestapo operated under its new name since its 26 April 1933 founding in Prussia.\nReligious dissent.\nMany parts of Germany (where religious dissent existed upon the Nazi seizure of power) saw a rapid transformation; a change as noted by the Gestapo in conservative towns such as W\u00fcrzburg, where people acquiesced to the regime either through accommodation, collaboration, or simple compliance. Increasing religious objections to Nazi policies led the Gestapo to carefully monitor church organisations. For the most part, members of the church did not offer political resistance but simply wanted to ensure that organizational doctrine remained intact.\nHowever, the Nazi regime sought to suppress any source of ideology other than its own, and set out to muzzle or crush the churches in the so-called . When Church leaders (clergy) voiced their misgiving about the euthanasia program and Nazi racial policies, Hitler intimated that he considered them \"traitors to the people\" and went so far as to call them \"the destroyers of Germany\". The extreme anti-semitism and neo-pagan heresies of the Nazis caused some Christians to outright resist, and Pope Pius XI to issue the encyclical Mit brennender Sorge denouncing Nazism and warning Catholics against joining or supporting the Party. Some pastors, like the Protestant clergyman Dietrich Bonhoeffer, paid for their opposition with their lives.\nIn an effort to counter the strength and influence of spiritual resistance, Nazi records reveal that the Gestapo's monitored the activities of bishops very closely\u2014instructing that agents be set up in every diocese, that the bishops' reports to the Vatican should be obtained and that the bishops' areas of activity must be found out. Deans were to be targeted as the \"eyes and ears of the bishops\" and a \"vast network\" established to monitor the activities of ordinary clergy: \"The importance of this enemy is such that inspectors of security police and of the security service will make this group of people and the questions discussed by them their special concern\".\nIn \"Dachau: The Official History 1933\u20131945\", Paul Berben wrote that clergy were watched closely, and frequently denounced, arrested and sent to Nazi concentration camps: \"One priest was imprisoned in Dachau for having stated that there were good folk in England too; another suffered the same fate for warning a girl who wanted to marry an S.S. man after abjuring the Catholic faith; yet another because he conducted a service for a deceased communist\". Others were arrested simply on the basis of being \"suspected of activities hostile to the State\" or that there was reason to \"suppose that his dealings might harm society\". Over 2,700 Catholic, Protestant, and Orthodox clergy were imprisoned at Dachau alone. After Heydrich (who was staunchly anti-Catholic and anti-Christian) was assassinated in Prague, his successor, Ernst Kaltenbrunner, relaxed some of the policies and then disbanded Department IVB (religious opponents) of the Gestapo.\nHomosexuality.\nViolence and arrest were not confined to that opposing political parties, membership in trade unions, or those with dissenting religious opinions, but also homosexuality. It was viewed negatively by Hitler. Homosexuals were correspondingly considered a threat to the (National Community). From the Nazis rise to national power in 1933, the number of court verdicts against homosexuals steadily increased and only declined once the Second World War started. In 1934, a special Gestapo office was set up in Berlin to deal with homosexuality.\nDespite male homosexuality being considered a greater danger to \"national survival\", lesbianism was likewise viewed as unacceptable\u2014deemed gender nonconformity\u2014and a number of individual reports on lesbians can be found in Gestapo files. Between 1933 and 1935, some 4,000 men were arrested; between 1936 and 1939, another 30,000 men were convicted. If homosexuals showed any signs of sympathy to the Nazis' identified racial enemies, they were considered an even greater danger. According to Gestapo case files, the majority of those arrested for homosexuality were males between eighteen and twenty-five years of age.\nStudent opposition.\nBetween June 1942 and March 1943, student protests were calling for an end to the Nazi regime. These included the non-violent resistance of Hans and Sophie Scholl, two leaders of the White Rose student group. However, resistance groups and those who were in moral or political opposition to the Nazis were stalled by the fear of reprisals from the Gestapo. Fearful of an internal overthrow, the forces of the Gestapo were unleashed on the opposition. Groups like the White Rose and others, such as the Edelweiss Pirates, and the Swing Youth, were placed under close Gestapo observation. Some participants were sent to concentration camps. Leading members of the most famous of these groups, the White Rose, were arrested by the police and turned over to the Gestapo. For several leaders the punishment was death. During the first five months of 1943, the Gestapo arrested thousands suspected of resistance activities and carried out numerous executions. Student opposition leaders were executed in late February, and a major opposition organisation, the Oster Circle, was destroyed in April 1943. Efforts to resist the Nazi regime amounted to very little and had only minor chances of success, particularly since a broad percentage of the German people did not support such actions.\nGeneral opposition and military conspiracy.\nBetween 1934 and 1938, opponents of the Nazi regime and their fellow travellers began to emerge. Among the first to speak out were religious dissenters but following in their wake were educators, aristocratic businessmen, office workers, teachers, and others from nearly every walk of life. Most people quickly learned that open opposition was dangerous since Gestapo informants and agents were widespread. However, a significant number of them still worked against the National Socialist government.\nIn May 1935, the Gestapo broke up and arrested members of the \"Markwitz Circle\", a group of former socialists in contact with Otto Strasser, who sought Hitler's downfall. From the mid-1930s into the early 1940s\u2014various groups made up of communists, idealists, working-class people, and far-right conservative opposition organisations covertly fought against Hitler's government, and several of them fomented plots that included Hitler's assassination. Nearly all of them, including: the R\u00f6mer Group, Robby Group, Solf Circle, , the Party of the Radical Middle Class, , and were either discovered or infiltrated by the Gestapo. This led to corresponding arrests, being sent to concentration camps and execution. One of the methods employed by the Gestapo to contend with these resistance factions was 'protective detention' which facilitated the process in expediting dissenters to concentration camps and against which there was no legal defence.\nEarly efforts to resist the Nazis with aid from abroad were hindered when the opposition's peace feelers to the Western Allies did not meet with success. This was partly because of the Venlo incident of 9 November 1939, in which SD and Gestapo agents, posing as anti-Nazis in the Netherlands, kidnapped two British Secret Intelligence Service (SIS) officers after having lured them to a meeting to discuss peace terms. This prompted Winston Churchill to ban any further contact with the German opposition. Later, the British and Americans did not want to deal with anti-Nazis because they were fearful that the Soviet Union would believe they were attempting to make deals behind their back.\nThe German opposition was in an unenviable position by the late spring and early summer of 1943. On one hand, it was next to impossible for them to overthrow Hitler and the party; on the other, the Allied demand for an unconditional surrender meant no opportunity for a compromise peace, which left the military and conservative aristocrats who opposed the regime no option (in their eyes) other than continuing the military struggle. Despite the fear of the Gestapo after mass arrests and executions in the spring, the opposition still plotted and planned. One of the more famous schemes, Operation Valkyrie, involved a number of senior German officers and was carried out by Colonel Claus Schenk Graf von Stauffenberg. In an attempt to assassinate Hitler, Stauffenberg planted a bomb underneath a conference table inside the Wolf's Lair field headquarters. Known as the 20 July plot, this assassination attempt failed and Hitler was only slightly injured. Reports indicate that the Gestapo was caught unaware of this plot as they did not have sufficient protections in place at the appropriate locations nor did they take any preventative steps. Stauffenberg and his group were shot on 21 July 1944; meanwhile, his fellow conspirators were rounded up by the Gestapo and sent to a concentration camp. Thereafter, there was a show trial overseen by Roland Freisler, followed by their execution.\nSome Germans were convinced that it was their duty to apply all possible expedients to end the war as quickly as possible. Sabotage efforts were undertaken by members of the (military intelligence) leadership, as they recruited people known to oppose the Nazi regime. The Gestapo cracked down ruthlessly on dissidents in Germany, just as they did everywhere else. Opposition became more difficult. Arrests, torture, and executions were common. Terror against \"state enemies\" had become a way of life to such a degree that the Gestapo's presence and methods were eventually normalised in the minds of people living in Nazi Germany.\nOrganisation.\nIn January 1933, Hermann G\u00f6ring, Hitler's minister without portfolio, was appointed the head of the Prussian Police and began filling the political and intelligence units of the Prussian Secret Police with Nazi Party members. A year after the organisation's inception, G\u00f6ring wrote in a British publication about having created the organisation on his own initiative and how he was \"chiefly responsible\" for the elimination of the Marxist and Communist threat to Germany and Prussia. Describing the activities of the organisation, G\u00f6ring boasted about the utter ruthlessness required for Germany's recovery, the establishment of concentration camps for that purpose, and even went on to claim that excesses were committed in the beginning, recounting how beatings took place here and there. On 26 April 1933, he reorganised the force's as the (better-known by the \"sobriquet\" Gestapo), a secret state police intended to serve the Nazi cause. Less than two weeks later in early May 1933, the Gestapo moved into their Berlin headquarters at Prinz-Albrecht-Stra\u00dfe 8.\nAs a result of its 1936 merger with the Kripo (National criminal police) to form sub-units of the (SiPo; Security Police), the Gestapo was officially classified as a government agency. Himmler's subsequent appointment to (Chief of German Police) and status as made him independent of Interior Minister Wilhelm Frick's nominal control.\nThe SiPo was placed under the direct command of Reinhard Heydrich who was already chief of the Nazi Party's intelligence service, the (SD). The idea was to fully identify and integrate the party agency (SD) with the state agency (SiPo). Most SiPo members joined the SS and held a rank in both organisations. Nevertheless, in practice there was jurisdictional overlap and operational conflict between the SD and Gestapo.\nIn September 1939, the SiPo and SD were merged into the newly created (RSHA; Reich Security Main Office). Both the Gestapo and Kripo became distinct departments within the RSHA. Although the was officially disbanded, the term SiPo was figuratively used to describe any RSHA personnel throughout the remainder of the war. In lieu of naming convention changes, the original construct of the SiPo, Gestapo, and Kripo cannot be fully comprehended as \"discrete entities\", since they ultimately formed \"a conglomerate in which each was wedded to each other and the SS through its Security Service, the SD\".\nThe creation of the RSHA represented the formalisation, at the top level, of the relationship under which the SD served as the intelligence agency for the security police. A similar co-ordination existed in the local offices. Within Germany and areas which were incorporated within the Reich for the purpose of civil administration, local offices of the Gestapo, criminal police, and SD were formally separate. They were subject to co-ordination by inspectors of the security police and SD on the staffs of the local higher SS and police leaders, however, and one of the principal functions of the local SD units was to serve as the intelligence agency for the local Gestapo units. In the occupied territories, the formal relationship between local units of the Gestapo, criminal police, and SD was slightly closer.\nThe Gestapo became known as RSHA (\"Department or Office IV\") with Heinrich M\u00fcller as its chief. In January 1943, Himmler appointed Ernst Kaltenbrunner RSHA chief; almost seven months after Heydrich had been assassinated. The specific internal departments of were as follows:\nIn 1941 , the central command office of the Gestapo was formed. However, these internal departments remained and the Gestapo continued to be a department under the RSHA umbrella. The local offices of the Gestapo, known as Gestapo and , answered to a local commander known as the (Inspector of the Security Police and Security Service) who, in turn, was under the dual command of of the Gestapo and also his local SS and Police Leader.\nIn total, there were some fifty-four regional Gestapo offices across the German federal states. The Gestapo also maintained offices at all Nazi concentration camps, held an office on the staff of the SS and Police Leaders, and supplied personnel as needed to formations such as the . Personnel assigned to these auxiliary duties were often removed from the Gestapo chain of command and fell under the authority of branches of the SS. It was the Gestapo chief, SS-\"Brigadierf\u00fchrer\" Heinrich M\u00fcller, who kept Hitler abreast of the killing operations in the Soviet Union and who issued orders to the four that their continual work in the east was to be \"presented to the F\u00fchrer.\"\nFemale criminal investigation career.\nAccording to regulations issued by the Reich Security Main Office in 1940, women who had been trained in social work or having a similar education could be hired as female detectives. Female youth leaders, lawyers, business administrators with experience in social work, female leaders in the and personnel administrators in the Bund Deutscher M\u00e4del were hired as detectives after a one-year course, if they had several years professional experience. Later, nurses, kindergarten teachers, and trained female commercial employees with an aptitude for police work were hired as female detectives after a two-year course as and could promote to a . After another two or three years in that grade, the female detective could advance to . Further promotions to and were also possible.\nMembership.\nIn 1933, there was no purge of the German police forces. The vast majority of Gestapo officers came from the police forces of the Weimar Republic; members of the SS, the SA, and the Nazi Party also joined the Gestapo but were less numerous. By March 1937, the Gestapo employed an estimated 6,500 people in fifty-four regional offices across the Reich. Additional staff were added in March 1938 consequent the annexation of Austria and again in October 1938 with the acquisition of the Sudetenland. In 1939, only 3,000 out of the total of 20,000 Gestapo men held SS ranks, and in most cases, these were honorary. One man who served in the Prussian Gestapo in 1933 recalled that most of his co-workers \"were by no means all Nazis. For the most part they were young professional civil service officers...\" The Nazis valued police competence more than politics, so in general in 1933, almost all of the men who served in the various state police forces under the Weimar Republic stayed on in their jobs. In W\u00fcrzburg, which is one of the few places in Germany where most of the Gestapo records survived, every member of the Gestapo was a career policeman or had a police background.\nThe Canadian historian Robert Gellately wrote that most Gestapo men were not Nazis, but at the same time were not opposed to the Nazi regime, which they were willing to serve, in whatever task they were called upon to perform. Over time, membership in the Gestapo included ideological training, particularly once Werner Best assumed a leading role for training in April 1936. Employing biological metaphors, Best emphasised a doctrine which encouraged members of the Gestapo to view themselves as 'doctors' to the 'national body' in the struggle against \"pathogens\" and \"diseases\"; among the implied sicknesses were \"communists, Freemasons, and the churches\u2014and above and behind all these stood the Jews\". Heydrich thought along similar lines and advocated both defensive and offensive measures on the part of the Gestapo, so as to prevent any subversion or destruction of the National Socialist body.\nWhether trained as police originally or not, Gestapo agents themselves were shaped by their socio-political environment. Historian George C. Browder contends that there was a four-part process (authorisation, bolstering, routinisation, and dehumanisation) in effect, which legitimised the psycho-social atmosphere conditioning members of the Gestapo to radicalised violence. Browder also describes a sandwich effect, where from above; Gestapo agents were subjected to ideologically oriented racism and criminal biological theories; and from below, the Gestapo was transformed by SS personnel who did not have the proper police training, which showed in their propensity for unrestrained violence. This admixture certainly shaped the Gestapo's public image which they sought to maintain despite their increasing workload; an image which helped them identify and eliminate enemies of the Nazi state.\nPopulation ratios, methods, and effectiveness.\nContrary to popular belief, the Gestapo was not the all-pervasive, omnipotent agency in German society. In Germany proper, many towns and cities had fewer than 50 official Gestapo personnel. For example, in 1939 Stettin and Frankfurt am Main only had a total of 41 Gestapo men combined. In D\u00fcsseldorf, the local Gestapo office of only 281 men were responsible for the entire Lower Rhine region, which comprised 4 million people. In lower Franconia, which included W\u00fcrzburg, there were only twenty-two Gestapo officers overseeing 840,000 or more inhabitants; this meant that the Nazi secret police \"was reliant on Germans spying on each other\". These \"V-men\", as undercover Gestapo agents were known, were used to infiltrate Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD) and Communist opposition groups, but this was more the exception than the rule. The Gestapo office in Saarbr\u00fccken had 50 full-term informers in 1939. The District Office in Nuremberg, which had the responsibility for all of northern Bavaria, employed a total of 80\u2013100 full-term informers between 1943 and 1945. The majority of Gestapo informers were not full-term employees working undercover, but were rather ordinary citizens who chose to denounce other people to the Gestapo.\nAccording to Canadian historian Robert Gellately's analysis of the local offices established, the Gestapo was\u2014for the most part\u2014made up of bureaucrats and clerical workers who depended upon denunciations by citizens for their information. Gellately argued that it was because of the widespread willingness of Germans to inform on each other to the Gestapo that Germany between 1933 and 1945 was a prime example of panopticism. The Gestapo\u2014at times\u2014was overwhelmed with denunciations and most of its time was spent sorting out the credible from the less credible denunciations. Many of the local offices were understaffed and overworked, struggling with the paper load caused by so many denunciations. Gellately has also suggested that the Gestapo was \"a reactive organisation...constructed within German society and whose functioning was structurally dependent on the continuing co-operation of German citizens\".\nAfter 1939, when many Gestapo personnel were called up for war-related work such as service with the , the level of overwork and understaffing at the local offices increased. For information about what was happening in German society, the Gestapo continued to be mostly dependent upon denunciations. 80% of all Gestapo investigations were started in response to information provided by denunciations by ordinary Germans; while 10% were started in response to information provided by other branches of the German government and another 10% started in response to information that the Gestapo itself unearthed. The information supplied by denunciations often led the Gestapo in determining who was arrested.\nThe popular picture of the Gestapo with its spies everywhere terrorising German society has been rejected by many historians as a myth invented after the war as a cover for German society's widespread complicity in allowing the Gestapo to work. Work done by social historians such as Detlev Peukert, Robert Gellately, Reinhard Mann, Inge Marssolek, Ren\u00e9 Otto, Klaus-Michael Mallmann and Paul Gerhard, which by focusing on what the local offices were doing has shown the Gestapo's almost total dependence on denunciations from ordinary Germans, and very much discredited the older \"Big Brother\" picture with the Gestapo having its eyes and ears everywhere. For example, of the 84 cases in W\u00fcrzburg of (\"race defilement\"\u2014sexual relations with non-Aryans), 45 (54%) were started in response to denunciations by ordinary people, two (2%) by information provided by other branches of the government, 20 (24%) via information gained during interrogations of people relating to other matters, four (5%) from information from (Nazi) NSDAP organisations, two (2%) during \"political evaluations\" and 11 (13%) have no source listed while none were started by Gestapo's own \"observations\" of the people of W\u00fcrzburg.\nAn examination of 213 denunciations in D\u00fcsseldorf showed that 37% were motivated by personal conflicts, no motive could be established in 39%, and 24% were motivated by support for the Nazi regime. The Gestapo always showed a special interest in denunciations concerning sexual matters, especially cases concerning with Jews or between Germans and foreigners, in particular Polish slave workers; the Gestapo applied even harsher methods to the foreign workers in the country, especially those from Poland, Jews, Catholics and homosexuals. As time went by, anonymous denunciations to the Gestapo caused trouble to various NSDAP officials, who often found themselves being investigated by the Gestapo.\nOf the political cases, 61 people were investigated for suspicion of belonging to the KPD, 44 for the SPD and 69 for other political parties. Most of the political investigations took place between 1933 and 1935 with the all-time high of 57 cases in 1935. After that year, political investigations declined with only 18 investigations in 1938, 13 in 1939, two in 1941, seven in 1942, four in 1943 and one in 1944. The \"other\" category associated with non-conformity included everything from a man who drew a caricature of Hitler to a Catholic teacher suspected of being lukewarm about teaching National Socialism in his classroom. The \"administrative control\" category concerned those who were breaking the law concerning residency in the city. The \"conventional criminality\" category concerned economic crimes such as money laundering, smuggling and homosexuality.\nWhile the total number of Gestapo officials was limited when contrasted against the represented populations, the average (Nazi term for the \"member of the German people\") was typically not under observation, so the statistical ratio between Gestapo officials and inhabitants is \"largely worthless and of little significance\" according to some recent scholars. As historian Eric Johnson remarked, \"The Nazi terror was selective terror\", with its focus upon political opponents, ideological dissenters (clergy and religious organisations), career criminals, the Sinti and Roma population, handicapped persons, homosexuals and above all, upon the Jews. \"Selective terror\" by the Gestapo, as mentioned by Johnson, is also supported by historian Richard Evans who states that, \"Violence and intimidation rarely touched the lives of most ordinary Germans. Denunciation was the exception, not the rule, as far as the behaviour of the vast majority of Germans was concerned.\" The involvement of ordinary Germans in denunciations also needs to be put into perspective so as not to exonerate the Gestapo. As Evans makes clear, \"...it was not the ordinary German people who engaged in surveillance, it was the Gestapo; nothing happened until the Gestapo received a denunciation, and it was the Gestapo's active pursuit of deviance and dissent that was the only thing that gave denunciations meaning.\" The Gestapo's effectiveness remained in the ability to \"project\" omnipotence...they co-opted the assistance of the German population by using denunciations to their advantage; proving in the end a powerful, ruthless and effective organ of terror under the Nazi regime that was seemingly everywhere. Lastly, the Gestapo's effectiveness, while aided by denunciations and the watchful eye of ordinary Germans, was more the result of the co-ordination and co-operation amid the various police organs within Germany, the assistance of the SS, and the support provided by the various Nazi Party organisations; all of them together forming an organised persecution network.\nTorture.\nThe Gestapo employed torture as a routine method to extract confessions, punish political enemies, and enforce ideological conformity in Nazi Germany, the official evidence for which was destroyed by the Nazis with Gestapo case-files being rarely found. Normal methods of investigation by the Gestapo included various forms of blackmail, threats, and extortion to secure \"confessions\". Beyond that, sleep deprivation and various forms of harassment were also used as investigative methods. The Gestapo periodically was known for planting evidence to resolve a case, especially if it concerned a Jewish person.\nHistorical research based on surviving Gestapo files has shown that torture was not limited to high-profile cases but was frequently used at the local level, especially in situations involving accusations of hiding Jews, listening to foreign radio broadcasts, or engaging in communist activity. Brutality on the part of interrogators\u2014often prompted by denunciations and followed with roundups\u2014enabled the Gestapo to uncover numerous resistance networks and in many ways, made them seem like they knew everything and could do anything they wanted. A simple denunciation could even lead to a person's death once in the Gestapo's hands. In his study of Gestapo files from Bavaria, historian Robert Gellately noted that many individuals were subjected to brutal treatment as part of routine investigative procedures. Historian Eric A. Johnson further corroborates this brutal treatment in cities like Cologne, where detainees were physically and mentally abused to obtain names of collaborators or co-conspirators. \nOnce an individual was brought in by the Gestapo, Richard Evans asserted that one could expect in many cases \"brutal violence and torture\" and a course of interrogation that often \"ended in the courts, the prisons and the camps.\" Many detainees bypassed the courts entirely through a mechanism known as \"Schutzhaft\" (\"protective custody\"). Once a \"Schutzhaftbefehl\" was signed by someone deemed an authority\u2014often a simple administrative form\u2014the detainee was shipped to a camp, frequently following brutal interrogation in Gestapo prisons. This allowed the Gestapo to imprison individuals indefinitely without trial and transfer them directly to concentration camps such as Dachau, Buchenwald, or Ravensbr\u00fcck.\nOperations in Nazi-occupied territories.\nAs an instrument of Nazi power, terror, and repression, the Gestapo operated throughout occupied Europe. Much like their affiliated organisations, the SS and the SD, the Gestapo \"played a leading part\" in enslaving and deporting workers from occupied territory, torturing and executing civilians, singling out and murdering Jews, and subjecting Allied prisoners of war to terrible treatment. To this end, the Gestapo was \"a vital component both in Nazi repression and the Holocaust.\" Once the German armies advanced into enemy territory, they were accompanied by staffed by officers from the Gestapo and Kripo, who usually operated in the rear areas to administer and police the occupied land. Whenever a region came fully under German military occupational jurisdiction, the Gestapo administered all executive actions under the military commander's authority, albeit operating relatively independent of it.\nA former partisan and Soviet officer named Hersch Gurewicz attested to the torture methods used by the Gestapo. He recalled a partisan was strapped to a table in a room and \"a German turned the lever and the table moved apart in sections like a rack. The man screamed and his leg bones snapped through his skin. The lever turned again and his arms ripped in jagged tears. After the man fainted, his torturers shot him dead.\" He also claimed that he had been strapped down and a wire slowly forced up his nose, into his lung, causing him to go unconscious. Later he was tied to a horse, which was made to gallop full speed, and recalled being smashed into the ground repeatedly, before being knocked out by a solid object.\nOccupation meant administration and policing, a duty assigned to the SS, the SD, and the Gestapo even before hostilities began, as was the case for Czechoslovakia. Correspondingly, Gestapo offices were established in a territory once occupied. Some locals aided the Gestapo, whether as professional police auxiliaries or in other duties. Nonetheless, operations performed either by German members of the Gestapo or auxiliaries from willing collaborators of other nationalities were inconsistent in both disposition and effectiveness. Varying degrees of pacification and police enforcement measures were necessary in each place, dependent on how cooperative or resistant the locals were to Nazi mandates and racial policies.\nThroughout the Eastern territories, the Gestapo and other Nazi organisations co-opted the assistance of indigenous police units, nearly all of whom were uniformed and able to carry out drastic actions. Many of the auxiliary police personnel operating on behalf of German Order Police, the SD, and Gestapo were members of the , which included staffing by Ukrainians, Belarusians, Russians, Estonians, Lithuanians, and Latvians. While in many countries the Nazis occupied in the East, the local domestic police forces supplemented German operations, noted Holocaust historian, Raul Hilberg, asserts that \"those of Poland were least involved in anti-Jewish actions.\" Nonetheless, German authorities ordered the mobilisation of reserve Polish police forces, known as the Blue Police, which strengthened the Nazi police presence and carried out numerous \"police\" functions; in some cases, its functionaries even identified and rounded up Jews or performed other unsavory duties on behalf of their German masters.\nIn places like Denmark, there were some 550 uniformed Danes in Copenhagen working with the Gestapo, patrolling and terrorising the local population at the behest of their German overseers, many of whom were arrested after the war. Other Danish civilians, like in many places across Europe, acted as Gestapo informants but this should not be seen as wholehearted support for the Nazi program, as motives for cooperation varied. Whereas in France, the number of members in the (French Gestapo) who worked on behalf of the Nazis was upwards of 30,000 to 32,000; they conducted operations nearly indistinguishable from their German equivalents.\nNuremberg trials.\nBetween 14 November 1945 and 3 October 1946, the Allies established an International Military Tribunal (IMT) to try 22 major Nazi war criminals and six groups for crimes against peace, war crimes and crimes against humanity. Nineteen of the 22 were convicted, and twelve\u2014Martin Bormann (in absentia), Hans Frank, Wilhelm Frick, Hermann G\u00f6ring, Alfred Jodl, Ernst Kaltenbrunner, Wilhelm Keitel, Joachim von Ribbentrop, Alfred Rosenberg, Fritz Sauckel, Arthur Seyss-Inquart, Julius Streicher\u2014were given the death penalty. Three\u2014Walther Funk, Rudolf Hess, Erich Raeder\u2014received life terms; and the remaining four\u2014Karl D\u00f6nitz, Konstantin von Neurath, Albert Speer, and Baldur von Schirach\u2014received shorter prison sentences. Three others\u2014Hans Fritzsche, Hjalmar Schacht, and Franz von Papen\u2014were acquitted. At that time, the Gestapo was condemned as a criminal organisation, along with the SS. However, Gestapo leader Heinrich M\u00fcller was never tried, as he disappeared at the end of the war.\nLeaders, organisers, investigators and accomplices participating in the formulation or execution of a common plan or conspiracy to commit the crimes specified were declared responsible for all acts performed by any persons in execution of such plan. The official positions of defendants as heads of state or holders of high government offices were not to free them from responsibility or mitigate their punishment; nor was that a defendant acted pursuant to an order of a superior to excuse him from responsibility, although it might be considered by the IMT in mitigation of punishment.\nAt the trial of any individual member of any group or organisation, the IMT was authorised to declare (in connection with any act of which the individual was convicted) that the group or organisation to which he belonged was a criminal organisation. When a group or organisation was thus declared criminal, the competent national authority of any signatory had the right to bring persons to trial for membership in that organisation, with the criminal nature of the group or organisation assumed proved.\nThe IMT subsequently convicted three of the groups: the Nazi leadership corps, the SS (including the SD) and the Gestapo. Gestapo members Hermann G\u00f6ring, Ernst Kaltenbrunner and Arthur Seyss-Inquart were individually convicted. While three groups were acquitted of collective war crimes charges, this did not relieve individual members of those groups from conviction and punishment under the denazification programme. Members of the three convicted groups, however, were subject to apprehension by Britain, the United States, the Soviet Union, and France. These groups\u2014the Nazi Party and government leadership, the German General staff and High Command (OKW); the (SA); the (SS), including the (SD); and the Gestapo\u2014had an aggregate membership exceeding two million, making a large number of their members liable to trial when the organisations were convicted.\nAftermath.\nIn 1997, Cologne transformed the former regional Gestapo headquarters in Cologne\u2014the EL-DE Haus\u2014into a museum to document the Gestapo's actions.\nAfter the war, U.S. Counterintelligence Corps employed the former Lyon Gestapo chief Klaus Barbie for his anti-communist efforts and also helped him escape to Bolivia.\nLeadership.\nSource:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12900", "revid": "1309597363", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12900", "title": "Grammatical conjugation", "text": "Creation of derived forms of a verb from its principal parts by inflection\nIn linguistics, conjugation ( ) is the creation of derived forms of a verb from its principal parts by inflection (alteration of form according to rules of grammar). For instance, the verb \"break\" can be conjugated to form the words \"break\", \"breaks\", and \"broke\". While English has a relatively simple conjugation, other languages such as French and Arabic or Spanish are more complex, with each verb having dozens of conjugated forms. Some languages such as Georgian and Basque (some verbs only) have highly complex conjugation systems with hundreds of possible conjugations for every verb.\nVerbs may inflect for grammatical categories such as person, number, gender, case, tense, aspect, mood, voice, possession, definiteness, politeness, causativity, clusivity, interrogatives, transitivity, valency, polarity, telicity, volition, mirativity, evidentiality, animacy, associativity, pluractionality, and reciprocity. Verbs may also be affected by agreement, polypersonal agreement, incorporation, noun class, noun classifiers, and verb classifiers. Agglutinative and polysynthetic languages tend to have the most complex conjugations, although some fusional languages such as Archi can also have extremely complex conjugation. Typically the principal parts are the root and/or several modifications of it (stems). All the different forms of the same verb constitute a lexeme, and the canonical form of the verb that is conventionally used to represent that lexeme (as seen in dictionary entries) is called a lemma.\nThe term conjugation is applied only to the inflection of verbs, and not of other parts of speech (inflection of nouns and adjectives is known as declension). It is also generally restricted to denoting the formation of finite forms of a verb \u2013 these may be referred to as \"conjugated forms\", as opposed to non-finite forms, such as an infinitive, gerund, or participle which respectively comprise their own grammatical categories.\n\"Conjugation\" is also the traditional term for a group of verbs that share a similar conjugation pattern in a particular language (a \"verb class\"). For example, Latin is said to have four conjugations of verbs. This means that any regular Latin verb can be conjugated in any person, number, tense, mood, and voice by knowing which of the four conjugation groups it belongs to, and its principal parts. A verb that does not follow all of the standard conjugation patterns of the language is said to be an irregular verb. The system of all conjugated variants of a particular verb or class of verbs is called a verb paradigm; this may be presented in the form of a conjugation table.\nVerbal agreement.\nVerbal agreement, or concord, is a morpho-syntactic construct in which properties of the subject and/or objects of a verb are indicated by the verb form. Verbs are then said to agree with their subjects (resp. objects).\nMany English verbs exhibit subject agreement of the following sort: whereas \"I go\", \"you go\", \"we go\", \"they go\" are all grammatical in standard English, \"he go\" is not (except in the subjunctive, as \"They requested that \"he go\" with them\"). Instead, a special form of the verb \"to go\" has to be used to produce \"he goes\". On the other hand \"I goes\", \"you goes\" etc. are not grammatical in standard English. (Things are different in some English dialects that lack agreement.) A few English verbs have no special forms that indicate subject agreement (\"I may\", \"you may\", \"he may\"), and the verb \"to be\" has an additional form \"am\" that can only be used with the pronoun \"I\" as the subject.\nVerbs in written French exhibit more intensive agreement morphology than English verbs: (I am), (\"you are\", singular informal), (she is), (we are), (\"you are\", plural), (they are). Historically, English used to have a similar verbal paradigm. Some historic verb forms are used by Shakespeare as slightly archaic or more formal variants (\"I do\", \"thou dost\", \"he doth\") of the modern forms.\nSome languages with verbal agreement can leave certain subjects implicit when the subject is fully determined by the verb form. In Spanish, for instance, subject pronouns do not need to be explicitly present, but in French, its close relative, they are obligatory. The Spanish equivalent to the French (I am) can be simply (lit. \"am\"). The pronoun (I) in the explicit form is used only for emphasis or to clear ambiguity in complex texts.\nSome languages have a richer agreement system in which verbs agree also with some or all of their objects. Ubykh exhibits verbal agreement for the subject, direct object, indirect object, benefaction and ablative objects (, \"you gave it to him for me\").\nBasque can show agreement not only for subject, direct object and indirect object but it also can exhibit agreement for the listener as the implicit benefactor: means \"they brought us the car\" (neuter agreement for the listener), but means \"they brought us the car\" (agreement for feminine singular listener).\nLanguages with a rich agreement morphology facilitate relatively free word order without leading to increased ambiguity. The canonical word order in Basque is subject\u2013object\u2013verb, but all permutations of subject, verb and object are permitted.\nNonverbal person agreement.\nIn some languages, predicative adjectives and copular complements receive a form of person agreement that is distinct from that used on ordinary predicative verbs. Although that is a form of conjugation in that it refers back to the person of the subject, it is not \"verbal\" because it always derives from pronouns that have become clitic to the nouns to which they refer. An example of nonverbal person agreement, along with contrasting verbal conjugation, can be found from Beja (person agreement affixes in bold):\nAnother example can be found from Ket:\nIn Turkic, and a few Uralic and Australian Aboriginal languages, predicative adjectives and copular complements take affixes that are identical to those used on predicative verbs, but their negation is different. For example, in Turkish:\nUnder negation, that becomes (negative affixes in bold):\nTherefore, the person agreement affixes used with predicative adjectives and nominals in Turkic languages are considered to be nonverbal in character. In some analyses, they are viewed as a form of verbal takeover by a copular strategy.\nFactors that affect conjugation.\nThese common grammatical categories affect how verbs can be conjugated:\nHere are other factors that may affect conjugation:\nExamples.\nIndo-European languages usually inflect verbs for several grammatical categories in complex paradigms, although some, like English, have simplified verb conjugation to a large extent. Below is the conjugation of the verb \"to be\" in the present tense (of the infinitive, if it exists, and indicative moods), in English, German, Yiddish, Dutch, Afrikaans, Icelandic, Faroese, Swedish, Norwegian, Latvian, Bulgarian, Serbo-Croatian, Polish, Slovenian, Macedonian, Urdu or Hindi, Bengali, Persian, Latin, French, Italian, Spanish, Portuguese, Russian, Albanian, Armenian, Irish, Ukrainian, Ancient Attic Greek and Modern Greek. This is usually the most irregular verb. The similarities in corresponding verb forms may be noticed. Some of the conjugations may be disused, like the English \"thou\"-form, or have additional meanings, like the English \"you\"-form, which can also stand for second person singular or be impersonal.\n1 Archaic, poetical; used only with the pronoun 'thou'.\n2 In Flemish dialects.\n3 In the bokm\u00e5l written standard.\n4 In the nynorsk written standard. \"vera\" and \"vere\" are both alternate forms.\n5 Archaic\n6 Attic.\n7 'e\u00ednai' is only used as a noun (\"being, existence\").\n8 Ptc: .\n9 In the Tosk and Geg dialects, respectively.\n10 Existential: \u0647\u0633\u062a (h\u00e6st) has another meaning. Usage of (\"\u00e6\") is considered to be colloquial, now. See, Indo-European copula\n11 With the Singular they 3rd person pronoun.\n12 Bengali verbs are further conjugated according to formality. There are three verb forms for 2nd person pronouns: \u09b9\u0993 (\"h\u00f4o\", familiar), \u09b9\u09cb\u09b8 (\"ho\u015b\", very familiar) and \u09b9\u09a8 (\"h\u00f4n\", polite). Also two forms for 3rd person pronouns: \u09b9\u09af\u09bc (\"h\u00f4y\", familiar) and \u09b9\u09a8 (\"h\u00f4n\", polite). Plural verb forms are exact same as singular.\n13 Valencian.\n14 Western varieties only.\nConjugation classes.\nPama-Nyungan languages.\nOne common feature of Pama\u2013Nyungan languages, the largest family of Australian Aboriginal languages, is the notion of conjugation classes, which are a set of groups into which each lexical verb falls. They determine how a verb is conjugated for Tense\u2013aspect\u2013mood. The classes can but do not universally correspond to the transitivity or valency of the verb in question. Generally, of the two to six conjugation classes in a Pama-Nyungan language, two classes are open with a large membership and allow for new coinages, and the remainder are closed and of limited membership.\nWati.\nIn Wati languages, verbs generally fall into four classes:\nThey are labelled by using common morphological components of verb endings in each respective class in infinitival forms. In the Wanman language these each correspond to la\", \"ya\", \"rra\", and wa\" verbs respectively.\nSee also a similar table of verb classes and conjugations in Pitjantjatjara, a Wati language wherein the correlating verb classes are presented below also by their imperative verbal endings -la, -\u2205, -ra and -wa respectively\nNgayarta.\nNgarla, a member of the Ngayarda sub-family of languages has a binary conjugation system labelled:\nIn the case of Ngarla, there is a notably strong correlation between conjugation class and transitivity, with transitive/ditransitive verbs falling in the l-class and intransitive/semi-transitive verbs in the \u2205-class.\nThese classes even extend to how verbs are nominalized as instruments with the l-class verb including the addition of an \"/l/\" before the nominalizing suffix and the blank class remaining blank:\nl-class example:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u2205-class example\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nYidiny.\nYidiny has a ternary verb class system with two open classes and one closed class (~20 members). Verbs are classified as:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12902", "revid": "48377652", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12902", "title": "Gomoku", "text": "Abstract strategy board game\nGomoku, also called \"five in a row\", is an abstract strategy board game. It is traditionally played with Go pieces (black and white stones) on a 15\u00d715 Go board while in the past a 19\u00d719 board was standard. Because pieces are typically not moved or removed from the board, gomoku may also be played as a paper-and-pencil game. The game is known in several countries under different names.\nRules.\nPlayers alternate turns placing a stone of their color on an empty intersection. Black plays first. The winner is the first player to form an unbroken line of five stones of their color horizontally, vertically, or diagonally. In some rules, this line must be exactly five stones long; six or more stones in a row does not count as a win and is called an overline. If the board is completely filled and no one has made a line of 5 stones, then the game ends in a draw.\nOrigin.\nHistorical records indicate that the origins of gomoku can be traced back to the mid-1700s during the Edo period. It is said that the 10th generation of Kuwanaya Buemon, a merchant who frequented the Nij\u014d family, was highly skilled in this game, which subsequently spread among the people. By the late Edo period, around 1850, books had been published on gomoku. The earliest published book on gomoku that can be verified is the in 1856.\nThe name \"gomoku\" is from the Japanese language, in which it is referred to as . \"Go\" means five, \"moku\" is a counter word for pieces and \"narabe\" means \"line-up\". The game is popular in China, where it is called \"Wuziqi\" (\u4e94\u5b50\u68cb). \"Wu\" (\u4e94 w\u01d4) means \"five\", \"zi\" (\u5b50 z\u01d0) means \"piece\", and \"qi\" ( q\u00ed) refers to a board game category in Chinese. The game is also popular in Korea, where it is called \"omok\" (\uc624\ubaa9 [\u4e94\u76ee]) which has the same structure and origin as the Japanese name.\nIn the nineteenth century, the game was introduced to Britain where it was known as Go Bang, said to be a corruption of the Japanese word \"goban\", which was itself adapted from the Chinese \"k'i pan (q\u00ed p\u00e1n)\" \"go-board.\"\nFirst-player advantage.\nGomoku has a strong advantage for the first player when unrestricted.\nChampionships in gomoku previously used the \"Pro\" opening rule, which mandated that the first player place the first stone in the center of the board. The second player's stone placement was unrestricted. The first player's second stone had to be placed at least three intersections away from the first player's first stone. This rule was used in the 1989 and 1991 world championships. When the win\u2013loss ratio of these two championships was calculated, the first player (black) won 67 percent of games.\nThis was deemed too unbalanced for tournament play, so tournament gomoku adopted the Swap2 opening protocol in 2009. In Swap2, the first player places three stones, two black and one white, on the board. The second player then selects one of three options: play as black, play as white and place another white stone, or place two more stones, one white and one black, and let the first player choose the color.\nThe win ratio of the first player has been calculated to be around 52 percent using the Swap2 opening protocol, greatly balancing the game and largely evening out the first-player advantage.\nVariants.\nFreestyle gomoku.\nFreestyle gomoku has no restrictions on either player and allows a player to win by creating a line of five or more stones, with each player alternating turns placing one stone at a time.\nSwap after 1st move.\nThe rule of \"swap after 1st move\" is a variant of the freestyle gomoku rule, and is mostly played in China. The game can be played on a 19\u00d719 or 15\u00d715 board. As per the rule, once the first player places a black stone on the board, the second player has the right to swap colors. The rest of the game proceeds as freestyle gomoku. This rule is set to balance the advantage of black in a simple way.\nRenju.\nBlack (the player who makes the first move) has long been known to have an advantage, even before L. Victor Allis proved that black can force a win (see below). Renju attempts to mitigate this imbalance with extra rules that aim to reduce black's first player advantage.\nIt is played on a 15\u00d715 board, with the rules of three and three, four and four, and overlines applied to Black only.\nRenju also makes use of various tournament opening rules, such as Soos\u00f5rv-8, the current international standard.\nCaro.\nIn Caro, (also called gomoku+, popular among Vietnamese), the winner must have an overline or an unbroken row of five stones that is not blocked at either end (overlines are immune to this rule). This makes the game more balanced and provides more power for White to defend.\nOmok.\nOmok is similar to Freestyle gomoku; however, it is played on a 19\u00d719 board and includes the rule of \"three and three.\"\nNinuki-renju.\nAlso called Wu, Ninuki Renju is a variant which adds capturing to the game; A pair of stones of the same color may be captured by the opponent by means of custodial capture (sandwiching a line of two stones lengthwise). The winner is the player either to make a perfect five in a row, or to capture five pairs of the opponent's stones. It uses a 15x15 board and the rules of three and three and overlines. It also allows the game to continue after a player has formed a row of five stones if their opponent can capture a pair across the line.\nPente.\nPente is related to Ninuki-Renju, and has the same custodial capture method, but is most often played on a 19x19 board and does not use the rules of three and three, four and four, or overlines.\nTournament opening rules.\nTournament rules are used in professional play to balance the game and mitigate the first player advantage. The tournament rule used for the gomoku world championships since 2009 is the Swap2 opening rule. For all of the following professional rules, an overline (six or more stones in a row) does not count as a win.\nPro.\nThe first player's first stone must be placed in the center of the board. The second player's first stone may be placed anywhere on the board. The first player's second stone must be placed at least three intersections away from the first stone (two empty intersections in between the two stones).\nLong Pro.\nThe first player's first stone must be placed in the center of the board. The second player's first stone may be placed anywhere on the board. The first player's second stone must be placed at least four intersections away from the first stone (three empty intersections in between the two stones).\nSwap.\nThe tentative first player places three stones (two black, and one white) anywhere on the board. The tentative second player then chooses which color to play as. Play proceeds from there as normal with white playing their second stone.\nSwap2.\nThe tentative first player places three stones on the board, two black and one white. The tentative second player then has three options:\nBecause the tentative first player doesn't know where the tentative second player will place the additional stones if they take option 3, the swap2 opening protocol limits excessive studying of a line by only one of the players.\nTheoretical generalizations.\n\"m\",\"n\",\"k\"-games are a generalization of gomoku to a board with \"m\"\u00d7\"n\" intersections, and \"k\" in a row needed to win. Connect Four is (7,6,4) with piece placement restricted to the lowest unoccupied place in a column.\nConnect(\"m\",\"n\",\"k\",\"p\",\"q\") games are another generalization of gomoku to a board with \"m\"\u00d7\"n\" intersections, \"k\" in a row needed to win, \"p\" stones for each player to place, and \"q\" stones for the first player to place for the first move only. In particular, Connect(\"m\",\"n\",6,2,1) is called Connect6.\nExample game.\nThis game on the 15\u00d715 board is adapted from the paper \"Go-Moku and Threat-Space Search\".\nThe opening moves show clearly black's advantage. An open row of three (one that is not blocked by an opponent's stone at either end) has to be blocked immediately, or countered with a threat elsewhere on the board. If not blocked or countered, the open row of three will be extended to an open row of four, which threatens to win in two ways.\nWhite has to block open rows of three at moves 10, 14, 16 and 20, but black only has to do so at move 9.\nMove 20 is a blunder for white (it should have been played next to black 19). Black can now force a win against any defense by white, starting with move 21.\nThere are two forcing sequences for black, depending on whether white 22 is played next to black 15 or black 21. The diagram on the right shows the first sequence. All the moves for white are forced. Such long forcing sequences are typical in gomoku, and expert players can read out forcing sequences of 20 to 40 moves rapidly and accurately.\nThe diagram on the right shows the second forcing sequence. This diagram shows why white 20 was a blunder; if it had been next to black 19 (at the position of move 32 in this diagram) then black 31 would not be a threat and so the forcing sequence would fail.\nWorld championships.\nWorld Gomoku Championships have occurred 2 times in 1989, 1991.\nSince 2009 tournament play has resumed, with the opening rule changed to swap2.\nList of the tournaments occurred and title holders follows.\nComputers and gomoku.\nResearchers have been applying artificial intelligence techniques to playing gomoku for several decades. Joseph Weizenbaum published a short paper in Datamation in 1962 entitled \"How to Make a Computer Appear Intelligent\" that described the strategy used in a gomoku program that could beat novice players. In 1994, L. Victor Allis raised the algorithm of proof-number search (pn-search) and dependency-based search (db-search), and proved that when starting from an empty 15\u00d715 board, the first player has a winning strategy using these searching algorithms. This applies to both free-style gomoku and standard gomoku without any opening rules. It seems very likely that black wins on larger boards too. In any size of a board, freestyle gomoku is an \"m\",\"n\",\"k\"-game, hence it is known that the first player can force a win or a draw. In 2001, Allis's winning strategy was also approved for renju, a variation of gomoku, when there was no limitation on the opening stage.\nHowever, neither the theoretical values of all legal positions, nor the opening rules such as Swap2 used by the professional gomoku players have been solved yet, so the topic of gomoku artificial intelligence is still a challenge for computer scientists, such as the problem on how to improve the gomoku algorithms to make them more strategic and competitive. Most state-of-the-art gomoku algorithms are based on the alpha-beta pruning framework.\nReisch proved that Generalized gomoku is PSPACE-complete. He also observed that the reduction can be adapted to the rules of k-in-a-Row for fixed k. Although he did not specify exactly which values of k are allowed, the reduction would appear to generalize to any k \u2265 5.\nThere exist several well-known tournaments for gomoku programs since 1989. The Computer Olympiad started with the gomoku game in 1989, but gomoku has not been in the list since 1993. The Renju World Computer Championship was started in 1991, and held for 4 times until 2004. The Gomocup tournament has been held annually since 2000, with more than thirty participants from about ten countries taking part. The Hungarian Computer Go-Moku Tournament was played twice in 2005. There were also two Computer vs. Human tournaments played in the Czech Republic, in 2006 and 2011. Not until 2017 did the computer programs prove capable of outperforming the world human champion in public competitions. In the Gomoku World Championship 2017, there was a match between the world champion program Yixin and the world champion human player Rudolf Dupszki. Yixin won the match with a score of 2\u20130.\nIn popular culture.\nGomoku was featured in a 2018 Korean film by Baek Seung-Hwa starring Park Se-wan titled Omok Girl. The film follows Baduk Lee (Park Se-wan), a former go prodigy who retired after a humiliating loss on time. Years later, Baduk Lee works part time at a go club, where she meets Ahn Kyung Kim, who introduces her to an Omok (Korean gomoku) tournament. Lee is initially uninterested and considers Omok a children's game, but after her roommate loses money on an impulse purchase, she enters the tournament for the prize money and loses badly, being humiliated once again. Afterwards, she begins training to redeem herself and becomes a serious omok player.\nIn the video game \"Vintage Story\", omok boards and pieces (made of gold, lead, and copper) can occasionally be found in ruins or as part of luxury traders' inventory. The board and pieces are functional, allowing players to have actual omok matches. In-universe, omok is so far the only game surviving from the times before the Rot."}
{"id": "12903", "revid": "234689", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12903", "title": "Gegenschein", "text": "Optical effect of interplanetary dust reflections\nGegenschein (; ; lit.\u2009'counter-shine') or counterglow is a faintly bright spot in the night sky centered at the antisolar point. The backscatter of sunlight by interplanetary dust causes this optical phenomenon, being a zodiacal light and part of its zodiacal light band.\nExplanation.\nLike zodiacal light, gegenschein is sunlight scattered by interplanetary dust. Most of this dust orbits the Sun near the ecliptic plane, with a possible concentration of particles centered at the L2 point of the Earth\u2013Sun system.\nGegenschein is distinguished from zodiacal light by its high angle of reflection of the incident sunlight on the dust particles. It forms a slightly brighter elliptical spot of 8\u201310\u00b0 across\u00a0directly opposite the Sun within the dimmer band of zodiacal light and zodiac constellation. The intensity of the gegenschein is relatively enhanced because each dust particle is seen at full phase, having a difficult to measure apparent magnitude of +5 to +6, with a very low surface brightness in the +10 to +12 magnitude range.\nHistory.\nIt is commonly stated that the gegenschein was first described by the French Jesuit astronomer and professor Esprit P\u00e9zenas (1692\u20131776) in 1730. Further observations were supposedly made by the German explorer Alexander von Humboldt during his South American journey from 1799 to 1803. It was Humboldt who first used the German term \"Gegenschein\". However, research conducted in 2021 by Texas State University astronomer and professor Donald Olson discovered that the Danish astronomer Theodor Brorsen was actually the first person to observe and describe one in 1854, although Brorsen had thought that P\u00e9zenas had observed it first. Olson believes what P\u00e9zenas actually observed was an auroral event, as he described the phenomenon as having a red glow; Olson found many other reports of auroral activity from around Europe and Asia on the same date P\u00e9zenas made his observation. Humboldt's report instead described glowing triangular patches on both the western and eastern horizons shortly after sunset, while true gegenschein is most visible near local midnight when it is highest in the sky.\nBrorsen published the first thorough investigations of the gegenschein in 1854. T. W. Backhouse discovered it independently in 1876, as did Edward Emerson Barnard in 1882. In modern times, the gegenschein is not visible in most inhabited regions of the world due to light pollution.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12904", "revid": "248739", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12904", "title": "Glyph", "text": "Purposeful written mark\nA glyph ( ) is any kind of purposeful mark. In typography, a glyph is \"the specific shape, design, or representation of a character\". It is a particular graphical representation, in a particular typeface, of an element of written language. A grapheme, or part of a grapheme (such as a diacritic), or sometimes several graphemes in combination (a composed glyph) can be represented by a glyph.\nGlyphs, graphemes and characters.\nIn modern English, symbols like letters and numerical digits are each both single graphemes and single glyphs. In most languages written in any variety of the Latin alphabet except English, the use of diacritics to signify a sound mutation is common. For example, the grapheme \u27e8\u00e0\u27e9 requires two glyphs: the basic |a| and the grave accent |`|. In general, a diacritic is regarded as a glyph, even if it is contiguous with the rest of the character like a cedilla in French, Catalan or Portuguese, the ogonek in several languages, or the stroke on a Polish \u27e8\u0141\u27e9. Although these marks originally had no independent meaning, they have since acquired meaning in the field of mathematics and computing, for instance.\nConversely, in the languages of Western Europe, the dot (formally, \"tittle\") on a lower-case \u27e8i\u27e9 is not a glyph in itself because it does not convey any distinction, and an |\u0131| in which the dot has been accidentally omitted is still likely to be recognized correctly. However, in Turkish and adjacent languages, this dot is a glyph because that language has two distinct versions of the letter \"i\", with and without a dot. \nIn Japanese syllabaries, some of the characters are made up of more than one separate mark, but in general these separate marks are not glyphs because they have no meaning by themselves. However, in some cases, additional marks fulfil the role of diacritics, to differentiate distinct characters. Such additional marks constitute glyphs. \nSome characters such as |\u00e6| in Icelandic and |\u00df| in German may be regarded as glyphs. They were originally typographic ligatures, but over time have become characters in their own right; these languages treat them as unique letters. However, a ligature such as |fi|, that is treated in some typefaces as a single unit, is arguably not a glyph as this is just a design choice of that typeface, essentially an allographic feature, and includes more than one grapheme. In normal handwriting, even long words are often written \"joined up\", without the pen leaving the paper, and the form of each written letter will often vary depending on which letters precede and follow it, but that does not make the whole word into a single glyph.\nOlder models of typewriters required the use of multiple glyphs to depict a single character, as an overstruck apostrophe and full stop to create an exclamation mark. If there is more than one allograph of a unit of writing, and the choice between them depends on context or on the preference of the author, they now have to be treated as separate glyphs, because mechanical arrangements have to be available to differentiate between them and to print whichever of them is required.\nIn computing as well as typography, the term \"character\" refers to a grapheme or grapheme-like unit of text, as found in writing systems (\"scripts\"). In typography and computing, the range of graphemes is broader than in a written language in other ways too: a typeface often has to cope with a range of different languages each of which contribute their own graphemes, and it may also be required to print non-linguistic symbols such as dingbats. The range of glyphs required increases correspondingly. In summary, in typography and computing, a glyph is a graphical unit.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12905", "revid": "20318", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12905", "title": "Goth subculture", "text": "Contemporary musical subculture\nGoth is a music-based subculture that emerged out of nightclubs such as the F Club and Batcave in the United Kingdom during the early 1980s, as well as gothic rock, a genre that evolved from British post-punk. The goth subculture is centered around fashion, music festivals, clubs, and organized meetings.\nStyles of dress within the subculture draw on glam rock, punk, new wave, new romantics and from the fashion of earlier periods such as the Victorian, Edwardian, and Belle \u00c9poque eras. The style most often includes dark (usually solid black) attire, dark makeup, and black hair. The subculture also drew inspiration from literary and cinematic gothic traditions, including German Expressionism and classic horror films (from Universal Monsters to Hammer horror), with a flair for theatricality and camp.\nIn the 1990s and 2000s, the goth subculture entered mainstream awareness, with its visual style and fashion influencing various aesthetic variants such as cybergoth and mall goth, while facing public moral panic, with media often linking it to deviance and self-harm. The subculture further developed on early social networking sites such as MySpace and Pure Volume. During the 2010s and 2020s, goth fashion internet aesthetics such as Health Goth and Whimsigoth emerged.\nHistory.\nDuring the late 1970s, the gothic rock genre emerged out of several British post-punk bands such as Siouxsie and the Banshees, Joy Division, Bauhaus and the Cure. However, it was not until the early 1980s that gothic rock became associated with a specific youth subculture.\nIn February 1981, \"Sounds\" writer Steve Keaton published an article on \"punk gothique\", entitled \"The Face of Punk Gothique\", a term coined by UK Decay frontman Steve Abbott to describe their music. In the article, Keaton stated, \"Could this be the coming of Punk Gothique? With Bauhaus flying in on similar wings could it be the next big thing?\" Writer Cathi Unsworth believes that Abbott was the first to ascribe the term to the music and the goth subculture with which it would come to be associated, citing an interview in May 1981 where he once again used the term \"punk gothique\".In Leeds, the F Club became instrumental to the development of the goth subculture in the early 1980s, though had originally opened in 1977 as a punk club. By July 1982, the opening of the Batcave in London's Soho provided a prominent meeting point for the emerging scene, which was briefly labelled \"positive punk\" by the \"NME\" in a special issue with a front cover in February 1983. The scene and subculture was centered around the Batcave, and spearheaded by artists such as Alien Sex Fiend, Specimen, the Mob, UK Decay, Sex Gang Children, Rubella Ballet, and Southern Death Cult. On June 14, 1983, BBC radio DJ John Peel noted the \"NME\" had dropped the term \"positive punk\" and had now opted for \"goth\" to describe the scene and subculture.\nSome of the bands that defined and embraced the gothic rock genre included Bauhaus, the Cure, the Birthday Party, UK Decay, Virgin Prunes, Killing Joke, and the Damned. In the United States, deathrock developed in California during the late 1970s and early 1980s as a distinct branch of American punk rock, with acts such as Christian Death, Kommunity FK and 45 Grave at the forefront.\nBy the mid-1980s, bands began proliferating and became increasingly popular, including the Sisters of Mercy, the Mission, Alien Sex Fiend, the March Violets, Xmal Deutschland, the Membranes, and Fields of the Nephilim. Record labels like Factory, 4AD and Beggars Banquet released much of this music in Europe, and through a vibrant import music market in the US, the subculture grew, especially in New York and Los Angeles, California, where many nightclubs featured \"gothic/industrial\" nights and bands like Black Tape for a Blue Girl, Theatre of Ice, Human Drama and The Wake became key figures for the genre to expand on an nationwide level.\nThe 1990s saw further growth for some 1980s bands and the emergence of many new acts, as well as new goth-centric U.S. record labels such as Cleopatra Records, among others. According to Dave Simpson of \"The Guardian\", \"[I]n the 90s, goths all but disappeared as dance music became the dominant youth cult\". As a result, the goth movement went underground and fractured into cyber goth, shock rock, industrial metal, gothic metal, and Medieval folk metal. Marilyn Manson was seen as a \"goth-shock icon\" by \"Spin\".\nArt, historical and cultural influences.\nThe Goth subculture of the 1980s drew inspiration from a variety of sources. Some of them were modern or contemporary, others were centuries-old or ancient. Michael Bibby and Lauren M. E. Goodlad liken the subculture to a bricolage. Among the music-subcultures that influenced it were punk, new wave, and glam. But it also drew inspiration from B-movies, Gothic literature, horror films, vampire cults and traditional mythology. Among the mythologies that proved influential in Goth were Celtic mythology, Christian mythology, Egyptian mythology, and various traditions of Paganism.\n18th and 19th centuries' literary influences.\nThe figures that the movement counted among its historic canon of ancestors were equally diverse. They included the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood, Friedrich Nietzsche (1844\u20121900), Comte de Lautr\u00e9amont (1846\u20121870), Salvador Dal\u00ed (1904\u20121989) and Jean-Paul Sartre (1905\u20121980). Writers that have had a significant influence on the movement also represent a diverse canon. They include Ann Radcliffe (1764\u20121823), John William Polidori (1795\u20121821), Edgar Allan Poe (1809\u20121849), Sheridan Le Fanu (1814-1873), Bram Stoker (1847\u20121912), Oscar Wilde (1854\u20121900), H. P. Lovecraft (1890\u20121937), Anne Rice (1941\u20122021), William Gibson (1948\u2012), Ian McEwan (1948\u2012), Storm Constantine (1956\u20122021), and Poppy Z. Brite (1967\u2012).\nGothic literature is a genre of fiction that combines romance and dark elements to produce mystery, suspense, terror, horror and the supernatural. According to David H. Richter, settings were framed to take place at \"...ruinous castles, gloomy churchyards, claustrophobic monasteries, and lonely mountain roads\". Typical characters consisted of the cruel parent, sinister priest, courageous victor, and the helpless heroine, along with supernatural figures such as demons, vampires, ghosts, and monsters. Often, the plot focused on characters ill-fated, internally conflicted, and innocently victimized by harassing malicious figures. In addition to the dismal plot focuses, the literary tradition of the gothic was to also focus on individual characters that were gradually going insane.\nEnglish author Horace Walpole, with his 1764 novel \"The Castle of Otranto\" is one of the first writers who explored this genre. The American Revolutionary War-era \"American Gothic\" story of the Headless Horseman, immortalized in \"The Legend of Sleepy Hollow\" (published in 1820) by Washington Irving, marked the arrival in the New World of dark, romantic storytelling. The tale was composed by Irving while he was living in England, and was based on popular tales told by colonial Dutch settlers of the Hudson Valley, New York. The story would be adapted to film in 1922, in 1949 as the animated \"The Adventures of Ichabod and Mr. Toad\", and again in 1999.\nThroughout the evolution of the goth subculture, classic Romantic, Gothic and horror literature has played a significant role. E. T. A. Hoffmann, Edgar Allan Poe, Charles Baudelaire, H. P. Lovecraft, and other tragic and Romantic writers have become as emblematic of the subculture as the use of dark eyeliner or dressing in black. Baudelaire, in fact, in his preface to \"Les Fleurs du mal\" (\"Flowers of Evil\") penned lines that could serve as a sort of goth malediction:\n&lt;poem&gt;\"C'est l'Ennui! \u2014l'\u0153il charg\u00e9 d'un pleur involontaire,\"\n\"Il r\u00eave d'\u00e9chafauds en fumant son houka.\"\n\"Tu le connais, lecteur, ce monstre d\u00e9licat,\"\n\"\u2014Hypocrite lecteur,\u2014mon semblable,\u2014mon fr\u00e8re!\"\nIt is Boredom! \u2014 an eye brimming with an involuntary tear,\nHe dreams of the gallows while smoking his water-pipe.\nYou know him, reader, this delicate monster,\n\u2014Hypocrite reader,\u2014my twin,\u2014my brother!&lt;/poem&gt;\nVisual art influences.\nThe gothic subculture has influenced different artists\u2014not only musicians\u2014but also painters and photographers. In particular their work is based on mystic, morbid and romantic motifs. In photography and painting the spectrum varies from erotic artwork to romantic images of vampires or ghosts. There is a marked preference for dark colours and sentiments, similar to Gothic fiction. At the end of the 19th century, painters like John Everett Millais and John Ruskin invented a new kind of Gothic.\nFilms and television.\nSome of the early gothic rock and deathrock artists adopted traditional horror film images and drew on horror film soundtracks for inspiration. Their audiences responded by adopting appropriate dress and props. Use of standard horror film props such as swirling smoke, rubber bats, and cobwebs featured as gothic club d\u00e9cor from the beginning in The Batcave. Such references in bands' music and images were originally tongue-in-cheek, but as time went on, bands and members of the subculture took the connection more seriously. As a result, morbid, supernatural and occult themes became more noticeably serious in the subculture. The interconnection between horror and goth was highlighted in its early days by \"The Hunger\", a 1983 vampire film starring David Bowie, Catherine Deneuve and Susan Sarandon. The film featured gothic rock group Bauhaus performing \"Bela Lugosi's Dead\" in a nightclub. Tim Burton created a storybook atmosphere filled with darkness and shadow in some of his films like \"Beetlejuice\" (1988), \"Batman\" (1989), \"Edward Scissorhands\" (1990), \"Batman Returns\" (1992) and the stop motion films \"The Nightmare Before Christmas\" (1993), which was produced/co-written by Burton,\nAs the subculture became well-established, the connection between goth and horror fiction became almost a clich\u00e9, with goths quite likely to appear as characters in horror novels and film. For example, \"The Craft\", \"The Crow\", \"The Matrix\" and \"Underworld\" film series drew directly on goth music and style. The dark comedies \"Beetlejuice\", \"The Faculty\", \"American Beauty\", \"Wedding Crashers\", and a few episodes of the animated TV show \"South Park\" portray or parody the goth subculture. In \"South Park\", several of the fictional schoolchildren are depicted as goths. The goth kids on the show are depicted as finding it annoying to be confused with the Hot Topic \"vampire\" kids from the episode \"The Ungroundable\" in season 12, and even more frustrating to be compared with emo kids. The goth kids are usually depicted listening to gothic music, writing or reading Gothic poetry, drinking coffee, flipping their hair, and smoking.\nMorticia Addams from The Addams Family created by Charles Addams is a fictional character and the mother in the Addams Family. Morticia was played by Carolyn Jones in the 1964 television show \"The Addams Family\" and by Anjelica Huston in the 1991 version.\nA recurring sketch in the 1990s on NBC's \"Saturday Night Live\" was \"Goth Talk\", in which a public access channel broadcast hosted by unpopular young goths would continually be interrupted by the more \"normal\" kids in school. The sketch featured series regulars Will Ferrell, Molly Shannon, and Chris Kattan.\nCharacteristics of the scene.\nIcons.\nGoth icons include several bandleaders: Siouxsie Sioux of Siouxsie and the Banshees, Robert Smith of the Cure, Peter Murphy of Bauhaus, Dave Vanian of The Damned; Rozz Williams of Christian Death, Olli Wisdom leader of the band Specimen, and keyboardist Jonathan Melton aka Jonny Slut, who evolved the Batcave style. Nick Cave was dubbed as \"the grand lord of gothic lushness\".\nFashion.\nMale and female references.\nOne female role model is Theda Bara, the 1910s femme fatale known for her dark eyeshadow.\nSiouxsie was particularly influential on the dress style of the gothic rock scene; Paul Morley of \"NME\" described Siouxsie and the Banshees' 1980 gig at Futurama: \"[Siouxsie was] modeling her newest outfit, the one that will influence how all the girls dress over the next few months. About half the girls at Leeds had used Sioux as a basis for their appearance, hair to ankle\". Other singers such as Nico, David Bowie Robert Smith, and Lux Interior are also style icons, like pop culture figures such as Bettie Page, Vampira, Morticia Addams, \nMusidora and Bela Lugosi,\nStyling.\nPrior to the emergence of the scene in the early 1980s, Karl Lagerfeld had hosted in 1977 the Soir\u00e9e Moratoire Noir party, specifying \"tenue tragique noire absolument obligatoire\" (black tragic dress absolutely required). The event included elements associated with leatherman style.\nGothic fashion is marked by conspicuously dark, antiquated and homogeneous features. It is stereotyped as eerie, mysterious, complex and exotic. A dark, sometimes morbid fashion and style of dress, typical gothic fashion includes colored black hair and black period-styled clothing. Both male and female goths wear dark eyeliner and dark fingernail polish, most especially black. Styles are often borrowed from punk fashion and\u2014more currently\u2014from the Victorian and Elizabethan periods. It also frequently expresses pagan, occult or other religious imagery. Gothic fashion and styling may also feature silver jewelry and piercings.\nTed Polhemus described goth fashion as a \"profusion of black velvets, lace, fishnets and leather tinged with scarlet or purple, accessorized with tightly laced corsets, gloves, precarious stilettos and silver jewelry depicting religious or occult themes\".\nIn contrast to the LARP-based Victorian and Elizabethan pomposity of the 2000s, the more Romantic side of 1980s trad-goth\u2014mainly represented by women\u2014was characterized by new wave/post-punk-oriented hairstyles (both long and short, partly shaved and teased) and street-compliant clothing, including black frill blouses, midi dresses or tea-length skirts, and floral lace tights, Dr. Martens, spike heels (pumps), and pointed toe buckle boots (winklepickers), sometimes supplemented with accessories such as bracelets, chokers and bib necklaces. This style, retroactively referred to as \"Ethergoth\", took its inspiration from Siouxsie Sioux and mid-1980s musicians from the 4AD roster like Elizabeth Fraser and Lisa Gerrard.\n\"The New York Times\" noted: \"The costumes and ornaments are a glamorous cover for the genre's somber themes. In the world of Goth, nature itself lurks as a malign protagonist, causing flesh to rot, rivers to flood, monuments to crumble and women to turn into slatterns, their hair streaming and lipstick askew\".\nCintra Wilson declares that the origins of the dark romantic style are found in the \"Victorian cult of mourning.\" Valerie Steele is an expert in the history of the style.\nReciprocity with fashion designers.\nGoth fashion has a reciprocal relationship with the fashion world. The 1980s established designers such as Drew Bernstein of Lip Service, and the 1990s saw a surge of US-based gothic fashion designers, many of whom continue to evolve the style to the present day. Style magazines such as \"Gothic Beauty\" have given repeat features to a select few gothic fashion designers who began their labels in the 1990s, such as Kambriel, Rose Mortem, and Tyler Ondine of Heavy Red.\nIn the later part of the first decade of the 21st century, designers such as Alexander McQueen, Anna Sui, Rick Owens, Gareth Pugh, Ann Demeulemeester, Philipp Plein, Hedi Slimane, John Richmond, John Galliano, Olivier Theyskens and Yohji Yamamoto brought elements of goth to runways. This was described as \"Haute Goth\" by Cintra Wilson in the \"New York Times\".\nThierry Mugler, Claude Montana, Jean Paul Gaultier and Christian Lacroix have also been associated with the fashion trend. In Spring 2004, Riccardo Tisci, Jean Paul Gaultier, Raf Simons and Stefano Pilati dressed their models as \"glamorous ghouls dressed in form-fitting suits and coal-tinted cocktail dresses\". Swedish designer Helena Horstedt and jewelry artist Hanna Hedman also practice a goth aesthetic.\nBooks and magazines.\nA prominent American literary influence on the gothic scene was provided by Anne Rice's re-imagining of the vampire in 1976. In \"The Vampire Chronicles\", Rice's characters were depicted as self-tormentors who struggled with alienation, loneliness, and the human condition. Not only did the characters torment themselves, but they also depicted a surreal world that focused on uncovering its splendour. These Chronicles assumed goth attitudes, but they were not intentionally created to represent the gothic subculture. Their romance, beauty, and erotic appeal attracted\nmany goth readers, making her works popular from the 1980s through the 1990s. While Goth has embraced Vampire literature both in its 19th century form and in its later incarnations, Rice's postmodern take on the vampire mythos has had a \"special resonance\" in the subculture. Her vampire novels feature intense emotions, period clothing, and \"cultured decadence\". Her vampires are socially alienated monsters, but they are also stunningly attractive. Rice's goth readers tend to envision themselves in much the same terms and view characters like Lestat de Lioncourt as role models.\nRichard Wright's novel \"Native Son\" contains gothic imagery and themes that demonstrate the links between blackness and the gothic; themes and images of \"premonitions, curses, prophecies, spells, veils, demonic possessions, graves, skeletons\" are present, suggesting gothic influence. Other classic themes of the gothic are present in the novel, such as transgression and unstable identities of race, class, gender, and nationality.\nThe re-imagining of the vampire continued with the release of Poppy Z. Brite's book \"Lost Souls\" in October 1992. Despite the fact that Brite's first novel was criticized by some mainstream sources for allegedly \"lack[ing] a moral center: neither terrifyingly malevolent supernatural creatures nor (like Anne Rice's protagonists) tortured souls torn between good and evil, these vampires simply add blood-drinking to the amoral panoply of drug abuse, problem drinking and empty sex practiced by their human counterparts\", many of these so-called \"human counterparts\" identified with the teen angst and goth music references therein, keeping the book in print. Upon release of a special 10th anniversary edition of \"Lost Souls\", \"Publishers Weekly\"\u2014the same periodical that criticized the novel's \"amorality\" a decade prior\u2014deemed it a \"modern horror classic\" and acknowledged that Brite established a \"cult audience\".\nThe 2002 release \"21st Century Goth\" by Mick Mercer, an author, noted music journalist and leading historian of gothic rock, explored the modern state of the goth scene around the world, including South America, Japan, and mainland Asia. His previous 1997 release, \"Hex Files: The Goth Bible\", similarly took an international look at the subculture.\nIn the US, \"Propaganda\" was a gothic subculture magazine founded in 1982. In Italy, \"Ver Sacrum\" covers the Italian goth scene, including fashion, sexuality, music, art and literature. Some magazines, such as the now-defunct \"Dark Realms\" and \"Goth Is Dead\" included goth fiction and poetry. Other magazines cover fashion (e.g., \"Gothic Beauty\"); music (e.g., \"Severance\") or culture and lifestyle (e.g., \"Althaus\" e-zine).\nOn 31 October 2011, ECW Press published the \"Encyclopedia Gothica\" written by author and poet Liisa Ladouceur with illustrations done by Gary Pullin. This non-fiction book describes over 600 words and phrases relevant to Goth subculture.\nBrian Craddock's 2017 novel Eucalyptus Goth charts a year in the life of a household of 20-somethings in Brisbane, Australia. The central characters are deeply entrenched in the local gothic subculture, with the book exploring themes relevant to the characters, notably unemployment, mental health, politics, and relationships.\nGraphic art.\nVisual contemporary graphic artists with this aesthetic include Gerald Brom, Dave McKean, and Trevor Brown as well as illustrators Edward Gorey, Charles Addams, Lorin Morgan-Richards, and James O'Barr. The artwork of Polish surrealist painter Zdzis\u0142aw Beksi\u0144ski is often described as gothic. British artist Anne Sudworth published a book on gothic art in 2007.\nEvents.\nThere are large annual goth-themed festivals in Germany, including Wave-Gotik-Treffen in Leipzig and M'era Luna in Hildesheim), both annually attracting tens of thousands of people. Castle Party is the biggest goth festival in Poland.\nSociology.\nGender and sexuality.\nSince the late 1970s, the UK goth scene refused \"traditional standards of sexual propriety\" and accepted and celebrated \"unusual, bizarre or deviant sexual practices\". In the 2000s, many members \"... claim overlapping memberships in the queer, polyamorous, bondage-discipline/sadomasochism, and pagan communities\".\nThough sexual empowerment is not unique to women in the goth scene, it remains an important part of many goth women's experience: The \"... [s]cene's celebration of active sexuality\" enables goth women \"... to resist mainstream notions of passive femininity\". They have an \"active sexuality\" approach which creates \"gender egalitarianism\" within the scene, as it \"allows them to engage in sexual play with multiple partners while sidestepping most of the stigma and dangers that women who engage in such behavior\" outside the scene frequently incur, while continuing to \"... see themselves as strong\".\nMen dress up in an androgynous way: \"... Men 'gender blend,' wearing makeup and skirts\". In contrast, the \"... women are dressed in sexy feminine outfits\" that are \"... highly sexualized\" and which often combine \"... corsets with short skirts and fishnet stockings\". Androgyny is common among the scene: \"... androgyny in Goth subcultural style often disguises or even functions to reinforce conventional gender roles\". It was only \"valorised\" for male goths, who adopt a \"feminine\" appearance, including \"make-up, skirts and feminine accessories\" to \"enhance masculinity\" and facilitate traditional heterosexual courting roles.\nIdentity.\nWhile goth is a music-based scene, the goth subculture is also characterized by particular aesthetics, outlooks, and a \"way of seeing and of being seen\". The last years, through social media, goths are able to meet people with similar interests, learn from each other, and finally, to take part in the scene. These activities on social media are the manifestation of the same practices which are taking place in goth clubs. This is not a new phenomenon since before the rise of social media on-line forums had the same function for goths. Observers have raised the issue of to what degree individuals are truly members of the goth subculture. On one end of the spectrum is the \"Uber goth\", a person who is described as seeking a pallor so much that they apply \"...as much white foundation and white powder as possible\". On the other end of the spectrum exists what another writer terms \"poseurs\" - \"goth wannabes, usually young kids going through a goth phase who do not hold to goth sensibilities but want to be part of the goth crowd\". It has been said that a \"mall goth\" is a teen who dresses in a goth style and spends time in malls with a Hot Topic store, but who does not know much about goth subculture or its music, thus making them a poseur. In one case, even a well-known performer has been labelled with the pejorative term - a \"number of goths, especially those who belonged to this subculture before the late-1980s, reject Marilyn Manson as a poseur who undermines the true meaning of goth\".\nMedia and academic commentary.\nThe BBC described academic research that indicated that goths are \"refined and sensitive, keen on poetry and books, not big on drugs or anti-social behaviour\". Teens often stay in the subculture \"into their adult life\", and they are likely to become well-educated and enter professions such as medicine or law. The subculture carries on appealing to teenagers who are looking for meaning and for identity. The scene teaches teens that there are difficult aspects to life that you \"have to make an attempt to understand\" or explain.\n\"The Guardian\" reported that a \"glue binding the [goth] scene together was drug use\"; however, in the scene, drug use was varied. Goth is one of the few subculture movements that is not associated with a single drug, in the way that the Hippie subculture is associated with cannabis and the Mod subculture is associated with amphetamines. A 2006 study of young goths found that those with higher levels of goth identification had higher drug use.\nPerception on nonviolence.\nA study conducted by the University of Glasgow, involving 1,258 youth interviewed at ages 11, 13, 15 and 19, found goth subculture to be strongly nonviolent and tolerant, thus providing \"valuable social and emotional support\" to teens vulnerable to self harm and mental illness.\nSchool shootings.\nIn the weeks following the 1999 Columbine High School massacre, media reports about the teen gunmen, Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold, portrayed them as part of a gothic cult. An increased suspicion of goth subculture subsequently manifested in the media. This led to a moral panic over teen involvement in goth subculture and a number of other activities, such as violent video games. Harris and Klebold had initially been thought to be members of \"The Trenchcoat Mafia\"; an informal club within Columbine High School. Later, such characterizations were considered incorrect.\nMedia reported that the gunman in the 2006 Dawson College shooting in Montreal, Quebec, Kimveer Singh Gill, was interested in goth subculture. Gill's self-professed love of Goth culture was the topic of media interest, and it was widely reported that the word \"Goth\", in Gill's writings, was a reference to the alternative industrial and goth subculture rather than a reference to gothic rock music. Gill, who committed suicide after the attack, wrote in his online journal: \"I'm so sick of hearing about jocks and preps making life hard for the goths and others who look different, or are different\".\nMick Mercer stated that Gill was \"not a Goth. Never a Goth. The bands he listed as his chosen form of ear-bashing were relentlessly metal and standard grunge, rock and goth metal, with some industrial presence\". Mercer stated that \"Kimveer Gill listened to metal\", \"He had nothing whatsoever to do with Goth\" and further commented \"I realise that like many Neos [neophyte], Kimveer Gill may even have believed he somehow was a Goth, because they're [Neophytes] only really noted for spectacularly missing the point\".\nPrejudice and violence directed at goths.\nIn part because of public misunderstanding surrounding gothic aesthetics, people in the goth subculture sometimes suffer prejudice, discrimination, and intolerance. As is the case with members of various other subcultures and alternative lifestyles, outsiders sometimes marginalize goths, either by intention or by accident. Actress Christina Hendricks talked of being bullied as a goth at school and how difficult it was for her to deal with societal pressure: \"Kids can be pretty judgmental about people who are different. But instead of breaking down and conforming, I stood firm. That is also probably why I was unhappy. My mother was mortified and kept telling me how horrible and ugly I looked. Strangers would walk by with a look of shock on their face, so I never felt pretty. I just always felt awkward\".\nOn 11 August 2007, while walking through Stubbylee Park in Bacup, Lancashire, a young couple, Sophie Lancaster and Robert Maltby, were attacked by a group of teenagers. Lancaster subsequently died from the severe head injuries she suffered in the attack. It later emerged that the attackers had attacked the couple because they were goths. On 29 April 2008, two of the attackers, Ryan Herbert and Brendan Harris, were convicted for the murder of Lancaster and given life sentences. Three others were given lesser sentences for the assault on her boyfriend Robert Maltby. In delivering the sentence, Judge Anthony Russell stated, \"This was a hate crime against these completely harmless people targeted because their appearance was different to yours\". He went on to defend the goth community, calling goths \"perfectly peaceful, law-abiding people who pose no threat to anybody\". Judge Russell added that he \"recognised it as a hate crime without Parliament having to tell him to do so and had included that view in his sentencing\". Despite this ruling, a bill to add discrimination based on subculture affiliation to the definition of hate crime in British law was not presented to parliament.\nIn 2013, police in Manchester announced they would be treating attacks on members of alternative subcultures, such as goths, the same as they do for attacks based on race, religion, and sexual orientation.\nA more recent phenomenon is the emergence of goth YouTubers who very often address the prejudice and violence against goths. These personalities create videos as a response to problems that they personally face, which include challenges such as bullying, and dealing with negative descriptions of themselves. Viewers often engage closely with these YouTubers, asking them for advice on how to deal with related personal struggles and getting responses in the form of personal messages or videos. These interactions take the form of an informal mentoring which contributes to the building of solidarity within the goth scene.\nSelf-harm studies.\nA study published on the \"British Medical Journal\" concluded that \"identification as belonging to the Goth subculture [at some point in their lives] was the best predictor of self harm and attempted suicide [among young teens]\", and that it was most possibly due to self-selection, with people committing self harm joining the goth subculture in order to get support from individuals with similar experiences.\nAccording to \"The Guardian\", some goth teens are more likely to harm themselves or attempt suicide. A medical journal study of 1,300 Scottish schoolchildren until their teen years found that the 53% of the 25 goth teens sampled had attempted to harm themselves and 47% had attempted suicide. The study found that the \"correlation was stronger than any other predictor\".\nThe authors held that most self-harm by teens was done before joining the subculture, and that joining the subculture would actually protect them and help them deal with distress in their lives, while cautioning that the study was based on a small sample size and needed replication to confirm the results. The study was criticized for using only a small sample of goth teens and not taking into account other influences and differences between types of goths.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12908", "revid": "24899805", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12908", "title": "Global warming potential", "text": "Potential heat absorbed by a greenhouse gas\nGlobal warming potential (GWP) is a measure of how much heat a greenhouse gas traps in the atmosphere over a specific time period, relative to carbon dioxide (CO2).2232 It is expressed as a multiple of warming caused by the same mass of (CO2). Therefore, by definition CO2 has a GWP of 1. For other gases it depends on how strongly the gas absorbs thermal radiation, how quickly the gas leaves the atmosphere, and the time frame considered.\nFor example, methane has a GWP over 20 years (GWP-20) of 81.2 meaning that, a leak of a tonne of methane is equivalent to emitting 81.2 tonnes of carbon dioxide measured over 20 years. As methane has a much shorter atmospheric lifetime than carbon dioxide, its GWP is much less over longer time periods, with a GWP-100 of 27.9 and a GWP-500 of 7.95.7SM-24\nThe carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e or CO2eq or CO2-e or CO2-eq) can be calculated from the GWP. For any gas, it is the mass of CO2 that would warm the earth as much as the mass of that gas. Thus it provides a common scale for measuring the climate effects of different gases. It is calculated as GWP times mass of the other gas.\nDefinition.\nThe global warming potential (GWP) is defined as an \"index measuring the radiative forcing following an emission of a unit mass of a given substance, accumulated over a chosen time horizon, relative to that of the reference substance, carbon dioxide (CO2). The GWP thus represents the combined effect of the differing times these substances remain in the atmosphere and their effectiveness in causing radiative forcing.\"2232\nIn turn, \"radiative forcing\" is a scientific concept used to quantify and compare the external drivers of change to Earth's energy balance. Radiative forcing is the change in energy flux in the atmosphere caused by natural or anthropogenic factors of climate change as measured in watts per meter squared.\nGWP in policymaking.\nAs governments develop policies to combat emissions from high-GWP sources, policymakers have chosen to use the 100-year GWP scale as the standard in international agreements. The Kigali Amendment to the Montreal Protocol sets the global phase-down of hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), a group of high-GWP compounds. It requires countries to use a set of GWP100 values equal to those published in the IPCC's Fourth Assessment Report (AR4). This allows policymakers to have one standard for comparison instead of changing GWP values in new assessment reports. One exception to the GWP100 standard exists: New York state\u2019s Climate Leadership and Community Protection Act requires the use of GWP20, despite being a different standard from all other countries participating in phase downs of HFCs.\nCalculated values.\nCurrent values (IPCC Sixth Assessment Report from 2021).\nThe global warming potential (GWP) depends on both the efficiency of the molecule as a greenhouse gas and its atmospheric lifetime. GWP is measured relative to the same mass of CO2 and evaluated for a specific timescale. Thus, if a gas has a high (positive) radiative forcing but also a short lifetime, it will have a large GWP on a 20-year scale but a small one on a 100-year scale. Conversely, if a molecule has a longer atmospheric lifetime than CO2 its GWP will increase when the timescale is considered. Carbon dioxide is defined to have a GWP of 1 over all time periods.\nMethane has an atmospheric lifetime of 12 \u00b1 2 years. The 2021 IPCC report lists the GWP as 83 over a time scale of 20 years, 30 over 100 years and 10 over 500 years. The decrease in GWP at longer times is because methane decomposes to water and CO2 through chemical reactions in the atmosphere. Similarly the third most important GHG, nitrous oxide (N2O), is a common gas emitted through the denitrification part of the nitrogen cycle. It has a lifetime of 109 years and an even higher GWP level running at 273 over 20 and 100 years.\nExamples of the atmospheric lifetime and GWP relative to CO2 for several greenhouse gases are given in the following table:\nEstimates of GWP values over 20, 100 and 500 years are periodically compiled and revised in reports from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. The most recent report is the IPCC Sixth Assessment Report (Working Group I) from 2023.\nThe IPCC lists many other substances not shown here. Some have high GWP but only a low concentration in the atmosphere.\nThe values given in the table assume the same mass of compound is analyzed; different ratios will result from the conversion of one substance to another. For instance, burning methane to carbon dioxide would reduce the global warming impact, but by a smaller factor than 25:1 because the mass of methane burned is less than the mass of carbon dioxide released (ratio 1:2.74). For a starting amount of 1 tonne of methane, which has a GWP of 25, after combustion there would be 2.74 tonnes of CO2, each tonne of which has a GWP of 1. This is a net reduction of 22.26 tonnes of GWP, reducing the global warming effect by a ratio of 25:2.74 (approximately 9 times).\nEarlier values from 2007.\nThe values provided in the table below are from 2007 when they were published in the IPCC Fourth Assessment Report. These values are still used (as of 2020) for some comparisons.\nImportance of time horizon.\nA substance's GWP depends on the number of years (denoted by a subscript) over which the potential is calculated. A gas which is quickly removed from the atmosphere may initially have a large effect, but for longer time periods, as it has been removed, it becomes less important. Thus methane has a potential of 25 over 100 years (GWP100 = 25) but 86 over 20 years (GWP20 = 86); conversely sulfur hexafluoride has a GWP of 22,800 over 100 years but 16,300 over 20 years (IPCC Third Assessment Report). The GWP value depends on how the gas concentration decays over time in the atmosphere. This is often not precisely known and hence the values should not be considered exact. For this reason when quoting a GWP it is important to give a reference to the calculation.\nThe GWP for a mixture of gases can be obtained from the mass-fraction-weighted average of the GWPs of the individual gases.\nCommonly, a time horizon of 100 years is used by regulators.\nWater vapour.\nWater vapour does contribute to anthropogenic global warming, but as the GWP is defined, it is negligible for H2O: an estimate gives a 100-year GWP between -0.001 and 0.0005.\nH2O can function as a greenhouse gas because it has a profound infrared absorption spectrum with more and broader absorption bands than CO2. Its concentration in the atmosphere is limited by air temperature, so that radiative forcing by water vapour increases with global warming (positive feedback). But the GWP definition excludes indirect effects. GWP definition is also based on emissions, and anthropogenic emissions of water vapour (cooling towers, irrigation) are removed via precipitation within weeks, so its GWP is negligible.\nCalculation methods.\nWhen calculating the GWP of a greenhouse gas, the value depends on the following factors:\nA high GWP correlates with a large infrared absorption and a long atmospheric lifetime. The dependence of GWP on the wavelength of absorption is more complicated. Even if a gas absorbs radiation efficiently at a certain wavelength, this may not affect its GWP much, if the atmosphere already absorbs most radiation at that wavelength. A gas has the most effect if it absorbs in a \"window\" of wavelengths where the atmosphere is fairly transparent. The dependence of GWP as a function of wavelength has been found empirically and published as a graph.\nBecause the GWP of a greenhouse gas depends directly on its infrared spectrum, the use of infrared spectroscopy to study greenhouse gases is centrally important in the effort to understand the impact of human activities on global climate change.\nJust as radiative forcing provides a simplified means of comparing the various factors that are believed to influence the climate system to one another, global warming potentials (GWPs) are one type of simplified index based upon radiative properties that can be used to estimate the potential future impacts of emissions of different gases upon the climate system in a relative sense. GWP is based on a number of factors, including the radiative efficiency (infrared-absorbing ability) of each gas relative to that of carbon dioxide, as well as the decay rate of each gas (the amount removed from the atmosphere over a given number of years) relative to that of carbon dioxide.\nThe radiative forcing capacity (RF) is the amount of energy per unit area, per unit time, absorbed by the greenhouse gas, that would otherwise be lost to space. It can be expressed by the formula:\nformula_1\nwhere the subscript \"i\" represents a wavenumber interval of 10 inverse centimeters. Absi represents the integrated infrared absorbance of the sample in that interval, and Fi represents the RF for that interval.\nThe Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) provides the generally accepted values for GWP, which changed slightly between 1996 and 2001, except for methane, which had its GWP almost doubled. An exact definition of how GWP is calculated is to be found in the IPCC's 2001 Third Assessment Report. The GWP is defined as the ratio of the time-integrated radiative forcing from the instantaneous release of 1\u00a0kg of a trace substance relative to that of 1\u00a0kg of a reference gas:\nformula_2\nwhere TH is the time horizon over which the calculation is considered; ax is the radiative efficiency due to a unit increase in atmospheric abundance of the substance (i.e., Wm\u22122 kg\u22121) and [x](t) is the time-dependent decay in abundance of the substance following an instantaneous release of it at time t=0. The denominator contains the corresponding quantities for the reference gas (i.e. CO2). The radiative efficiencies ax and ar are not necessarily constant over time. While the absorption of infrared radiation by many greenhouse gases varies linearly with their abundance, a few important ones display non-linear behaviour for current and likely future abundances (e.g., CO2, CH4, and N2O). For those gases, the relative radiative forcing will depend upon abundance and hence upon the future scenario adopted.\nSince all GWP calculations are a comparison to CO2 which is non-linear, all GWP values are affected. Assuming otherwise as is done above will lead to lower GWPs for other gases than a more detailed approach would. Clarifying this, while increasing CO2 has less and less effect on radiative absorption as ppm concentrations rise, more powerful greenhouse gases like methane and nitrous oxide have different thermal absorption frequencies to CO2 that are not filled up (saturated) as much as CO2, so rising ppms of these gases are far more significant.\nApplications.\nCarbon dioxide equivalent.\nCarbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e or CO2eq or CO2-e) of a quantity of gas is calculated from its GWP. For any gas, it is the mass of CO2 which would warm the earth as much as the mass of that gas. Thus it provides a common scale for measuring the climate effects of different gases. It is calculated as GWP multiplied by mass of the other gas. For example, if a gas has GWP of 100, two tonnes of the gas have CO2e of 200 tonnes, and 9 tonnes of the gas has CO2e of 900 tonnes.\nOn a global scale, the warming effects of one or more greenhouse gases in the atmosphere can also be expressed as an equivalent atmospheric concentration of CO2. CO2e can then be the atmospheric concentration of CO2 which would warm the earth as much as a particular concentration of some other gas or of all gases and aerosols in the atmosphere. For example, CO2e of 500 parts per million would reflect a mix of atmospheric gases which warm the earth as much as 500 parts per million of CO2 would warm it. Calculation of the equivalent atmospheric concentration of CO2 of an atmospheric greenhouse gas or aerosol is more complex and involves the atmospheric concentrations of those gases, their GWPs, and the ratios of their molar masses to the molar mass of CO2.\nCO2e calculations depend on the time-scale chosen, typically 100 years or 20 years, since gases decay in the atmosphere or are absorbed naturally, at different rates.\nThe following units are commonly used:\nFor example, the table above shows GWP for methane over 20 years at 86 and nitrous oxide at 289, so emissions of 1 million tonnes of methane or nitrous oxide are equivalent to emissions of 86 or 289 million tonnes of carbon dioxide, respectively.\nUse in Kyoto Protocol and for reporting to UNFCCC.\nUnder the Kyoto Protocol, in 1997 the Conference of the Parties standardized international reporting, by deciding (see decision number 2/CP.3) that the values of GWP calculated for the IPCC Second Assessment Report were to be used for converting the various greenhouse gas emissions into comparable CO2 equivalents.\nAfter some intermediate updates, in 2013 this standard was updated by the Warsaw meeting of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC, decision number 24/CP.19) to require using a new set of 100-year GWP values. They published these values in Annex III, and they took them from the IPCC Fourth Assessment Report, which had been published in 2007. Those 2007 estimates are still used for international comparisons through 2020, although the latest research on warming effects has found other values, as shown in the tables above.\nThough recent reports reflect more scientific accuracy, countries and companies continue to use the IPCC Second Assessment Report (SAR) and IPCC Fourth Assessment Report values for reasons of comparison in their emission reports. The IPCC Fifth Assessment Report has skipped the 500-year values but introduced GWP estimations including the climate-carbon feedback (f) with a large amount of uncertainty.\nOther metrics to compare greenhouse gases.\nThe \"Global Temperature change Potential\" (GTP) is another way to compare gases. While GWP estimates infrared thermal radiation absorbed, GTP estimates the resulting rise in average surface temperature of the world, over the next 20, 50 or 100 years, caused by a greenhouse gas, relative to the temperature rise which the same mass of CO2 would cause. Calculation of GTP requires modelling how the world, especially the oceans, will absorb heat. GTP is published in the same IPCC tables with GWP.\nAnother metric called GWP* (pronounced \"GWP star\") has been proposed to take better account of short-lived climate pollutants (SLCPs) such as methane. A permanent increase in the rate of emission of an SLCP has a similar effect to that of a one-time emission of an amount of carbon dioxide, because both raise the radiative forcing permanently or (in the case of carbon dioxide) practically permanently (since the CO2 stays in the air for a long time). GWP* therefore assigns an \"increase\" in emission rate of an SLCP a supposedly equivalent amount (tonnes) of CO2. However GWP* has been criticised both for its suitability as a metric and for inherent design features which can perpetuate injustices and inequity. Developing countries whose emissions of SLCPs are increasing are \"penalized\", while developed countries such as Australia or New Zealand which have steady emissions of SLCPs are not penalized in this way, though they may be penalized for their emissions of CO2.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12909", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12909", "title": "Green Bank equation", "text": ""}
{"id": "12910", "revid": "50021206", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12910", "title": "Grothendieck topology", "text": "Mathematical structure\nIn category theory, a branch of mathematics, a Grothendieck topology is a structure on a category \"C\" that makes the objects of \"C\" act like the open sets of a topological space. A category together with a choice of Grothendieck topology is called a site.\nGrothendieck topologies axiomatize the notion of an open cover. Using the notion of covering provided by a Grothendieck topology, it becomes possible to define sheaves on a category and their cohomology. This was first done in algebraic geometry and algebraic number theory by Alexander Grothendieck to define the \u00e9tale cohomology of a scheme. It has been used to define other cohomology theories since then, such as \u2113-adic cohomology, flat cohomology, and crystalline cohomology. While Grothendieck topologies are most often used to define cohomology theories, they have found other applications as well, such as to John Tate's theory of rigid analytic geometry.\nThere is a natural way to associate a site to an ordinary topological space, and Grothendieck's theory is loosely regarded as a generalization of classical topology. Under meager point-set hypotheses, namely sobriety, this is completely accurate\u2014it is possible to recover a sober space from its associated site. However simple examples such as the indiscrete topological space show that not all topological spaces can be expressed using Grothendieck topologies. Conversely, there are Grothendieck topologies that do not come from topological spaces.\nThe term \"Grothendieck topology\" has changed in meaning. In it meant what is now called a Grothendieck pretopology, and some authors still use this old meaning. modified the definition to use sieves rather than covers. Much of the time this does not make much difference, as each Grothendieck pretopology determines a unique Grothendieck topology, though quite different pretopologies can give the same topology.\nOverview.\nAndr\u00e9 Weil's famous Weil conjectures proposed that certain properties of equations with integral coefficients should be understood as geometric properties of the algebraic variety that they define. His conjectures postulated that there should be a cohomology theory of algebraic varieties that gives number-theoretic information about their defining equations. This cohomology theory was known as the \"Weil cohomology\", but using the tools he had available, Weil was unable to construct it.\nIn the early 1960s, Alexander Grothendieck introduced \u00e9tale maps into algebraic geometry as algebraic analogues of local analytic isomorphisms in analytic geometry. He used \u00e9tale coverings to define an algebraic analogue of the fundamental group of a topological space. Soon Jean-Pierre Serre noticed that some properties of \u00e9tale coverings mimicked those of open immersions, and that consequently it was possible to make constructions that imitated the cohomology functor formula_1. Grothendieck saw that it would be possible to use Serre's idea to define a cohomology theory that he suspected would be the Weil cohomology. To define this cohomology theory, Grothendieck needed to replace the usual, topological notion of an open covering with one that would use \u00e9tale coverings instead. Grothendieck also saw how to phrase the definition of covering abstractly; this is where the definition of a Grothendieck topology comes from.\nDefinition.\nMotivation.\nThe classical definition of a sheaf begins with a topological space formula_2. A sheaf associates information to the open sets of formula_2. This information can be phrased abstractly by letting formula_4 be the category whose objects are the open subsets formula_5 of formula_2 and whose morphisms are the inclusion maps formula_7 of open sets formula_5 and formula_9 of formula_2. We will call such maps \"open immersions\", just as in the context of schemes. Then a presheaf on formula_2 is a contravariant functor from formula_4 to the category of sets, and a sheaf is a presheaf that satisfies the gluing axiom (here including the separation axiom). The gluing axiom is phrased in terms of pointwise covering, i.e., formula_13 covers formula_5 if and only if formula_15. In this definition, formula_16 is an open subset of formula_2. Grothendieck topologies replace each formula_16 with an entire family of open subsets; in this example, formula_16 is replaced by the family of all open immersions formula_20. Such a collection is called a \"sieve\". Pointwise covering is replaced by the notion of a \"covering family\"; in the above example, the set of all formula_21 as formula_22 varies is a covering family of formula_5. Sieves and covering families can be axiomatized, and once this is done open sets and pointwise covering can be replaced by other notions that describe other properties of the space formula_2.\nSieves.\nIn a Grothendieck topology, the notion of a collection of open subsets of \"U\" stable under inclusion is replaced by the notion of a sieve. If \"c\" is any given object in \"C\", a sieve on \"c\" is a subfunctor of the functor Hom(\u2212, \"c\"); (this is the Yoneda embedding applied to \"c\"). In the case of \"O\"(\"X\"), a sieve \"S\" on an open set \"U\" selects a collection of open subsets of \"U\" that is stable under inclusion. More precisely, consider that for any open subset \"V\" of \"U\", \"S\"(\"V\") will be a subset of Hom(\"V\", \"U\"), which has only one element, the open immersion \"V\" \u2192 \"U\". Then \"V\" will be considered \"selected\" by \"S\" if and only if \"S\"(\"V\") is nonempty. If \"W\" is a subset of \"V\", then there is a morphism \"S\"(\"V\") \u2192 \"S\"(\"W\") given by composition with the inclusion \"W\" \u2192 \"V\". If \"S\"(\"V\") is non-empty, it follows that \"S\"(\"W\") is also non-empty.\nIf \"S\" is a sieve on \"X\", and \"f\": \"Y\" \u2192 \"X\" is a morphism, then left composition by \"f\" gives a sieve on \"Y\" called the pullback of \"S\" along \"f\", denoted by \"f\"formula_25\"S\". It is defined as the fibered product \"S\"\u00a0\u00d7Hom(\u2212, \"X\")\u00a0Hom(\u2212, \"Y\") together with its natural embedding in Hom(\u2212, \"Y\"). More concretely, for each object \"Z\" of \"C\", \"f\"formula_25\"S\"(\"Z\") = { \"g\": \"Z\" \u2192 \"Y\" | \"fg\" formula_27\"S\"(\"Z\") }, and \"f\"formula_25\"S\" inherits its action on morphisms by being a subfunctor of Hom(\u2212, \"Y\"). In the classical example, the pullback of a collection {\"V\"i} of subsets of \"U\" along an inclusion \"W\" \u2192 \"U\" is the collection {\"V\"i\u2229W}.\nGrothendieck topology.\nA Grothendieck topology \"J\" on a category \"C\" is a collection, \"for each object c of C\", of distinguished sieves on \"c\", denoted by \"J\"(\"c\") and called covering sieves of \"c\". This selection will be subject to certain axioms, stated below. Continuing the previous example, a sieve \"S\" on an open set \"U\" in \"O\"(\"X\") will be a covering sieve if and only if the union of all the open sets \"V\" for which \"S\"(\"V\") is nonempty equals \"U\"; in other words, if and only if \"S\" gives us a collection of open sets that cover \"U\" in the classical sense.\nAxioms.\nThe conditions we impose on a Grothendieck topology are:\nThe base change axiom corresponds to the idea that if formula_50 covers formula_5, then formula_52 covers formula_53. The local character axiom corresponds to the idea that if formula_50 covers formula_5 and formula_56 covers formula_16 for each formula_22, then the collection formula_59 covers formula_5. The identity axiom corresponds to the idea that, at least when formula_5 is an open set, the set of open subsets of formula_5 covers formula_5.\nGrothendieck pretopologies.\nIn fact, it is possible to put these axioms in another form where their geometric character is more apparent, assuming that the underlying category \"C\" contains certain fibered products. In this case, instead of specifying sieves, we can specify that certain collections of maps with a common codomain should cover their codomain. These collections are called covering families. If the collection of all covering families satisfies certain axioms, then we say that they form a Grothendieck pretopology. These axioms are:\nFor any pretopology, the collection of all sieves that contain a covering family from the pretopology is always a Grothendieck topology.\nFor categories with fibered products, there is a converse. Given a collection of arrows {\"X\"\"\u03b1\" \u2192 \"X\"}, we construct a sieve \"S\" by letting \"S\"(\"Y\") be the set of all morphisms \"Y\" \u2192 \"X\" that factor through some arrow \"X\"\"\u03b1\" \u2192 \"X\". This is called the sieve generated by {\"X\"\"\u03b1\" \u2192 \"X\"}. Now choose a topology. Say that {\"X\"\"\u03b1\" \u2192 \"X\"} is a covering family if and only if the sieve that it generates is a covering sieve for the given topology. It is easy to check that this defines a pretopology.\n(PT 3) is sometimes replaced by a weaker axiom:\n(PT 3) implies (PT 3'), but not conversely. However, suppose that we have a collection of covering families that satisfies (PT 0) through (PT 2) and (PT 3'), but not (PT 3). These families generate a pretopology. The topology generated by the original collection of covering families is then the same as the topology generated by the pretopology, because the sieve generated by an isomorphism \"Y\" \u2192 \"X\" is Hom(\u2212, \"X\"). Consequently, if we restrict our attention to topologies, (PT 3) and (PT 3') are equivalent.\nSites and sheaves.\nLet \"C\" be a category and let \"J\" be a Grothendieck topology on \"C\". The pair (\"C\", \"J\") is called a site.\nA presheaf on a category is a contravariant functor from \"C\" to the category of all sets. Note that for this definition \"C\" is not required to have a topology. A sheaf on a site, however, should allow gluing, just like sheaves in classical topology. Consequently, we define a sheaf on a site to be a presheaf \"F\" such that for all objects \"X\" and all covering sieves \"S\" on \"X\", the natural map Hom(Hom(\u2212, \"X\"), \"F\") \u2192 Hom(\"S\", \"F\"), induced by the inclusion of \"S\" into Hom(\u2212, \"X\"), is a bijection. Halfway in between a presheaf and a sheaf is the notion of a separated presheaf, where the natural map above is required to be only an injection, not a bijection, for all sieves \"S\". A morphism of presheaves or of sheaves is a natural transformation of functors. The category of all sheaves on \"C\" is the topos defined by the site (\"C\", \"J\").\nUsing the Yoneda lemma, it is possible to show that a presheaf on the category \"O\"(\"X\") is a sheaf on the topology defined above if and only if it is a sheaf in the classical sense.\nSheaves on a pretopology have a particularly simple description: For each covering family {\"X\"\"\u03b1\" \u2192 \"X\"}, the diagram\nformula_64\nmust be an equalizer. For a separated presheaf, the first arrow need only be injective.\nSimilarly, one can define presheaves and sheaves of abelian groups, rings, modules, and so on. One can require either that a presheaf \"F\" is a contravariant functor to the category of abelian groups (or rings, or modules, etc.), or that \"F\" be an abelian group (ring, module, etc.) object in the category of all contravariant functors from \"C\" to the category of sets. These two definitions are equivalent.\nExamples of sites.\nThe discrete and indiscrete topologies.\nLet C be any category. To define the discrete topology, we declare all sieves to be covering sieves. If C has all fibered products, this is equivalent to declaring all families to be covering families. To define the indiscrete topology, also known as the coarse or chaotic topology, we declare only the sieves of the form Hom(\u2212, \"X\") to be covering sieves. The indiscrete topology is generated by the pretopology that has only isomorphisms for covering families. A sheaf on the indiscrete site is the same thing as a presheaf.\nThe canonical topology.\nLet C be any category. The Yoneda embedding gives a functor Hom(\u2212, \"X\") for each object \"X\" of C. The canonical topology is the biggest (finest) topology such that every representable presheaf, i.e. presheaf of the form Hom(\u2212, \"X\"), is a sheaf. A covering sieve or covering family for this site is said to be \"strictly universally epimorphic\" because it consists of the legs of a colimit cone (under the full diagram on the domains of its constituent morphisms) and these colimits are stable under pullbacks along morphisms in C. A topology that is less fine than the canonical topology, that is, for which every covering sieve is strictly universally epimorphic, is called subcanonical. Subcanonical sites are exactly the sites for which every presheaf of the form Hom(\u2212, \"X\") is a sheaf. Most sites encountered in practice are subcanonical.\nSmall site associated to a topological space.\nWe repeat the example that we began with above. Let \"X\" be a topological space. We defined \"O\"(\"X\") to be the category whose objects are the open sets of \"X\" and whose morphisms are inclusions of open sets. Note that for an open set \"U\" and a sieve \"S\" on \"U\", the set \"S\"(\"V\") contains either zero or one element for every open set \"V\". The covering sieves on an object \"U\" of \"O\"(\"X\") are those sieves \"S\" satisfying the following condition:\nThis notion of cover matches the usual notion in point-set topology.\nThis topology can also naturally be expressed as a pretopology. We say that a family of inclusions {\"V\"\"\u03b1\" formula_65 \"U\"} is a covering family if and only if the union formula_66\"V\"\"\u03b1\" equals \"U\". This site is called the small site associated to a topological space \"X\".\nBig site associated to a topological space.\nLet \"Spc\" be the category of all topological spaces. Given any family of functions {\"u\"\"\u03b1\" : \"V\"\"\u03b1\" \u2192 \"X\"}, we say that it is a surjective family or that the morphisms \"u\"\"\u03b1\" are jointly surjective if formula_66 \"u\"\"\u03b1\"(\"V\"\"\u03b1\") equals \"X\". We define a pretopology on \"Spc\" by taking the covering families to be surjective families all of whose members are open immersions. Let \"S\" be a sieve on \"Spc\". \"S\" is a covering sieve for this topology if and only if:\nFix a topological space \"X\". Consider the comma category \"Spc/X\" of topological spaces with a fixed continuous map to \"X\". The topology on \"Spc\" induces a topology on \"Spc/X\". The covering sieves and covering families are almost exactly the same; the only difference is that now all the maps involved commute with the fixed maps to \"X\". This is the big site associated to a topological space \"X\". Notice that \"Spc\" is the big site associated to the one point space. This site was first considered by Jean Giraud.\nThe big and small sites of a manifold.\nLet \"M\" be a manifold. \"M\" has a category of open sets \"O\"(\"M\") because it is a topological space, and it gets a topology as in the above example. For two open sets \"U\" and \"V\" of \"M\", the fiber product \"U\" \u00d7\"M\" \"V\" is the open set \"U\" \u2229 \"V\", which is still in \"O\"(\"M\"). This means that the topology on \"O\"(\"M\") is defined by a pretopology, the same pretopology as before.\nLet \"Mfd\" be the category of all manifolds and continuous maps. (Or smooth manifolds and smooth maps, or real analytic manifolds and analytic maps, etc.) \"Mfd\" is a subcategory of \"Spc\", and open immersions are continuous (or smooth, or analytic, etc.), so \"Mfd\" inherits a topology from \"Spc\". This lets us construct the big site of the manifold \"M\" as the site \"Mfd/M\". We can also define this topology using the same pretopology we used above. Notice that to satisfy (PT 0), we need to check that for any continuous map of manifolds \"X\" \u2192 \"Y\" and any open subset \"U\" of \"Y\", the fibered product \"U\" \u00d7\"Y\" \"X\" is in \"Mfd/M\". This is just the statement that the preimage of an open set is open. Notice, however, that not all fibered products exist in \"Mfd\" because the preimage of a smooth map at a critical value need not be a manifold.\nTopologies on the category of schemes.\nThe category of schemes, denoted \"Sch\", has a tremendous number of useful topologies. A complete understanding of some questions may require examining a scheme using several different topologies. All of these topologies have associated small and big sites. The big site is formed by taking the entire category of schemes and their morphisms, together with the covering sieves specified by the topology. The small site over a given scheme is formed by only taking the objects and morphisms that are part of a cover of the given scheme.\nThe most elementary of these is the Zariski topology. Let \"X\" be a scheme. \"X\" has an underlying topological space, and this topological space determines a Grothendieck topology. The Zariski topology on \"Sch\" is generated by the pretopology whose covering families are jointly surjective families of scheme-theoretic open immersions. The covering sieves \"S\" for \"Zar\" are characterized by the following two properties:\nDespite their outward similarities, the topology on \"Zar\" is \"not\" the restriction of the topology on \"Spc\"! This is because there are morphisms of schemes that are topologically open immersions but that are not scheme-theoretic open immersions. For example, let \"A\" be a non-reduced ring and let \"N\" be its ideal of nilpotents. The quotient map \"A\" \u2192 \"A/N\" induces a map Spec \"A/N\" \u2192 Spec \"A\", which is the identity on underlying topological spaces. To be a scheme-theoretic open immersion it must also induce an isomorphism on structure sheaves, which this map does not do. In fact, this map is a closed immersion.\nThe \u00e9tale topology is finer than the Zariski topology. It was the first Grothendieck topology to be closely studied. Its covering families are jointly surjective families of \u00e9tale morphisms. It is finer than the Nisnevich topology, but neither finer nor coarser than the \"cdh\" and l\u2032 topologies.\nThere are two flat topologies, the \"fppf\" topology and the \"fpqc\" topology. \"fppf\" stands for ', and in this topology, a morphism of affine schemes is a covering morphism if it is faithfully flat, of finite presentation, and is quasi-finite. \"fpqc\" stands for ', and in this topology, a morphism of affine schemes is a covering morphism if it is faithfully flat. In both categories, a covering family is defined to be a family that is a cover on Zariski open subsets. In the fpqc topology, any faithfully flat and quasi-compact morphism is a cover. These topologies are closely related to descent. The \"fpqc\" topology is finer than all the topologies mentioned above, and it is very close to the canonical topology.\nGrothendieck introduced crystalline cohomology to study the \"p\"-torsion part of the cohomology of characteristic \"p\" varieties. In the \"crystalline topology\", which is the basis of this theory, the underlying category has objects given by infinitesimal thickenings together with divided power structures. Crystalline sites are examples of sites with no final object.\nContinuous and cocontinuous functors.\nThere are two natural types of functors between sites. They are given by functors that are compatible with the topology in a certain sense.\nContinuous functors.\nIf (\"C\", \"J\") and (\"D\", \"K\") are sites and \"u\" : \"C\" \u2192 \"D\" is a functor, then \"u\" is continuous if for every sheaf \"F\" on \"D\" with respect to the topology \"K\", the presheaf \"Fu\" is a sheaf with respect to the topology \"J\". Continuous functors induce functors between the corresponding topoi by sending a sheaf \"F\" to \"Fu\". These functors are called pushforwards. If formula_68 and formula_69 denote the topoi associated to \"C\" and \"D\", then the pushforward functor is formula_70.\n\"u\"\"s\" admits a left adjoint \"u\"\"s\" called the pullback. \"u\"\"s\" need not preserve limits, even finite limits.\nIn the same way, \"u\" sends a sieve on an object \"X\" of \"C\" to a sieve on the object \"uX\" of \"D\". A continuous functor sends covering sieves to covering sieves. If \"J\" is the topology defined by a pretopology, and if \"u\" commutes with fibered products, then \"u\" is continuous if and only if it sends covering sieves to covering sieves and if and only if it sends covering families to covering families. In general, it is \"not\" sufficient for \"u\" to send covering sieves to covering sieves (see SGA IV 3, 1.9.3).\nCocontinuous functors.\nAgain, let (\"C\", \"J\") and (\"D\", \"K\") be sites and \"v\" : \"C\" \u2192 \"D\" be a functor. If \"X\" is an object of \"C\" and \"R\" is a sieve on \"vX\", then \"R\" can be pulled back to a sieve \"S\" as follows: A morphism \"f\" : \"Z\" \u2192 \"X\" is in \"S\" if and only if \"v\"(\"f\") : \"vZ\" \u2192 \"vX\" is in \"R\". This defines a sieve. \"v\" is cocontinuous if and only if for every object \"X\" of \"C\" and every covering sieve \"R\" of \"vX\", the pullback \"S\" of \"R\" is a covering sieve on \"X\".\nComposition with \"v\" sends a presheaf \"F\" on \"D\" to a presheaf \"Fv\" on \"C\", but if \"v\" is cocontinuous, this need not send sheaves to sheaves. However, this functor on presheaf categories, usually denoted formula_71, admits a right adjoint formula_72. Then \"v\" is cocontinuous if and only if formula_72 sends sheaves to sheaves, that is, if and only if it restricts to a functor formula_74. In this case, the composite of formula_71 with the associated sheaf functor is a left adjoint of \"v\"* denoted \"v\"*. Furthermore, \"v\"* preserves finite limits, so the adjoint functors \"v\"* and \"v\"* determine a geometric morphism of topoi formula_76.\nMorphisms of sites.\nA continuous functor \"u\" : \"C\" \u2192 \"D\" is a morphism of sites \"D\" \u2192 \"C\" (\"not\" \"C\" \u2192 \"D\") if \"u\"\"s\" preserves finite limits. In this case, \"u\"\"s\" and \"u\"\"s\" determine a geometric morphism of topoi formula_76. The reasoning behind the convention that a continuous functor \"C\" \u2192 \"D\" is said to determine a morphism of sites in the opposite direction is that this agrees with the intuition coming from the case of topological spaces. A continuous map of topological spaces \"X\" \u2192 \"Y\" determines a continuous functor \"O\"(\"Y\") \u2192 \"O\"(\"X\"). Since the original map on topological spaces is said to send \"X\" to \"Y\", the morphism of sites is said to as well.\nA particular case of this happens when a continuous functor admits a left adjoint. Suppose that \"u\" : \"C\" \u2192 \"D\" and \"v\" : \"D\" \u2192 \"C\" are functors with \"u\" right adjoint to \"v\". Then \"u\" is continuous if and only if \"v\" is cocontinuous, and when this happens, \"u\"\"s\" is naturally isomorphic to \"v\"* and \"u\"\"s\" is naturally isomorphic to \"v\"*. In particular, \"u\" is a morphism of sites.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12912", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12912", "title": "Gung Fu", "text": ""}
{"id": "12913", "revid": "43147063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12913", "title": "Greens", "text": "Greens may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "12914", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12914", "title": "Ghost in the Shell", "text": "Japanese cyberpunk media franchise\nGhost in the Shell is a Japanese cyberpunk military science fiction media franchise based on the manga series of the same name written and illustrated by Masamune Shirow. The manga, first serialized between 1989 and 1991, is set in mid-21st century Japan and tells the story of the fictional counter-cyberterrorist organization Public Security Section 9, led by protagonist Major Motoko Kusanagi.\nAnimation studio Production I.G has produced several anime adaptations of the series. These include the 1995 film of the same name and its 2004 sequel, '; the 2002 television series ' and its 2020 follow-up, '; and the ' original video animation series. In addition, an American-produced live-action film was released on March 2017. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOverview.\nTitle.\nThe original editor Koichi Yuri says: At first, \"Ghost in the Shell\" came from Shirow, but when Yuri asked for \"something more flashy\", Shirow came up with \"\u653b\u6bbb\u6a5f\u52d5\u968a \"Koukaku Kidou Tai (Shell Squad)\"\" for Yuri. But Shirow was attached to including \"Ghost in the Shell\" as well even if in smaller type.\nSetting.\nPrimarily set in the mid-twenty-first century in the fictional Japanese city of , otherwise known as , the manga and the many anime adaptations follow the members of Public Security Section 9, a task-force consisting of various professionals skilled at solving and preventing crime, mostly with some sort of police background. Political intrigue and counter-terrorism operations are standard fare for Section 9, but the various actions of corrupt officials, companies, and cyber-criminals in each scenario are unique and require the diverse skills of Section 9's staff to prevent a series of incidents from escalating.\nIn this post-cyberpunk iteration of a possible future, computer technology has advanced to the point that many members of the public possess cyberbrains, technology that allows them to interface their biological brain with various networks. The level of cyberization varies from simple minimal interfaces to almost complete replacement of the brain with cybernetic parts, in cases of severe trauma. This can also be combined with various levels of prostheses, with a fully prosthetic body enabling a person to become a cyborg. The main character of \"Ghost in the Shell\", Major Motoko Kusanagi, is such a cyborg, having had a terrible accident befall her as a child that ultimately required her to use a full-body prosthesis to house her cyberbrain. This high level of cyberization, however, opens the brain up to attacks from highly skilled hackers, with the most dangerous being those who will hack a person to bend to their whims.\nMedia.\nLiterature.\nOriginal manga.\nThe original \"Ghost in the Shell\" manga ran in Japan from April 1989 to November 1990 in Kodansha's manga anthology \"Young Magazine\", and was released in a \"tank\u014dbon\" volume on October 2, 1991. \"Ghost in the Shell 2: Man-Machine Interface\" followed in 1997 for nine issues in \"Young Magazine\", and was collected in the \"Ghost in the Shell: Solid Box\" on December 1, 2000. Then a standard version with modifications and new pages was published on June 26, 2001. Four stories from \"Man-Machine Interface\" that were not released in tankobon format from previous releases were later collected in \"Ghost in the Shell 1.5: Human-Error Processor\", and published by Kodansha on July 17, 2003. Several art books have also been published for the manga.\nFilms.\nAnimated films.\nTwo animated films based on the original manga have been released, both directed by Mamoru Oshii and animated by Production I.G. \"Ghost in the Shell\" was released in 1995 and follows the \"Puppet Master\" storyline from the manga. It was re-released in 2008 as \"Ghost in the Shell 2.0\" with new audio and updated 3D computer graphics in certain scenes. \"Innocence\", otherwise known as \"\", was released in 2004, with its story based on a chapter from the first manga.\nLive-action film.\nIn 2008, DreamWorks and producer Steven Spielberg acquired the rights to a live-action film adaptation of the original \"Ghost in the Shell\" manga. On January 24, 2014, Rupert Sanders was announced as director, with a screenplay by William Wheeler. In April 2016, the full cast was announced, which included Juliette Binoche, Chin Han, Lasarus Ratuere and Kaori Momoi, and Scarlett Johansson in the lead role; the casting of Johansson drew accusations of whitewashing. Principal photography on the film began on location in Wellington, New Zealand, on February 1, 2016. Filming wrapped in June 2016. \"Ghost in the Shell\" premiered in Tokyo on March 16, 2017, and was released in the United States on March 31, 2017, in 2D, 3D and IMAX 3D. It received mixed reviews, with praise for its visuals and Johansson's performance but criticism for its script.\nTelevision.\n\"Stand Alone Complex\" TV series, film and ONA.\nIn 2002, \"Ghost in the Shell: Stand Alone Complex\" premiered on Animax, presenting a new telling of \"Ghost in the Shell\" independent from the original manga, focusing on Section 9's investigation of the Laughing Man hacker. It was followed in 2004 by a second season titled \"Ghost in the Shell: S.A.C. 2nd GIG\", which focused on the Individual Eleven terrorist group. The primary storylines of both seasons were compressed into OVAs broadcast as \"Ghost in the Shell: Stand Alone Complex The Laughing Man\" in 2005 and \"Ghost in the Shell: Stand Alone Complex Individual Eleven\" in 2006. Also in 2006, \"\", featuring Section 9's confrontation with a hacker known as the Puppeteer, was broadcast, serving as a finale to the anime series. for the series and its films was composed by Yoko Kanno.\nOn April 7, 2017, Kodansha and Production I.G announced that Kenji Kamiyama and Shinji Aramaki would be co-directing a new \"K\u014dkaku Kid\u014dtai\" anime production. On December 7, 2018, it was reported by Netflix that they had acquired the worldwide streaming rights to the original net animation (ONA) anime series, titled \"\", and that it would premiere on April 23, 2020. The series is in 3DCG and Sola Digital Arts collaborated with Production I.G on the project. Ilya Kuvshinov handled character designs. The series had two seasons of 12 episodes each.\nIn addition to the anime, a series of published books, two separate manga adaptations, and several video games for consoles and mobile phones have been released for \"Stand Alone Complex\".\n\"Arise\" OVA, TV series and film.\nIn 2013, a new iteration of the series titled \"\" premiered, taking an original look at the \"Ghost in the Shell\" world, set before the original manga. It was released as a series of four original video animation (OVA) episodes (with limited theatrical releases) from 2013 to 2014, then recompiled as a 10-episode television series under the title of \"K\u014dkaku Kid\u014dtai: Arise - Alternative Architecture\". An additional fifth OVA titled \"Pyrophoric Cult\", originally premiering in the \"Alternative Architecture\" broadcast as two original episodes, was released on August 26, 2015. Kazuchika Kise served as the chief director of the series, with Tow Ubukata as head writer. Cornelius was brought onto the project to compose the score for the series, with the Major's new voice actress Maaya Sakamoto also providing vocals for certain tracks.\n\"Ghost in the Shell: The New Movie\", also known as \"Ghost in the Shell: Arise \u2212 The Movie\" or \"New Ghost in the Shell\", is a 2015 film directed by Kazuya Nomura that serves as a finale to the \"Ghost in the Shell: Arise\" story arc. The film is a continuation to the plot of the \"Pyrophoric Cult\" episode of \"Arise\", and ties up loose ends from that arc.\nA manga adaptation was serialized in Kodansha's \"Young Magazine\", which started on March 13 and ended on August 26, 2013.\n2026 anime.\nOn May 25, 2024, it was announced that a new anime television series adaptation will be produced by Science Saru for a 2026 premiere. Saru will be in a production committee with Bandai Namco Filmworks, Kodansha and Production I.G.\nVideo games.\n\"Ghost in the Shell\" was developed by Exact and released for the PlayStation on July 17, 1997, in Japan by Sony Computer Entertainment. It is a third-person shooter featuring an original storyline where the character plays a rookie member of Section 9. The video game's soundtrack \"Megatech Body\" features various techno artists, such as Takkyu Ishino, Scan X and Mijk Van Dijk.\nSeveral video games were also developed to tie into the \"Stand Alone Complex\" television series, in addition to a first-person shooter by Nexon and Neople titled \"\", released in 2016.\nA virtual reality game entitled \"Ghost in the Shell Arise: Stealth Hounds\", was made available at Bandai Namco's arcade VR Zone Shinjuku in 2017.\nLegacy.\n\"Ghost in the Shell\" influenced some prominent filmmakers. The Wachowskis, creators of \"The Matrix\" and its sequels, showed it to producer Joel Silver, saying, \"We wanna do that for real.\" \"The Matrix\" series took several concepts from the film, including the Matrix digital rain, which was inspired by the opening credits of \"Ghost in the Shell\", and the way characters access the Matrix through holes in the back of their necks. Other parallels have been drawn to James Cameron's \"Avatar\", Steven Spielberg's \"A.I. Artificial Intelligence\" and Jonathan Mostow's \"Surrogates\". James Cameron cited \"Ghost in the Shell\" as a source of inspiration, citing it as an influence on \"Avatar\".\nBungie's 2001 third-person action game \"Oni\" draws substantial inspiration from \"Ghost in the Shell\"'s setting and characters. \"Ghost in the Shell\" also influenced video games such as the \"Metal Gear Solid\" series, \"Deus Ex\", and \"Cyberpunk 2077\".\nThe track \"The Ballade of Puppets: The Ghost Awaits in the World Beyond\" written and arranged by Kenji Kawai for the movie \"\" was used as the opening number of the ice show \"https://\", produced by Japanese figure skater, Olympic bronze medallist and former world champion Daisuke Takahashi. The performance included an ensemble of 24 elite figure skaters (including Takahashi, Olympic champion Shizuka Arakawa, former world silver medallists Kaitlyn Weaver and Andrew Poje and Olympic team bronze medallist Jason Brown) and was choreographed by retired ice dancer Massimo Scali. Takahashi said about the song \"\"I've been obsessed with this song since I was 18 and wanted to skate to it myself one day... It's\" \"over four minutes long, so I didn't really get the chance, but I thought it would be cool to use it for the opening.\"\"\nEchoes of Life, a solo ice show tour by Japanese figure skater and two-time Olympic champion Yuzuru Hanyu, included a program with the song \"Utai IV Reawakening\" arranged by Kenji Kawai for the live-action American film \"Ghost in the Shell\". The programs of \"Echoes of Life\" are woven into a story that questions the meaning of life following the journey of an enhance human being in a devastated, imaginary near future.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12915", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12915", "title": "Guillain-Barre Syndrome", "text": ""}
{"id": "12916", "revid": "1310107679", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12916", "title": "Gauss\u2013Legendre algorithm", "text": "Quickly converging computation of \u03c0\nThe Gauss\u2013Legendre algorithm is an algorithm to compute the digits of \u03c0. It is notable for being rapidly convergent, with only 25 iterations producing 45 million correct digits of\u00a0\u03c0. However, it has some drawbacks (for example, it is computer memory-intensive) and therefore all record-breaking calculations for many years have used other methods, almost always the Chudnovsky algorithm. For details, see Chronology of computation of \u03c0.\nThe method is based on the individual work of Carl Friedrich Gauss (1777\u20131855) and Adrien-Marie Legendre (1752\u20131833) combined with modern algorithms for multiplication and square roots. It repeatedly replaces two numbers by their arithmetic and geometric mean, in order to approximate their arithmetic-geometric mean.\nThe version presented below is also known as the Gauss\u2013Euler, Brent\u2013Salamin (or Salamin\u2013Brent) algorithm; it was independently discovered in 1975 by Richard Brent and Eugene Salamin. It was used to compute the first 206,158,430,000 decimal digits of \u03c0 on September 18 to 20, 1999, and the results were checked with Borwein's algorithm.\nAlgorithm.\nThe first five iterations give (approximations given up to and including the first incorrect digit):\nformula_6\nformula_7\nformula_8\nformula_9\nformula_10\nThe algorithm has quadratic convergence, which essentially means that the number of correct digits doubles with each iteration of the algorithm.\nMathematical background.\nLimits of the arithmetic\u2013geometric mean.\nThe arithmetic\u2013geometric mean of two numbers, a0 and b0, is found by calculating the limit of the sequences\nformula_11\nwhich both converge to the same limit.\nIf formula_12 and formula_13 then the limit is formula_14 where formula_15 is the complete elliptic integral of the first kind\nformula_16\nIf formula_17, formula_18, then\nformula_19\nwhere formula_20 is the complete elliptic integral of the second kind:\nformula_21 \nGauss knew of these two results.\nLegendre\u2019s identity.\nLegendre proved the following identity: \nformula_22\nfor all formula_23.\nElementary proof with integral calculus.\nThe Gauss-Legendre algorithm can be proven to give results converging to formula_24 using only integral calculus. This is done here and here.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12917", "revid": "18040497", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12917", "title": "Great Internet Mersenne Prime Search", "text": "Volunteer project using software to search for Mersenne prime numbers\nThe Great Internet Mersenne Prime Search (GIMPS) is a collaborative project of volunteers who use freely available software to search for Mersenne prime numbers.\nGIMPS was founded in 1996 by George Woltman, who also wrote the Prime95 client and its Linux port MPrime. Scott Kurowski wrote the back-end PrimeNet server to demonstrate volunteer computing software by Entropia, a company he founded in 1997. GIMPS is registered as Mersenne Research, Inc. with Kurowski as Executive Vice President and board director. GIMPS is said to be one of the first large-scale volunteer computing projects over the Internet for research purposes.\nAs of \u00a02024[ [update]], the project has found a total of eighteen Mersenne primes, sixteen of which were the largest known prime number at their respective times of discovery. The largest known prime as of \u00a02024http:// is 2136,279,841\u00a0\u2212\u00a01 (or M136,279,841 for short) and was discovered on October 12, 2024, by Luke Durant, and \u043en June 18, 2025, the project passed a milestone after all exponents below 136,279,841 were checked at least once.\nAlgorithm.\nFrom its inception until 2018, the project relied primarily on the Lucas\u2013Lehmer primality test (LL) as it is an algorithm that is both specialized for testing Mersenne primes and particularly efficient on binary computer architectures. Before applying it to a given Mersenne number, there was a trial division phase, used to rapidly eliminate many Mersenne numbers with small factors. Pollard's \"p\" \u2212 1 algorithm is also used to search for smooth factors. The variant of LL used in the main implementation (Prime95) is specifically based on irrational base discrete weighted transform with double-precision floating-point numbers, which provide an efficient way to square a large number modulo 2P-1.\nSpecial care is taken to make sure that the use of floating-point numbers does not introduce errors into the LL calculation. The program verifies that the round-off error is no greater than 0.4 every 128 iterations, or if the exponent being tested is within 0.5% of the maximum exponent size that can be handled by the size of FFT in use (or if requested using a special option), at every single iteration. Every 12 hours the program runs an additional error check based on the Jacobi symbol, with 50% chance of catching an error. On top of these, each completed LL calculation is repeated by a different hardware for \"double-checking\". Based on historical double-check data, each LL calculation without any serious error reported had an error rate of 1.5%; those with at least one serious error reported had an error rate of 50%.\nIn 2018, GIMPS adopted a Fermat primality test with basis a=3 as an alternative option for primality testing, while keeping the Lucas\u2013Lehmer test as a double-check for Mersenne numbers detected as probable primes by the Fermat test. This new test is called PRP (probable prime) in GIMPS parlance. Using a method devised by Robert Gerbicz, GIMPS can be \"99.999+%\" sure that a PRP result is generated correctly. As a result, even though the Lucas\u2013Lehmer test is deterministic and the Fermat test is only probabilistic, the probability of the Fermat test finding a Fermat pseudoprime that is not prime is vastly lower than the error rate of the Lucas\u2013Lehmer test due to computer hardware errors.\nIn September 2020, GIMPS began to support primality proofs based on verifiable delay functions countributed by Krzysztof Pietrzak. The proof files are generated while the Fermat primality test is in progress. These proofs, together with Gerbicz's error-checking algorithm (see above), provide a complete confidence in the correctness of the test result and eliminate the need for double checks (check of proof could be run in 1/100 of the time of the original Fermat computation). First-time Lucas\u2013Lehmer tests were deprecated in April 2021, leaving LL to only be used on probable primes found by the Fermat test. PRP and LL are very similar in terms of runtime; the preference comes from a higher confidence in PRP results.\nGIMPS also has sub-projects to factor known composite Mersenne and Fermat numbers. These use the elliptic-curve factorization method and Williams's p + 1 algorithm.\nHistory.\nThe project began in early January 1996, with a program that ran on i386 computers.\nThe name for the project was coined by Luke Welsh, one of its earlier searchers and the co-discoverer of the 29th Mersenne prime.\nWithin a few months, several dozen people had joined, and over a thousand by the end of the first year.\nJoel Armengaud, a participant, discovered the primality of M1,398,269 on November\u00a013,\u20091996.\nSince then, GIMPS has discovered a new Mersenne prime every 1 to 2 years on average. However, the most recent largest prime found in October 2024 took nearly six years to find.\nStatus.\nAs of \u00a02022[ [update]], GIMPS has a sustained average aggregate throughput of approximately 4.71\u00a0PetaFLOPS (or PFLOPS). In November 2012, GIMPS maintained 95\u00a0TFLOPS, theoretically earning the GIMPS virtual computer a rank of 330 among the TOP500 most powerful known computer systems in the world. The preceding place was then held by an 'HP Cluster Platform 3000 BL460c G7' of Hewlett-Packard. As of July 2021 TOP500 results, the current GIMPS numbers would no longer make the list.\nPreviously, this was approximately 50\u00a0TFLOPS in early 2010, 30\u00a0TFLOPS in mid-2008, 20\u00a0TFLOPS in mid-2006, and 14\u00a0TFLOPS in early 2004.\nSoftware.\nPrime95.\nThe primary software used by GIMPS is Prime95, which implements all algorithms for an x86 or x86-64 CPU: trial factoring (usually left to GPUs), PRP, P-1, P+1, ECM, and PRP certification. Although the Prime95 software's source code is publicly available, technically it is not free software, since it has a restriction that users must abide by the project's distribution terms.\nSpecifically, if the software is used to discover a prime number with at least 100,000,000 decimal digits, the user will only win $50,000 of the $150,000 prize offered by the Electronic Frontier Foundation. On the other hand, they will win $3,000 when discovering a smaller prime not qualifying for the prize.\nGIMPS also \"reserves the right to change this EULA without notice and with reasonable retroactive effect\".\"\"\nThird-party software.\nThe third-party software do not share the same restriction as Prime95. They can be used to join GIMPS using a program called AutoPrimeNet, which fetches tasks from GIMPS and send back the results. Available software include:\nIn addition, PrimeNet accepts other forms of data contributions from projects such as TJOAI (Tadashi Taura's custom software to trial-factor many Mersenne numbers at once).\nPrimes found.\nAll Mersenne primes are of the form M\"p\" \n 2\"p\" \u2212 1, where \"p\" is a prime number itself. The smallest Mersenne prime in this table is 21398269 \u2212 1.\nThe first column is the rank of the Mersenne prime in the (ordered) sequence of all Mersenne primes; GIMPS has found all known Mersenne primes beginning with the 35th.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^ \u2020 As of \u00a09, 2025[ [update]], 79,314,817 is the largest exponent below which all other prime exponents have been checked twice, so it is not verified whether any undiscovered Mersenne primes exist between the 50th (M77232917) and the 52nd (M136279841) on this chart; the ranking is therefore provisional. Furthermore, 138,659,453 is the largest exponent below which all other prime exponents have been tested at least once, so all Mersenne numbers below the 52nd Mersenne prime have been tested.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^ \u2021 The number M136279841 has 41,024,320 decimal digits. To help visualize the size of this number, if it were to be saved to disk, the resulting text file would be nearly 42 megabytes long (most books in plain text format are under two megabytes). A standard word processor layout (50 lines per page, 75 digits per line) would require 10,940 pages to display it. If one were to print it out using standard printer paper, single-sided, it would require approximately 22 reams (22 \u00d7 500 = 11,000 sheets) of paper.\nAs mentioned above, every Lucas-Lehmer result undergoes double-checking to avoid both false positives and false negatives. Positive results are given more scrutiny. The importance of this was illustrated in 2003, when a false positive was reported to the server as being a Mersenne prime but verification failed.\nThe official \"discovery date\" of a prime is the date that a human first noticed the result for the prime, which may differ from the date that the result was first reported to the server. For example, M74207281 was reported to the server on September 17, 2015, but the report was overlooked until January 7, 2016.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12919", "revid": "15304268", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12919", "title": "Game.com", "text": "Handheld game console\nThe Game.com is a fifth-generation handheld game console developed and released by Tiger Electronics on September 12, 1997. Designed as a multimedia device for older audiences, it aimed to combine gaming with early digital functions such as touchscreen input and limited Internet connectivity. The original model features a monochrome touchscreen, dual cartridge slots, and could be connected to a 14.4 kbit/s modem for access to e-mail and basic web functions via a proprietary interface. Its name is a reference to the .com top-level domain, reflecting its Internet-related features. It was the first game console to include a touchscreen and the first handheld to offer Internet connectivity, positioning it as an early forerunner in multifunctional handheld gaming devices.\nDespite its innovations, the system struggled commercially due to a small game library and technical limitations, prompting a redesign. The Game.com Pocket Pro, a smaller version that lacked Internet capabilities, was released in mid-1999. Due to poor sales, the Game.com console line was discontinued in 2000, having sold less than 300,000 units.\nHistory.\nTiger Electronics had previously introduced its R-Zone game console in 1995 \u2013 as a competitor to Nintendo's Virtual Boy \u2013 but the system was a failure. Prior to the R-Zone, Tiger had also manufactured handheld games consisting of LCD screens with imprinted graphics.\nOriginal version.\nBy February 1997, Tiger was planning to release a new game console as a direct competitor to Nintendo's Game Boy. Prior to its release, Tiger Electronics stated that the Game.com would \"change the gaming world as we know it,\" while a spokesperson stated that it would be \"one of this summer's hits.\" The Game.com, the only new game console of the year, was on display at the Electronic Entertainment Expo (E3) in May 1997, with sales expected to begin in July. Dennis Lynch of the \"Chicago Tribune\" considered the Game.com to be the \"most interesting hand-held device\" on display at E3, describing it as a \"sort of Game Boy for adults\".\nThe Game.com was released in the United States on September 12, 1997, with a retail price of $69.95, while an Internet-access cartridge was scheduled for release in October. \"Lights Out\" was included with the console as a pack-in game and Solitaire was built into the handheld itself. The console's release marked Tiger's largest product launch ever. Tiger also launched a website for the system at the domain \"game.com\". The Game.com was marketed with a television commercial in which a spokesperson insults gamers who ask questions about the console, while stating that it \"plays more games than you idiots have brain cells\"; GamesRadar stated that the advertisement \"probably didn't help matters much\". By the end of 1997, the console had been released in the United Kingdom, at a retail price of \u00a379.99.\nThe Game.com came in a black-and-white color, and featured a design similar to Sega's Game Gear console. The screen is larger than the Game Boy's and has higher resolution. The Game.com included a phone directory, a calculator, and a calendar, and had an older target audience with its PDA features. Tiger designed the console's features to be simple and cheap. The device was powered by four AA batteries, and an optional AC adapter was also available. One of the major peripherals that Tiger produced for the system was the compete.com serial cable, allowing players to connect their consoles to play multiplayer games. The console includes two game cartridge slots. In addition to reducing the need to swap out cartridges, this enabled Game.com games to include online elements, since both a game cartridge and the modem cartridge could be inserted at the same time.\nThe Game.com was the first video game console to feature a touchscreen and also the first handheld video game console to have Internet connectivity. The Game.com's black-and-white monochrome touchscreen measures approximately one and a half inches by two inches, and is divided into square zones that are imprinted onto the screen itself, to aid players in determining where to apply the stylus. The touchscreen lacks a backlight. The Game.com was also the first handheld gaming console to have internal memory, which is used to save information such as high scores and contact information.\nAs 1998 opened, the Game.com was considered the only remaining viable competitor for the Game Boy, and Tiger planned to emphasize the Game.com's internet capabilities in marketing, as well as release new games based on major films and Giga Pets.\nGame.com Pocket Pro.\nBecause of poor sales with the original Game.com, Tiger developed an updated version known as the Game.com Pocket Pro. The console was shown at the American International Toy Fair in February 1999, and was later shown along with several future games at E3 in May 1999. The Game.com Pocket Pro had been released by June 1999, with a retail price of $29.99. The new console was available in five different colors: green, orange, pink, purple, and teal.\nAlthough it lacked color like its predecessor, the Pocket Pro was reduced in size to be equivalent to the Game Boy Pocket. The screen size was also reduced, and the new console featured only one cartridge slot. Unlike the original Game.com, the Pocket Pro required only two AA batteries. The Game.com Pocket Pro included a phone directory, a calendar and a calculator, but lacked Internet capabilities.\nThe Game.com Pocket Pro's primary competitor was the Game Boy Color. Despite several games based on popular franchises, the Game.com console line failed to sell in large numbers, and was discontinued in 2000 because of poor sales. The Game.com was a commercial failure, with less than 300,000 units sold, although the idea of a touchscreen would later be used successfully in the Nintendo DS, released in 2004.\nInternet features.\nAccessing the Internet required the use of an Internet cartridge and a dial-up modem, neither of which were included with the console. Email messages could be read and sent on the Game.com using the Internet cartridge, and the Game.com supported text-only web browsing through Internet service providers. Email messages could not be saved to the Game.com's internal memory. In addition to a Game.com-branded 14.4 kbit/s modem, Tiger also offered an Internet service provider through Delphi that was made to work specifically with the Game.com.\nTiger subsequently released the Web Link cartridge, allowing players to connect their system to a desktop computer. Using the Web Link cartridge, players could upload their high scores to the Game.com website for a chance to be listed on a webpage featuring the top high scores. None of the console's games made use of the Internet feature.\nGames.\nSeveral games were available for the Game.com at the time of its 1997 launch, in comparison to hundreds of games available for the Game Boy. Tiger planned to have a dozen games available by the end of 1997, and hoped to have as many as 50 games available in 1998, with all of them to be produced or adapted internally by Tiger. Some third parties expressed interest in developing for the system, but Tiger decided against signing any initially. Tiger secured licenses for several popular game series, including \"Duke Nukem\", \"Resident Evil\", and \"Mortal Kombat Trilogy\". Game prices initially ranged between $19 and $29. Cartridge size was in the 16 megabit range.\nAt the time of the Pocket Pro's 1999 release, the Game.com library consisted primarily of games intended for an older audience. Some games that were planned for release in 1999 would be exclusive to Game.com consoles. Game prices at that time ranged from $14 to $30. Twenty games were ultimately released for the Game.com, most of them developed internally by Tiger, in addition to the built-in game Solitaire.\nCancelled games.\nThe following is a list of games that were announced in various forms or known to be in development for the console but were never released.\nReception.\nAt the time of the Game.com's launch in 1997, Chris Johnston of VideoGameSpot believed that the console would have difficulty competing against the Game Boy. Johnston also believed that text-based Internet and email would attract only limited appeal, stating that such features were outdated. Johnston concluded that the Game.com \"is a decent system, but Nintendo is just way too powerful in the industry.\" Chip and Jonathan Carter wrote that the console did not play action games as well as it did with other games, although they praised the console's various options and wrote, \"Graphically, we'd have to say this has the potential to perform better than Game Boy. As for sound, Game.com delivers better than any other hand-held on the market.\" A team of four \"Electronic Gaming Monthly\" editors gave the Game.com scores of 5.5, 4.5, 5.0, and 4.0. They were impressed by the PDA features and touchscreen, but commented that the games library had thus far failed to deliver on the Game.com's great potential. They elaborated that while the non-scrolling games, particularly \"Wheel of Fortune\", were great fun and made good use of the touchscreen, the more conventional action games were disappointing and suffered from prominent screen blurring.\n\"Wisconsin State Journal\" stated that the Game.com offered \"some serious\" advantages over the Game Boy, including its touchscreen. It was also stated that in comparison to the Game Boy, the Game.com's 8-bit processor provided \"marginal improvements\" in the quality of speed and graphics. The newspaper noted that the Game.com had a \"tiny, somewhat blurry screen.\" \"The Philadelphia Inquirer\" wrote a negative review of the Game.com, particularly criticizing Internet connectivity issues. Also criticized was the system's lack of a backlit screen, as the use of exterior lighting could cause difficulty in viewing the screen, which was highly reflective.\nSteven L. Kent, writing for the \"Chicago Tribune\", wrote that although the console had an elegant design, as well as better sound and a higher-definition screen than the Game Boy, these qualities \"[have] not translated into ideal game play. Though Tiger has produced fighting, racing and shooting games for Game.com, the games have noticeably slow frame rates. The racing game looks like a flickering silent picture show.\" Cameron Davis of VideoGames.com wrote, \"Sure, this is no Game Boy Color-killer, but the Game.Com was never meant to be. To deride it by comparing it with more powerful and established formats would be a bit unfair\". Davis also wrote, \"The touch screen is pretty sensitive, but it works well - you won't need more than a few seconds to get used to it.\" However, he criticized the screen's squared zones: \"more often than not it proves distracting when you are playing games that don't require it.\"\n\"GamePro\" criticized the Pocket Pro's lack of screen color and its difficult controls, but considered its two best qualities to be its cheap price and a game library of titles exclusive to the console. \"The Philadelphia Inquirer\" also criticized the Pocket Pro's lack of a color screen, as well as \"frustrating\" gameplay caused by the \"unresponsive\" controls, including the stylus. The newspaper stated that, \"Even at $29.99, the pocket.pro is no bargain.\"\nLegacy.\nBrett Alan Weiss of the website AllGame wrote, \"The Game.com, the little system that (almost) could, constantly amazes me with the strength and scope of its sound effects. [...] It's astounding what power comes out of such a tiny little speaker.\" In 2004, Kent included the modem and \"some PDA functionality\" as the console's strengths, while listing its \"Slow processor\" and \"lackluster library of games\" as weaknesses. In 2006, \"Engadget\" stated that \"You can't fault Tiger Electronics for their ambition,\" but wrote that the Game.com \"didn't do any one thing particularly well\", criticizing its text-only Internet access and stating that its \"disappointing games were made even worse\" by the \"outdated\" screen.\nIn 2009, \"PC World\" ranked the Game.com at number nine on its list of the 10 worst video game systems ever released, criticizing its Internet aspect, its game library, its low-resolution touchscreen, and its \"Silly name that attempted to capitalize on Internet mania.\" However, \"PC World\" positively noted its \"primitive\" PDA features and its solitaire game, considered by the magazine to be the system's best game. In 2011, Mikel Reparaz of GamesRadar ranked the Game.com at number 3 on a list of 7 failed handheld consoles, writing that while the Game.com had several licensed games, it \"doesn't actually mean much when they all look like cruddy, poorly animated Game Boy ports.\" Raparaz also stated that the Game.com \"looked dated even by Game Boy standards,\" noting that the Game Boy Pocket had a sharper display screen. Reparaz stated that the Game.com's continuation into 2000 was a \"pretty significant achievement\" considering its competition from the Game Boy Color.\nIn 2013, Jeff Dunn of GamesRadar criticized the Game.com for its \"blurry\" and \"imprecise\" touchscreen, as well as its \"limited and unwieldy\" Internet and email interfaces. Dunn also criticized the \"painful\" Internet setup process, and stated that all of the console's available games were \"ugly and horrible.\" Dunn noted, however, that the Game.com's Internet aspect was a \"smart\" feature. In 2016, Motherboard stated that the Game.com was \"perhaps one of the worst consoles of all time,\" due largely to its low screen quality. In 2018, Nadia Oxford of USgamer noted the Game.com's \"paper-thin\" library of games and stated that the console \"died in record time because it was poorly-made, to say the least.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12920", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12920", "title": "GPRS", "text": "Packet oriented mobile data service on 2G and 3G\nGeneral Packet Radio Service (GPRS), also called 2.5G, is a mobile data standard that is part of the 2G cellular communication network Global System for Mobile Communications (GSM). Networks and mobile devices with GPRS started to roll out around the year 2001; it offered, for the first time on GSM networks, seamless data transmission using packet-switched data for an \"always-on\" connection, eliminating the need to dial up, providing improved Internet access for web, email, Wireless Application Protocol (WAP) services, Short Message Service (SMS), Multimedia Messaging Service (MMS) and others.\nUp until the rollout of GPRS, only circuit-switched data was used in cellular networks, meaning that one or more radio channels were occupied for the entire duration of a data connection. On the other hand, on GPRS networks, data is broken into small packets and transmitted through available channels. This increased efficiency also gives it theoretical data rates of 56\u2013114\u00a0kbit/s, significantly faster than the preceding Circuit Switched Data (CSD) technology. GPRS was succeeded by EDGE (\"2.75G\") which provided improved performance and speeds on the 2G GSM system.\nTechnical overview.\nThe GPRS core network allows 2G, 3G and W-CDMA mobile networks to transmit IP packets to external networks such as the Internet. The GPRS system is an integrated part of the GSM network switching subsystem.\nGPRS is a best-effort service, implying variable throughput and latency that depend on the number of other users sharing the service concurrently, as opposed to circuit switching, where a certain quality of service (QoS) is guaranteed during the connection. It uses unused time-division multiple access (TDMA) channels in the GSM system for efficiency. Unlike older circuit-switched data, GPRS was sold according to the total volume of data transferred instead of time spent online, which is now standard. \nServices offered.\nGPRS extends the GSM Circuit Switched Data capabilities and makes the following services possible:\nIf SMS over GPRS is used, an SMS transmission speed of about 30 SMS messages per minute may be achieved. This is much faster than using SMS over GSM, whose transmission speed is about 6 to 10 messages per minute.\nFrequencies.\nAs the GPRS standard is an extension of GSM capabilities, the service operates on the 2G and 3G GSM frequencies. GPRS devices can typically use (one or more) of the frequencies within one of the frequency bands the radio supports (850, 900, 1800, 1900\u00a0MHz). Depending on the device, location, and intended use, regulations may be imposed either restricting or explicitly specifying authorised frequency bands.\nGSM-850 and GSM-1900 are used in the United States, Canada, and many other countries in the Americas. GSM-900 and GSM-1800 are used in Europe, the Middle East, Africa and most of Asia. In South Americas these bands are used in Costa Rica (GSM-1800), Brazil (GSM-850, 900 and 1800), Guatemala (GSM-850, GSM-900 and 1900), El Salvador (GSM-850, GSM-900 and 1900). There is a more comprehensive record of https://\nProtocols supported.\nGPRS supports the following protocols:\nWhen TCP/IP is used, each phone can have one or more IP addresses allocated. GPRS will store and forward the IP packets to the phone even during handover. TCP will retransmit any packets that are lost.\nHardware.\nDevices supporting GPRS are grouped into three classes:\nBecause a Class A device must service GPRS and GSM networks together, it effectively needs two radios. To avoid this hardware requirement, a GPRS mobile device may implement the Dual Transfer Mode (DTM) feature. A DTM-capable mobile can handle both GSM packets and GPRS packets with network coordination to ensure both types are not transmitted at the same time. Such devices are considered pseudo-Class A, sometimes referred to as \"simple class A\".\nUSB 3G/GPRS modems have a terminal-like interface over USB with V.42bis, and data formats. Some models include an external antenna connector. Modem cards for laptop PCs, or external USB modems are available, similar in shape and size to a computer mouse, or a pendrive.\nAddressing.\nA GPRS connection is established by reference to its Access Point Name (APN). The APN defines the services such as WAP, SMS, MMS, and Internet services such as email and World Wide Web access.\nIn order to set up a GPRS connection for a wireless modem, a user must specify an APN, optionally a user name and password, and very rarely an IP address, provided by the network operator.\nCoding schemes and speeds.\nThe upload and download speeds that can be achieved in GPRS depend on a number of factors such as:\nMultiple access schemes.\nThe multiple access methods used in GSM with GPRS are based on frequency-division duplex (FDD) and TDMA. During a session, a user is assigned to one pair of up-link and down-link frequency channels. This is combined with time domain statistical multiplexing which makes it possible for several users to share the same frequency channel. The packets have constant length, corresponding to a GSM time slot. The down-link uses first-come first-served packet scheduling, while the up-link uses a scheme very similar to reservation ALOHA (R-ALOHA). This means that slotted ALOHA (S-ALOHA) is used for reservation inquiries during a contention phase, and then the actual data is transferred using dynamic TDMA with first-come first-served.\nChannel coding.\nThe channel coding process in GPRS consists of two steps: first, a cyclic code is used to add parity bits, which are also referred to as the Block Check Sequence, followed by coding with a possibly-punctured convolutional code. The Coding Schemes CS-1 to CS-4 specify the number of parity bits generated by the cyclic code and the puncturing rate of the convolutional code. In Coding Schemes CS-1 through CS-3, the convolutional code is of rate 1/2; i.e., each input bit is converted into two coded bits. In Coding Schemes CS-2 and CS-3, the output of the convolutional code is punctured to achieve the desired code rate. In Coding Scheme CS-4, no convolutional coding is applied. The following table summarises the options.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe least robust, but fastest, coding scheme (CS-4) is available near a BTS, while the most robust coding scheme (CS-1) is used when the mobile station (MS) is further away from a BTS.\nUsing CS-4 it is possible to achieve a user speed of 20.0\u00a0kbit/s per time slot. However, using this scheme the cell coverage is 25% of normal. CS-1 can achieve a user speed of only 8.0\u00a0kbit/s per time slot, but has 98% of normal coverage. Newer network equipment can adapt the transfer speed automatically depending on the mobile location.\nIn addition to GPRS, there are two other GSM technologies which deliver data services: Circuit Switched Data (CSD) and High-Speed Circuit-Switched Data (HSCSD). In contrast to the shared nature of GPRS, these instead establish a dedicated circuit (usually billed per minute). Some applications such as video calling may prefer HSCSD, especially when there is a continuous flow of data between the endpoints.\nThe following table summarises some possible configurations of GPRS and circuit switched data services.\nMultislot Class.\nThe multislot class determines the speed of data transfer available in the uplink and downlink directions. It is a value between 1 and 45 which the network uses to allocate radio channels in the uplink and downlink direction. Multislot class with values greater than 31 are referred to as high multislot classes.\nA multislot allocation is represented as, for example, 5+2. The first number is the number of downlink timeslots and the second is the number of uplink timeslots allocated for use by the mobile station. A commonly used value is class 10 for many GPRS/EGPRS mobiles which uses a maximum of 4 timeslots in downlink direction and 2 timeslots in uplink direction. However simultaneously a maximum number of 5 simultaneous timeslots can be used in both uplink and downlink. The network will automatically configure for either 3+2 or 4+1 operation depending on the nature of data transfer.\nSome high end mobiles, usually also supporting UMTS, also support GPRS/EDGE multislot class 32. According to 3GPP TS 45.002 (Release 12), Table B.1, mobile stations of this class support 5 timeslots in downlink and 3 timeslots in uplink with a maximum number of 6 simultaneously used timeslots. If data traffic is concentrated in downlink direction the network will configure the connection for 5+1 operation. When more data is transferred in the uplink the network can at any time change the constellation to 4+2 or 3+3. Under the best reception conditions, i.e. when the best EDGE modulation and coding scheme can be used, 5 timeslots can carry a bandwidth of 5*59.2\u00a0kbit/s = 296\u00a0kbit/s. In uplink direction, 3 timeslots can carry a bandwidth of 3*59.2\u00a0kbit/s = 177.6\u00a0kbit/s.\nAttributes of a multislot class.\nEach multislot class identifies the following:\nThe different multislot class specifications are detailed in Annex B of 3GPP TS 45.002 (Multiplexing and multiple access on the radio path)\nUsability.\nThe maximum speed of a GPRS connection offered in 2003 was similar to a modem connection in an analog wire telephone network, about 32\u201340\u00a0kbit/s, depending on the phone used. Latency is very high; round-trip time (RTT) is typically about 600\u2013700\u00a0ms and often reaches 1\u00a0s. GPRS is typically prioritized lower than speech, and thus the quality of connection varies greatly.\nDevices with latency/RTT improvements (via, for example, the extended UL TBF mode feature) are generally available. Also, network upgrades of features are available with certain operators. With these enhancements the active round-trip time can be reduced, resulting in significant increase in application-level throughput speeds.\nHistory.\nGSM was designed for voice, not data. It did not provide direct access to the Internet and it had a limited capacity of 9600 bits per second. The limitations of CSD also included higher costs. The first commercial GPRS service was launched in 2000 on the BT Cellnet network in the United Kingdom as a packet-switched data service embedded in the channel-switched GSM network. GPRS extends the reach of the fixed Internet by connecting mobile terminals worldwide.\nGPRS was established by the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) in response to the earlier CDPD and i-mode packet-switched cellular technologies and is integrated into GSM Release 97 and newer releases. It is now maintained by 3GPP.\nThe CELLPAC protocol developed 1991\u20131993 was the trigger point for starting in 1993 the specification of standard GPRS by ETSI http://. Especially, the CELLPAC Voice &amp; Data functions introduced in a 1993 ETSI Workshop contribution anticipate what was later known to be the roots of GPRS. This workshop contribution is referenced in 22 GPRS-related US patents. Successor systems to GSM/GPRS like W-CDMA (UMTS) and LTE rely on key GPRS functions for mobile Internet access as introduced by CELLPAC.\nAccording to a study on history of GPRS development, Bernhard Walke and his student Peter Decker are the inventors of GPRS\u00a0\u2014 the first system providing worldwide mobile Internet access."}
{"id": "12922", "revid": "33341051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12922", "title": "Gnosis", "text": "Common Greek noun for knowledge\nGnosis is the common Greek noun for knowledge (\u03b3\u03bd\u1ff6\u03c3\u03b9\u03c2, \"gn\u014dsis\", f.). The term was used among various Hellenistic religions and philosophies in the Greco-Roman world. It is best known for its implication within Gnosticism, where it signifies a spiritual knowledge or insight into humanity's real nature as divine, leading to the deliverance of the divine spark within humanity from the constraints of earthly existence.\nEtymology.\n\"Gnosis\" is a feminine Greek noun which means \"knowledge\" or \"awareness.\" It is often used for personal knowledge as opposed to intellectual knowledge (\u03b5\u1f34\u03b4\u03b5\u03b9\u03bd \"e\u00eddein\"), as with the French \"conna\u00eetre\" compared with \"savoir\", the Portuguese \"conhecer\" compared with \"saber\", the Spanish \"conocer\" compared with \"saber\", the Italian \"conoscere\" compared with \"sapere\", the German \"kennen\" rather than \"wissen\", or the Modern Greek \u03b3\u03bd\u03c9\u03c1\u03af\u03b6\u03c9 compared with \u03be\u03ad\u03c1\u03c9.\nA related term is the adjective \"gnostikos\", \"cognitive\", a reasonably common adjective in Classical Greek. The terms do not appear to indicate any mystic, esoteric or hidden meaning in the works of Plato, but instead expressed a sort of higher intelligence and ability analogous to talent.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Stranger:\" In this way, then, divide all science into two arts, calling the one practical (\"praktikos\"), and the other purely intellectual (\"gnostikos\").\"Younger Socrates:\" Let us assume that all science is one and that these are its two forms.\u2014\u200a\nIn the Hellenistic era the term became associated with the mystery cults.\nIn the Acts of Thomas, translated by G.R.S. Mead, the \"motions of gnosis\" are also referred to as \"kingly motions\".\nIrenaeus used the phrase \"knowledge falsely so-called\" (\"\", from 1 Timothy 6:20) for the title of his book \"On the Detection and Overthrow of False Knowledge\", that contains the adjective \"gnostikos\", which is the source for the 17th-century English term \"Gnosticism\".\nSubtle distinctions.\n\"Epignosis\".\nThe difference and meaning of \"epignosis\" () contrasted with gnosis is disputed. One proposed distinction is between the abstract and absolute knowledge (\"gnosis\") and a practical or more literal knowledge (\"epignosis\"). Other interpretations have suggested that 2 Peter is referring to an \"epignosis of Jesus Christ\", what J. B. Lightfoot described as a \"larger and more thorough knowledge\". Conversion to Christianity is seen as evidence of the deeper knowledge protecting against false doctrine.\n\"Episteme\".\nEpisteme, like Gnosis, is a Greek word for \"knowledge,\" but they represent distinct kinds of understanding\u2014though not necessarily exclusively. Episteme refers to knowledge gained through experience and reason. It encompasses the body of ideas we typically recognize as knowledge, and is the source of our word epistemology. Gnosis, however, is often associated with experiential, intuitive, or spiritual understanding rather than empirical or logical deduction. While episteme deals with objective truths and verifiable facts, gnosis is more concerned with personal insight, inner transformation, and an engagement more ineffable than explicable.\nGnosticism.\nGnosticism originated in the late 1st century CE in non-rabbinical Jewish and developed further within early Christianity. In the early years of Christianity, various sectarian groups, labeled \"gnostics\" by their opponents, emphasised salvation by secret knowledge (\"gnosis\"), over faith (\"pistis\") or grace (gratia) in the teachings and traditions of the various communities of Christians. Gnosticism presents a distinction between the highest, unknowable God, and the Demiurge, \"creator\" of the material universe. The Gnostics considered the most essential part of the process of salvation to be this esoteric knowledge, in contrast to God's grace as an outlook in their worldview along with faith in the ecclesiastical authority.\nIn Gnosticism, the biblical serpent in the Garden of Eden was praised and thanked for bringing knowledge (\"gnosis\") to Adam and Eve and thereby freeing them from the malevolent Demiurge's control. Gnostic Christian doctrines rely on a dualistic cosmology that implies the eternal conflict between good and evil, and a conception of the serpent as the liberating savior and bestower of knowledge to humankind opposed to the Demiurge or creator god, identified with the Hebrew God of the Old Testament. Gnostic Christians considered the Hebrew God of the Old Testament as the evil, false god and creator of the material universe, and the Unknown God of the Gospel, the father of Jesus Christ and creator of the spiritual world, as the true, good God. In the Archontic, Sethian, and Ophite systems, Yaldabaoth (Yahweh) is regarded as the malevolent Demiurge and false god of the Old Testament who generated the material universe and keeps the souls trapped in physical bodies, imprisoned in the world full of pain and suffering that he created.\nHowever, not all Gnostic movements regarded the creator of the material universe as inherently evil or malevolent. For instance, Valentinians believed that the Demiurge is merely an ignorant and incompetent creator, trying to fashion the world as good as he can, but lacking the proper power to maintain its goodness. All Gnostics were regarded as heretics by the proto-orthodox Early Church Fathers.\nMandaeism.\nIn Mandaeism, the concept of \"manda\" (\"knowledge\", \"wisdom\", \"intellect\") is roughly equivalent to the Gnostic concept of gnosis. Mandaeism ('having knowledge') is the only surviving Gnostic religion from antiquity. Mandaeans formally refer to themselves as \"Nasurai\" (Nasoraeans) meaning guardians or possessors of secret rites and knowledge. The Mandaeans emphasize salvation of the soul through secret knowledge (gnosis) of its divine origin. Mandaeism \"provides knowledge of whence we have come and whither we are going.\"\nChristian usage.\nNew Testament.\nThe New Testament uses the term \u03b3\u03bd\u1ff6\u03c3\u03b9\u03c2 (Strong's G1108, Transliteration gn\u014dsis) 28 times. Most of this usage is found in Paul's Epistles, which later Gnostics used to develop their distinct concept of gnosis.\nPatristic literature.\nThe Church Fathers, such as Clement of Alexandria, used the word \"gnosis\" (knowledge), alongside the word syneidesis (conscience) to mean a spiritual knowledge by which believers could use reason to intuitively discern truth or righteousness. This positive usage was to contrast it with how gnostic sectarians used the word. Cardiognosis (\"knowledge of the heart\") from Eastern Christianity related to the tradition of the starets and in Roman Catholic theology is the view that only God knows the condition of one's relationship with God.\nBoston College Catholic philosopher Dermot Moran notes that\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...even in early Christianity, matters were complex, such that an anti-gnostic writer like Clement of Alexandria can regularly invoke the notion of \"gnostike theoria\" in a positive sense.\nEastern Orthodox thought.\n\"Gnosis\" in Orthodox Christian (primarily Eastern Orthodox) thought is the spiritual knowledge of a saint (one who has obtained theosis) or divinely-illuminated human being. Within the cultures of the term's provenance (Byzantine and Hellenic) \"Gnosis\" was a knowledge or insight into the infinite, divine and uncreated in all and above all, rather than knowledge strictly into the finite, natural or material world. Gnosis is transcendental as well as mature understanding. It indicates direct spiritual, experiential knowledge and intuitive knowledge, mystic rather than that from rational or reasoned thinking. Gnosis itself is gained through understanding at which one can arrive via inner experience or contemplation such as an internal epiphany of intuition and external epiphany such as the theophany.\nIn the \"Philokalia,\" it is emphasized that such knowledge is not secret knowledge but rather a maturing, transcendent form of knowledge derived from contemplation (\"theoria\" resulting from practice of \"hesychasm)\", since knowledge cannot truly be derived from knowledge, but rather, knowledge can only be derived from \"theoria\" (to witness, see (vision) or experience). Knowledge, thus plays an important role in relation to \"theosis\" (deification/personal relationship with God) and \"theoria\" (revelation of the divine, vision of God). Gnosis, as the proper use of the spiritual or noetic faculty plays an important role in Orthodox Christian theology. Its importance in the economy of salvation is discussed periodically in the \"Philokalia\" where as direct, personal knowledge of God (\"noesis\") it is distinguished from ordinary epistemological knowledge (episteme\u2014i.e., speculative philosophy).\nIslam.\nSufism.\nKnowledge (or \"gnosis\") in Sufism refers to knowledge of Self and God. The gnostic is called \"al-arif bi'lah\" or \"one who knows by God\". The goal of the Sufi practitioner is to remove inner obstacles to the knowledge of God. Sufism, understood as the quest for Truth, is to seek for the separate existence of the Self to be consumed by Truth, as stated by the Sufi poet Mansur al-Hallaj, who was executed for saying \"I am the Truth\" (ana'l haqq).\nJewish usage.\nHellenistic Jewish literature.\nThe Greek word \"gnosis\" (knowledge) is used as a standard translation of the Hebrew word \"knowledge\" ( ) in the Septuagint, thus:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Lord gives wisdom [] (\"sophia\"), from his face come knowledge [] (\"gnosis\") and understanding [] (\"synesis\")\"\u2014\u200a\nPhilo also refers to the \"knowledge\" (\"gnosis\") and \"wisdom\" (\"sophia\") of God.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12923", "revid": "6263999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12923", "title": "Georgian", "text": "Georgian may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
