{"id": "20090", "revid": "47481484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20090", "title": "Marmite", "text": "Savoury spread\nMarmite ( ) is a British savoury spread based on yeast extract invented by the Marmite Food Company in 1902. It is made from by-products of beer brewing (lees) and is produced by the British company Unilever. Marmite is a vegan source of B vitamins, including supplementary vitamin B12. It is traditionally eaten spread thinly on buttered toast.\nMarmite is a sticky dark-brown paste with a distinctive, salty, powerful flavour and heady aroma. This distinctive taste is represented in the marketing slogan: \"Love it or hate it.\" Such is its prominence in British culture that Marmite is often used as a metaphor for something that is an acquired taste or polarises opinion. Marmite is commonly used as a flavouring, as it is known for its savoury taste due to its high levels of glutamate (1960mg/100g).\nThe image on the jar shows a \"marmite\" (), a French term for a large, covered earthenware or metal cooking pot. Marmite was originally supplied in earthenware pots but since the 1920s has been sold in glass jars. Marmite's distinctive bulbous jars are supplied by the German glass manufacturer Gerresheimer.\nSimilar products include the Australian Vegemite (whose name is derived from that of Marmite), the Swiss Cenovis, the Brazilian Cenovit, the long-extinct Argentinian Condib\u00e9, the French Viandox, and the German Vitam-R. Marmite in New Zealand has been manufactured since 1919 under licence, but with a different recipe; it is the only one sold as \"Marmite\" in Australasia and the Pacific Islands, whereas elsewhere the British version predominates.\nHistory.\nThe first yeast extract spread was invented during the late 19th century when the German scientist Justus von Liebig discovered that brewer's yeast could be concentrated, bottled and eaten. Initial attempts to manufacture this yeast extract for commercial purposes had little success. This was until 1902, when the Marmite Food Extract Company was formed in Burton upon Trent, Staffordshire, England with Marmite as its main product and Burton as the site of the first factory. The by-product yeast needed for the paste was supplied by Bass Brewery. The initial producers of Marmite found that the yeast produced from British beer did not lend itself to the same treatment as continental yeast, which had different methods of fermentation. New machinery and manufacturing processes were implemented before a satisfactory yeast extract product was ready to market.\nBy 1907, the product had become successful enough to warrant construction of a second factory at Camberwell Green in London. By 1912, the discovery of vitamins was a boost for Marmite, as the spread is a rich source of the vitamin B complex; with the vitamin B1 deficiency beriberi being common during World War I, the spread became more popular. British troops during World War I were issued Marmite as part of their rations.\nDuring the 1930s, Marmite was used by the English haematologist and physician researcher Lucy Wills to successfully treat a form of anaemia in mill workers in Bombay (present-day Mumbai), British India. She later identified folic acid as the active ingredient. Marmite was used to treat malnutrition by Suriya-Mal workers during the 1934\u201335 malaria epidemic in British Ceylon (present-day Sri Lanka). Housewives were encouraged to spread Marmite thinly and to \"use it sparingly just now\" because of limited rations of the product.\nIn 1990, Marmite Limited, which had become a subsidiary of Bovril Limited, was bought by CPC International Inc, which changed its name to Best Foods Inc in 1998. Best Foods Inc subsequently merged with Unilever in 2000, and Marmite is now a trademark owned by Unilever.\nSimilar products.\nThere are a number of similar yeast products available in other countries; these products are not directly connected to the original Marmite recipe and brand. The Australian product Vegemite was developed in early 1920s by the chemist and food technologist Cyril Callister for Fred Walker &amp; Co. due to shortages of Marmite exports to Australia as a result of the First World War. It is now distributed in many countries. AussieMite is another marmite-like product sold in Australia. Other products include OzeMite, which is made by Dick Smith Foods; Cenovit, a Brazilian spread; Vitam-R, a German spread; Cenovis, a Swiss spread (sold internationally under the brand Sonaris); and Vegex, an autolyzed yeast product available in the United States since 1913. In the United Kingdom, own-branded yeast extract, very similar to Marmite, is sold by Sainsbury's, Asda, Tesco and Aldi.\nUsage.\nMarmite has traditionally been eaten as a savoury spread on bread, toast, savoury biscuits or crackers, and other similar baked products. Owing to its concentrated taste, it is often spread very thinly in combination with butter or margarine. It can be made into a savoury hot drink by adding one teaspoon to a mug of hot water, much like Oxo or Bovril. It is also commonly used to enrich casseroles and stews.\nMarmite is often paired with cheese\u2014for example, in a cheese sandwich or a cheese-flavoured biscuit such as Mini Cheddars. In the UK, Starbucks offers cheese and Marmite panini. There are Marmite-flavoured varieties of Walkers Crisps, and of some brands of rice cakes and biscuits.\nMarmite has also been used as an ingredient in cocktails, including the Marmite Cocktail and the Marmite Gold Rush.\nCelebrity chefs have created signature Marmite-flavoured recipes: Nigella Lawson has one for Marmite spaghetti, and Heston Blumenthal has one for Marmite consomm\u00e9.\nIn 2020, Marmite launched a campaign on Instagram\u2014\"The Great Marmite Experiment\"\u2014encouraging people to share their Marmite-flavoured recipes. The many entries in response included roast potatoes, beef Wellington and cookies.\nIn Malaysia, Singapore and Hong Kong, Marmite is enjoyed stirred into congee (savoury rice porridge), and in an intensely savoury Malaysian dish (local Chinese dish) called Marmite chicken, consisting of fried pieces of chicken tossed in a Marmite sauce.\nManufacture.\nWhile the process is secret, the general method for making yeast extract on a commercial scale is to add salt to a suspension of yeast, making the solution hypertonic, which results in the cells shrivelling; this triggers autolysis, during which the yeast self-destructs. The dying yeast cells are then heated to complete their breakdown, and since yeast cells have thick cell walls which would detract from the smoothness of the end product, the husks are sieved out. As with other yeast extracts, Marmite contains free glutamic acid, the monosodium salt of which being monosodium glutamate.\nCurrently, the main ingredients of Marmite are glutamic acid-rich yeast extract, with lesser quantities of salt, vegetable extract, spice extracts and celery extracts, although the precise composition is a trade secret. Vitamins added for food fortification include riboflavin, folic acid, and vitamin B12. Vitamin B12 is not naturally found in yeast extract, but is very important for vegans who are at risk of deficiency.\nNutritional information.\nMarmite is rich in B vitamins including thiamine (B1), riboflavin (B2), niacin (B3), and folic acid (B9). Vitamin B12 is only available through artificial enrichment; riboflavin and folic acid are added on top of the naturally occurring amount. The sodium content of the spread is high and has caused concern, although it is the amount per serving rather than the percentage in bulk Marmite that is relevant. The main ingredient of Marmite is yeast extract, which contains a high concentration of glutamic acid. Marmite is not gluten-free, as it is made with wheat, and although it is thoroughly washed, it may contain small quantities of gluten. (Sodium amount is noted as table salt-equivalent in UK nutritional labels. 6.1 g of salt corresponds to 2.4 g of sodium.)\nMarmite is contraindicated if a person takes a monoamine oxidase inhibitor antidepressant, such as phenelzine (Nardil) or tranylcypromine (Parnate), as yeast extracts interact adversely with these types of medications due to their tyramine content.\nStorage.\nMarmite should be stored in the dark and kept cool, but should not be refrigerated. The \"best before\" date is given as guidance for the loss of vitamins rather than safety.\nMarketing.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"I remember sitting in my office looking at the brief and saying to Richard [Flintham], 'I fucking hate Marmite.' And he said 'Oh, I love it.' And we both just looked at each other.\"\n Andy McLeod of marketing agency BMP DDB on the creation of the \"Love it or Hate it\" campaign\nMarmite's publicity campaigns initially emphasised the spread's healthy nature, extolling it as \"The growing up spread you never grow out of\". The first major Marmite advertising campaign began during the 1930s, with characters whose faces incorporated the word \"good\". Soon afterwards, the increasing awareness of vitamins was used in Marmite advertising, with slogans proclaiming that \"A small quantity added to the daily diet will ensure you and your family are taking sufficient vitamin B to keep nerves, brain, and digestion in proper working order\".\nDuring the 1980s, the spread was advertised with the slogan \"My mate, Marmite\", chanted in television commercials by an army platoon. The spread had been a standard vitamin supplement for British-based German POWs during the Second World War. For many years television advertisements for Marmite featured the 1975 song \"Low Rider\" by the American funk band War with the lyrics changed to the phrase \"My Mate, Marmite\".\nLove/hate polarisation.\nBy the 1990s Marmite's distinctive and powerful flavour had earned it as many detractors as it had fans, and it was known for producing a polarised \"love/hate\" reaction amongst consumers. Marmite began a \"Love it or Hate it\" campaign in October 1996, and this resulted in the inventing of the phrase \"Marmite effect\" or \"Marmite reaction\" for anything which provoked controversy. On 22 April 2010, Unilever threatened legal action against the British National Party (BNP) for using a jar of Marmite and the \"love it or hate it\" slogan in a party political broadcast.\nAvailability worldwide.\nBecause of the local product named \"Marmite\", European Marmite is sold by the name \"Our Mate\" in Australia and New Zealand. New Zealand Marmite uses the name \"NZ-Mite\" elsewhere.\nDenmark.\nIn Denmark, food safety legislation dictates that foodstuffs that contain added vitamins can only be sold by retailers which have been licensed by the Veterinary and Food Administration. In May 2011, the company that imports the product to Denmark revealed that it was not licensed and had therefore stopped selling the product: this resulted in widespread but inaccurate reports by the British media that Marmite had been banned by the Danish authorities. The Danish Veterinary and Food Administration stated in 2015 that Marmite had not been banned in the country, but that fortified foods need to be tested for safety and approved before they can be marketed in the country. The issue was resolved in 2016, after the completion of a 2014 supplier-requested test.\nCanada.\nOn 24 January 2014, the Canadian Food Inspection Agency was noted, in a Canadian Broadcasting Corporation story, as preparing to stop the sale of Marmite, as well as Vegemite and Ovaltine, in Canada because they were enriched with vitamins and minerals which were not listed by Canadian food regulations. The agency said the products were not a health hazard.\nThe CFIA later specified that these specific items had been seized because they were not the versions that are formulated for sale in Canada and which satisfy all Canadian food regulations. Canadian versions of Marmite and the other products would still be permitted to be sold in Canada.\nIn April 2025, after vegemite was once more taken off the shelves of an Australian owned cafe in Toronto by the CFIA, Australian PM Anthony Albanese expressed his support of vegemite over marmite and stated that he found it \"rather odd\" that Canada permitted vegemite's \"rubbish\" rival product Marmite.\nSouth Africa.\nMarmite is manufactured by licence in South Africa by Pioneer Foods in its traditional form.\nSouth Africa also produces a bottled, long-life Marmite-flavoured cheese spread. It is light in texture and contains a hint of Marmite.\nSpecial editions.\nIn 2002 a 100th anniversary jar was released.\nIn February 2007, Marmite produced a limited edition Guinness Marmite of 300,000 jars of of their yeast extract with 30% Guinness yeast, giving it a noticeable hint of \"Guinness\" flavour. In January 2008 Champagne Marmite was released for Valentine's Day, with a limited-edition production of 600,000 units initially released exclusively to Selfridges of London. The product had 0.3% champagne added to the recipe, and a modified heart-shaped label with \"I love you\" in place of the logo.\nIn 2009 a limited edition Marston's Pedigree Marmite was initiated to celebrate the 2009 Ashes Cricket test series.\nIn March 2010, a \"super-strength\" version of Marmite was released, called Marmite XO (XO standing for \"extra old\"). Marmite XO is matured for 28 days, four times longer than usual. The original Marmite XO's cap was black, and has a black and gold label. In July 2019, Marmite XO returned due to popular demand. The 2019 version has an off-white cap as opposed to the original black.\nIn April 2012, a special-edition jar in commemoration of the Diamond Jubilee of Queen Elizabeth II was released. With the product renamed \"Ma'amite\", the redesigned label featured a colour scheme based upon the Union Jack; the marmite and spoon logo replaced by a gold crown, and with a red rather than yellow cap. The front label also declares \"Made with 100% British Yeast\". Coinciding with the 110th anniversary of the brand, production was limited to 300,000 jars. For Christmas 2012 a gold limited edition was begun, containing edible gold-coloured flecks.\nMarmite chocolate is also available.\nIn 2015 Marmite Summer of Love Special Edition featured a flower power-themed label. This special edition's blend had a lighter taste made using 100% lager yeast.\nOn 25 March 2019, Marmite peanut butter was introduced.\nOn 2 May 2022, Marmite Truffle was launched and sold exclusively in Sainsbury's, along with Marmite 'Dynamite', a chilli-flavoured Marmite spread. The Marmite Truffle was marketed with a variation of the 'Love it or Hate it' slogan designed to make it sound more sophisticated: \"One either loves it or considers it utterly vulgar\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20091", "revid": "2300502", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20091", "title": "Medieval (term)", "text": ""}
{"id": "20092", "revid": "22380047", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20092", "title": "Mabon ap Modron", "text": "Welsh mythological character\nMabon ap Modron is a figure from Welsh mythology where he is the son of Modron and a member of Arthur's war band. Both he and his mother were likely deities in origin, descending from a divine mother\u2013son pair. Mabon has been equated with the mythological hero Pryderi fab Pwyll as well as with a minor Arthurian character known as Mabon ab Mellt. His literary echo may be found in several continental Arthurian romance characters and in some of their English adaptations.\nEtymology and origin.\nHis name and figure is related to the Romano-British god of youth Maponos (a Celtic equivalent of Apollo), whose name means \"Great Son\". His mother, Modron, in turn, is likely related to the Gaulish goddess Dea Matrona. The name \"Mabon\" is derived from the Common Brittonic and Gaulish deity name \"Maponos\" \"Great Son\", from the Proto-Celtic root \"*makwo-\" \"son\". Similarly, Modron is derived from the name of the Brittonic and Gaulish deity \"M\u0101tron\u0101\", meaning \"Great Mother\", from Proto-Celtic \"*m\u0101t\u012br\" \"mother\". According Roger Sherman Loomis, Mabon, the \"Great Youth\", also appears under the names Gwair and Pryderi. His counterpart in the Irish mythology is the god of youth Aengus (\u00d5engus) Mac ing \u00d5g.\nWelsh tradition.\n\"Culhwch ac Olwen\".\nAfter Culhwch and his companions manage to defeat the antagonist, the giant Ysbaddaden, the latter relents and agrees to give Culhwch his daughter Olwen on the condition that he completes a number of impossible tasks (\"anoethau\"), including hunting the giant boar Twrch Trwyth and recovering the exalted prisoner, Mabon son of Modron, the only man able to hunt the dog Drudwyn, in turn the only dog who can track Twrch Trwyth. King Arthur and his men learn that Mabon was stolen from his mother's arms when he was three nights old, and question the world's oldest and wisest animals about his whereabouts, until they are led to the salmon of Llyn Llyw, the oldest animal of them all. The enormous salmon carries Arthur's men Cei and Bedwyr downstream to Mabon's prison in Gloucester; they hear him through the walls, singing a lamentation for his fate. The rest of Arthur's men launch an assault on the front of the prison, while Cei and Bedwyr sneak in the back and rescue Mabon. He subsequently plays a key role in the hunt for Twrch Trwyth.\nOther appearances.\nOne of the earliest direct reference to Mabon can be found in the tenth century poem \"Pa Gur\", in which Arthur recounts the feats and achievements of his knights so as to gain entrance to a fortress guarded by Glewlwyd Gafaelfawr, the eponymous porter. The poem relates that Mabon fab Mydron (Modron) is one of Arthur's followers, and is described as a \"servant to Uther Pendragon\". A second figure, Mabon fab Mellt, is described as having \"stained the grass with blood\". He further appears in the medieval tale \"The Dream of Rhonabwy\", in which he fights alongside Arthur at the Battle of Badon and is described as one of the king's chief advisors.\nDerived characters.\nMabon the son of Modron is almost certainly related to several continental (French and German) Arthurian romance figures: often magical, sometimes villainous, sometimes a giant, sometimes known as the Black Knight. Such characters may include those known as Mabon/Maboun (an enchanter in \"Le Bel Inconnu\"; as Maboun[nys] in the English \"Libeaus Desconus\"), Mabon/Nabon le Noir[e] (different characters of a giant in the Prose \"Tristan\" and an enchanter in the Post-Vulgate \"Merlin Continuation\"; the name in turn also inspired that of the knight Nabon le Noyre/Noire in the English \"Le Morte d'Arthur\"), Mabonagrain/Mabonagrein (a giant in \"Erec and Enide\"), Mabuz (a fairy prince in \"Lanzelot\"), Madoc/Maduc le Noir/li Noirs (a knight in the \"Livre d'Artus\" and \"La Vengeance Raguidel\"). \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20097", "revid": "18731412", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20097", "title": "Microwave", "text": "Electromagnetic radiation with wavelengths from 1 m to 1 mm\nMicrowave is a form of electromagnetic radiation with wavelengths shorter than other radio waves but longer than infrared waves. Its wavelength ranges from about one meter to one millimeter, corresponding to frequencies between 300\u00a0MHz and 300\u00a0GHz, broadly construed. A more common definition in radio-frequency engineering is the range between 1 and 100\u00a0GHz (wavelengths between 30\u00a0cm and 3\u00a0mm),3 or between 1 and 3000\u00a0GHz (30\u00a0cm and 0.1\u00a0mm). In all cases, microwaves include the entire super high frequency (SHF) band (3 to 30\u00a0GHz, or 10 to 1\u00a0cm) at minimum. The boundaries between far infrared, terahertz radiation, microwaves, and ultra-high-frequency (UHF) are fairly arbitrary and differ between different fields of study.3\nThe prefix \"micro-\" in \"microwave\" indicates that microwaves are small (having shorter wavelengths), compared to the radio waves used in prior radio technology. Frequencies in the microwave range are often referred to by their IEEE radar band designations: S, C, X, Ku, K, or Ka band, or by similar NATO or EU designations.\nMicrowaves travel by line-of-sight; unlike lower frequency radio waves, they do not diffract around hills, follow the Earth's surface as ground waves, or reflect from the ionosphere, so terrestrial microwave communication links are limited by the visual horizon to about . At the high end of the band, they are absorbed by gases in the atmosphere, limiting practical communication distances to around a kilometer.\nMicrowaves are widely used in modern technology, for example in point-to-point communication links, wireless networks, microwave radio relay networks, radar, satellite and spacecraft communication, medical diathermy and cancer treatment, remote sensing, radio astronomy, particle accelerators, spectroscopy, industrial heating, collision avoidance systems, garage door openers and keyless entry systems, and for cooking food in microwave ovens.\nElectromagnetic spectrum.\nMicrowaves occupy a place in the electromagnetic spectrum with frequency above ordinary radio waves, and below infrared light:\nIn descriptions of the electromagnetic spectrum, some sources classify microwaves as radio waves, a subset of the radio wave band, while others classify microwaves and radio waves as distinct types of radiation. This is an arbitrary distinction.\nFrequency bands.\nBands of frequencies in the microwave spectrum are designated by letters. Unfortunately, there are several incompatible band designation systems, and even within a system the frequency ranges corresponding to some of the letters vary somewhat between different application fields. The letter system had its origin in World War 2 in a top-secret U.S. classification of bands used in radar sets; this is the origin of the oldest letter system, the IEEE radar bands. One set of microwave frequency bands designations by the Radio Society of Great Britain (RSGB), is tabulated below:\nOther definitions exist.\nThe term P band is sometimes used for UHF frequencies below the L band but is now obsolete per IEEE Std 521.\nWhen radars were first developed at K band during World War 2, it was not known that there was a nearby absorption band (due to water vapor and oxygen in the atmosphere). To avoid this problem, the original K band was split into a lower band, Ku, and upper band, Ka.\nPropagation.\nMicrowaves travel solely by line-of-sight paths; unlike lower frequency radio waves, they do not travel as ground waves which follow the contour of the Earth, or reflect off the ionosphere (skywaves). Although at the low end of the band, they can pass through building walls enough for useful reception, usually rights of way cleared to the first Fresnel zone are required. Therefore, on the surface of the Earth, microwave communication links are limited by the visual horizon to about . Microwaves are absorbed by moisture in the atmosphere, and the attenuation increases with frequency, becoming a significant factor (rain fade) at the high end of the band. Beginning at about 40\u00a0GHz, atmospheric gases also begin to absorb microwaves, so above this frequency microwave transmission is limited to a few kilometers. A spectral band structure causes absorption peaks at specific frequencies (see graph at right). Above 100\u00a0GHz, the absorption of electromagnetic radiation by Earth's atmosphere is so effective that it is in effect opaque, until the atmosphere becomes transparent again in the so-called infrared and optical window frequency ranges.\nTroposcatter.\nIn a microwave beam directed at an angle into the sky, a small amount of the power will be randomly scattered as the beam passes through the troposphere. A sensitive receiver beyond the horizon with a high gain antenna focused on that area of the troposphere can pick up the signal. This technique has been used at frequencies between 0.45 and 5\u00a0GHz in tropospheric scatter (troposcatter) communication systems to communicate beyond the horizon, at distances up to 300\u00a0km.\nAntennas.\nThe short wavelengths of microwaves allow omnidirectional antennas for portable devices to be made very small, from 1 to 20 centimeters long, so microwave frequencies are widely used for wireless devices such as cell phones, cordless phones, and wireless LANs (Wi-Fi) access for laptops, and Bluetooth earphones. Antennas used include short whip antennas, rubber ducky antennas, sleeve dipoles, patch antennas, and increasingly the printed circuit inverted F antenna (PIFA) used in cell phones.\nTheir short wavelength also allows narrow beams of microwaves to be produced by conveniently small high gain antennas from a half meter to 5 meters in diameter. Therefore, beams of microwaves are used for point-to-point communication links, and for radar. An advantage of narrow beams is that they do not interfere with nearby equipment using the same frequency, allowing frequency reuse by nearby transmitters. Parabolic (\"dish\") antennas are the most widely used directive antennas at microwave frequencies, but horn antennas, slot antennas and lens antennas are also used. Flat microstrip antennas are being increasingly used in consumer devices. Another directive antenna practical at microwave frequencies is the phased array, a computer-controlled array of antennas that produces a beam that can be electronically steered in different directions.\nAt microwave frequencies, the transmission lines which are used to carry lower frequency radio waves to and from antennas, such as coaxial cable and parallel wire lines, have excessive power losses, so when low attenuation is required, microwaves are carried by metal pipes called waveguides. Due to the high cost and maintenance requirements of waveguide runs, in many microwave antennas the output stage of the transmitter or the RF front end of the receiver is located at the antenna.\nDesign and analysis.\nThe term \"microwave\" also has a more technical meaning in electromagnetics and circuit theory. Apparatus and techniques may be described qualitatively as \"microwave\" when the wavelengths of signals are roughly the same as the dimensions of the circuit, so that lumped-element circuit theory is inaccurate, and instead distributed circuit elements and transmission-line theory are more useful methods for design and analysis.\nAs a consequence, practical microwave circuits tend not to use the discrete resistors, capacitors, and inductors used with lower-frequency radio waves. Open-wire and coaxial transmission lines used at lower frequencies are replaced by waveguides and stripline, and lumped-element tuned circuits are replaced by cavity resonators or resonant stubs. In turn, at even higher frequencies, where the wavelength of the electromagnetic waves becomes small in comparison to the size of the structures used to process them, microwave techniques become inadequate, and the methods of optics are used.\nSources.\nHigh-power microwave sources use specialized vacuum tubes to generate microwaves. These devices operate on different principles from low-frequency vacuum tubes, using the ballistic motion of electrons in a vacuum under the influence of controlling electric or magnetic fields, and include the magnetron (used in microwave ovens), klystron, traveling-wave tube (TWT), crossed-field amplifier, and gyrotron. These devices work in the density modulated mode, rather than the current modulated mode. This means that they work on the basis of clumps of electrons flying ballistically through them, rather than using a continuous stream of electrons.\nLow-power microwave sources use solid-state devices such as the field-effect transistor (at least at lower frequencies), tunnel diodes, Gunn diodes, and IMPATT diodes. Low-power sources are available as benchtop instruments, rackmount instruments, embeddable modules and in card-level formats. A maser is a solid-state device that amplifies microwaves using similar principles to the laser, which amplifies higher-frequency light waves.\nAll warm objects emit low level microwave black-body radiation, depending on their temperature, so in meteorology and remote sensing, microwave radiometers are used to measure the temperature of objects or terrain. The sun and other astronomical radio sources such as Cassiopeia A emit low level microwave radiation which carries information about their makeup, which is studied by radio astronomers using receivers called radio telescopes. The cosmic microwave background radiation (CMBR), for example, is a weak microwave noise filling empty space which is a major source of information on cosmology's Big Bang theory of the origin of the Universe.\nApplications.\nMicrowave technology is extensively used for point-to-point telecommunications (i.e., non-broadcast uses). Microwaves are especially suitable for this use since they are more easily focused into narrower beams than radio waves, allowing frequency reuse; their comparatively higher frequencies allow broad bandwidth and high data transmission rates, and antenna sizes are smaller than at lower frequencies because antenna size is inversely proportional to the transmitted frequency. Microwaves are used in spacecraft communication, and much of the world's data, TV, and telephone communications are transmitted long distances by microwaves between ground stations and communications satellites. Microwaves are also employed in microwave ovens and in radar technology.\nCommunication.\nBefore the advent of fiber-optic transmission, most long-distance telephone calls were carried via networks of microwave radio relay links run by carriers such as AT&amp;T Long Lines. Starting in the early 1950s, frequency-division multiplexing was used to send up to 5,400 telephone channels on each microwave radio channel, with as many as ten radio channels combined into one antenna for the \"hop\" to the next site, up to 70\u00a0km away.\nWireless LAN protocols, such as Bluetooth and the IEEE 802.11 specifications used for Wi-Fi, also use microwaves in the 2.4\u00a0GHz ISM band, although 802.11a uses ISM band and U-NII frequencies in the 5\u00a0GHz range. Licensed long-range (up to about 25\u00a0km) Wireless Internet Access services have been used for almost a decade in many countries in the 3.5\u20134.0\u00a0GHz range. The FCC recently carved out spectrum for carriers that wish to offer services in this range in the U.S. \u2014 with emphasis on 3.65\u00a0GHz. Dozens of service providers across the country are securing or have already received licenses from the FCC to operate in this band. The WIMAX service offerings that can be carried on the 3.65\u00a0GHz band will give business customers another option for connectivity.\nMetropolitan area network (MAN) protocols, such as WiMAX (Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access) are based on standards such as IEEE 802.16, designed to operate between 2 and 11\u00a0GHz. Commercial implementations are in the 2.3\u00a0GHz, 2.5\u00a0GHz, 3.5\u00a0GHz and 5.8\u00a0GHz ranges.\nMobile Broadband Wireless Access (MBWA) protocols based on standards specifications such as IEEE 802.20 or ATIS/ANSI HC-SDMA (such as iBurst) operate between 1.6 and 2.3\u00a0GHz to give mobility and in-building penetration characteristics similar to mobile phones but with vastly greater spectral efficiency.\nSome mobile phone networks, like GSM, use the low-microwave/high-UHF frequencies around 1.8 and 1.9\u00a0GHz in the Americas and elsewhere, respectively. DVB-SH and S-DMB use 1.452 to 1.492\u00a0GHz, while proprietary/incompatible satellite radio in the U.S. uses around 2.3\u00a0GHz for DARS.\nMicrowave radio is used in point-to-point telecommunications transmissions because, due to their short wavelength, highly directional antennas are smaller and therefore more practical than they would be at longer wavelengths (lower frequencies). There is also more bandwidth in the microwave spectrum than in the rest of the radio spectrum; the usable bandwidth below 300\u00a0MHz is less than 300\u00a0MHz while many GHz can be used above 300\u00a0MHz. Typically, microwaves are used in remote broadcasting of news or sports events as the backhaul link to transmit a signal from a remote location to a television station from a specially equipped van. See broadcast auxiliary service (BAS), remote pickup unit (RPU), and studio/transmitter link (STL).\nMost satellite communications systems operate in the C, X, Ka, or Ku bands of the microwave spectrum. These frequencies allow large bandwidth while avoiding the crowded UHF frequencies and staying below the atmospheric absorption of EHF frequencies. Satellite TV either operates in the C band for the traditional large dish fixed satellite service or Ku band for direct-broadcast satellite. Military communications run primarily over X or Ku-band links, with Ka band being used for Milstar.\nNavigation.\nGlobal Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSS) including the Chinese Beidou, the American Global Positioning System (introduced in 1978) and the Russian GLONASS broadcast navigational signals in various bands between about 1.2\u00a0GHz and 1.6\u00a0GHz.\nRadar.\nRadar is a radiolocation technique in which a beam of radio waves emitted by a transmitter bounces off an object and returns to a receiver, allowing the location, range, speed, and other characteristics of the object to be determined. The short wavelength of microwaves causes large reflections from objects the size of motor vehicles, ships and aircraft. Also, at these wavelengths, the high gain antennas such as parabolic antennas which are required to produce the narrow beamwidths needed to accurately locate objects are conveniently small, allowing them to be rapidly turned to scan for objects. Therefore, microwave frequencies are the main frequencies used in radar. Microwave radar is widely used for applications such as air traffic control, weather forecasting, navigation of ships, and speed limit enforcement. Long-distance radars use the lower microwave frequencies since at the upper end of the band atmospheric absorption limits the range, but millimeter waves are used for short-range radar such as collision avoidance systems.\nRadio astronomy.\nMicrowaves emitted by astronomical radio sources; planets, stars, galaxies, and nebulas are studied in radio astronomy with large dish antennas called radio telescopes. In addition to receiving naturally occurring microwave radiation, radio telescopes have been used in active radar experiments to bounce microwaves off planets in the Solar System, to determine the distance to the Moon or map the invisible surface of Venus through cloud cover.\nA recently completed microwave radio telescope is the Atacama Large Millimeter Array, located at more than 5,000 meters (16,597\u00a0ft) altitude in Chile, which observes the universe in the millimeter and submillimeter wavelength ranges. The world's largest ground-based astronomy project to date, it consists of more than 66 dishes and was built in an international collaboration by Europe, North America, East Asia and Chile.\nA major recent focus of microwave radio astronomy has been mapping the cosmic microwave background radiation (CMBR) discovered in 1964 by radio astronomers Arno Penzias and Robert Wilson. This faint background radiation, which fills the universe and is almost the same in all directions, is \"relic radiation\" from the Big Bang, and is one of the few sources of information about conditions in the early universe. Due to the expansion and thus cooling of the Universe, the originally high-energy radiation has been shifted into the microwave region of the radio spectrum. Sufficiently sensitive radio telescopes can detect the CMBR as a faint signal that is not associated with any star, galaxy, or other object.\nHeating and power application.\nA microwave oven passes microwave radiation at a frequency near through food, causing dielectric heating primarily by absorption of the energy in water. Microwave ovens became common kitchen appliances in Western countries in the late 1970s, following the development of less expensive cavity magnetrons. Water in the liquid state possesses many molecular interactions that broaden the absorption peak. In the vapor phase, isolated water molecules absorb at around 22\u00a0GHz, almost ten times the frequency of the microwave oven.\nMicrowave heating is used in industrial processes for drying and curing products.\nMany semiconductor processing techniques use microwaves to generate plasma for such purposes as reactive ion etching and plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD).\nMicrowaves are used in stellarators and tokamak experimental fusion reactors to help break down the gas into a plasma and heat it to very high temperatures. The frequency is tuned to the cyclotron resonance of the electrons in the magnetic field, anywhere between 2\u2013200\u00a0GHz, hence it is often referred to as Electron Cyclotron Resonance Heating (ECRH). The upcoming ITER thermonuclear reactor will use up to 20\u00a0MW of 170\u00a0GHz microwaves.\nMicrowaves can be used to transmit power over long distances, and post-World War 2 research was done to examine possibilities. NASA worked in the 1970s and early 1980s to research the possibilities of using solar power satellite (SPS) systems with large solar arrays that would beam power down to the Earth's surface via microwaves.\nLess-than-lethal weaponry exists that uses millimeter waves to heat a thin layer of human skin to an intolerable temperature so as to make the targeted person move away. A two-second burst of the 95\u00a0GHz focused beam heats the skin to a temperature of at a depth of . The United States Air Force and Marines are currently using this type of active denial system in fixed installations.\nSpectroscopy.\nMicrowave radiation is used in electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR or ESR) spectroscopy, typically in the X-band region (~9\u00a0GHz) in conjunction typically with magnetic fields of 0.3 T. This technique provides information on unpaired electrons in chemical systems, such as free radicals or transition metal ions such as Cu(II). Microwave radiation is also used to perform rotational spectroscopy and can be combined with electrochemistry as in microwave enhanced electrochemistry.\nFrequency measurement.\nMicrowave frequency can be measured by either electronic or mechanical techniques.\nFrequency counters or high frequency heterodyne systems can be used. Here the unknown frequency is compared with harmonics of a known lower frequency by use of a low-frequency generator, a harmonic generator and a mixer. The accuracy of the measurement is limited by the accuracy and stability of the reference source.\nMechanical methods require a tunable resonator such as an absorption wavemeter, which has a known relation between a physical dimension and frequency.\nIn a laboratory setting, Lecher lines can be used to directly measure the wavelength on a transmission line made of parallel wires, the frequency can then be calculated. A similar technique is to use a slotted waveguide or slotted coaxial line to directly measure the wavelength. These devices consist of a probe introduced into the line through a longitudinal slot so that the probe is free to travel up and down the line. Slotted lines are primarily intended for measurement of the voltage standing wave ratio on the line. However, provided a standing wave is present, they may also be used to measure the distance between the nodes, which is equal to half the wavelength. The precision of this method is limited by the determination of the nodal locations.\nEffects on health.\nMicrowaves are non-ionizing radiation, which means that microwave photons do not contain sufficient energy to ionize molecules or break chemical bonds, or cause DNA damage, as ionizing radiation such as x-rays or ultraviolet can. The word \"radiation\" refers to energy radiating from a source and not to radioactivity. The main effect of absorption of microwaves is to heat materials; the electromagnetic fields cause polar molecules to vibrate. It has not been shown conclusively that microwaves (or other non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation) have significant adverse biological effects at low levels. Some, but not all, studies suggest that long-term exposure may have a carcinogenic effect.\nDuring World War II, it was observed that individuals in the radiation path of radar installations experienced clicks and buzzing sounds in response to microwave radiation. Research by NASA in the 1970s has shown this to be caused by thermal expansion in parts of the inner ear. In 1955, Dr. James Lovelock was able to reanimate rats chilled to using microwave diathermy.\nWhen injury from exposure to microwaves occurs, it usually results from dielectric heating induced in the body. The lens and cornea of the eye are especially vulnerable because they contain no blood vessels that can carry away heat. Exposure to microwave radiation can produce cataracts by this mechanism, because the microwave heating denatures proteins in the crystalline lens of the eye (in the same way that heat turns egg whites white and opaque). Exposure to heavy doses of microwave radiation (as from an oven that has been tampered with to allow operation even with the door open) can produce heat damage in other tissues as well, up to and including serious burns that may not be immediately evident because of the tendency for microwaves to heat deeper tissues with higher moisture content.\nHistory.\nThe motivation for exploiting the microwave frequencies was the increasing congestion in the lower frequency bands, and the ability to use smaller antennas at higher frequencies830\nHertzian optics.\nMicrowaves were first generated in the 1890s in some of the earliest radio wave experiments by physicists who thought of them as a form of \"invisible light\". James Clerk Maxwell in his 1873 theory of electromagnetism, now called Maxwell's equations, had predicted that a coupled electric field and magnetic field could travel through space as an electromagnetic wave, and proposed that light consisted of electromagnetic waves of short wavelength.832 In 1888, physicist Heinrich Hertz was the first to demonstrate the existence of electromagnetic waves, generating radio waves using a primitive spark gap radio transmitter.830 \nHertz and the other early radio researchers were interested in exploring the similarities between radio waves and light waves, to test Maxwell's theory. They concentrated on producing short wavelength radio waves in the UHF and microwave ranges, with which they could duplicate classic optics experiments in their laboratories, using quasioptical components such as prisms and lenses made of paraffin, sulfur and pitch and wire diffraction gratings, to refract and diffract radio waves like light rays. Hertz used frequencies at the threshold of the microwave region: 50, 100, and 430\u00a0MHz.831 His directional 430\u00a0MHz transmitter consisted of a 26\u00a0cm brass rod dipole antenna with a spark gap between the ends, suspended at the focal line of a parabolic antenna made of a curved zinc sheet, powered by high voltage pulses from an induction coil.845 His historic experiments demonstrated that radio waves like light exhibited refraction, diffraction, polarization, interference and standing waves,845-846 proving that radio waves and light waves were both forms of Maxwell's electromagnetic waves. He also experimented with open wire and coaxial transmission lines.841\nBeginning in 1894 Jagadish Chandra Bose performed the first experiments with microwaves. He was the first person to produce millimeter waves, generating frequencies up to 60\u00a0GHz (5\u00a0millimeter) using a 3\u00a0mm metal ball spark oscillator. Bose also invented waveguide, horn antennas, and semiconductor crystal detectors for use in his experiments. Independently in 1894, Oliver Lodge and Augusto Righi experimented with 1.5 and 12\u00a0GHz microwaves respectively, generated by small metal ball spark resonators. Russian physicist Pyotr Lebedev in 1895 generated 50\u00a0GHz millimeter waves. In 1897 Lord Rayleigh solved the mathematical boundary-value problem of electromagnetic waves propagating through conducting tubes and dielectric rods of arbitrary shape which gave the modes and cutoff frequency of microwaves propagating through a waveguide.\nHowever, since microwaves were limited to line-of-sight paths, they could not communicate beyond the visual horizon, and the low power of the spark transmitters then in use limited their practical range to a few miles. The subsequent development of radio communication after 1896 employed lower frequencies, which could travel beyond the horizon as ground waves and by reflecting off the ionosphere as skywaves, and microwave frequencies were not further explored at this time.\nFirst microwave communication experiments.\nPractical use of microwave frequencies did not occur until the 1940s and 1950s due to a lack of adequate sources, since the triode vacuum tube (valve) electronic oscillator used in radio transmitters could not produce frequencies above a few hundred megahertz due to excessive electron transit time and interelectrode capacitance. By the 1930s, the first low-power microwave vacuum tubes had been developed using new principles; the Barkhausen\u2013Kurz tube and the split-anode magnetron.849-850 These could generate a few watts of power at frequencies up to a few gigahertz and were used in the first experiments in communication with microwaves.\nIn 1931 an Anglo-French consortium headed by Andre C. Clavier demonstrated the first experimental microwave relay link, across the English Channel between Dover, UK and Calais, France. The system transmitted telephony, telegraph and facsimile data over bidirectional 1.7\u00a0GHz beams with a power of one-half watt, produced by miniature Barkhausen\u2013Kurz tubes at the focus of metal dishes.\nA word was needed to distinguish these new shorter wavelengths, which had previously been lumped into the \"short wave\" band, which meant all waves shorter than 200 meters. The terms \"quasi-optical waves\" and \"ultrashort waves\" were used briefly but did not catch on. The first usage of the word \"micro-wave\" occurred in 1931 in reporting of the Clavier Anglo-French microwave link.849\nRadar development.\nThe development of radar, mainly in secrecy, before and during World War II, resulted in the technological advances which made microwaves practical.851 Microwave wavelengths in the centimeter range were required to give the small radar antennas which were compact enough to fit on aircraft a narrow enough beamwidth to localize enemy aircraft. It was found that conventional transmission lines used to carry radio waves had excessive power losses at microwave frequencies, and George Southworth at Bell Labs and Wilmer Barrow at MIT independently invented waveguide in 1936. Barrow invented the horn antenna in 1938 as a means to efficiently radiate microwaves into or out of a waveguide. In a microwave receiver, a nonlinear component was needed that would act as a detector and mixer at these frequencies, as vacuum tubes had too much capacitance. To fill this need researchers resurrected an obsolete technology, the point contact crystal detector (cat whisker detector) which was used as a demodulator in crystal radios around the turn of the century before vacuum tube receivers. The low capacitance of semiconductor junctions allowed them to function at microwave frequencies. The first modern silicon and germanium diodes were developed as microwave detectors in the 1930s, and the principles of semiconductor physics learned during their development led to semiconductor electronics after the war.\nThe first powerful sources of microwaves were invented at the beginning of World War II: the klystron tube by Russell and Sigurd Varian at Stanford University in 1937,852-853 and the cavity magnetron tube by John Randall and Harry Boot at Birmingham University, UK in 1940.853-855 Ten centimeter (3\u00a0GHz) microwave radar powered by the magnetron tube was in use on British warplanes in late 1941 and proved to be a game changer. Britain's 1940 decision to share its microwave technology with its US ally (the Tizard Mission)852 significantly shortened the war. The MIT Radiation Laboratory established secretly at Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1940 to research radar, produced much of the theoretical knowledge necessary to use microwaves.852 Microwave relay systems were developed by the Allied military in the war and used for secure battlefield communication networks in the European theater. The first was the British Wireless Set No. 10, a 5\u00a0GHz, 8 telephone line, time division multiplex system developed by the UK's Signals Research and Development Establishment in 1942.855\nPost World War II exploitation.\nAfter World War II, microwaves were rapidly exploited commercially. Due to their high frequency they had a very large information-carrying capacity (bandwidth); a single microwave beam could carry tens of thousands of phone calls. In the 1950s and 60s transcontinental microwave relay networks were built in the US and Europe to exchange telephone calls between cities and distribute television programs. In the new television broadcasting industry, from the 1940s microwave dishes were used to transmit backhaul video feeds from mobile production trucks back to the studio, allowing the first remote TV broadcasts. The first communications satellites were launched in the 1960s, which relayed telephone calls and television between widely separated points on Earth using microwave beams. In 1964, Arno Penzias and Robert Woodrow Wilson while investigating noise in a satellite horn antenna at Bell Labs, Holmdel, New Jersey discovered cosmic microwave background radiation.\nMicrowave radar became the central technology used in air traffic control, maritime navigation, anti-aircraft defense, ballistic missile detection, and later many other uses. Radar and satellite communication motivated the development of modern microwave antennas; the parabolic antenna (the most common type), cassegrain antenna, lens antenna, slot antenna, and phased array.\nThe ability of short waves to quickly heat materials and cook food had been investigated in the 1930s by Ilia E. Mouromtseff at Westinghouse, and at the 1933 Chicago World's Fair demonstrated cooking meals with a 60\u00a0MHz radio transmitter. In 1945 Percy Spencer, an engineer working on radar at Raytheon, noticed that microwave radiation from a magnetron oscillator melted a candy bar in his pocket. He investigated cooking with microwaves and invented the microwave oven, consisting of a magnetron feeding microwaves into a closed metal cavity containing food, which was patented by Raytheon on 8 October 1945. Due to their expense microwave ovens were initially used in institutional kitchens, but by 1986 roughly 25% of households in the U.S. owned one. Microwave heating became widely used as an industrial process in industries such as plastics fabrication, and as a medical therapy to kill cancer cells in microwave hyperthermy.\nThe traveling wave tube (TWT) developed in 1943 by Rudolph Kompfner and John Pierce provided a high-power tunable source of microwaves up to 50\u00a0GHz and became the most widely used microwave tube (besides the ubiquitous magnetron used in microwave ovens). The gyrotron tube family developed in Russia could produce megawatts of power up into millimeter wave frequencies and is used in industrial heating and plasma research, and to power particle accelerators and nuclear fusion reactors.\nSolid state microwave devices.\nThe development of semiconductor electronics in the 1950s led to the first solid state microwave devices which worked by a new principle; negative resistance (some of the prewar microwave tubes had also used negative resistance). The feedback oscillator and two-port amplifiers which were used at lower frequencies became unstable at microwave frequencies, and negative resistance oscillators and amplifiers based on one-port devices like diodes worked better.\nThe tunnel diode invented in 1957 by Japanese physicist Leo Esaki could produce a few milliwatts of microwave power. Its invention set off a search for better negative resistance semiconductor devices for use as microwave oscillators, resulting in the invention of the IMPATT diode in 1956 by W.T. Read and Ralph L. Johnston and the Gunn diode in 1962 by J. B. Gunn. Diodes are the most widely used microwave sources today.\nTwo low-noise solid state negative resistance microwave amplifiers were developed; the maser invented in 1953 by Charles H. Townes, James P. Gordon, and H. J. Zeiger, and the varactor parametric amplifier developed in 1956 by Marion Hines. The parametric amplifier and the ruby maser, invented in 1958 by a team at Bell Labs headed by H.E.D. Scovil were used for low noise microwave receivers in radio telescopes and satellite ground stations. The maser led to the development of atomic clocks, which keep time using a precise microwave frequency emitted by atoms undergoing an electron transition between two energy levels. Negative resistance amplifier circuits required the invention of new nonreciprocal waveguide components, such as circulators, isolators, and directional couplers. In 1969 Kaneyuki Kurokawa derived mathematical conditions for stability in negative resistance circuits which formed the basis of microwave oscillator design.\nMicrowave integrated circuits.\nPrior to the 1980s microwave devices and circuits were bulky and expensive, so microwave frequencies were generally limited to the output stage of transmitters and the RF front end of receivers, and signals were heterodyned to a lower intermediate frequency for processing. The period from the 1970s to the present has seen the development of tiny inexpensive active solid-state microwave components which can be mounted on circuit boards, allowing circuits to perform significant signal processing at microwave frequencies. This has made possible satellite television, cable television, GPS devices, and modern wireless devices, such as smartphones, Wi-Fi, and Bluetooth which connect to networks using microwaves.\nMicrostrip, a type of transmission line usable at microwave frequencies, was invented with printed circuits in the 1950s. The ability to cheaply fabricate a wide range of shapes on printed circuit boards allowed microstrip versions of capacitors, inductors, resonant stubs, splitters, directional couplers, diplexers, filters and antennas to be made, thus allowing compact microwave circuits to be constructed.\nTransistors that operated at microwave frequencies were developed in the 1970s. The semiconductor gallium arsenide (GaAs) has a much higher electron mobility than silicon, so devices fabricated with this material can operate at 4 times the frequency of similar devices of silicon. Beginning in the 1970s GaAs was used to make the first microwave transistors, and it has dominated microwave semiconductors ever since. MESFETs (metal-semiconductor field-effect transistors), fast GaAs field effect transistors using Schottky junctions for the gate, were developed starting in 1968 and have reached cutoff frequencies of 100\u00a0GHz, and are now the most widely used active microwave devices. Another family of transistors with a higher frequency limit is the HEMT (high electron mobility transistor), a field effect transistor made with two different semiconductors, AlGaAs and GaAs, using heterojunction technology, and the similar HBT (heterojunction bipolar transistor).\nGaAs can be made semi-insulating, allowing it to be used as a substrate on which circuits containing passive components, as well as transistors, can be fabricated by lithography. By 1976 this led to the first integrated circuits (ICs) which functioned at microwave frequencies, called monolithic microwave integrated circuits (MMIC). The word \"monolithic\" was added to distinguish these from microstrip PCB circuits, which were called \"microwave integrated circuits\" (MIC). Since then, silicon MMICs have also been developed. Today MMICs have become the workhorses of both analog and digital high-frequency electronics, enabling the production of single-chip microwave receivers, broadband amplifiers, modems, and microprocessors.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20101", "revid": "19275268", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20101", "title": "Mary", "text": "Mary may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "20102", "revid": "4007668", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20102", "title": "Manasseh", "text": "Manasseh (Hebrew: , \u00a0, \u00a0) is both a given name and a surname. Its variants include Manasses and Manasse.\nNotable people with the name include:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Name listThis page or section lists people that share the same given name or the same family name. "}
{"id": "20104", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20104", "title": "Military Academies", "text": ""}
{"id": "20106", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20106", "title": "Military academies", "text": ""}
{"id": "20107", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20107", "title": "Marie-Louise-Elisabeth Vigee-Lebrun", "text": ""}
{"id": "20108", "revid": "40144701", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20108", "title": "Mick Doohan", "text": "Australian motorcycle racer (born 1965)\nMichael Sydney Doohan ( ; born 4 June 1965) is an Australian former Grand Prix motorcycle road racing World Champion, who won five consecutive 500 cc World Championships.\nBiography.\nOriginally from the Gold Coast, Queensland, Doohan attended St Joseph's College, Gregory Terrace and Aspley State High School, Brisbane. He raced in Australian Superbikes in the late 1980s, and also won both races as Superbike World Championship visited Oran Park in 1988 as well as the second leg of the Japanese round held earlier in the year. In a break-out season he also won the final Australian motorcycle Grand Prix to be held in the TT format at Mount Panorama before the race became a round of the World Championship the following year and moved to Phillip Island. He is one of the few 500 cc or MotoGP World Champions to have won a Superbike World Championship race.\nHe made his Grand Prix debut for Honda on an NSR 500 cc two-stroke motorcycle in 1989. Late in the 1990 season Doohan claimed his first victory at the Hungarian Grand Prix on his way to third in the championship.\nIn 1991, Doohan was paired with his fellow Australian Wayne Gardner on a Honda RVF750 superbike and won the Suzuka 8 Hours endurance race. He competed successfully throughout the early 1990s and appeared to be on his way to winning his first world championship when he was seriously injured in a practice crash before the 1992 Dutch TT. He suffered permanent and serious damage to his right leg due to medical complications and, at one stage, faced amputation of the leg. At the time, Doohan was 65 points in the lead of the championship, but could not compete for eight weeks after the crash. After an arduous recovery, he returned to racing for the final two races but could not prevent Yamaha rider Wayne Rainey from winning his third consecutive title (by four points from Doohan). In 1993 he struggled with the healing of his leg and the ability to race the Honda at elite level, stating later that in that year it was all he could do to just keep his ride at Honda. It was also during this time he switched to a left thumb-operated rear brake, as his right foot was no longer able to perform this function.\nIn 1994 however, Doohan won his first 500 cc World Championship. Thereafter, until 1998, he dominated the class, winning five consecutive 500 cc World Championships. In 1997, his most successful year, Doohan won 12 out of 15 races, finished second in another two, and crashed out of the final race of the season at his home GP while leading by more than six seconds. In the 1996 Queen's Birthday Honours, Doohan was inducted as a Member of the Order of Australia (AM) for his contribution to the sport of motor racing.\nDespite up to eight rivals on non-factory HRC Honda motorcycles Doohan's margin of superiority over them was such that in many races Doohan would build a comfortable lead and then ride well within his limits to cruise to victory. Although pure riding skill clearly played a large part in his success, the ability of his chief race engineer, Jeremy Burgess, to perfect the suspension and geometry of a racing motorcycle may have given him an advantage over his rivals. Between 1994 and 1998 the bike was said not to have had many changes, with Honda engineers reportedly becoming frustrated at Doohan's reluctance to try innovations such as electronic shifting (it was only when Rossi came to Honda in 2000 that Honda engineers had their head with Rossi willing to try more innovations).\nOne notable trait of Doohan's post-crash riding style was the use of a thumb-operated rear brake developed during 1993 owing to the reduced range of motion in his ankle. This was operated by a \"nudge\" bar similar to a personal water craft throttle, but mounted on the left handlebar. In 1999 Doohan had another accident, this time in a very wet qualifying session for the Spanish Grand Prix. He again broke his leg in several places and subsequently announced his retirement. Jeremy Burgess, Doohan's chief engineer for his entire career, later became Valentino Rossi's chief engineer. After Doohan retired he went to work as a roving adviser to Honda's Grand Prix race effort. At the conclusion of the 2004 season, Doohan and Honda parted company.\nIn June 2011, Doohan made an appearance at the Isle of Man TT. Doohan completed a parade lap, and was most enamored by the thrill and spectacle of the Snaefell Mountain Course. He then went on to pay tribute to his former Honda racing teammate, Joey Dunlop.\nCars.\nAfter his success in Grand Prix motorcycle racing, Doohan got a chance to test a Formula One race car, the Williams FW19, at Circuit de Catalunya (in Spain) in April 1998. He found the car difficult to drive and crashed against a guard rail. In 2001, Doohan drove a Mercedes Benz CLK55 AMG works rally car with his co-driver Mark Stacey in the 2001 Targa Tasmania rally. He was in thirteenth place on day three when he crashed the car; he and Stacey were uninjured after the incident.\nPersonal life.\nOn 8 August 2006, Doohan appeared in Darwin Magistrates Court to face charges over a weekend fracas at a strip club. He was fined $2,500 after pleading guilty to assaulting a bouncer and failing to leave a licensed premise. No conviction was recorded.\nDoohan married Selina Sines, who had been his partner for the previous eleven years, on Tuesday 21 March 2006, on Hamilton Island; the couple have two children, including Formula One racing driver Jack Doohan.\nDoohan helped design an Intamin Motorbike Launch Roller Coaster, named Mick Doohan's Motocoaster. The ride is located at Dreamworld on the Gold Coast, Queensland. Doohan's name was removed from the ride's branding in May 2022, and it is now known simply as Motocoaster.\nHonours.\nDoohan was made a Member of the Order of Australia (AM) in 1996 and received an Australian Sports Medal in 2000. He was awarded the \"Key to the City\" by the City of Gold Coast in 1997. He was inducted into the Sport Australia Hall of Fame in 2009. The first turn at Phillip Island Grand Prix Circuit is named after him.\nIn 2009 as part of the Q150 celebrations, Doohan was announced as one of the Q150 Icons of Queensland for his role as a \"sports legend\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20113", "revid": "7183365", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20113", "title": "Mobile Suit Gundam", "text": "Japanese anime television series\n&lt;table class=\"infobox\" style=\"width: 22em\"&gt;\n&lt;/td&gt;&lt;/tr&gt;\n&lt;tr&gt;&lt;td colspan=\"2\"&gt;"}
{"id": "20114", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20114", "title": "Mariner4", "text": ""}
{"id": "20115", "revid": "4", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20115", "title": "Mariner6", "text": ""}
{"id": "20116", "revid": "4", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20116", "title": "Mariner7", "text": ""}
{"id": "20117", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20117", "title": "Mariner8", "text": ""}
{"id": "20119", "revid": "50436820", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20119", "title": "Methodism", "text": "Denomination of Protestant Christianity\nMethodism, also called the Methodist movement, is a Protestant Christian tradition whose origins, doctrine and practice derive from the life and teachings of John Wesley. George Whitefield and John's brother Charles Wesley were also significant early leaders in the movement. They were named \"Methodists\" for \"the methodical way in which they carried out their Christian faith\". Methodism originated as a revival movement within Anglicanism with roots in the Church of England in the 18th century and became a separate denomination after Wesley's death. The movement spread throughout the British Empire, the United States and beyond because of vigorous missionary work, and today has about 80\u00a0million adherents worldwide. Most Methodist denominations are members of the World Methodist Council.\nWesleyan theology, which is upheld by the Methodist denominations, focuses on sanctification and the transforming effect of faith on the character of a Christian, exemplified by living a victorious life over sin. Unique to Wesleyan Methodism is its definition of sin: a \"voluntary transgression of a known law of God.\" Distinguishing doctrines include the new birth, assurance, imparted righteousness, and obedience to God manifested in performing works of piety. John Wesley held that entire sanctification was \"the grand depositum\", or foundational doctrine, of the Methodist faith, and its propagation was the reason God brought Methodists into existence. Scripture is considered the primary authority, but Methodists also look to Christian tradition, including the historic creeds. Most Methodists teach that Jesus Christ, the Son of God, died for all of humanity and that salvation is achievable for all. This is the Arminian doctrine, as opposed to the Calvinist position that God has predestined the salvation of a select group of people. However, Whitefield and several other early leaders of the movement were considered Calvinistic Methodists and held to the Calvinist position.\nThe movement has a wide variety of forms of worship, ranging from high church to low church in liturgical usage, in addition to tent revivals and camp meetings held at certain times of the year. Denominations that descend from the British Methodist tradition are generally less ritualistic, while worship in American Methodism varies depending on the Methodist denomination and congregation. Methodist worship distinctiveness includes the observance of the quarterly lovefeast, the watchnight service on New Year's Eve, as well as altar calls in which people are invited to experience the new birth and entire sanctification. Its emphasis on growing in grace after the new birth (and after being entirely sanctified) led to the creation of class meetings for encouragement in the Christian life. Methodism is known for its rich musical tradition, and Charles Wesley was instrumental in writing much of the hymnody of Methodism.\nIn addition to evangelism, Methodism is known for its charity, as well as support for the sick, the poor, and the afflicted through works of mercy that \"flow from the love of God and neighbor\" evidenced in the entirely sanctified believer. These ideals, the Social Gospel, are put into practice by the establishment of hospitals, orphanages, soup kitchens, and schools to follow Christ's command to spread the gospel and serve all people. Methodists are historically known for their adherence to the doctrine of nonconformity to the world, reflected by their traditional standards of a commitment to sobriety, prohibition of gambling, regular attendance at class meetings, and weekly observance of the Friday fast.\nEarly Methodists were drawn from all levels of society, including the aristocracy, but the Methodist preachers took the message to social outcasts such as criminals. In Britain, the Methodist Church had a major effect in the early decades of the developing working class (1760\u20131820). In the United States, it became the religion of many slaves, who later formed black churches in the Methodist tradition.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOrigins.\nThe Methodist revival began in England with a group of men, including John Wesley (1703\u20131791) and his younger brother Charles Wesley (1707\u20131788), as a movement within the Church of England in the 18th century. The Wesley brothers founded the \"Holy Club\" at the University of Oxford, where John was a fellow and later a lecturer at Lincoln College. The club met weekly and they systematically set about living a holy life. They were accustomed to receiving Communion every week, fasting regularly, abstaining from most forms of amusement and luxury, and frequently visiting the sick and the poor and prisoners. The fellowship were branded as \"Methodist\" by their fellow students because of the way they used \"rule\" and \"method\" in their religious affairs.\nIn 1735, at the invitation of the founder of the Georgia Colony, General James Oglethorpe, both John and Charles Wesley set out for America to be ministers to the colonists and missionaries to the Native Americans. Unsuccessful in their work, the brothers returned to England conscious of their lack of genuine Christian faith.\nThey sought help from Peter Boehler and other members of the Moravian Church. At a Moravian service in Aldersgate on 24 May 1738, John Wesley experienced what has come to be called his evangelical conversion, when he felt his \"heart strangely warmed\". It is the foundation of the charismatic Aldersgate Renewal that continues to this day (currently 2025). He records in his journal: \"I felt I did trust in Christ, Christ alone, for salvation; and an assurance was given me that He had taken away my sins, even mine, and saved me from the law of sin and death.\" Charles Wesley had reported a similar experience a few days previously. Considering this a pivotal moment, Daniel L. Burnett writes: \"The significance of [John] Wesley's Aldersgate Experience is monumental ... Without it, the names of Wesley and Methodism would likely be nothing more than obscure footnotes in the pages of church history.\"\nThe property at 28 Aldersgate Street is the approximate former location of a Moravian Church. On (24 May 1738) / May 24, 1738, while attending a meeting at the church, the Anglican clergyman John Wesley underwent a profound religious experience that he described as a \"warming of the heart\". The following year, he left the Moravians and founded the Methodist Society of England. The yearly anniversary of his experience is celebrated by Methodists on Aldersgate Day. Wesley's Chapel, in nearby City Road, remains a major focal point of the worldwide Methodist charismatic movement. Aldersgate Renewal Ministries (ARM) is a global movement where people may experience their own Pentecost, pray for healing, pray God's will in a heavenly language unknown to the speaker (tongues), encounter and pray with the Holy Spirit using spiritual / charismatic gifts that are listed in 1 Corinthians 12 of the Holy Bible. Working with churches in the Wesleyan heritage (including the https://), people encounter the Holy Spirit, and are encouraged to live supernatural, Holy Spirit-filled lives. ARM teaches people today of the rich Wesleyan heritage and history, recognizing that John Wesley's theology of grace is in fact a theology of the Holy Spirit.\nThe Wesley brothers immediately began to preach salvation by faith to individuals and groups, in houses, in religious societies, and in the few churches which had not closed their doors to evangelical preachers. John Wesley came under the influence of the Dutch theologian Jacobus Arminius (1560\u20131609). Arminius had rejected the Calvinist teaching that God had predestined an elect number of people to eternal bliss while others perished eternally. Conversely, George Whitefield (1714\u20131770), Howell Harris (1714\u20131773), and Selina Hastings, Countess of Huntingdon (1707\u20131791) were notable for being Calvinistic Methodists.\nReturning from his mission in Georgia, George Whitefield joined the Wesley brothers in what was rapidly becoming a national crusade. Whitefield, who had been a fellow student of the Wesleys and prominent member of the Holy Club at Oxford, became well known for his unorthodox, itinerant ministry, in which he was dedicated to open-air preaching\u00a0\u2013 reaching crowds of thousands. A key step in the development of John Wesley's ministry was, like Whitefield, to preach in fields, collieries, and churchyards to those who did not regularly attend parish church services. Accordingly, many Methodist converts were those disconnected from the Church of England; Wesley remained a cleric of the Established Church and insisted that Methodists attend their local parish church as well as Methodist meetings because only an ordained minister could perform the sacraments of Baptism and Holy Communion.\nFaced with growing evangelistic and pastoral responsibilities, Wesley and Whitefield appointed lay preachers and leaders. Methodist preachers focused particularly on evangelising people who had been \"neglected\" by the established Church of England. Wesley and his assistant preachers organized the new converts into Methodist societies. These societies were divided into groups called \"classes\"\u00a0\u2013 intimate meetings where individuals were encouraged to confess their sins to one another and to build up each other. They also took part in love feasts which allowed for the sharing of testimony, a key feature of early Methodism. Growth in numbers and increasing hostility impressed upon the revival converts a deep sense of their corporate identity. Three teachings that Methodists saw as the foundation of Christian faith were:\nWesley's organisational skills soon established him as the primary leader of the movement. Whitefield was a Calvinist, whereas Wesley was an outspoken opponent of the doctrine of predestination. Wesley argued (against Calvinist doctrine) that Christians could enjoy a second blessing\u00a0\u2013 entire sanctification (Christian perfection) in this life: loving God and their neighbours, meekness and lowliness of heart and abstaining from all appearance of evil. These differences put strains on the alliance between Whitefield and Wesley, with Wesley becoming hostile toward Whitefield in what had been previously close relations. Whitefield consistently begged Wesley not to let theological differences sever their friendship, and, in time, their friendship was restored, though this was seen by many of Whitefield's followers to be a doctrinal compromise.\nMany clergy in the established church feared that new doctrines promulgated by the Methodists, such as the necessity of a new birth for salvation\u00a0\u2013 the first work of grace, of justification by faith and of the constant and sustained action of the Holy Spirit upon the believer's soul, would produce ill effects upon weak minds. Theophilus Evans, an early critic of the movement, even wrote that it was \"the natural Tendency of their Behaviour, in Voice and Gesture and horrid Expressions, to make People mad\". In one of his prints, William Hogarth likewise attacked Methodists as \"enthusiasts\" full of \"Credulity, Superstition, and Fanaticism\". Other attacks against the Methodists were physically violent\u00a0\u2013 Wesley was nearly murdered by a mob at Wednesbury in 1743. The Methodists responded vigorously to their critics and thrived despite the attacks against them.\nInitially, the Methodists merely sought reform within the Church of England (Anglicanism), but the movement gradually departed from that Church. George Whitefield's preference for extemporaneous prayer rather than the fixed forms of prayer in the \"Book of Common Prayer\", in addition to his insistence on the necessity of the new birth, set him at odds with Anglican clergy.\nAs Methodist societies multiplied, and elements of an ecclesiastical system were, one after another, adopted, the breach between John Wesley and the Church of England gradually widened. In 1784, Wesley responded to the shortage of priests in the American colonies due to the American Revolutionary War by ordaining preachers for America with the power to administer the sacraments. Wesley's actions precipitated the split between American Methodists and the Church of England (which held that only bishops could ordain people to ministry).\nWith regard to the position of Methodism within Christendom, \"John Wesley once noted that what God had achieved in the development of Methodism was no mere human endeavor but the work of God. As such it would be preserved by God so long as history remained.\" Calling it \"the grand depositum\" of the Methodist faith, Wesley specifically taught that the propagation of the doctrine of entire sanctification was the reason that God raised up the Methodists in the world. In light of this, Methodists traditionally promote the motto \"Holiness unto the Lord\".\nJohn William Fletcher became one of the key teachers of Methodist theology when he immigrated to England and became an Anglican minister. He was also instrumental in leading the charismatic movement. He was Wesley's choice of successor to the Methodist movement, but died before Wesley. At the time of Wesley's death, there were over 500 Methodist preachers in British colonies and the new United States. Total membership of the Methodist societies in Britain was recorded as 56,000 in 1791, rising to 360,000 in 1836 and 1,463,000 by the national census of 1851.\nEarly Methodism experienced a radical and spiritual phase that allowed women authority in church leadership. The role of the woman preacher emerged from the sense that the home should be a place of community care and should foster personal growth. Methodist women formed a community that cared for the vulnerable, extending the role of mothering beyond physical care. Women were encouraged to testify their faith. However, the centrality of women's role sharply diminished after 1790 as Methodist churches became more structured and more male-dominated.\nThe Wesleyan Education Committee, which existed from 1838 to 1902, has documented the Methodist Church's involvement in the education of children. At first, most effort was placed in creating Sunday Schools. Still, in 1836 the British Methodist Conference gave its blessing to the creation of \"Weekday schools\".\nMethodism spread throughout the British Empire and, mostly through Whitefield's preaching during what historians call the First Great Awakening, in colonial America. However, after Whitefield's death in 1770, American Methodism entered a more lasting Wesleyan and Arminian development phase. Revival services and camp meetings were used \"for spreading the Methodist message\", with Francis Asbury stating that they were \"our harvest seasons\". Henry Boehm reported that at a camp meeting in Dover in 1805, 1100 persons received the New Birth and 600 believers were entirely sanctified. Around the time of John Swanel Inskip's leadership of the National Camp Meeting Association for the Promotion of Christian Holiness in the mid to latter 1800s, 80 percent of the membership of the North Georgia Conference of the Methodist Episcopal Church, South professed being entirely sanctified.\nTheology.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nA traditional summary of Methodist teaching\nAll need to be saved.All may be saved.All may know themselves saved.All may be saved to the uttermost.\n\"Catechism for the Use of the People Called Methodists\".\nMany Methodist bodies, such as the African Methodist Episcopal Church and the United Methodist Church, base their doctrinal standards on the Articles of Religion, John Wesley's abridgment of the Thirty-nine Articles of the Church of England that excised its Calvinist features. Some Methodist denominations also publish catechisms, which concisely summarise Christian doctrine. Methodists generally accept the Apostles' Creed and the Nicene Creed as declarations of shared Christian faith. Methodism affirms the traditional Christian belief in the triune Godhead (Father, Son and Holy Spirit) as well as the orthodox understanding of the person of Jesus Christ as God incarnate who is both fully divine and fully human. Methodism also emphasizes doctrines that indicate the power of the Holy Spirit to strengthen the faith of believers and to transform their personal lives.\nMethodism is broadly evangelical in doctrine and is characterized by Wesleyan theology; John Wesley is studied by Methodists for his interpretation of church practice and doctrine. At its heart, the theology of John Wesley stressed the life of Christian holiness: to love God with all one's heart, mind, soul and strength and to love one's neighbour as oneself. One popular expression of Methodist doctrine is in the hymns of Charles Wesley. Since enthusiastic congregational singing was a part of the early evangelical movement, Wesleyan theology took root and spread through this channel. Martin V. Clarke, who documented the history of Methodist hymnody, states:\nTheologically and doctrinally, the content of the hymns has traditionally been a primary vehicle for expressing Methodism's emphasis on salvation for all, social holiness, and personal commitment, while particular hymns and the communal act of participating in hymn singing have been key elements in the spiritual lives of Methodists.\nSalvation.\nWesleyan Methodists identify with the Arminian conception of free will, as opposed to the theological determinism of absolute predestination. Methodism teaches that salvation is initiated when one chooses to respond to God, who draws the individual near to him (the Wesleyan doctrine of prevenient grace), thus teaching synergism. Methodists interpret Scripture as teaching that the saving work of Jesus Christ is for all people (unlimited atonement) but effective only to those who respond and believe, in accordance with the Reformation principles of \"sola gratia\" (grace alone) and \"sola fide\" (faith alone). John Wesley taught four key points fundamental to Methodism:\nAfter the first work of grace (the new birth), Methodist soteriology emphasizes the importance of the pursuit of holiness in salvation, a concept best summarized in a quote by Methodist evangelist Phoebe Palmer who stated that \"justification would have ended with me had I refused to be holy.\" Thus, for Methodists, \"true faith ... cannot subsist without works.\" Methodist doctrine holds that the Christian life, subsequent to the New Birth (first work of grace), should be characterized by holy living, free from sin. Methodism, inclusive of the holiness movement, thus teaches that \"justification [is made] conditional on obedience and progress in sanctification\", emphasizing \"a deep reliance upon Christ not only in coming to faith, but in remaining in the faith.\" John Wesley taught that the keeping of the moral law contained in the Ten Commandments, as well as engaging in the works of piety and the works of mercy, were \"indispensable for our sanctification\". In its categorization of sin, Methodist doctrine distinguishes between (1) \"sin, properly so called\" and (2) \"involuntary transgression of a divine law, known or unknown\"; the former category includes voluntary transgression against God, while the second category includes infirmities (such as \"immaturity, ignorance, physical handicaps, forgetfulness, lack of discernment, and poor communication skills\").\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Wesley explains that those born of God do not sin \"habitually\" since to do so means that sin still reigns, which is a mark of an unbeliever. Neither does the Christian sin \"willfully\" since the believer's will is now set on living for Christ. He further claims that believers do not sin by desire because the heart has been thoroughly transformed to desire only God's perfect will. Wesley then addresses \"sin by infirmities\". Since infirmities involve no \"concurrence of (the) will\", such deviations, whether in thought, word, or deed, are not \"properly\" sin. He therefore concludes that those born of God do not commit sin, having been saved from \"all their sins\" (II.2, 7).\nThis is reflected in the Articles of Religion of the Free Methodist Church (emphasis added in italics), which uses the wording of John Wesley:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Justified persons, while they do not outwardly commit sin\", are nevertheless conscious of sin still remaining in the heart. They feel a natural tendency to evil, a proneness to depart from God, and cleave to the things of earth. Those that are sanctified wholly are saved from all inward sin-from evil thoughts and evil tempers. No wrong temper, none contrary to love remains in the soul. All their thoughts, words, and actions are governed by pure love. Entire sanctification takes place subsequently to justification, and is the work of God wrought instantaneously upon the consecrated, believing soul. After a soul is cleansed from all sin, it is then fully prepared to grow in grace\" (\"Discipline\", \"Articles of Religion\", ch. i, \u00a7 1, p. 23).\nMethodists also believe in the second work of grace\u00a0\u2013 Christian perfection, also known as entire sanctification, which removes original sin, makes the believer holy and empowers them with power to wholly serve God. John Wesley explained, \"entire sanctification, or Christian perfection, is neither more nor less than pure love; love expelling sin, and governing both the heart and life of a child of God. The Refiner's fire purges out all that is contrary to love.\"\nMethodist churches teach that apostasy can occur through a loss of faith or through sinning. If a person backslides but later decides to return to God, he or she must repent for sins and be entirely sanctified again (the Wesleyan-Arminian doctrine of conditional security).\nSacraments.\nMethodists hold that sacraments are sacred acts of divine institution. Methodism has inherited its liturgy from Anglicanism, although Wesleyan theology tends to have a stronger \"sacramental emphasis\" than that held by evangelical Anglicans.\nIn common with most Protestants, Methodists recognize two sacraments as being instituted by Christ: Baptism and Holy Communion (also called the Lord's Supper). Most Methodist churches practice infant baptism, in anticipation of a response to be made later (confirmation), as well as baptism of believing adults. The \"Catechism for the Use of the People Called Methodists\" states that, \"[in Holy Communion] Jesus Christ is present with his worshipping people and gives himself to them as their Lord and Saviour.\" In the United Methodist Church, the explanation of how Christ's presence is made manifest in the elements (bread and wine) is described as a \"Holy Mystery\".\nMethodist churches generally recognize sacraments to be a means of grace. John Wesley held that God also imparted grace by other established means such as public and private prayer, Scripture reading, study and preaching, public worship, and fasting; these constitute the works of piety. Wesley considered means of grace to be \"outward signs, words, or actions ... to be the ordinary channels whereby [God] might convey to men, preventing [i.e., preparing], justifying or sanctifying grace.\" Specifically Methodist means, such as the class meetings, provided his chief examples for these prudential means of grace.\nSources of teaching.\nAmerican Methodist theologian Albert Outler, in assessing John Wesley's own practices of theological reflection, proposes a methodology termed the \"Wesleyan Quadrilateral\". Wesley's Quadrilateral is referred to in Methodism as \"our theological guidelines\" and is taught to its ministers (clergy) in seminary as the primary approach to interpreting Scripture and gaining guidance for moral questions and dilemmas faced in daily living.\nTraditionally, Methodists declare the Bible (Old and New Testaments) to be the only divinely inspired Scripture and the primary source of authority for Christians. The historic Methodist understanding of Scripture is based on the superstructure of Wesleyan covenant theology. Methodists also make use of tradition, drawing primarily from the teachings of the Church Fathers, as a secondary source of authority. Tradition may serve as a lens through which Scripture is interpreted. Theological discourse for Methodists almost always makes use of Scripture read inside the wider theological tradition of Christianity.\nJohn Wesley contended that a part of the theological method would involve experiential faith. In other words, truth would be vivified in personal experience of Christians (overall, not individually), if it were really truth. And every doctrine must be able to be defended rationally. He did not divorce faith from reason. By reason, one asks questions of faith and seeks to understand God's action and will. Tradition, experience and reason, however, were subject always to Scripture, Wesley argued, because only there is the Word of God revealed \"so far as it is necessary for our salvation.\"\nPrayer, worship, and liturgy.\nWith respect to public worship, Methodism was endowed by the Wesley brothers with worship characterised by a twofold practice: the ritual sacramental liturgy of the \"Book of Common Prayer\" on the one hand and the non-ritualistic preaching service on the other. This twofold practice became distinctive of Methodism because worship in the Church of England was based, by law, solely on the \"Book of Common Prayer\" and worship in the Nonconformist churches was almost exclusively that of \"services of the word\", i.e. preaching services, with Holy Communion being observed infrequently. John Wesley's influence meant that, in Methodism, the two practices were combined, a situation which remains characteristic of the tradition. Methodism has heavily emphasized \"offerings of extempore and spontaneous prayer\". To this end, Methodist revival services and camp meetings have been characterized by groaning and shouting, as people sought the fullness of salvation that Methodists taught to be embodied by the experience of entire sanctification. To outsiders, Wesleyans were labeled as \"Shouting Methodists\" due to their free expression during worship.\nHistorically, Methodist churches have devoutly observed the Lord's Day (Sunday) with a morning service of worship, along with an evening service of worship (with the evening service being aimed at seekers and focusing on \"singing, prayer, and preaching\"); the holding of a midweek prayer meeting on Wednesday evenings has been customary. 18th-century Methodist church services were characterized by the following pattern: \"preliminaries (e.g., singing, prayers, testimonies), to a 'message,' followed by an invitation to commitment\", the latter of which took the form altar call\u2014a practice that a remains \"a vital part\" of worship. A number of Methodist congregations devote a portion of their Sunday evening service and mid-week Wednesday evening prayer meeting to having congregants share their prayer requests, in addition to hearing personal testimonies about their faith and experiences in living the Christian life. After listening to various members of the congregation voice their prayer requests, congregants may kneel for intercessory prayer. The Lovefeast, traditionally practiced quarterly, was another practice that characterized early Methodism as John Wesley taught that it was an apostolic ordinance. Worship, hymnology, devotional and liturgical practices in Methodism were also influenced by Pietistic Lutheranism and, in turn, Methodist worship became influential in the Holiness movement.\nEarly Methodism was known for its \"almost monastic rigors, its living by rule, [and] its canonical hours of prayer\". It inherited from its Anglican patrimony the practice of reciting the Daily Office, which Methodist Christians were expected to pray. The first prayer book of Methodism, \"The Sunday Service of the Methodists with other occasional Services\" thus included the canonical hours of both Morning Prayer and Evening Prayer; these services were observed everyday in early Christianity, though on the Lord's Day, worship included the Eucharist. Later Methodist liturgical books, such as the \"Methodist Worship Book\" (1999) provide for Morning Prayer and Evening Prayer to be prayed daily; the United Methodist Church encourages its communicants to pray the canonical hours as \"one of the essential practices\" of being a disciple of Jesus. Some Methodist religious orders publish the Daily Office to be used for that community, for example, \"The Book of Offices and Services of The Order of Saint Luke\" contains the canonical hours to be prayed traditionally at seven fixed prayer times: Lauds (6 am), Terce (9 am), Sext (12 pm), None (3 pm), Vespers (6 pm), Compline (9 pm) and Vigil (12 am). Some Methodist congregations offer daily Morning Prayer.\nIn America, the United Methodist Church and Free Methodist Church, as well as the Primitive Methodist Church and Wesleyan Methodist Church, have a wide variety of forms of worship, ranging from high church to low church in liturgical usage. When the Methodists in America were separated from the Church of England because of the American Revolution, John Wesley provided a revised version of the \"Book of Common Prayer\" called \"The Sunday Service of the Methodists; With Other Occasional Services\" (1784). Today, the primary liturgical books of the United Methodist Church are \"The United Methodist Hymnal\" and \"The United Methodist Book of Worship\" (1992). Congregations employ its liturgy and rituals as optional resources, but their use is not mandatory. These books contain the liturgies of the church that are generally derived from Wesley's \"Sunday Service\" and from the 20th-century liturgical renewal movement.\nThe British Methodist Church is less ordered, or less liturgical, in worship. It makes use of the \"Methodist Worship Book\" (similar to the Church of England's \"Common Worship\"), containing set services and rubrics for the celebration of other rites, such as marriage. The \"Worship Book\" is also ultimately derived from Wesley's \"Sunday Service\".\nA unique feature of American Methodism has been the observance of the season of Kingdomtide, encompassing the last 13 weeks before Advent, thus dividing the long season after Pentecost into two segments. During Kingdomtide, Methodist liturgy has traditionally emphasized charitable work and alleviating the suffering of the poor.\nA second distinctive liturgical feature of Methodism is the use of Covenant Services. Although practice varies between national churches, most Methodist churches annually follow the call of John Wesley for a renewal of their covenant with God. It is common for each congregation to use the Covenant Renewal liturgy during the watchnight service in the night of New Year's Eve, though in Britain, these are often on the first Sunday of the year. Wesley's covenant prayer is still used, with minor modification, in the order of service:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAs John Wesley advocated outdoor evangelism, revival services are a traditional worship practice of Methodism that are often held in churches, as well as at camp meetings, brush arbor revivals, and tent revivals.\nMembership.\nTraditionally, Methodist connexions descending from the tradition of the Methodist Episcopal Church have a probationary period of six months before an individual is admitted into church membership as a full member of a congregation. Given the wide attendance at Methodist revival meetings, many people started to attend Methodist services of worship regularly, though they had not yet committed to membership. When they made that commitment, becoming a probationer was the first step and during this period, probationers \"receive additional instruction and provide evidence of the seriousness of their faith and willingness to abide by church discipline before being accepted into full membership.\" In addition to this, to be a probationary member of a Methodist congregation, a person traditionally requires an \"earnest desire to be saved from [one's] sins\". In the historic Methodist system, probationers were eligible to become members of class meetings, where they could be further discipled in their faith.\nCatechisms such as \"The Probationer's Handbook\", authored by minister Stephen O. Garrison, have been used by probationers to learn the Methodist faith. After six months, probationers were examined before the Leaders and Stewards' Meeting (which consisted of Class Leaders and Stewards) where they were to provide \"satisfactory assurance both of the correctness of his faith and of his willingness to observe and keep the rules of the church.\" If probationers were able to do this, they were admitted as full members of the congregation by the pastor.\nFull members of a Methodist congregation \"were obligated to attend worship services on a regular basis\" and \"were to abide by certain moral precepts, especially as they related to substance use, gambling, divorce, and immoral pastimes.\" This practice continues in certain Methodist connexions, such as the Lumber River Conference of the Holiness Methodist Church, in which probationers must be examined by the pastor, class leader, and board for full membership, in addition to being baptized. The same structure is found in the African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church, which teaches:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In order that we may not admit improper persons into our church, great care be taken in receiving persons on probation, and let not one be so received or enrolled who does not give satisfactory evidence of his/her desire to flee the wrath to come and to be saved from his/her sins. Such a person satisfying us in these particulars may be received into our church on six months probation; but shall not be admitted to full membership until he/she shall have given satisfactory evidence of saving faith in the Lord Jesus Christ.\u2014\u200a\nThe pastor and class leader are to ensure \"that all persons on probation be instructed in the Rules and Doctrines of The African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church before they are admitted to Full Membership\" and that \"probationers are expected to conform to the rules and usages of the Church, and to show evidence of their desire for fellowship in the Church\". After the six-month probation period, \"A probationer may be admitted to full membership, provided he/she has served out his/her probation, has been baptized, recommended at the Leaders' Meeting, and, if none has been held according to law, recommended by the Leader, and, on examination by the Pastor before the Church as required in \u00b6600 has given satisfactory assurance both of the correctness of his/her faith, and of his/her willingness to observe and keep the rules of our Church.\" The Allegheny Wesleyan Methodist Connection admits to associate membership, by vote of the congregation, those who give affirmation to two questions: \"1) Does the Lord now forgive your sins? 2) Will you acquaint yourself with the discipline of our connection and earnestly endeavor to govern your life by its rules as God shall give you understanding?\" Probationers who wish to become full members are examined by the advisory board before being received as such through four vows (on the new birth, entire sanctification, outward holiness, and assent to the Articles of Religion) and a covenant. In the United Methodist Church, the process of becoming a professing member of a congregation is done through the taking membership vows (normatively in the rite of confirmation) after a period of instruction and receiving the sacrament of baptism. It is the practice of certain Methodist connexions that when people become members of a congregation, they are offered the Right Hand of Fellowship. Methodists traditionally celebrate the Covenant Renewal Service as the watchnight service annually on New Year's Eve, in which members renew their covenant with God and the Church.\nLifestyle.\nEarly Methodists wore plain dress, with Methodist clergy condemning \"high headdresses, ruffles, laces, gold, and 'costly apparel' in general\". John Wesley recommended that Methodists annually read his thoughts \"On Dress\"; in that sermon, Wesley expressed his desire for Methodists: \"Let me see, before I die, a Methodist congregation, full as plain dressed as a Quaker congregation.\" The 1858 Discipline of the Wesleyan Methodist Connection thus stated that \"we would ... enjoin on all who fear God plain dress.\" Peter Cartwright, a Methodist revivalist, stated that in addition to wearing plain dress, the early Methodists distinguished themselves from other members of society by fasting once a week, abstaining from alcohol (teetotalism), and devoutly observing the Sabbath. Methodist circuit riders were known for practicing the spiritual discipline of mortifying the flesh as they \"arose well before dawn for solitary prayer; they remained on their knees without food or drink or physical comforts sometimes for hours on end.\" The early Methodists did not participate in, and condemned, \"worldly habits\" including \"playing cards, racing horses, gambling, attending the theater, dancing (both in frolics and balls), and cockfighting.\"\nIn Methodism, fasting is considered one of the works of piety. The Directions Given to Band Societies (25 December 1744) by John Wesley mandate fasting and abstinence from meat on all Fridays of the year (in remembrance of the crucifixion of Jesus). Wesley himself also fasted before receiving Holy Communion \"for the purpose of focusing his attention on God,\" and asked other Methodists to do the same.\nOver time, many of these practices were relaxed in mainline Methodism, although practices such as teetotalism and fasting are still encouraged, in addition to the current prohibition of gambling. Denominations of the conservative holiness movement, such as the Allegheny Wesleyan Methodist Connection and Evangelical Methodist Church Conference, continue to reflect the spirit of the historic Methodist practice of wearing plain dress, with members abstaining from the \"wearing of apparel which does not modestly and properly clothe the person\" and \"refraining from the wearing of jewelry\" and \"superfluous ornaments (including the wedding ring)\". The Fellowship of Independent Methodist Churches, which continues to observe the ordinance of women's headcovering, stipulates \"renouncing all vain pomp and glory\" and \"adorning oneself with modest attire.\" The General Rules of the Methodist Church in America, which are among the doctrinal standards of many Methodist Churches, promote first-day Sabbatarianism as they require \"attending upon all the ordinances of God\" including \"the public worship of God\" and prohibit \"profaning the day of the Lord, either by doing ordinary work therein or by buying or selling.\"\nContemporary Methodist denominations.\nMethodism is a worldwide movement and Methodist churches are present on all populated continents. Although Methodism is declining in Great Britain and North America, it is growing in other places\u00a0\u2013 at a rapid pace in, for example, South Korea. There is no single Methodist Church with universal juridical authority; Methodists belong to multiple independent denominations or \"connexions\". The great majority of Methodists are members of denominations which are part of the World Methodist Council, an international association of 80 Methodist, Wesleyan, and related uniting denominations, representing about 80\u00a0million people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I look on all the world as my parish; thus far I mean, that, in whatever part of it I am, I judge it meet, right, and my bounden duty, to declare unto all that are willing to hear, the glad tidings of salvation.\u2014\u200a\nEurope.\nMethodism is prevalent in the English-speaking world but it is also organized in mainland Europe, largely due to missionary activity of British and American Methodists. British missionaries were primarily responsible for establishing Methodism across Ireland and Italy. Today the United Methodist Church (UMC)\u00a0\u2013 a large denomination based in the United States\u00a0\u2013 has a presence in Albania, Austria, Belarus, Belgium, Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Croatia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Moldova, North Macedonia, Norway, Poland, Romania, Serbia, Slovakia, Sweden, Switzerland, and Ukraine. Collectively the European and Eurasian regions of the UMC constitute a little over 100,000 Methodists (as of 2017[ [update]]). Other smaller Methodist denominations exist in Europe.\nGreat Britain.\nThe original body founded as a result of Wesley's work came to be known as the Wesleyan Methodist Church. Schisms within the original church, and independent revivals, led to the formation of a number of separate denominations calling themselves \"Methodist\". The largest of these were the Primitive Methodists, deriving from a revival at Mow Cop in Staffordshire, the Bible Christians, and the Methodist New Connexion. The original church adopted the name \"Wesleyan Methodist\" to distinguish it from these bodies. In 1907, a union of smaller groups with the Methodist New Connexion and Bible Christian Church brought about the United Methodist Church; then the three major streams of British Methodism united in 1932 to form the present Methodist Church of Great Britain. The fourth-largest denomination in the country, the Methodist Church of Great Britain has about 202,000 members in 4,650 congregations.\nEarly Methodism was particularly prominent in Devon and Cornwall, which were key centers of activity by the Bible Christian faction of Methodists. The Bible Christians produced many preachers, and sent many missionaries to Australia. Methodism also grew rapidly in the old mill towns of Yorkshire and Lancashire, where the preachers stressed that the working classes were equal to the upper classes in the eyes of God. In Wales, three elements separately welcomed Methodism: Welsh-speaking, English-speaking, and Calvinistic.\nBritish Methodists, in particular the Primitive Methodists, took a leading role in the temperance movement of the 19th and early 20th centuries. Methodists saw alcoholic beverages, and alcoholism, as the root of many social ills and tried to persuade people to abstain from these. Temperance appealed strongly to the Methodist doctrines of sanctification and perfection. To this day, alcohol remains banned in Methodist premises, however this restriction no longer applies to domestic occasions in private homes (i.e. the minister may have a drink at home in the manse). The choice to consume alcohol is now a personal decision for any member.\nBritish Methodism does not have bishops; however, it has always been characterised by a strong central organisation, the Connexion, which holds an annual Conference (the church retains the 18th-century spelling \"connexion\" for many purposes). The Connexion is divided into Districts in the charge of the chairperson (who may be male or female). Methodist districts often correspond approximately, in geographical terms, to counties\u00a0\u2013 as do Church of England dioceses. The districts are divided into circuits governed by the Circuit Meeting and led and administrated principally by a superintendent minister. Ministers are appointed to Circuits rather than to individual churches, although some large inner-city churches, known as \"central halls\", are designated as circuits in themselves\u00a0\u2013 of these Westminster Central Hall, opposite Westminster Abbey in central London, is the best known. Most circuits have fewer ministers than churches, and the majority of services are led by lay local preachers, or by supernumerary ministers (ministers who have retired, called supernumerary because they are not counted for official purposes in the numbers of ministers for the circuit in which they are listed). The superintendent and other ministers are assisted in the leadership and administration of the Circuit by circuit stewards - laypeople with particular skills who, who with the ministers, collectively form what is normally known as the Circuit Leadership Team.\nThe Methodist Council also helps to run a number of schools, including two public schools in East Anglia: Culford School and the Leys School. The council promotes an all round education with a strong Christian ethos.\nOther Methodist denominations in Britain include: the Free Methodist Church, the Fellowship of Independent Methodist Churches, the Church of the Nazarene, and The Salvation Army, all of which are Methodist churches aligned with the holiness movement, as well as the Wesleyan Reform Union, an early secession from the Wesleyan Methodist Church, and the Independent Methodist Connexion.\nIreland.\nJohn Wesley visited Ireland on at least twenty-four occasions and established classes and societies. The Methodist Church in Ireland () today operates across both Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland on an all-Ireland basis. As of 2018[ [update]], there were around 50,000 Methodists across Ireland. In 2013, the biggest concentration \u2013 13,171 \u2013 was in Belfast, with 2,614 in Dublin. As of 2021[ [update]], it is the fourth-largest denomination in Northern Ireland, with Methodists accounting for 2.3% of the population, compared to 3% in 2011.\nEric Gallagher was the President of the Church in the 1970s, becoming a well-known figure in Irish politics. He was one of the group of Protestant churchmen who met with Provisional IRA officers in Feakle, County Clare to try to broker peace. The meeting was unsuccessful due to a Garda raid on the hotel.\nIn 1973, the Fellowship of Independent Methodist Churches (FIMC) was established as a number of theologically conservative congregations departed both the Methodist Church in Ireland and Free Methodist Church due to what they perceived as the rise of Modernism in those denominations.\nItaly.\nThe Italian Methodist Church () is a small Protestant community in Italy, with around 7,000 members. Since 1975, it is in a formal covenant of partnership with the Waldensian Church, with a total of 45,000 members. Waldensians are a Protestant movement which started in Lyon, France, in the late 1170s.\nItalian Methodism has its origins in the Italian Free Church, British Wesleyan Methodist Missionary Society, and the American Methodist Episcopal Mission. These movements flowered in the second half of the 19th century in the new climate of political and religious freedom that was established with the end of the Papal States and unification of Italy in 1870.\nBertrand M. Tipple, minister of the American Methodist Church in Rome, founded a college there in 1914.\nIn April 2016, the World Methodist Council opened an Ecumenical Office in Rome. Methodist leaders and the leader of the Roman Catholic Church, Pope Francis, jointly dedicated the new office. It helps facilitate Methodist relationships with the wider Church, especially the Roman Catholic Church.\nNordic and Baltic countries.\nThe \"Nordic and Baltic Area\" of the United Methodist Church covers the Nordic countries (Denmark, Sweden, Norway, and Finland) and the Baltic countries (Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania). Methodism was introduced to the Nordic countries in the late 19th century. Today the United Methodist Church in Norway () is the largest annual meeting in the region with 10,684 members in total (as of 2013[ [update]]). The United Methodist Church in Sweden () joined the Uniting Church in Sweden in 2011.\nIn Finland, Methodism arrived through Ostrobothnians sailors in the 1860s, and Methodism spread especially in Swedish-speaking Ostrobothnia. The first Methodist congregation was founded in Vaasa in 1881 and the first Finnish-speaking congregation in Pori in 1887. At the turn of the century, the congregation in Vaasa became the largest and most active congregation in Methodism.\nFrance.\nThe French Methodist movement was founded in the 1820s by Charles Cook in the village of Cong\u00e9nies in Languedoc near N\u00eemes and Montpellier. The most important chapel of department was built in 1869, where there had been a Quaker community since the 18th century. Sixteen Methodist congregations voted to join the Reformed Church of France in 1938. In the 1980s, missionary work of a Methodist church in Agen led to new initiatives in Fleurance and Mont de Marsan.\nMethodism exists today in France under various names. The best-known is the Union of Evangelical Methodist Churches () or UEEM. It is an autonomous regional conference of the United Methodist Church and is the fruit of a fusion in 2005 between the \"Methodist Church of France\" and the \"Union of Methodist Churches\". As of 2014[ [update]], the UEEM has around 1,200 members and 30 ministers.\nGermany.\nIn Germany, Switzerland and Austria, is the name of the United Methodist Church. The German part of the church had about 52,031 members in 2015[ [update]]. Members are organized into three annual conferences: north, east and south. All three annual conferences belong to the \"Germany Central Conference\". Methodism is most prevalent in southern Saxony and around Stuttgart.\nA Methodist missionary returning from Britain introduced (British) Methodism to Germany in 1830, initially in the region of W\u00fcrttemberg. Methodism was also spread in Germany through the missionary work of the Methodist Episcopal Church which began in 1849 in Bremen, soon spreading to Saxony and other parts of Germany. Other Methodist missionaries of the Evangelical Association went near Stuttgart (W\u00fcrttemberg) in 1850. Further Methodist missionaries of the Church of the United Brethren in Christ worked in Franconia and other parts of Germany from 1869 until 1905. Therefore, Methodism has four roots in Germany.\nEarly opposition towards Methodism was partly rooted in theological differences\u00a0\u2013 northern and eastern regions of Germany were predominantly Lutheran and Reformed, and Methodists were dismissed as fanatics. Methodism was also hindered by its unfamiliar church structure (Connectionalism), which was more centralised than the hierarchical polity in the Lutheran and Reformed churches. After World War I, the 1919 Weimar Constitution allowed Methodists to worship freely and many new chapels were established. In 1936, German Methodists elected their first bishop.\nHungary.\nThe first Methodist mission in Hungary was established in 1898 in B\u00e1cska, in a then mostly German-speaking town of Verb\u00e1sz (since 1918 part of the Serbian province of Vojvodina). In 1905 a Methodist mission was established also in Budapest. In 1974, a group later known as the Hungarian Evangelical Fellowship seceded from the Hungarian Methodist Church over the question of interference by the communist state.\nAs of 2017[ [update]], the United Methodist Church in Hungary, known locally as the Hungarian Methodist Church (), had 453 professing members in 30 congregations. It runs two student homes, two homes for the elderly, the Forray Methodist High School, the Wesley Scouts and the Methodist Library and Archives. The church has a special ministry among the Roma.\nThe seceding Hungarian Evangelical Fellowship () also remains Methodist in its organisation and theology. It has eight full congregations and several mission groups, and runs a range of charitable organisations: hostels and soup kitchens for the homeless, a non-denominational theological college, a dozen schools of various kinds, and four old people's homes.\nToday there are a dozen Methodist/Wesleyan churches and mission organisations in Hungary, but all Methodist churches lost official church status under new legislation passed in 2011, when the number of officially recognized churches in the country fell to 14. However, the list of recognized churches was lengthened to 32 at the end of February 2012. This gave recognition to the Hungarian Methodist Church and the Salvation Army, which was banned in Hungary in 1949 but had returned in 1990, but not to the Hungarian Evangelical Fellowship. The legislation has been strongly criticised by the Venice Commission of the Council of Europe as discriminatory.\nThe Hungarian Methodist Church, the Salvation Army and the Church of the Nazarene and other Wesleyan groups formed the Wesley Theological Alliance for theological and publishing purposes in 1998. Today the Alliance has 10 Wesleyan member churches and organisations. The Hungarian Evangelical Fellowship does not belong to it and has its own publishing arm.\nRussia.\nThe Methodist Church established several strongholds in Russia\u00a0\u2013 Saint Petersburg in the west and the Vladivostok region in the east, with large Methodist centres in Moscow and Ekaterinburg (former Sverdlovsk). Methodists began their work in the west among Swedish immigrants in 1881 and started their work in the east in 1910. On 26 June 2009, Methodists celebrated the 120th year since Methodism arrived in Czarist Russia by erecting a new Methodist centre in Saint Petersburg. A Methodist presence was continued in Russia for 14 years after the Russian Revolution of 1917 through the efforts of Deaconess Anna Eklund. In 1939, political antagonism stymied the work of the Church and Deaconess Anna Eklund was coerced to return to her native Finland.\nAfter 1989, the Soviet Union allowed greatly increased religious freedoms and this continued after the USSR's collapse in 1991. During the 1990s, Methodism experienced a powerful wave of revival in the nation. Three sites in particular carried the torch\u00a0\u2013 Samara, Moscow and Ekaterinburg. As of 2011[ [update]], the United Methodist Church in Eurasia comprised 116 congregations, each with a native pastor. There are currently 48 students enrolled in residential and extension degree programs at the United Methodist Seminary in Moscow.\nCaribbean.\nMethodism came to the Caribbean in 1760 when the planter, lawyer and Speaker of the Antiguan House of Assembly, Nathaniel Gilbert (c. 1719\u20131774), returned to his sugar estate home in Antigua. A Methodist revival spread in the British West Indies due to the work of British missionaries. Missionaries established societies which would later become the Methodist Church in the Caribbean and the Americas (MCCA). The MCCA has about 62,000 members in over 700 congregations, ministered by 168 pastors. There are smaller Methodist denominations that have seceded from the parent church.\nAntigua.\nThe story is often told that in 1755, Nathaniel Gilbert, while convalescing, read a treatise of John Wesley, \"An Appeal to Men of Reason and Religion\" sent to him by his brother Francis. As a result of having read this book Gilbert, two years later, journeyed to England with three of his slaves and there in a drawing room meeting arranged in Wandsworth on 15 January 1759, met the preacher John Wesley. He returned to the Caribbean that same year and on his subsequent return began to preach to his slaves in Antigua.\nWhen Gilbert died in 1774 his work in Antigua was continued by his brother Francis Gilbert to approximately 200 Methodists. However, within a year Francis took ill and returned to Britain and the work was carried on by Sophia Campbell (\"a Negress\") and Mary Alley (\"a Mulatto\"), two devoted women who kept the flock together with class and prayer meetings as well as they could.\nOn 2 April 1778, John Baxter, a local preacher and skilled shipwright from Chatham in Kent, England, landed at English Harbour in Antigua (now called Nelson's Dockyard) where he was offered a post at the naval dockyard. Baxter was a Methodist and had heard of the work of the Gilberts and their need for a new preacher. He began preaching and meeting with the Methodist leaders, and within a year the Methodist community had grown to 600 persons. By 1783, the first Methodist chapel was built in Antigua, with John Baxter as the local preacher, its wooden structure seating some 2,000 people.\nSt. Bart's.\nIn 1785, William Turton (1761\u20131817) a Barbadian son of a planter, met John Baxter in Antigua, and later, as layman, assisted in the Methodist work in the Swedish colony of St. Bartholomew from 1796.\nIn 1786, the missionary endeavour in the Caribbean was officially recognized by the Methodist Conference in England, and that same year Thomas Coke, having been made Superintendent of the church two years previously in America by Wesley, was travelling to Nova Scotia, but weather forced his ship to Antigua.\nJamaica.\nIn 1818 Edward Fraser (1798 \u2013 aft. 1850), a privileged Barbadian slave, moved to Bermuda and subsequently met the new minister James Dunbar. The Nova Scotia Methodist Minister noted young Fraser's sincerity and commitment to his congregation and encouraged him by appointing him as assistant. By 1827 Fraser assisted in building a new chapel. He was later freed and admitted to the Methodist Ministry to serve in Antigua and Jamaica.\nBarbados.\nFollowing William J. Shrewsbury's preaching in the 1820s, Sarah Ann Gill (1779\u20131866), a free-born black woman, used civil disobedience in an attempt to thwart magistrate rulings that prevented parishioners holding prayer meetings. In hopes of building a new chapel, she paid an extraordinary \u00a31,700-0s\u20130d and ended up having militia appointed by the Governor to protect her home from demolition.\nIn 1884 an attempt was made at autonomy with the formation of two West Indian Conferences, however by 1903 the venture had failed. It was not until the 1960s that another attempt was made at autonomy. This second attempt resulted in the emergence of the Methodist Church in the Caribbean and the Americas in May 1967.\nFrancis Godson (1864\u20131953), a Methodist minister, who having served briefly in several of the Caribbean islands, eventually immersed himself in helping those in hardship of the First World War in Barbados. He was later appointed to the Legislative Council of Barbados, and fought for the rights of pensioners. He was later followed by renowned Barbadian Augustus Rawle Parkinson (1864\u20131932), who also was the first principal of the Wesley Hall School, Bridgetown in Barbados (which celebrated its 125th anniversary in September 2009).\nIn more recent times in Barbados, Victor Alphonso Cooke (born 1930) and Lawrence Vernon Harcourt Lewis (born 1932) are strong influences on the Methodist Church on the island. Their contemporary and late member of the Dalkeith Methodist Church, was the former secretary of the University of the West Indies, consultant of the \"Canadian Training Aid Programme\" and a man of letters \u2013 Francis Woodbine Blackman (1922\u20132010). It was his research and published works that enlightened much of this information on Caribbean Methodism.\nAfrica.\nMost Methodist denominations in Africa follow the British Methodist tradition and see the Methodist Church of Great Britain as their mother church. Originally modelled on the British structure, since independence most of these churches have adopted an episcopal model of church governance.\nNigeria.\nThe Nigerian Methodist Church is one of the largest Methodist denominations in the world and one of the largest Christian churches in Nigeria, with around two million members in 2000 congregations. It has seen exponential growth since the turn of the millennium.\nChristianity was established in Nigeria with the arrival in 1842 of a Wesleyan Methodist missionary. He had come in response to the request for missionaries by the ex-slaves who returned to Nigeria from Sierra Leone. From the mission stations established in Badagry and Abeokuta, the Methodist church spread to various parts of the country west of the River Niger and part of the north. In 1893 missionaries of the Primitive Methodist Church arrived from Fernando Po, an island off the southern coast of Nigeria. From there the Methodist Church spread to other parts of the country, east of the River Niger and also to parts of the north. The church west of the River Niger and part of the north was known as the Western Nigeria District and east of the Niger and another part of the north as the Eastern Nigeria District. Both existed independently of each other until 1962 when they constituted the Conference of Methodist Church Nigeria. The conference is composed of seven districts. The church has continued to spread into new areas and has established a department for evangelism and appointed a director of evangelism. An episcopal system of church governance adopted in 1976 was not fully accepted by all sections of the church until the two sides came together and resolved to end the disagreement. A new constitution was ratified in 1990. The system is still episcopal but the points which caused discontent were amended to be acceptable to both sides. Today, the Nigerian Methodist Church has a prelate, eight archbishops and 44 bishops.\nGhana.\nMethodist Church Ghana is one of the largest Methodist denominations, with around 800,000 members in 2,905 congregations, ministered by 700 pastors. It has fraternal links with the British Methodist and United Methodist churches worldwide.\nMethodism in Ghana came into existence as a result of the missionary activities of the Wesleyan Methodist Church, inaugurated with the arrival of Joseph Rhodes Dunwell to the Gold Coast in 1835. Like the mother church, the Methodist Church in Ghana was established by people of Protestant background. Roman Catholic and Anglican missionaries came to the Gold Coast from the 15th century. A school was established in Cape Coast by the Anglicans during the time of Philip Quaque, a Ghanaian priest. Those who came out of this school had Bible copies and study supplied by the Society for the Propagation of Christian Knowledge. A member of the resulting Bible study groups, William De-Graft, requested Bibles through Captain Potter of the ship \"Congo\". Not only were Bibles sent, but also a Methodist missionary. In the first eight years of the Church's life, 11 out of 21 missionaries who worked in the Gold Coast died. Thomas Birch Freeman, who arrived at the Gold Coast in 1838 was a pioneer of missionary expansion. Between 1838 and 1857 he carried Methodism from the coastal areas to Kumasi in the Asante hinterland of the Gold Coast. He also established Methodist Societies in Badagry and AbeoKuta in Nigeria with the assistance of William De-Graft.\nBy 1854, the church was organized into circuits constituting a district with T. B. Freeman as chairman. Freeman was replaced in 1856 by William West. The district was divided and extended to include areas in the then Gold Coast and Nigeria by the synod in 1878, a move confirmed at the British Conference. The districts were Gold Coast District, with T. R. Picot as chairman and Yoruba and Popo District, with John Milum as chairman. Methodist evangelisation of northern Gold Coast began in 1910. After a long period of conflict with the colonial government, missionary work was established in 1955. Paul Adu was the first indigenous missionary to northern Gold Coast.\nIn July 1961, the Methodist Church in Ghana became autonomous, and was called the Methodist Church Ghana, based on a deed of foundation, part of the church's \"Constitution and Standing Orders\".\nSouthern Africa.\nThe Methodist Church operates across South Africa, Namibia, Botswana, Lesotho and Swaziland, with a limited presence in Zimbabwe and Mozambique. It is a member church of the World Methodist Council.\nMethodism in Southern Africa began as a result of lay Christian work by an Irish soldier of the English Regiment, John Irwin, who was stationed at the Cape and began to hold prayer meetings as early as 1795. The first Methodist lay preacher at the Cape, George Middlemiss, was a soldier of the 72nd Regiment of the British Army stationed at the Cape in 1805. This foundation paved the way for missionary work by Methodist missionary societies from Great Britain, many of whom sent missionaries with the 1820 English settlers to the Western and Eastern Cape. Among the most notable of the early missionaries were Barnabas Shaw and William Shaw. The largest group was the Wesleyan Methodist Church, but there were a number of others that joined to form the Methodist Church of South Africa, later known as the Methodist Church of Southern Africa.\nThe Methodist Church of Southern Africa is the largest mainline Protestant denomination in South Africa\u00a0\u2013 7.3% of the South African population recorded their religious affiliation as 'Methodist' in the last national census.\nAsia.\nChina.\nMethodism was brought to China in the autumn of 1847 by the Methodist Episcopal Church. The first missionaries sent out were Judson Dwight Collins and Moses Clark White, who sailed from Boston 15 April 1847, and reached Fuzhou 6 September. They were followed by Henry Hickok and Robert Samuel Maclay, who arrived 15 April 1848. In 1857, the first convert was baptised in connection with its labours. In August 1856, a brick built church was dedicated named the \"Church of the True God\" (), the first substantial church building erected in Fuzhou by Protestant Missions. In the winter of the same year another brick built church, located on the hill in the suburbs on the south bank of the Min, was finished and dedicated, called the \"Church of Heavenly Peace\". In 1862, the number of members was 87. The Fuzhou Conference was organized by Isaac W. Wiley on 6 December 1867, by which time the number of members and probationers had reached 2,011.\nHok Chau (; also known as Lai-Tong Chau, ) was the first ordained Chinese minister of the South China District of the Methodist Church (incumbent 1877\u20131916). Benjamin Hobson, a medical missionary sent by the London Missionary Society in 1839, set up Wai Ai Clinic (). Liang Fa, Hok Chau and others worked there. Liang baptized Chau in 1852. The Methodist Church based in Britain sent missionary George Piercy to China. In 1851, Piercy went to Guangzhou (Canton), where he worked in a trading company. In 1853, he started a church in Guangzhou. In 1877, Chau was ordained by the Methodist Church, where he pastored for 39 years.\nIn 1867, the mission sent out the first missionaries to Central China, who began work at Jiujiang. In 1869, missionaries were also sent to the capital city Beijing, where they laid the foundations of the work of the North China Mission. In November 1880, the West China Mission was established in Sichuan Province. In 1896, the work in the Hinghua prefecture (modern-day Putian) and surrounding regions was also organized as a Mission Conference.\nIn 1947, the Methodist Church in the Republic of China celebrated its centenary. In 1949, however, the Methodist Church moved to Taiwan with the Kuomintang government.\nIndia.\nMethodism came to India twice, in 1817 and in 1856, according to P. Dayanandan who has extensively researched the subject. Thomas Coke and six other missionaries set sail for India on New Year's Day in 1814. Coke, then 66, died en route. Rev. James Lynch was the one who finally arrived in Madras in 1817 at a place called Black Town (Broadway), later known as George Town. Lynch conducted the first Methodist missionary service on 2 March 1817, in a stable.\nThe first Methodist church was dedicated in 1819 at Royapettah. A chapel at Broadway (Black Town) was later built and dedicated on 25 April 1822. This church was rebuilt in 1844 since the earlier structure was collapsing. A chapel at St. Thomas Mount was built on 1829. At this time there were about 100 Methodist members in all of Madras, and they were either Europeans or Eurasians (European and Indian descent). Among names associated with the founding period of Methodism in India are Elijah Hoole and Thomas Cryer, who came as missionaries to Madras.\nIn 1857, the Methodist Episcopal Church started its work in India, and with prominent evangelists like William Taylor of the Emmanuel Methodist Church, Vepery, born in 1874. Taylor and the evangelist James Mills Thoburn established the Thoburn Memorial Church in Calcutta in 1873 and the Calcutta Boys' School in 1877.\nIn 1947, the Wesleyan Methodist Church in India merged with Presbyterians, Anglicans and other Protestant churches to form the Church of South India while the American Methodist Church remained affiliated as the Methodist Church in Southern Asia (MCSA) to the mother church in the USA \u2013 the United Methodist Church until 1981, when by an enabling act, the Methodist Church in India (MCI) became an autonomous church in India. Today, the Methodist Church in India is governed by the General Conference of the Methodist Church of India headed by six bishops, with headquarters in Mumbai, India.\nMalaysia and Singapore.\nMissionaries from Britain, North America, and Australia founded Methodist churches in many Commonwealth countries. These are now independent from their former \"mother\" churches. In addition to the churches, these missionaries often also founded schools to serve the local community. A good example of such schools are the Methodist Boys' School in Kuala Lumpur, Methodist Girls' School and Methodist Boys' School in George Town, and Anglo-Chinese School, Methodist Girls' School, Paya Lebar Methodist Girls School and Fairfield Methodist Schools in Singapore.\nPhilippines.\nMethodism in the Philippines began shortly after the United States acquired the Philippines in 1898 as a result the Spanish\u2013American War. On 21 June 1898, after the Battle of Manila Bay but before the Treaty of Paris, executives of the American Mission Society of the Methodist Episcopal Church expressed their desire to join other Protestant denominations in starting mission work in the islands and to enter into a Comity Agreement that would facilitate the establishment of such missions. The first Protestant worship service was conducted on 28 August 1898 by an American military chaplain named George C. Stull. Stull was an ordained Methodist minister from the Montana Annual Conference of The Methodist Episcopal Church (later part of the United Methodist Church after 1968).\nMethodist and Wesleyan traditions in the Philippines are shared by three of the largest mainline Protestant churches in the country: The United Methodist Church in the Philippines, \"Iglesia Evangelica Metodista En Las Islas Filipinas\" (\"Evangelical Methodist Church in the Philippine Islands\", abbreviated IEMELIF), and The United Church of Christ in the Philippines. There are also evangelical Protestant churches in the country of the Methodist tradition like the Wesleyan Church of the Philippines, the Free Methodist Church of the Philippines, and the Church of the Nazarene. There are also the IEMELIF Reform Movement (IRM), The Wesleyan (Pilgrim Holiness) Church of the Philippines, the Philippine Bible Methodist Church, Incorporated, the Pentecostal Free Methodist Church, Incorporated, the Fundamental Christian Methodist Church, The Reformed Methodist Church, Incorporated, The Methodist Church of the Living Bread, Incorporated, and the Wesley Evangelical Methodist Church &amp; Mission, Incorporated.\nThere are three episcopal areas of the United Methodist Church in the Philippines: the Baguio Episcopal Area, Davao Episcopal Area and Manila Episcopal Area.\nA call for autonomy from groups within the United Methodist Church in the Philippines was discussed at several conferences led mostly by episcopal candidates. This led to the establishment of the \"Ang Iglesia Metodista sa Pilipinas\" (\"The Methodist Church in the Philippines\") in 2010, led by Bishop Lito C. Tangonan, George Buenaventura, Chita Milan and Joe Frank E. Zu\u00f1iga. The group finally declared full autonomy and legal incorporation with the Securities and Exchange Commission was approved on 7 December 2011 with papers held by present procurators. It now has 126 local churches in Metro Manila, Palawan, Bataan, Zambales, Pangasinan, Bulacan, Aurora, Nueva Ecija, as well as parts of Pampanga and Cavite. Tangonan was consecrated as the denomination's first Presiding Bishop on 17 March 2012.\nSouth Korea.\nThe Korean Methodist Church (KMC) is one of the largest churches in South Korea with around 1.5\u00a0million members and 8,306 ministers. Methodism in Korea grew out of British and American mission work which began in the late 19th century. The first missionary was Robert Samuel Maclay of the Methodist Episcopal Church, who sailed from Japan in 1884 and was given the authority of medical and schooling permission from emperor Gojong. The Korean church became fully autonomous in 1930, retaining affiliation with Methodist churches in America and later the United Methodist Church. The church experienced rapid growth in membership throughout most of the 20th century\u00a0\u2013 in spite of the Korean War\u00a0\u2013 before stabilizing in the 1990s. The KMC is a member of the World Methodist Council and hosted the first Asia Methodist Convention in 2001.\nThere are many Korean-language Methodist churches in North America catering to Korean-speaking immigrants.\nTaiwan.\nIn 1947, the Methodist Church in the Republic of China celebrated its centenary. In 1949, however, the Methodist Church moved to Taiwan with the Kuomintang government. On 21 June 1953, Taipei Methodist Church was erected, then local churches and chapels with a baptized membership numbering over 2,500. Various types of educational, medical and social services are provided (including Tunghai University). In 1972, the Methodist Church in the Republic of China became autonomous, and the first bishop was installed in 1986.\nAmericas.\nBrazil.\nThe Methodist Church in Brazil was founded by American missionaries in 1867 after an initial unsuccessful founding in 1835. It has grown steadily since, becoming autonomous in 1930. In the 1970s it ordained its first woman minister. In 1975 it also founded the first Methodist university in Latin America, the Methodist University of Piracicaba. As of 2011[ [update]], the Brazilian Methodist Church is divided into eight annual conferences with 162,000 members.\nCanada.\nThe father of Methodism in Canada was Rev. Coughlan, who arrived in Newfoundland in 1763, where he opened a school and travelled widely.\nThe second was William Black (1760\u20131834) who began preaching in settlements along the Petitcodiac River of New Brunswick in 1781. A few years afterwards, Methodist Episcopal circuit riders from the U.S. state of New York began to arrive in Canada West at Niagara, and the north shore of Lake Erie in 1786, and at the Kingston region on the northeast shore of Lake Ontario in the early 1790s. At the time the region was part of British North America and became part of Upper Canada after the Constitutional Act of 1791. Upper and Lower Canada were both parts of the New York Episcopal Methodist Conference until 1810 when they were transferred to the newly formed Genesee Conference. Reverend Major George Neal began to preach in Niagara in October 1786 and was ordained in 1810 by Bishop Philip Asbury, at the Lyons, New York Methodist Conference. He was Canada's first saddlebag preacher and travelled from Lake Ontario to Detroit for 50 years preaching the gospel.\nThe spread of Methodism in the Canadas was seriously disrupted by the War of 1812 but quickly gained lost ground after the Treaty of Ghent was signed in 1815. In 1817, the British Wesleyans arrived in the Canadas from the Maritimes but by 1820 had agreed, with the Episcopal Methodists, to confine their work to Lower Canada (present-day Quebec) while the latter would confine themselves to Upper Canada (present-day Ontario). In the summer of 1818, the first place of public worship was erected for the Wesleyan Methodists in York, later Toronto. The chapel for the First Methodist Church was built on the corner of King Street and Jordan Street, the entire cost of the building was $250, an amount that took the congregation three years to raise. In 1828, Upper Canadian Methodists were permitted by the General Conference in the United States to form an independent Canadian Conference and, in 1833, the Canadian Conference merged with the British Wesleyans to form the Wesleyan Methodist Church in Canada. In 1884, most Canadian Methodists were brought under the umbrella of the Methodist Church, Canada.\nIn the fall of 1873 and winter of 1874, General Superintendent B. T. Roberts of the Free Methodist Church visited Scarborough on the invitation of Robert Loveless, a Primitive Methodist layman. Later, in 1876 while presiding over the very young North Michigan Conference, he read conference appointments that assigned C.H. Sage his field of labour\u2014Canada. This led to the expansion of the Free Methodist Church in Canada.\nIn 1925, the Methodist Church, Canada and most Presbyterian congregations (then by far the largest Protestant communion in Canada), most Congregational Union of Ontario and Quebec congregations, Union Churches in Western Canada, and the American Presbyterian Church in Montreal merged to form the United Church of Canada. In 1968, the Evangelical United Brethren Church's Canadian congregations joined the United Church of Canada.\nThe Free Methodist Church in Canada is the largest Methodist denomination in the country at present. A smaller denomination, the British Methodist Episcopal Church, remains active today as well.\nMexico.\nThe Methodist Church came to Mexico in 1872, with the arrival of two Methodist commissioners from the United States to observe the possibilities of evangelistic work in M\u00e9xico. In December 1872, Bishop Gilbert Haven arrived in Mexico City. He was ordered by M. D. William Butler to go to M\u00e9xico. Bishop John C. Keener arrived from the Methodist Episcopal Church, South in January 1873.\nIn 1874, M. D. William Butler established the first Protestant Methodist school of M\u00e9xico, in Puebla. The school was founded under the name \"Instituto Metodista Mexicano\". Today the school is called \"Instituto Mexicano Madero\". It is still a Methodist school, and it is one of the most elite, selective, expensive and prestigious private schools in the country, with two campuses in Puebla State, and one in Oaxaca. A few years later the principal of the school created a Methodist university.\nOn 18 January 1885, the first Annual Conference of the United Episcopal Church of M\u00e9xico was established.\nUnited States.\nWesley came to believe that the New Testament evidence did not leave the power of ordination to the priesthood in the hands of bishops but that other priests could ordain. In 1784, he ordained preachers for Scotland, England, and America, with power to administer the sacraments (this was a major reason for Methodism's final split from the Church of England after Wesley's death). At that time, Wesley sent Thomas Coke to America. Francis Asbury founded the Methodist Episcopal Church at the Baltimore Christmas Conference in 1784; Coke (already ordained in the Church of England) ordained Asbury deacon, elder, and bishop each on three successive days. Circuit riders, many of whom were laymen, travelled by horseback to preach the gospel and establish churches in many places. One of the most famous circuit riders was Robert Strawbridge who lived in the vicinity of Carroll County, Maryland, soon after arriving in the Colonies around 1760.\nThe First Great Awakening was a religious movement in the 1730s and 1740s, beginning in New Jersey, then spreading to New England, and eventually south into Virginia and North Carolina. George Whitefield played a major role, traveling across the colonies and preaching in a dramatic and emotional style, accepting everyone as his audience.\nThe new style of sermons and the way people practiced their faith breathed new life into religion in America. People became passionately and emotionally involved in their religion, rather than passively listening to intellectual discourse in a detached manner. People began to study the Bible at home. The effect was akin to the individualistic trends present in Europe during the Protestant Reformation.\nThe Second Great Awakening was a nationwide wave of revivals, from 1790 to 1840. In New England, the renewed interest in religion inspired a wave of social activism among Yankees; Methodism grew and established several colleges, notably Boston University. In the \"burned over district\" of western New York, the spirit of revival burned brightly. Methodism saw the emergence of a Holiness movement. In the west, especially at Cane Ridge, Kentucky, and in Tennessee, the revival strengthened the Methodists and the Baptists. Methodism grew rapidly in the Second Great Awakening, becoming the nation's largest denomination by 1820. From 58,000 members in 1790, it reached 258,000 in 1820 and 1,661,000 in 1860, growing by a factor of 28.6 in 70 years, while the total American population grew by a factor of eight. Other denominations also used revivals, but the Methodists grew fastest of all because \"they combined popular appeal with efficient organization under the command of missionary bishops.\" Methodism attracted German immigrants, and the first German Methodist Church was erected in Cincinnati, Ohio.\nDisputes over slavery placed the church in difficulty in the first half of the 19th century, with the northern church leaders fearful of a split with the South, and reluctant to take a stand. The Wesleyan Methodist Connexion (later renamed the Wesleyan Methodist Church) and the Free Methodist Church were formed by staunch abolitionists, and the Free Methodists were especially active in the Underground Railroad, which helped to free slaves. In 1962, the Evangelical Wesleyan Church separated from the Free Methodist Church. In 1968 the Wesleyan Methodist Church and Pilgrim Holiness Church merged to form the Wesleyan Church; a significant amount dissented from this decision resulting in the independence of the Allegheny Wesleyan Methodist Connection and the formation of the Bible Methodist Connection of Churches, both of which fall within the conservative holiness movement.\nIn a much larger split, in 1845 at Louisville, Kentucky, the churches of the slaveholding states left the Methodist Episcopal Church and formed the Methodist Episcopal Church, South. The northern and southern branches were reunited in 1939, when slavery was no longer an issue. In this merger also joined the Methodist Protestant Church. Some southerners, more conservative in theology, opposed the merger, and formed the Southern Methodist Church in 1940.\nThe Third Great Awakening from 1858 to 1908 saw enormous growth in Methodist membership, and a proliferation of institutions such as colleges (e.g., Morningside College). Methodists were often involved in the \"Missionary Awakening\" and the Social Gospel Movement. The awakening in so many cities in 1858 started the movement, but in the North it was interrupted by the Civil War. In the South, on the other hand, the Civil War stimulated revivals, especially in Lee's army.\nIn 1914\u20131917 many Methodist ministers made strong pleas for world peace. President Woodrow Wilson (a Presbyterian), promised \"a war to end all wars\", using language of a future peace that had been a watchword for the postmillennial movement. In the 1930s many Methodists favored isolationist policies. Thus in 1936, Methodist Bishop James Baker, of the San Francisco Conference, released a poll of ministers showing 56% opposed warfare. However, the Methodist Federation called for a boycott of Japan, which had invaded China and was disrupting missionary activity there. In Chicago, 62 local African Methodist Episcopal churches voted their support for the Roosevelt administration's policy, while opposing any plan to send American troops overseas to fight. When war came in 1941, the vast majority of Methodists supported the national war effort, but there were also a few (673) conscientious objectors.\nThe United Methodist Church (UMC) was formed in 1968 as a result of a merger between the Evangelical United Brethren Church (EUB) and the Methodist Church. The former church had resulted from mergers of several groups of German Methodist heritage; however, there was no longer any need or desire to worship in the German language. The latter church was a result of union between the Methodist Protestant Church and the northern and southern factions of the Methodist Episcopal Church. The merged church had approximately nine million members as of the late 1990s. While United Methodist Church in America membership has been declining, associated groups in developing countries are growing rapidly. Prior to the merger that led to the formation of the United Methodist Church, the Evangelical Methodist Church entered into a schism with the Methodist Church, citing modernism in its parent body as the reason for the departure in 1946.\nAmerican Methodist churches are generally organized on a \"connectional\" model, related, but not identical to that used in Britain. Pastors are assigned to congregations by bishops, distinguishing it from presbyterian government. Methodist denominations typically give lay members representation at regional and national Conferences at which the business of the church is conducted, making it different from most episcopal government. This connectional organizational model differs further from the congregational model, for example of Baptist, and Congregationalist Churches, among others.\nIn addition to the United Methodist Church, there are over 40 other denominations that descend from John Wesley's Methodist movement. Some, such as the African Methodist Episcopal Church, the Free Methodists and the Wesleyan Church (formerly Wesleyan Methodist), are explicitly Methodist. There are also independent Methodist churches, many of which are affiliated with the Association of Independent Methodists. The Salvation Army and the Church of the Nazarene adhere to Methodist theology.\nThe Holiness Revival was primarily among people of Methodist persuasion, who felt that the church had once again become apathetic, losing the Wesleyan zeal. Some important events of this revival were the writings of Phoebe Palmer during the mid-1800s, the establishment of the first of many holiness camp meetings at Vineland, New Jersey, in 1867, and the founding of Asbury College (1890), and other similar institutions in the U.S. around the turn of the 20th century.\nIn 2020, United Methodists announced a plan to split the denomination over the issue of same-sex marriage, which resulted in traditionalist clergy, laity and theologians forming the Global Methodist Church, an evangelical Methodist denomination that came into being on 1 May 2022.\nOceania.\nMethodism is particularly widespread in some Pacific Island nations, such as Fiji, Samoa and Tonga.\nAustralia.\nIn the 19th century there were annual conferences in each Australasian colony (including New Zealand). Various branches of Methodism in Australia merged during the 20 years from 1881. The Methodist Church of Australasia was formed on 1 January 1902 when five Methodist denominations in Australia \u2013 the Wesleyan Methodist Church, the Primitive Methodists, the Bible Christian Church, the United Methodist Free and the Methodist New Connexion Churches merged. In polity it largely followed the Wesleyan Methodist Church.\nIn 1945 Kingsley Ridgway offered himself as a Melbourne-based \"field representative\" for a possible Australian branch of the Wesleyan Methodist Church of America, after meeting an American serviceman who was a member of that denomination. The Wesleyan Methodist Church of Australia was founded on his work.\nThe Methodist Church of Australasia merged with the majority of the Presbyterian Church of Australia and the Congregational Union of Australia in 1977, becoming the Uniting Church. The Wesleyan Methodist Church of Australia and some independent congregations chose not to join the union.\nWesley Mission in Pitt Street, Sydney, the largest parish in the Uniting Church, remains strongly in the Wesleyan tradition. There are many local churches named after John Wesley.\nFrom the mid-1980s a number of independent Methodist churches were founded by missionaries and other members from the Methodist Churches of Malaysia and Singapore. Some of these came together to form what is now known as the Chinese Methodist Church in Australia in 1993, and it held its first full Annual Conference in 2002. Since the 2000s many independent Methodist churches have also been established or grown by Tongan immigrants.\nFiji.\nAs a result of the early efforts of missionaries, most of the natives of the Fiji Islands were converted to Methodism in the 1840s and 1850s. According to the 2007 census, 34.6% of the population (including almost two-thirds of ethnic Fijians), are adherents of Methodism, making Fiji one of the most Methodist nations. The Methodist Church of Fiji and Rotuma, the largest religious denomination, is an important social force along with the traditional chiefly system. In the past, the church once called for a theocracy and fueled anti-Hindu sentiment.\nNew Zealand.\nIn June 1823 Wesleydale, the first Wesleyan Methodist mission in New Zealand, was established at Kaeo. The Methodist Church of New Zealand, which is directly descended from the 19th-century missionaries, was the fourth-most common Christian denomination recorded in the 2018 New Zealand census.\nSince the early 1990s, missionaries and other Methodists from Malaysia and Singapore established Methodist churches around major urban areas in New Zealand. These congregations came together to form the Chinese Methodist Church in New Zealand (CMCNZ) in 2003.{\nSamoan Islands.\nThe Methodist Church is the third largest denomination throughout the Samoan Islands, in both Samoa and American Samoa. In 1868, Piula Theological College was established in Lufilufi on the north coast of Upolu island in Samoa and serves as the main headquarters of the Methodist church in the country. The college includes the historic Piula Monastery as well as Piula Cave Pool, a natural spring situated beneath the church by the sea.\nTonga.\nMethodism had a particular resonance with the inhabitants of Tonga. In the 1830s Wesleyan missionaries converted paramount chief Taufa'ahau Tupou who in turn converted fellow islanders. Today, Methodism is represented on the islands by the Free Church of Tonga and the Free Wesleyan Church, which is the largest church in Tonga. As of 2011[ [update]] 48% of Tongans adhered to Methodist churches. The royal family of the country are prominent members of the Free Wesleyan Church, and the late king was a lay preacher. Tongan Methodist minister Sione 'Amanaki Havea developed coconut theology, which tailors theology to a Pacific Islands context.\nEcumenical relations.\nMany Methodists have been involved in the ecumenical movement, which has sought to unite the fractured denominations of Christianity. Because Methodism grew out of the Church of England, a denomination from which neither of the Wesley brothers seceded, some Methodist scholars and historians, such as Rupert E. Davies, have regarded their 'movement' more as a preaching order within wider Christian life than as a church, comparing them with the Franciscans, who formed a religious order within the medieval European church and not a separate denomination. Certainly, Methodists have been deeply involved in early examples of church union, especially the United Church of Canada and the Church of South India.\nA disproportionate number of Methodists take part in inter-faith dialogue. For example, Wesley Ariarajah, a long-serving director of the World Council of Churches' sub-unit on \"Dialogue with People of Living Faiths and Ideologies\" is a Methodist.\nIn October 1999, an executive committee of the World Methodist Council resolved to explore the possibility of its member churches becoming associated with the doctrinal agreement which had been reached by the Catholic Church and Lutheran World Federation (LWF). In May 2006, the International Methodist\u2013Catholic Dialogue Commission completed its most recent report, entitled \"The Grace Given You in Christ: Catholics and Methodists Reflect Further on the Church\", and submitted the text to Methodist and Catholic authorities. In July of the same year, in Seoul, South Korea, the Member Churches of the World Methodist Council (WMC) voted to approve and sign a \"Methodist Statement of Association\" with the Joint Declaration on the Doctrine of Justification, the agreement which was reached and officially accepted in 1999 by the Catholic Church and the Lutheran World Federation and which proclaimed that:\n\"Together we confess: By grace alone, in faith in Christ's saving work and not because of any merit on our part, we are accepted by God and receive the Holy Spirit, who renews our hearts while equipping and calling us to good works... as sinners our new life is solely due to the forgiving and renewing mercy that God imparts as a gift and that we receive in faith, and never can merit in any way,\" affirming \"fundamental doctrinal agreement\" concerning justification between the Catholic Church, the LWF, and the World Methodist Council.\nThis is not to say there is perfect agreement between the three denominational traditions; while Catholics and Methodists believe that salvation involves cooperation between God and man, Lutherans believe that God brings about the salvation of individuals without any cooperation on their part.\nCommenting on the ongoing dialogues with Catholic Church leaders, Ken Howcroft, Methodist minister and the Ecumenical Officer for the Methodist Church of Great Britain, noted that \"these conversations have been immensely fruitful.\" Methodists are increasingly recognizing that the 15 centuries prior to the Reformation constitute a shared history with Catholics, and are gaining new appreciation for neglected aspects of the Catholic tradition. There are, however, important unresolved doctrinal differences separating Roman Catholicism and Methodism, which include \"the nature and validity of the ministry of those who preside at the Eucharist [Holy Communion], the precise meaning of the Eucharist as the sacramental 'memorial' of Christ's saving death and resurrection, the particular way in which Christ is present in Holy Communion, and the link between eucharistic communion and ecclesial communion\".\nIn the 1960s, the Methodist Church of Great Britain made ecumenical overtures to the Church of England, aimed at denominational union. Formally, these failed when they were rejected by the Church of England's General Synod in 1972; conversations and co-operation continued, however, leading in 2003 to the signing of a covenant between the two churches. From the 1970s onward, the Methodist Church also started several Local Ecumenical Projects (LEPs, later renamed Local Ecumenical Partnerships) with local neighbouring denominations, which involved sharing churches, schools and in some cases ministers. In many towns and villages Methodists are involved in LEPs which are sometimes with Anglican or Baptist churches, but most commonly Methodist and United Reformed Church. In terms of belief, practice and churchmanship, many Methodists see themselves as closer to the United Reformed Church (another Nonconformist church) than to the Church of England. In the 1990s and early 21st century, the British Methodist Church was involved in the Scottish Church Initiative for Union, seeking greater unity with the established and Presbyterian Church of Scotland, the Scottish Episcopal Church and the United Reformed Church in Scotland.\nThe Methodist Church of Great Britain is a member of several ecumenical organisations, including the World Council of Churches, the Conference of European Churches, the Community of Protestant Churches in Europe, Churches Together in Britain and Ireland, Churches Together in England, Action of Churches Together in Scotland and Cyt\u00fbn (Wales).\nMethodist denominations in the United States have also strengthened ties with other Christian traditions. In April 2005, bishops in the United Methodist Church approved \"A Proposal for Interim Eucharistic Sharing\". This document was the first step toward full communion with the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America (ELCA). The ELCA approved this same document in August 2005. At the 2008 General Conference, the United Methodist Church approved full communion with the ELCA. The UMC is also in dialogue with the Episcopal Church for full communion. The UMC and ELC worked together on a document called \"Confessing Our Faith Together\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20121", "revid": "25859633", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20121", "title": "Martin Luther King Jr", "text": ""}
{"id": "20122", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20122", "title": "MIDI-2", "text": ""}
{"id": "20124", "revid": "2952402", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20124", "title": "Mancala", "text": "Type of count-and-capture game\nMancala ( \"manqalah\") is a family of two-player turn-based strategy board games played with small stones, beans, marbles or seeds and rows of holes or pits in the earth, a board or other playing surface. The objective is usually to capture all or some set of the opponent's pieces.\nVersions of the game date back past the 3rd century and evidence suggests such games existed in Ancient Egypt. It is among the oldest known family of games to still be widely played today.\nHistory.\nAccording to contemporary archaeology and game studies scholars, the oldest mancala-type games are about 2,000\u20132,500 years old. \nClaims that the findings at 'Ain Ghazal, Jordan in the floor of a Neolithic dwelling as early as ~5,870 BCE and the initial interpretation by Gary O. Rollefson are unsustainable and have been widely disputed. More recent and undisputed claims concern artifacts from the city of Gedera in an excavated Roman bathhouse where pottery boards and rock cuts that were unearthed dating back to between the 2nd and 3rd century AD. Among other early evidence of the game are fragments of a pottery board and several rock cuts found in Aksumite areas in Matara (in Eritrea) and Yeha (in Ethiopia), which are dated by archaeologists to between the 6th and 7th centuries AD.\nThe oldest mention of the game is in the \"Kitab al-Aghani\" (\"Book of Songs\") of the 10th-century, attributed to Abu al-Faraj al-Isfahani. The game may have been mentioned by Giyorgis of Segla in his 14th century Ge\u02bdez text \"Mysteries of Heaven and Earth\", where he refers to a game called qarqis, a term used in Ge\u02bdez to refer to both Gebet'a (mancala) and \"Sant'araz\" (modern \"sent'erazh\", Ethiopian chess). Evidence of the game has also been uncovered in Kenya.\nThe games have also existed in Eastern Europe. In Estonia, it was once very popular (see \"Bohnenspiel\"), and likewise in Bosnia (where it is called Ban-Ban and still played today), Serbia, and Greece (\"Mandoli\", Cyclades). Two mancala tables from the early 18th century are to be found in Weikersheim Castle in southern Germany. In western Europe, it never caught on but was documented by Oxford University orientalist Thomas Hyde.\nIn the United States, a traditional mancala game called Warra was still played in Louisiana in the early 20th century, and a commercial version called Kalah became popular in the 1940s. In Cape Verde, mancala is known as \"ouril\". It is played on the Islands and was brought to the United States by Cape Verdean immigrants. It is played to this day in Cape Verdean communities in New England.\nHistorians may have found evidence of mancala in slave communities of the Americas. The game was brought to the Americas by enslaved Africans during the trans-Atlantic slave trade. The game was played by enslaved Africans to foster community and develop social skills. Archeologists may have found evidence of the game mancala played in Nashville, Tennessee at the Hermitage Plantation.\nRecent studies of mancala rules have given insight into the distribution of mancala. This distribution has been linked to migration routes, which may go back several hundred years.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"mancala\" () is a tool noun derived from an Arabic root \"naqala\" () meaning \"to move\".\nGeneral gameplay.\nMost mancala games have a common gameplay. Players begin by placing a certain number of seeds, prescribed for the particular game, in each of the pits on the game board. A player may count their stones to plot the game. A turn consists of removing all seeds from a pit, \"sowing\" the seeds (placing one in each of the following pits in sequence), and capturing based on the state of the board. The game's object is to plant the most seeds in the bank. This leads to the English phrase \"count and capture\" sometimes used to describe the gameplay. Although the details differ greatly, this general sequence applies to all games.\nIf playing in capture mode, once a player ends their turn in an empty pit on their own side, they capture the opponent's pieces directly across. Once captured, the player gets to put the seeds in their own bank. After capturing, the opponent forfeits a turn.\nEquipment.\nEquipment is typically a board, constructed of various materials, with a series of holes arranged in rows, usually two or four. The materials include clay and other shapeable materials. Some games are more often played with holes dug in the earth, or carved in stone. The holes may be referred to as \"depressions\", \"pits\", or \"houses\". Sometimes, large holes on the ends of the board called \"stores\", are used for holding the pieces.\nPlaying pieces are seeds, beans, stones, cowry shells, half-marbles or other small undifferentiated counters that are placed in and transferred about the holes during play.\nBoard configurations vary among different games but also within variations of a given game; for example Endodoi is played on boards from 2\u00d76 to 2\u00d710. The largest are Tchouba (Mozambique) with a board of 160 (4\u00d740) holes requiring 320 seeds, and En Geh\u00e9 (Tanzania), played on longer rows with up to 50 pits (a total of 2\u00d750=100) and using 400 seeds. The most minimalistic variants are Nano-Wari and Micro-Wari, created by the Bulgarian ethnologue Assia Popova. The Nano-Wari board has eight seeds in just two pits; Micro-Wari has a total of four seeds in four pits.\nWith a two-rank board, players usually are considered to control their respective sides of the board, although moves often are made into the opponent's side. With a four-rank board, players control an inner row and an outer row, and a player's seeds will remain in these closest two rows unless the opponent captures them.\nObjective.\nThe objective of most two- and three-row mancala games is to capture more stones than the opponent; in four-row games, one usually seeks to leave the opponent with no legal move or sometimes to capture all counters in their front row.\nAt the beginning of a player's turn, they select a hole with seeds that will be sown around the board. This selection is often limited to holes on the current player's side of the board, as well as holes with a certain minimum number of seeds.\nIn a process known as \"sowing\", all the seeds from a hole are dropped one by one into subsequent holes in a motion wrapping around the board. Sowing is an apt name for this activity, since not only are many games traditionally played with seeds but placing seeds one at a time in different holes reflects the physical act of sowing. If the sowing action stops after dropping the last seed, the game is considered a \"single lap\" game.\n\"Multiple laps\" or \"relay sowing\" is a frequent feature of mancala games, although not universal. When relay sowing, if the last seed during sowing lands in an occupied hole, all the contents of that hole, including the last sown seed, are immediately re-sown from the hole. The process usually will continue until sowing ends in an empty hole. Another common way to receive \"multiple laps\" is when the final seed sown lands in your designated hole.\nMany games from the Indian subcontinent use \"pussakanawa laps\". These are like standard multi-laps, but instead of continuing the movement with the contents of the last hole filled, a player continues with the next hole. A pussakanawa lap move will then end when a lap ends just before an empty hole.\nIf a player ends their stone with a point move they get a \"free turn\".\nCapturing.\nDepending on the last hole sown in a lap, a player may \"capture\" stones from the board. The exact requirements for capture, as well as what is done with captured stones, vary considerably among games. Typically, a capture requires sowing to end in a hole with a certain number of stones, ending across the board from stones in specific configurations or landing in an empty hole adjacent to an opponent's hole that contains one or more pieces.\nAnother common way of capturing is to capture the stones that reach a certain number of seeds at any moment.\nAlso, several games include the notion of capturing holes, and thus all seeds sown on a captured hole belong at the end of the game to the player who captured it.\nNames and variants.\nThe name is a classification or type of game, rather than any specific game. Some of the most popular mancala games (concerning distribution area, the numbers of players and tournaments, and publications) are:\nAlthough more than 800 names of traditional mancala games are known, some names denote the same game, while others are used for more than one game. Almost 200 modern invented versions have also been described.\nPsychology.\nLike other board games, mancala games have led to psychological studies. Retschitzki has studied the cognitive processes used by awal\u00e9 players. Some of Restchitzki's results on memory and problem solving have recently been simulated by Fernand Gobet with the CHREST computer model. De Voogt has studied the psychology of Bao playing.\nCompetition.\nSeveral groups of mancala games have their own tournaments. A medley tournament including at least two modalities has been part of the Mind Sports Olympiad, including in the in-person event and the online Grand Prix.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20125", "revid": "44240353", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20125", "title": "Maastricht", "text": "City and municipality in Limburg, Netherlands\nMaastricht ( , , ; ) is a city and a municipality in the southeastern Netherlands. It is the capital and largest city of the province of Limburg. Maastricht is located on both sides of the Meuse (), at the point where the river is joined by the Jeker. Mount Saint Peter (\"Sint-Pietersberg\") is largely situated within the city's municipal borders. Maastricht is adjacent to the border with Belgium and is part of the Meuse-Rhine Euroregion, an international metropolis with a population of about 3.9 million, which includes the nearby German and Belgian cities of Aachen, Li\u00e8ge, and Hasselt.\nMaastricht developed from a Roman settlement (\"Trajectum ad Mosam\") to a medieval river trade and religious centre. In the 16th century it became a garrison town and in the 19th century an early industrial centre. Today, the city is a thriving cultural and regional hub. It became well known through the Maastricht Treaty and as the birthplace of the euro. Maastricht has 1,677 national heritage buildings (\"rijksmonumenten\"), the second highest number in the Netherlands, after Amsterdam. The city is visited by tourists for shopping and recreation, and has a large international student population. The last stage of the Cretaceous period and the Mesozoic era, the Maastrichtian, is named after this city, at the end of which was the Cretaceous\u2013Paleogene extinction event, which resulted in the extinction of the non-avian dinosaurs.\nHistory.\nToponymy.\nMaastricht is mentioned in ancient documents as \"[Ad] Treiectinsem [urbem]\" ab. 575, \"Treiectensis\" in 634, \"Triecto\", \"Triectu\" in 7th century, \"Triiect\" in 768\u2013781, \"Traiecto\" in 945, \"Masetrieth\" in 1051.\nThe place name \"Maastricht\" is an Old Dutch compound \"Masa-\" (&gt; \"Maas\" \"the Meuse river\") + Old Dutch \"*treiekt\", itself borrowed from Gallo-Romance cf. its Walloon name \"li trek\", from Classical Latin \"trajectus\" (\"ford, passage, place to cross a river\") with the later addition of \"Maas\" \"Meuse\" to avoid the confusion with the \"-trecht\" of Utrecht having exactly the same original form and etymology. The Latin name first appears in medieval documents and it is not known whether \"\" was Maastricht's name during Roman times.\nA resident of Maastricht is referred to as \"Maastrichtenaar\" while in the local dialect it is either \"Mestreechteneer\" or, colloquially, \"Sjeng\" (derived from the formerly popular French name \"Jean\").\nEarly history.\nNeanderthal remains have been found to the west of Maastricht (Belv\u00e9d\u00e8re excavations). Of a later date are Palaeolithic remains, between 8,000 and 25,000 years old. Celts lived here around 500 BC, at a spot where the river Meuse was shallow and therefore easy to cross.\nIt is not known when the Romans arrived in Maastricht, nor whether the settlement was founded by them. The Romans built a bridge across the Meuse in the 1st century AD, during the reign of Augustus Caesar. The bridge was an important link in the main road between Bavay and Cologne. Roman Maastricht was relatively small. Remains of the Roman road, the bridge, a religious shrine, a Roman bath, a granary, some houses and the 4th-century castrum walls and gates, have been excavated. Fragments of provincial Roman sculptures, as well as coins, jewelry, glass, pottery and other objects from Roman Maastricht are on display in the exhibition space of the city's public library (\"Centre C\u00e9ramique\").\nAccording to legend, the Armenian-born Saint Servatius, Bishop of Tongeren, died in Maastricht in 384 where he was interred along the Roman road, outside the castrum. According to Gregory of Tours it was bishop Monulph who around 570 built the first stone church on the grave of Servatius, a precursor of the present-day Basilica of Saint Servatius. The city remained an early Christian diocese until it lost the distinction to nearby Li\u00e8ge in the 8th or 9th century.\nMiddle Ages.\nIn the early Middle Ages Maastricht, along with Aachen and Li\u00e8ge, formed part of what is considered the heartland of the Carolingian dynasty. At this time, the town was an important centre for river trade and manufacturing. Merovingian coins minted in Maastricht have been found throughout Europe. In 881 the town was plundered by the Vikings. In the 10th century it briefly became the capital of the duchy of Lower Lorraine.\nDuring the 11th and 12th centuries the town flourished culturally. Several provosts of the chapter of Saint Servatius held important positions in the Holy Roman Empire. The two collegiate churches were largely rebuilt and redecorated during this era. Maastricht Romanesque stone sculpture and silversmithing are regarded as highlights of Mosan art. Maastricht painters were praised by Wolfram von Eschenbach in his Parzival. Around the same time, the poet Henric van Veldeke wrote a legend of Saint Servatius, one of the earliest works in Dutch literature. The two main churches acquired a wealth of relics and the septennial Maastricht Pilgrimage became a major event that drew up to 100,000 pilgrims.\nUnlike most Dutch towns, Maastricht did not receive city rights at a certain date. These gradually developed during its long history. In 1204 the city's dual authority was formalised in a treaty, with the prince-bishop of Li\u00e8ge and the duke of Brabant holding joint sovereignty over the city. Soon afterwards the first ring of medieval walls were built. In 1275, the old Roman bridge collapsed under the weight of a procession, allegedly killing 400 people. A replacement bridge, funded by church indulgences, was built slightly to the north and survives until today, the Sint Servaasbrug.\nThroughout the Middle Ages, the city remained a centre for trade and manufacturing principally of wool and leather but gradually economic decline set in. After a brief period of economic prosperity around 1500, the city's economy suffered during the wars of religion of the 16th and 17th centuries, and recovery did not happen until the Industrial Revolution in the early 19th century.\n16th to 18th centuries.\nThe strategic location of Maastricht at a major river crossing necessitated the construction of an array of fortifications around the city during this period. The Spanish and Dutch garrisons became an important factor in the city's economy. In 1579 the city was sacked by the Spanish army led by the Duke of Parma (Siege of Maastricht, 1579). For over fifty years the Spanish crown took over the role previously held by the dukes of Brabant in the joint sovereignty over Maastricht. In 1632 the city was conquered by Prince Frederick Henry of Orange and the Dutch States General replaced the Spanish crown in the joint government of Maastricht. There was an attempt in 1634 of Spanish forces to recapture the city, but to no avail.\nAnother Siege of Maastricht (1673) took place during the Franco-Dutch War. In June 1673, Louis XIV laid siege to the city because French supply lines were being threatened. During this siege, Vauban, the famous French military engineer, developed a new tactic in order to break down the strong fortifications surrounding Maastricht. His systematic approach remained the standard method of attacking fortresses until the 20th century. On 25 June 1673, while preparing to storm the city, captain-lieutenant Charles de Batz de Castelmore, also known as the \"comte d'Artagnan\", was killed by a musket shot outside the Tongerse Poort. This event was embellished in the Alexandre Dumas novel \"The Vicomte de Bragelonne\", part of the D'Artagnan Romances. French troops occupied Maastricht from 1673 to 1678.\nIn 1748 the French again conquered the city at what is known as the Second French Siege of Maastricht, during the War of Austrian Succession. After each siege the city's fortifications were restored and expanded. The French revolutionary army failed to take the city in 1793 but a year later they succeeded. The condominium was dissolved and Maastricht was annexed to the French First Republic, later the First French Empire. For almost twenty years (1795\u20131814/15) Maastricht was the capital of the French d\u00e9partement of Meuse-Inf\u00e9rieure.\n19th and early 20th century.\nAfter the Napoleonic era, Maastricht became part of the United Kingdom of the Netherlands in 1815. It was made the capital of the newly formed Province of Limburg (1815\u20131839). When the southern provinces of the newly formed kingdom seceded in 1830, the Dutch garrison in Maastricht remained loyal to the Dutch king, William I, even when most of the inhabitants of the town and the surrounding area sided with the Belgian revolutionaries. In 1831, arbitration by the Great Powers allocated the city to the Netherlands. However, neither the Dutch nor the Belgians agreed to this and the arrangement was not implemented until the 1839 Treaty of London. During this period of isolation Maastricht developed into an early industrial town.\nBecause of its eccentric location in the southeastern Netherlands, as well as its geographical and cultural proximity to Belgium and Germany, integration of Maastricht and Limburg into the Netherlands did not come about easily. Maastricht retained a distinctly non-Dutch appearance during much of the 19th century and it was not until the First World War that the city was forced to look northwards.\nLike the rest of the Netherlands, Maastricht remained neutral during World War I. However, being wedged between Germany and Belgium, it received large numbers of refugees, putting a strain on the city's resources. Early in World War II, the city was taken by the Germans by surprise during the Battle of Maastricht of May 1940. On 13 and 14 September 1944 it was the first Dutch city to be liberated by Allied forces of the US Old Hickory Division. The three Meuse bridges were destroyed or severely damaged during the war. As elsewhere in the Netherlands, the majority of Maastricht Jews died in Nazi concentration camps.\nAfter World War II.\nDuring the latter half of the century, traditional industries (such as Maastricht's potteries) declined and the city's economy shifted to a service economy. Maastricht University was founded in 1976. Several European institutions found their base in Maastricht. In 1981 and 1991 European Councils were held in Maastricht, the latter one resulting a year later in the signing of the Maastricht Treaty, leading to the creation of the European Union and the euro. Since 1988, The European Fine Art Fair, regarded as the world's leading art fair, annually draws in some of the wealthiest art collectors.\nSince the 1990s, large parts of the city have been refurbished, including the areas around the main railway station and the Maasboulevard promenade along the Meuse, the Entre Deux and Mosae Forum shopping centres, as well as some of the main shopping streets. A prestigious quarter designed by international architects and including the new Bonnefanten Museum, a public library, and a theatre was built on the grounds of the former Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 C\u00e9ramique factory near the town centre. Further large-scale projects, such as the redevelopment of the area around the A2 motorway, the Sphinx Quarter and the Belv\u00e9d\u00e8re area are under construction.\nIn the early 2000s, Maastricht launched several campaigns against drug-dealing in an attempt to stop foreign buyers taking advantage of the liberal Dutch legislation and causing trouble in the downtown area.\nGeography.\nNeighbourhoods.\nMaastricht consists of seven areas (\"wijken\") and 44 neighbourhoods (\"buurten\"). Each area and neighbourhood has a number which corresponds to its CBS code.\nItteren, Borgharen, Limmel, Amby, Heer, Heugem, Scharn, Oud-Caberg, Sint Pieter and Wolder are neighbourhoods that used to be separate municipalities or villages until they were annexed by the city of Maastricht in the course of the 20th century.\nNeighbouring municipalities.\nThe outlying areas of the following municipalities are bordering the municipality of Maastricht directly.\n\"Clockwise from north-east to north-west:\"\n\"(B = Situated in Belgium)\"\nBorder.\nMaastricht's city limits has an international border with Belgium. Most of it borders Belgium's Flemish region, but a small part to the south also has a border with Wallonia. Both countries are part of Europe's Schengen Area and, thus, are open without border controls.\nClimate.\nMaastricht features the same climate as most of the Netherlands (\"Cfb\", Oceanic climate), however, due to its more inland location in between hills, summers tend to be warmer (especially in the Meuse valley, which lies lower than the meteorological station) and winters a bit colder, although the difference is only noticeable on just a few days a year. The highest temperature recorded was on 25 July 2019 at .\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLanguages.\nMaastricht is a city of linguistic diversity, partly as a result of its location at the crossroads of multiple language areas and its international student population.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn 2010\u20132014, 69.8% of the population of Maastricht regarded themselves as religious. 60.4% of the total population stated an affiliation with the Roman Catholic Church. 13.9% attended a religious ceremony at least once a month.\nEconomy.\nPublic institutions.\nSince the 1980s, a number of European and international institutions have made Maastricht their base. They provide an increasing number of employment opportunities for expats living in the Maastricht area.\nCulture and tourism.\nSights of Maastricht.\nMaastricht is known in the Netherlands and beyond for its lively squares, narrow streets, and historic buildings. The city has 1,677 national heritage buildings (\"rijksmonumenten\"), more than any Dutch city outside Amsterdam. In addition to that there are 3,500 locally listed buildings (\"gemeentelijke monumenten\"). The entire city centre is a conservation area (\"beschermd stadsgezicht\") and largely traffic-free. The tourist information office (VVV) is located in the basement of Dinghuis, a late-medieval courthouse overlooking Grote Staat.\nMaastricht's main sights include:\nEvents and festivals.\nFurthermore, the Maastricht Exposition and Congress Centre (MECC) hosts many events throughout the year.\nNature.\nParks.\nThere are several city parks and recreational areas in Maastricht:\nPolitics.\nCity council.\nThe municipal government of Maastricht consists of a city council, a mayor and a number of aldermen. The city council, a 39-member legislative body directly elected every four years, appoints the aldermen on the basis of a coalition agreement between two or more parties after each election.\nAldermen and mayors.\nThe mayor and aldermen make up the executive branch of the municipal government.\nThe mayor from 2002, Gerd Leers (CDA), resigned in January 2010 following allegations of irregularities in a holiday villa project in Bulgaria owned by Leers. He was replaced by Onno Hoes, a Liberal (VVD), the only male mayor in the country officially married to a man. In 2013 Hoes was subject to controversy after disclosures of intimate affairs with several other men, although he remained mayor. After a new affair in 2014, Hoes eventually stepped down.\nFrom July 2015, Annemarie Penn-te Strake became mayor. She was an independent serving no political party, although her husband was a former chairman of the Maastricht Seniorenpartij. She had served in the Dutch judicial system for many years, and during her tenure as mayor she still served as attorney general. In July 2023 Wim Hillenaar (CDA) took over as mayor.\nCannabis.\nOne controversial issue which dominated Maastricht politics for many years was the city's approach to soft drugs. Under the Dutch soft drug policy, individuals may buy cannabis from 'coffeeshops' under certain conditions. From the 1980s, Maastricht saw a growing influx of 'drug tourists', mainly from neighbouring Belgium, France and Germany. The city government attempted to reduce negative side effects, including illegal sale of hard drugs in the city centre and anti-social behaviour.\nA 2008 proposal to relocate the coffeeshops to the outskirts of the city was opposed by neighbouring municipalities (some in Belgium) and by the Dutch and Belgian parliaments. In December 2010, a Maastricht law to restrict entry to coffeeshops to local residents was upheld by the Court of Justice of the European Union, with the Dutch government introducing a similar national law in 2012. The new system led to a reduction in drug tourism in Maastricht's cannabis shops, but an increase in drug dealing on the streets. A 2018 Maastricht University study showed a substantial decline in drug nuisance since 2012, although criminal drug networks had grown due to police budget cuts.\nTransport.\nBy bike.\nMaastricht is bikeable. People biking are able to cross the river using every bridge in the city.\nBy car.\nMaastricht is served by the A2 and A79 motorways. The city can be reached from Brussels and Cologne in approximately one hour and from Amsterdam in about two and a half hours.\nThe A2 motorway runs through Maastricht in a double-decked tunnel. Before 2016, the A2 motorway ran through the city; heavily congested, it caused air pollution in the urban area. Construction of a two-level tunnel designed to solve these problems started in 2011 and was opened (in stages) by December 2016.\nIn spite of several large underground car parks, parking in the city centre forms a major problem during weekends and bank holidays because of the large numbers of visitors. Parking fees are deliberately high to encourage visitors to use public transport or park and ride facilities away from the centre.\nBy train.\nMaastricht is served by three rail operators, all of which call at the main Maastricht railway station near the centre and two of which call at the smaller Maastricht Randwyck, near the business and university district. Only Arriva also calls at Maastricht Noord, which opened in 2013. Intercity trains northwards to Amsterdam, Eindhoven, Den Bosch and Utrecht are operated by Dutch Railways. The line to Heerlen, Valkenburg and Kerkrade is operated by Arriva. The National Railway Company of Belgium runs south to Li\u00e8ge in Belgium. The westbound railway to Hasselt (Belgium) closed in 1954. The former railway to Aachen was closed down in the 1980s. However, Aachen can still be reached via Heerlen.\nBy bus.\nRegular bus lines connect the city centre, outer areas, business districts and railway stations. The regional Arriva bus network extends to most parts of South Limburg and Aachen (Germany). Regional buses by De Lijn connect Maastricht with Hasselt, Tongeren and Maasmechelen, and one bus connects Maastricht with Li\u00e8ge, operated by TEC. Various bus companies such as Flixbus and Eurolines provide intercity bus services from Maastricht to many European destinations.\nBy air.\nMaastricht is served by the nearby Maastricht Aachen Airport (), in nearby Beek, and it is informally referred to by that name. The airport is located about north of the city centre. The airport is primarily served by low-cost airline Wizz Air. The nearest airports are both located in nearby Germany which are D\u00fcsseldorf Airport, located north east and Cologne Bonn Airport, located east of Maastricht. However, residents in the city also use Amsterdam Schiphol Airport as an international hub. The airport is located north west of the city.\nBy boat.\nMaastricht has a river port (\"Beatrixhaven\") and is connected by water with Belgium and the rest of the Netherlands through the river Meuse, the Juliana Canal, the Albert Canal and the Zuid-Willemsvaart. Although there are no regular boat connections to other cities, various organized boat trips for tourists connect Maastricht with Belgium cities such as Li\u00e8ge.\nDistances to other cities.\nThese distances are as the crow flies and so do not represent actual overland distances.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns.\nMaastricht is twinned with:\nLocal anthem.\nIn 2002 the municipal government officially adopted a local anthem (Limburgish (Maastrichtian variant): \"Mestreechs Volksleed\", ) composed of lyrics in Maastrichtian, written by Alfons Olterdissen. The theme was originally composed by his brother, Guus Olterdissen, though the theme is similar to the theme \"Pe al nostru steag e scris Unire\" of the Romanian composer Ciprian Porumbescu (1853\u20131883). It is unknown if the Olterdissen brothers were aware of the Romanian piece.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20126", "revid": "36234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20126", "title": "Multitasking (disambiguation)", "text": ""}
{"id": "20127", "revid": "43634408", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20127", "title": "M. C. Escher", "text": "Dutch graphic artist (1898\u20131972)\nMaurits Cornelis Escher (; ; 17 June 1898\u00a0\u2013 27 March 1972) was a Dutch graphic artist who made woodcuts, lithographs, and mezzotints, many of which were inspired by mathematics.\nDespite wide popular interest, for most of his life Escher was neglected in the art world, even in his native Netherlands. He was 70 before a retrospective exhibition was held. In the late twentieth century, he became more widely appreciated, and in the twenty-first century he has been celebrated in exhibitions around the world.\nHis work features mathematical objects and operations including impossible objects, explorations of infinity, reflection, symmetry, perspective, truncated and stellated polyhedra, hyperbolic geometry, and tessellations. Although Escher believed he had no mathematical ability, he interacted with the mathematicians George P\u00f3lya, Roger Penrose, and Donald Coxeter, and the crystallographer Friedrich Haag, and conducted his own research into tessellation.\nEarly in his career, he drew inspiration from nature, making studies of insects, landscapes, and plants such as lichens, all of which he used as details in his artworks. He traveled in Italy and Spain, sketching buildings, townscapes, architecture and the tilings of the Alhambra and the Mezquita of Cordoba, and became steadily more interested in their mathematical structure.\nEscher's art became well known among scientists and mathematicians, and in popular culture, especially after it was featured by Martin Gardner in his April 1966 Mathematical Games column in \"Scientific American\". Apart from being used in a variety of technical papers, his work has appeared on the covers of many books and albums. He was one of the major inspirations for Douglas Hofstadter's Pulitzer Prize\u2013winning 1979 book \"G\u00f6del, Escher, Bach\".\nEarly life.\nMaurits Cornelis Escher was born on 17 June 1898 in Leeuwarden, Friesland, the Netherlands, in a house that forms part of the Princessehof Ceramics Museum today. He was the youngest son of the civil engineer George Arnold Escher and his second wife, Sara Gleichman. In 1903, the family moved to Arnhem, where he attended primary and secondary school until 1918. Known to his friends and family as \"Mauk\", he was a sickly child and was placed in a special school at the age of seven; he failed the second grade. Although he excelled at drawing, his grades were generally poor. He took carpentry and piano lessons until he was thirteen years old.\nIn 1918, he went to the Technical College of Delft. From 1919 to 1922, Escher attended the Haarlem School of Architecture and Decorative Arts, learning drawing and the art of making woodcuts. He briefly studied architecture, but he failed a number of subjects (due partly to a persistent skin infection) and switched to decorative arts, studying under the graphic artist Samuel Jessurun de Mesquita.\nStudy journeys.\nIn 1922, an important year of his life, Escher traveled through Italy, visiting Florence, San Gimignano, Volterra, Siena, and Ravello. In the same year, he traveled through Spain, visiting Madrid, Toledo, and Granada. He was impressed by the Italian countryside and, in Granada, by the Moorish architecture of the fourteenth-century Alhambra. The intricate decorative designs of the Alhambra, based on geometrical symmetries featuring interlocking repetitive patterns in the coloured tiles or sculpted into the walls and ceilings, triggered his interest in the mathematics of tessellation and became a powerful influence on his work.\nEscher returned to Italy and lived in Rome from 1923 to 1935. While in Italy, Escher met Jetta Umiker\u00a0\u2013 a Swiss woman, like himself attracted to Italy\u00a0\u2013 whom he married in 1924. The couple settled in Rome where their first son, Giorgio (George) Arnaldo Escher, named after his grandfather, was born. Escher and Jetta later had two more sons\u00a0\u2013 Arthur and Jan.\nHe travelled frequently, visiting (among other places) Viterbo in 1926, the Abruzzi in 1927 and 1929, Corsica in 1928 and 1933, Calabria in 1930, the Amalfi coast in 1931 and 1934, and Gargano and Sicily in 1932 and 1935. The townscapes and landscapes of these places feature prominently in his artworks. In May and June 1936, Escher travelled back to Spain, revisiting the Alhambra and spending days at a time making detailed drawings of its mosaic patterns. It was here that he became fascinated, to the point of obsession, with tessellation, explaining:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe sketches he made in the Alhambra formed a major source for his work from that time on. He studied the architecture of the Mezquita, the Moorish mosque of Cordoba. This turned out to be the last of his long study journeys; after 1937, his artworks were created in his studio rather than in the field. His art correspondingly changed sharply from being mainly observational, with a strong emphasis on the realistic details of things seen in nature and architecture, to being the product of his geometric analysis and his visual imagination. All the same, even his early work already shows his interest in the nature of space, the unusual, perspective, and multiple points of view.\nLater life.\nIn 1935, the political climate in Italy under Mussolini became unacceptable to Escher. He had no interest in politics, finding it impossible to involve himself with any ideals other than the expressions of his own concepts through his own particular medium, but he was averse to fanaticism and hypocrisy. When his eldest son, George, was forced at the age of nine to wear a Ballila uniform in school, the family left Italy and moved to Ch\u00e2teau-d'\u0152x, Switzerland, where they remained for two years.\nThe Netherlands post office had Escher design a semi-postal stamp for the \"Air Fund\" (Dutch: \"Het Nationaal Luchtvaartfonds\") in 1935, and again in 1949 he designed Dutch stamps. These were for the 75th anniversary of the Universal Postal Union; a different design was used by Suriname and the Netherlands Antilles for the same commemoration.\nEscher, who had been very fond of and inspired by the landscapes in Italy, was decidedly unhappy in Switzerland. In 1937, the family moved again, to Uccle (Ukkel), a suburb of Brussels, Belgium. World War II forced them to move in January 1941, this time to Baarn, Netherlands, where Escher lived until 1970. Most of Escher's best-known works date from this period. The sometimes cloudy, cold, and wet weather of the Netherlands allowed him to focus intently on his work. After 1953, Escher lectured widely. A planned series of lectures in North America in 1962 was cancelled after an illness, and he stopped creating artworks for a time, but the illustrations and text for the lectures were later published as part of the book \"Escher on Escher\". He was awarded the Knighthood of the Order of Orange-Nassau in 1955; in 1967, he was made an Officer.\nIn July 1969, he finished his last work, a large woodcut with threefold rotational symmetry called \"Snakes\", in which snakes wind through a pattern of linked rings. These shrink to infinity toward both the center and the edge of a circle. It was exceptionally elaborate, being printed using three blocks, each rotated three times about the center of the image and precisely aligned to avoid gaps and overlaps, for a total of nine print operations for each finished print. The image encapsulates Escher's love of symmetry; of interlocking patterns; and, at the end of his life, of his approach to infinity. The care that Escher took in creating and printing this woodcut can be seen in a video recording.\nEscher moved to the Rosa Spier Huis in Laren in 1970, an artists' retirement home in which he had his own studio. He died in a hospital in Hilversum on 27 March 1972, aged 73. He is buried at the New Cemetery in Baarn.\nMathematically inspired work.\nMuch of Escher's work is inescapably mathematical. This has caused a disconnect between his fame among mathematicians and the general public, and the lack of esteem with which he has been viewed in the art world. His originality and mastery of graphic techniques are respected, but his works have been thought too intellectual and insufficiently lyrical. Movements such as conceptual art have, to a degree, reversed the art world's attitude to intellectuality and lyricism, but this did not rehabilitate Escher, because traditional critics still disliked his narrative themes and his use of perspective. However, these same qualities made his work highly attractive to the public.\nEscher is not the first artist to explore mathematical themes: J. L. Locher, a previous director of the Kunstmuseum in The Hague, pointed out that Parmigianino (1503\u20131540) had explored spherical geometry and reflection in his 1524 \"Self-portrait in a Convex Mirror\", depicting his own image in a curved mirror, while William Hogarth's 1754 \"Satire on False Perspective\" foreshadows Escher's playful exploration of errors in perspective. Another early artistic forerunner is Giovanni Battista Piranesi (1720\u20131778), whose dark \"fantastical\" prints such as \"The Drawbridge\" in his \"Carceri\" (\"Prisons\") sequence depict perspectives of complex architecture with many stairs and ramps, peopled by walking figures. Escher greatly admired Piranesi and had several of Piranesi's prints hanging in his studio.\nOnly with 20th century movements such as Cubism, De Stijl, Dadaism, and Surrealism did mainstream art start to explore Escher-like ways of looking at the world with multiple simultaneous viewpoints. However, although Escher had much in common with, for example, Magritte's surrealism and Op art, he did not make contact with any of these movements.\nTessellation.\nIn his early years, Escher sketched landscapes and nature. He sketched insects such as ants, bees, grasshoppers, and mantises, which appeared frequently in his later work. His early love of Roman and Italian landscapes and of nature created an interest in tessellation, which he called \"Regular Division of the Plane\"; this became the title of his 1958 book, complete with reproductions of a series of woodcuts based on tessellations of the plane, in which he described the systematic buildup of mathematical designs in his artworks. He wrote, \"crystallographers have opened the gate leading to an extensive domain\".\nAfter his 1936 journey to the Alhambra and to La Mezquita, Cordoba, where he sketched the Moorish architecture and the tessellated mosaic decorations, Escher began to explore tessellation using geometric grids as the basis for his sketches. He then extended these to form complex interlocking designs, for example with animals such as birds, fish, and reptiles. One of his first attempts at a tessellation was his pencil, India ink, and watercolour \"Study of Regular Division of the Plane with Reptiles\" (1939), constructed on a hexagonal grid. The heads of the red, green, and white reptiles meet at a vertex; the tails, legs, and sides of the animals interlock exactly. It was used as the basis for his 1943 lithograph \"Reptiles\".\nHis first study of mathematics began with papers by George P\u00f3lya and by the crystallographer Friedrich Haag on plane symmetry groups, sent to him by his brother Berend, a geologist. He carefully studied the 17 canonical wallpaper groups and created periodic tilings with 43 drawings of different types of symmetry. From this point on, he developed a mathematical approach to expressions of symmetry in his artworks using his own notation. Starting in 1937, he created woodcuts based on the 17 groups. His \"Metamorphosis I\" (1937) began a series of designs that told a story through the use of pictures. In \"Metamorphosis I\", he transformed convex polygons into regular patterns in a plane to form a human motif. He extended the approach in his piece \"Metamorphosis III\", which is almost seven metres long.\nIn 1941 and 1942, Escher summarised his findings for his own artistic use in a sketchbook, which he labeled (following Haag) \"Regelmatige vlakverdeling in asymmetrische congruente veelhoeken\" (\"Regular division of the plane with asymmetric congruent polygons\"). The mathematician Doris Schattschneider unequivocally described this notebook as recording \"a methodical investigation that can only be termed mathematical research.\" She defined the research questions he was following as\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeometries.\nAlthough Escher did not have mathematical training \u2013 his understanding of mathematics was largely visual and intuitive \u2013 his art had a strong mathematical component, and several of the worlds that he drew were built around impossible objects. After 1924, Escher turned to sketching landscapes in Italy and Corsica with irregular perspectives that are impossible in natural form. His first print of an impossible reality was \"Still Life and Street\" (1937); impossible stairs and multiple visual and gravitational perspectives feature in popular works such as \"Relativity\" (1953). \"House of Stairs\" (1951) attracted the interest of the mathematician Roger Penrose and his father, the biologist Lionel Penrose. In 1956, they published a paper, \"Impossible Objects: A Special Type of Visual Illusion\" and later sent Escher a copy. Escher replied, admiring the Penroses' continuously rising flights of steps, and enclosed a print of \"Ascending and Descending\" (1960). The paper contained the tribar or Penrose triangle, which Escher used repeatedly in his lithograph of a building that appears to function as a perpetual motion machine, \"Waterfall\" (1961).\nEscher was interested enough in Hieronymus Bosch's 1500 triptych \"The Garden of Earthly Delights\" to re-create part of its right-hand panel, \"Hell\", as a lithograph in 1935. He reused the figure of a Mediaeval woman in a two-pointed headdress and a long gown in his lithograph \"Belvedere\" in 1958; the image is, like many of his other \"extraordinary invented places\", peopled with \"jesters, knaves, and contemplators\". Thus, Escher not only was interested in possible or impossible geometry but was, in his own words, a \"reality enthusiast\"; he combined \"formal astonishment with a vivid and idiosyncratic vision\".\nEscher worked primarily in the media of lithographs and woodcuts, although the few mezzotints he made are considered to be masterpieces of the technique. In his graphic art, he portrayed mathematical relationships among shapes, figures, and space. Integrated into his prints were mirror images of cones, spheres, cubes, rings, and spirals.\nEscher was fascinated by mathematical objects such as the M\u00f6bius strip, which has only one surface. His wood engraving \"M\u00f6bius Strip II\" (1963) depicts a chain of ants marching forever over what, at any one place, are the two opposite faces of the object\u2014which are seen on inspection to be parts of the strip's single surface. In Escher's own words:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe mathematical influence in his work became prominent after 1936, when, having boldly asked the Adria Shipping Company if he could sail with them as travelling artist in return for making drawings of their ships, they surprisingly agreed, and he sailed the Mediterranean, becoming interested in order and symmetry. Escher described this journey, including his repeat visit to the Alhambra, as \"the richest source of inspiration I have ever tapped\".\nEscher's interest in curvilinear perspective was encouraged by his friend and \"kindred spirit\", the art historian and artist Albert Flocon, in another example of constructive mutual influence. Flocon identified Escher as a \"thinking artist\" alongside Piero della Francesca, Leonardo da Vinci, Albrecht D\u00fcrer, Wenzel Jamnitzer, Abraham Bosse, Girard Desargues, and P\u00e8re Nicon. Flocon was delighted by Escher's \"Grafiek en tekeningen\" (\"Graphics and Drawings\"), which he read in 1959. This stimulated Flocon and Andr\u00e9 Barre to correspond with Escher and to write the book \"La Perspective curviligne\" (\"Curvilinear perspective\").\nPlatonic and other solids.\nEscher often incorporated three-dimensional objects such as the Platonic solids such as spheres, tetrahedrons, and cubes into his works, as well as mathematical objects such as cylinders and stellated polyhedra. In the print \"Reptiles\", he combined two- and three-dimensional images. In one of his papers, Escher emphasized the importance of dimensionality:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEscher's artwork is especially well-liked by mathematicians such as Doris Schattschneider and scientists such as Roger Penrose, who enjoy his use of polyhedra and geometric distortions. For example, in \"Gravitation\", animals climb around a stellated dodecahedron.\nThe two towers of \"Waterfall\"'s impossible building are topped with compound polyhedra, one a compound of three cubes, the other a stellated rhombic dodecahedron now known as Escher's solid. Escher had used this solid in his 1948 woodcut \"Stars\", which contains all five of the Platonic solids and various stellated solids, representing stars; the central solid is animated by chameleons climbing through the frame as it whirls in space. Escher possessed a 6\u00a0cm refracting telescope and was a keen-enough amateur astronomer to have recorded observations of binary stars.\nLevels of reality.\nEscher's artistic expression was created from images in his mind, rather than directly from observations and travels to other countries. His interest in the multiple levels of reality in art is seen in works such as \"Drawing Hands\" (1948), where two hands are shown, each drawing the other. The critic Steven Poole commented that\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is a neat depiction of one of Escher's enduring fascinations: the contrast between the two-dimensional flatness of a sheet of paper and the illusion of three-dimensional volume that can be created with certain marks. In \"Drawing Hands\", space and the flat plane coexist, each born from and returning to the other, the black magic of the artistic illusion made creepily manifest.\nInfinity and hyperbolic geometry.\nIn 1954, the International Congress of Mathematicians met in Amsterdam, and N. G. de Bruin organised a display of Escher's work at the Stedelijk Museum for the participants. Both Roger Penrose and H. S. M. Coxeter were deeply impressed with Escher's intuitive grasp of mathematics. Inspired by \"Relativity\", Penrose devised his tribar, and his father, Lionel Penrose, devised an endless staircase. Roger Penrose sent sketches of both objects to Escher, and the cycle of invention was closed when Escher then created the perpetual motion machine of \"Waterfall\" and the endless march of the monk-figures of \"Ascending and Descending\".\nIn 1957 Coxeter obtained Escher's permission to use two of his drawings in his paper \"Crystal symmetry and its generalizations\". He sent Escher a copy of the paper; Escher recorded that Coxeter's figure of a hyperbolic tessellation \"gave me quite a shock\": the infinite regular repetition of the tiles in the hyperbolic plane, growing rapidly smaller towards the edge of the circle, was precisely what he wanted to allow him to represent infinity on a two-dimensional plane.\nEscher carefully studied Coxeter's figure, marking it up to analyse the successively smaller circles with which (he deduced) it had been constructed. He then constructed a diagram, which he sent to Coxeter, showing his analysis; Coxeter confirmed it was correct, but disappointed Escher with his highly technical reply. All the same, Escher persisted with hyperbolic tiling, which he called \"Coxetering\". Among the results were the series of wood engravings \"Circle Limit I\u2013IV\". In 1959, Coxeter published his finding that these works were extraordinarily accurate: \"Escher got it absolutely right to the millimeter\".\nLegacy.\nIn art collections.\nThe Escher intellectual property is controlled by the M.C. Escher Company, while exhibitions of his artworks are managed separately by the M.C. Escher Foundation.\nThe primary institutional collections of original works by M.C. Escher are exhibited at the Escher Museum in The Hague (which are part of the large collection of the Kunstmuseum there); the National Gallery of Art (Washington, DC); the National Gallery of Canada (Ottawa); the Israel Museum (Jerusalem); and the Huis ten Bosch (Nagasaki, Japan).\nExhibitions.\nDespite wide popular interest, Escher was for a long time somewhat neglected in the art world; even in his native Netherlands, he was 70 before a retrospective exhibition was held. In the twenty-first century, major exhibitions have been held in cities around the world. An exhibition of his work in Rio de Janeiro attracted more than 573,000 visitors in 2011; its daily visitor count of 9,677 made it the most visited museum exhibition of the year, anywhere in the world. No major exhibition of Escher's work was held in Britain until 2015, when the Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art ran one in Edinburgh from June to September 2015, moving in October 2015 to the Dulwich Picture Gallery, London. The exhibition poster is based on \"Hand with Reflecting Sphere\", 1935, which shows Escher in his house reflected in a handheld sphere, thus illustrating the artist, his interest in levels of reality in art (e.g., is the hand in the foreground more real than the reflected one?), perspective, and spherical geometry. The exhibition moved to Italy in 2015\u20132016, attracting over 500,000 visitors in Rome and Bologna, and then Milan.\nIn 2023, the Kunstmuseum in the Hague created a large retrospective of Escher, entitled 'Escher - Other World'.\nIn mathematics and science.\nDoris Schattschneider identifies eleven strands of mathematical and scientific research anticipated or directly inspired by Escher. These are the classification of regular tilings using the edge relationships of tiles: two-color and two-motif tilings (counterchange symmetry or antisymmetry); color symmetry (in crystallography); metamorphosis or topological change; covering surfaces with symmetric patterns; Escher's algorithm (for generating patterns using decorated squares); creating tile shapes; local versus global definitions of regularity; symmetry of a tiling induced by the symmetry of a tile; orderliness not induced by symmetry groups; the filling of the central void in Escher's lithograph \"Print Gallery\" by H. Lenstra and B. de Smit.\nThe Pulitzer Prize-winning 1979 book \"G\u00f6del, Escher, Bach\" by Douglas Hofstadter discusses the ideas of self-reference and strange loops expressed in Escher's art. The asteroid 4444 Escher was named in Escher's honor in 1985.\nIn popular culture.\nEscher's fame in popular culture grew when his work was featured by Martin Gardner in his April 1966 \"Mathematical Games\" column in \"Scientific American\". Escher's works have appeared on many album covers including The Scaffold's 1969 \"L the P\" with \"Ascending and Descending\"; Mott the Hoople's eponymous 1969 record with \"Reptiles\", Beaver &amp; Krause's 1970 \"In A Wild Sanctuary\" with \"Three Worlds\"; and Mandrake Memorial's 1970 \"Puzzle\" with \"House of Stairs\" and (inside) \"Curl Up\". His works have similarly been used on many book covers, including some editions of Edwin Abbott's \"Flatland\", which used \"Three Spheres\"; E. H. Gombrich's \"Meditations on a Hobby Horse\" with \"Horseman\"; Pamela Hall's \"Heads You Lose\" with \"Plane Filling 1\"; Patrick A. Horton's \"Mastering the Power of Story\" with \"Drawing Hands\"; Erich Gamma et al.'s \"Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-oriented software\" with \"Swans\"; and Arthur Markman's \"Knowledge Representation\" with \"Reptiles\". The \"World of Escher\" markets posters, neckties, T-shirts, and jigsaw puzzles of Escher's artworks. Both Austria and the Netherlands have issued postage stamps commemorating the artist and his works.\nIn 1996, Byron Preiss and Harry N. Abrams Inc. published \"Escher Interactive\" for Microsoft Windows, a CD-ROM that contained a digital gallery and interactive games inspired by Escher's work.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20129", "revid": "45364314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20129", "title": "Shang-Chi", "text": "Marvel Comics superhero\nZheng Shang-Chi, also known as the Master of Kung Fu and Brother Hand, is a superhero appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. The character was created by writer Steve Englehart and artist Jim Starlin, debuting in \"Special Marvel Edition\" #15 (December 1973) in the Bronze Age of Comic Books, and starring in his own solo title until 1983. Described as the greatest martial artist alive, Shang-Chi has been trained since birth to be the ultimate fighter with a specialization in various unarmed and weaponry-based \"wushu\" styles, including the use of the \"g\u00f9n\", \"nunchaku\", and \"jian\". Shang-Chi later assumes leadership of the Five Weapons Society and acquires the Ten Rings weapons.\nShang-Chi was spun off from novelist Sax Rohmer's licensed property as the unknown son of fictional villain Dr. Fu Manchu. In later editions, his connection to Manchu was underplayed after Marvel lost the comic book rights to the latter's character; to get around this problem, the publisher eventually renamed Shang-Chi's father Zheng Zu.\nShang-Chi made his live-action debut in the Marvel Cinematic Universe film \"Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings\" (2021), where he is portrayed by Simu Liu.\nPublication history.\nIn the early 1970s, writer Steve Englehart and artist Jim Starlin approached DC Comics to adapt the television series \"Kung Fu\" into a comic book, as DC's parent company, Warner Communications, owned the rights to the series. DC Comics, however, was not interested in their pitch, believing the show's and the martial arts genre's popularity would fade quickly. The duo then approached Marvel Comics with the idea to create a kung fu-focused original comic. Editor-in-chief Roy Thomas agreed, but only if they would include the Sax Rohmer's pulp villain Dr. Fu Manchu, as Marvel had previously acquired the comic book rights to the character, and made their protagonist half-white. Englehart and Starlin agreed. They developed Shang-Chi, a master of kung fu, who was introduced as a previously unknown son of Manchu. Though an original character himself, many of Shang-Chi's supporting characters (most notably Manchu, Sir Denis Nayland Smith, Dr. James Petrie and Fah Lo Suee) were Rohmer creations. Starlin left the series after #17 (replaced by Paul Gulacy) and Englehart after #19 (replaced by Doug Moench). No characters from the \"Kung Fu\" television series were officially included in the comic series, though in the #19 issue the character Lu Sun bore such a strong resemblance to Kwai Chang Caine that to avoid copyright issues, the character was given a mustache throughout the issue. With artist Paul Gulacy, Shang-Chi's visual appearance was modeled after that of Bruce Lee.\nShang-Chi first appeared in \"Special Marvel Edition\" #15 (December 1973). He appeared again in issue #16, and with issue #17 (April 1974) the publication was retitled \"The Hands of Shang-Chi, Master of Kung Fu\". Amidst the martial arts craze in the United States in the 1970s, the book became very popular, surviving until issue #125 (June 1983), a solid run that included four \"Giant-Size\" issues and one \"Annual\". \"Special Collector's Edition\" #1 (1975) cover-titled as \"Savage Fists of Kung Fu\" reprinted stories from \"The Deadly Hands of Kung Fu\" #1\u20132; \"The Deadly Hands of Kung Fu Special\" #1; and \"Special Marvel Edition\" #15. The character did several crossovers with other Marvel martial artists, including the White Tiger, Iron Fist and the Daughters of the Dragon (Colleen Wing and Misty Knight). He appeared regularly in \"The Deadly Hands of Kung Fu\".\nShang-Chi had two more short series: the \"Master of Kung Fu: Bleeding Black\" one-shot issue (1990) and the MAX miniseries \"Master of Kung Fu: Hellfire Apocalypse\" (2002) with artist Paul Gulacy on art again. The character had two stories in the comics anthology series \"Marvel Comics Presents\", including one by Moench that ran in the series' first eight issues in 1988, and co-starred in the \"Moon Knight Special\" (1992).\nIn 1995, Shang-Chi would be one of the revival titles produced by Milestone Media, according to writer Dwayne McDuffie, the title would show Shang-Chi using firearms, inspired by gun fu style by Hong Kong filmmaker John Woo; however, according to McDuffie, the proposal was cancelled after the departure of editor-in-chief Tom DeFalco and the death of Mark Gruenwald the following year.\nIn 1997 a story arc starring Shang-Chi ran in \"Journey into Mystery\" #514\u2013516, and was intended to lead into a miniseries for the character in 1998.\nAlthough spun out of licensed properties, Shang-Chi is a Marvel-owned character and has been firmly established as a part of the Marvel Universe with guest appearances in numerous other titles, such as \"Marvel Team-Up\", \"Marvel Two-in-One\", \"Marvel Knights\" and \"X-Men\". Most of the original licensed characters in the supporting cast have been either phased out or renamed in the more recent series and stories.\nIn some of his modern appearances, mention is made of his villainous father either in cryptic terms or using a variety of new names, due to Marvel no longer having the rights to Dr. Fu Manchu. In 2010's \"Secret Avengers\" #6\u201310, writer Ed Brubaker officially sidestepped the entire issue via a storyline where the Shadow Council resurrects a zombified version of Manchu, only to discover that \"Fu Manchu\" was only an alias and that Shang-Chi's father's real name was Zheng Zu, an ancient Chinese sorcerer who discovered the secret to immortality. Similarly, Shang-Chi's half sister Fah Lo Suee was later renamed Zheng Bao Yu in 2013's \"The Fearless Defenders\" #8, written by Cullen Bunn, while Smith and Petrie have not appeared in any Marvel properties since the end of the \"Master of Kung Fu\" series in 1983.\nShang-Chi returned as a main character in the 2007 \"Heroes for Hire\" comic book. In 2009, the black and white one-shot \"Shang-Chi: Master of Kung\" Fu was released, with stories written by Jonathan Hickman, Mike Benson, Charlie Huston and Robin Furth and illustrated by Tomm Coker, C.P. Smith, Enrique Romero and Paul Gulacy.\nIn 2014, the miniseries \"Deadly Hands of Kung Fu\" was released with Shang-Chi in appearance, written by Mike Benson and illustrated by Tan Eng Huat.\nIn 2015, Shang-Chi starred in the \"Master of Kung Fu\" revival in the \"Secret Wars\" storyline. Written by Haden Blackman and illustrated by Taljic, the four-issue series is a \"wuxia\"-inspired story that takes place in the Battleworld domain of K'un-L'un and centered around Shang-Chi in his fight to overthrow his despotic father, Emperor Zheng Zu.\nIn 2017, after a 34-year gap, Shang-Chi once again starred in \"Master of Kung Fu\"'s 126th issue as part of the \"Marvel Legacy\" relaunch, written by mixed martial artist CM Punk and illustrated by Dalibor Talajic.\nIn 2020, Shang-Chi starred in a self-titled five issue miniseries written by \"American Born Chinese\" author Gene Luen Yang with art by Dike Ruan and Philip Tan. Initially set for a June 2020 release, the first issue was delayed to September due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Shang-Chi starred in a new ongoing series by Yang and Ruan in 2021, with Marcus To replacing Ruan by the 9th issue. Following the release of the Marvel Cinematic Universe film \"Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings\" (2021), Yang incorporated several concepts introduced in the film into the comics, including the character Jiang Li as Shang-Chi's real mother, who was based on Shang-Chi's mother Ying Li, retconning Shang-Chi's white American mother and his mixed-race heritage; the heavenly realm Ta-Lo, which was previously introduced by writers Mark Gruenwald, Ralph Macchio and artist Keith Pollard in \"Thor\" #310 (1980); and the Ten Rings weapons.\nIn March 2021, the one-shot \"The Legend of Shang-Chi\" was published, by Alyssa Wong (script) and Andie Tong (art).\nIn September 2021, Shang-Chi starred in a miniseries made available by the Marvel Unlimited app, the miniseries was written by Alyssa Wong and illustrated by Nathan Stockman.\nIn July 2022, the ongoing \"Shang-Chi\" series was succeeded by a new ongoing series titled \"Shang-Chi and the Ten Rings\", with the previously solicited \"Shang-Chi\" #13 being retitled \"Shang-Chi and the Ten Rings\" #1. \nYang's 24-issue run concluded with the one-shot \"Shang-Chi: Master of the Ten Rings\", with Michael YG replacing To on art, in January 2023. In October, he starred in the graphic novel \"Shang-Chi and the Quest for Immortality\", which was written and illustrated by Victoria Ying and colored by Ian Herring.\nIn December 2023, Shang-Chi starred in a \"Deadly Hands of Kung Fu\" revival titled \"Deadly Hands of Kung Fu: Gang War\", a three issue miniseries written by Greg Pak and illustrated by Caio Majado which was part of the \"Gang War\" crossover event. In February 2024, Shang-Chi was added to the team lineup for a new \"Thunderbolts\" series, written by Collin Kelly and Jackson Lanzing and illustrated by Geraldo Borges. Lanzing explained that Shang-Chi's inclusion to the title was due to the character's spy thriller roots from the \"Master of Kung Fu\" series.\nIn September 2024, Shang-Chi was featured as a main character in the limited series \"Avengers Assemble\", which was written by Steve Orlando and drawn by Cory Smith.\nIn May 2025, it was announced that there will be a new version of Shang-Chi in the new Ultimate Universe.\nName.\nThe name Shang-Chi was conceived by co-creator Steve Englehart through his study of the I-Ching, combining \u5347 () witch \u6c23 () to represent \"the rising and advancing of the spirit\".\nIn 2019, American actor Ronny Chieng, of Malaysian Chinese descent, opined that Marvel should not use () as the characters for Shang-Chi, as it literally means \"upper air\" and seemed strange to Chieng. He proposed () instead, or () to preserve Englehart's original intent. In \"The Ultimates\" #15, the Ultimate Universe version of Shang-Chi is called Shen Qi, which translates as miraculous.\nFictional character biography.\n\"Master of Kung Fu\".\nShang-Chi was born in Henan Province, China, and is the son of Zheng Zu who at the time was using the alias of Dr. Fu Manchu. Shang-Chi was trained from infancy in the martial arts by his father and his tutors. Believing his father was a benevolent humanitarian, Shang-Chi is sent on a mission to London to murder Dr. James Petrie, who his father claimed was a threat to peace. After assassinating Petrie, Shang-Chi encounters Manchu's archenemy Sir Denis Nayland Smith, who tells Shang-Chi his father's true nature. Realizing Smith is telling the truth, Shang-Chi escapes from Manchu's Manhattan headquarters, telling his father they are now enemies and vowing to put an end to his evil schemes.\nShang-Chi subsequently fights his adoptive brother Midnight, who was sent by their father to kill Shang-Chi for his defection, and then encounters Smith's \"aide-de-camp\" and MI-6 agent Black Jack Tarr, sent by Smith to apprehend Shang-Chi. After several encounters and coming to trust one another, Shang-Chi becomes an ally of Sir Denis Nayland Smith and MI-6. Together with Smith, Tarr, fellow MI-6 agents Clive Reston and Leiko Wu (his eventual love interest), and Dr. Petrie, Shang-Chi goes on many adventures and missions, usually thwarting his father's plans for world domination. Shang-Chi occasionally encounters his half-sister Fah Lo Suee, who leads her own faction of the Si-Fan but opposes her attempts to co-opt him into her own schemes to usurp their father's criminal empire.\nWith Smith, Tarr, Reston, Wu and Petrie, Shang-Chi forms Freelance Restorations, Ltd, an independent spy agency based in Stormhaven Castle, Scotland. After many skirmishes and battles, Shang-Chi witnesses the death of Fu Manchu. Soon after his father's death, a guilt-ridden Shang-Chi quits Freelance Restorations, severs all ties with his former allies, forsakes his life as an adventurer, and retires to a village in remote Yang-Tin, China, to live as a fisherman.\nReturn.\nSome time later, Shang-Chi returns from China and rejoins Tarr, Reston, and Wu. They battle Argus' terrorist group that aims to cause the United States to act more aggressively against all terrorists. Argus has Wu tortured, cutting off her hand. Shang-Chi and the others rescue Wu, but Shang-Chi imbibes a dose of a slow-acting poison. He is cured by Dr. Fu Manchu's elixir vitae.\nHis father's criminal empire split into factions: Sleeping Dragon Clan (led by Chiang Kai-Dong), Steel Lotus Group (led by Hsien Ming-Ho), Wild Tiger Mob (led by Deng Ling-Xiao) and Coiled Serpent Syndicate (led by Mao Liu-Cho). Kingpin takes control of his own faction of the Si-Fan in Hong Kong and provides them cybernetics. Shang-Chi joins forces with the X-Men and Elektra Natchios against the Kingpin's Si-Fan.\nAfter collaborating with British Intelligence, Fah Loh Suee was eventually placed as a director of MI-6. Her endeavors perpetually placed her at odds with Shang-Chi and his fellow MI-6 agents. Years later, she once again became involved in the criminal underworld. Now going by the name the Cursed Lotus, she headed a narcotics empire supplying a highly addictive drug, Wild Tiger, with Deng Ling-Xiao and the Wild Tiger, acting as a front for her in Hong Kong. Despite the Wild Tiger Mob being brought down by Shang-Chi, she eludes capture. Shang-Chi never discovers his half-sister's involvement.\nFu Manchu eventually resurfaces and employed Zaran (Zhou Man She) to retrieve a chemical from A.I.M. and later directed him to kill Shang-Chi for him. He sent his dacoits to aid Zaran against Shang-Chi and the Marvel Knights. Although they succeeded in destroying the building that Shang-Chi was in, Zaran failed to slay him.\nLater retakes control of the Si-Fan but his plot to deploy his Hellfire Weapon is thwarted once again by his son and his allies, at that time it was known as Comte de Saint Germain or Ghost. Shang-Chi have rejoined MI-6, against his father and his previously unknown half-brother Moving Shadow. The mission results in his father's Hellfire weapon being destroyed and Moving Shadow's death at Dr. Fu Manchu's hand for his failure in killing Shang-Chi.\n\"Heroes for Hire\".\nAs a member of the restored Heroes for Hire, Shang-Chi puts his strength of character at the service of their teammates. Humbug, turning against the heroes, tried to double-cross both his friends and the \"Earth Hive\" of insects, joining the Hive. Shang-Chi refuses to kill Humbug until he finds Humbug has no qualms about torturing the Tarantula if it means less suffering for Colleen. Shang-Chi snaps his neck and leaves with the catatonic Tarantula, ashamed of becoming a soulless murderer.\nStill working for MI-6, Shang-Chi collaborates with Pete Wisdom of MI-13 in facing the Welsh dragon, which has become a human crime lord. He becomes the tutor of a young Earth-616 Killraven.\nHeroic Age.\nIn the \"Shadowland\" storyline, Shang-Chi is one of the heroes fighting the Hand's ninjas. He later works together with Spider-Man against Mister Negative and temporarily takes Mister Negative's powers until Shang-Chi is brought back to normal by Spider-Man.\nIn \"Secret Avengers\", Steve Rogers tracks down Shang-Chi to help turn back the Shadow Council, which has partially resurrected Shang-Chi's father and employed the Hai-Dai, a squad of assassins, to hunt Shang-Chi down. Beast reveals to Shang-Chi and the Secret Avengers Dr. Fu Manchu is really an ancient sorcerer named Zheng Zu. When Shang-Chi and Rogers meet with John Steele and the Shadow Council for the prisoner exchange, Rogers is overpowered by Steele and Shang-Chi is captured. While Zheng Zu prepares to sacrifice Shang-Chi to complete his resurrection, the Avengers and Moon Knight drop in on him and the Shadow Council. The Prince of Orphans disrupts the ritual, resulting in Zheng Zu's death and Shang-Chi's rescue. Shang-Chi subsequently joins the Secret Avengers, but leaves the team following the defeat of Arnim Zola 4.2.3. The reveal of Zu's true identity results in Fah Lo Suee's real identity, Zheng Bao Yu, being revealed as well. Now in full control of the Hai-Dai, Bao Yu resumes her father's long-forgotten experiment of bio-engineering Brood eggs as weapons, which she uses to carry out hits in New York's Chinatown. The plot is uncovered by Misty Knight and Annabelle Riggs of the Fearless Defenders with help from Elsa Bloodstone; the three track Bao Yu and the Hai-Dai assassins and scientists to an underground laboratory. With the help of No-Name of the Brood, the Fearless Defenders defeat the Hai-Dai and destroy the experiments, forcing Bao Yu to teleport away from her lair.\nPer the instructions of the new Madame Web, Shang-Chi is assigned to train Spider-Man in kung fu to compensate for the loss of his spider-sense, which was 'overloaded' after the wall-crawler had to transmit a strong signal on the same frequency to disable a drone army of Spider-Slayers. Under Shang-Chi's tutelage, Spider-Man develops his own martial arts style, the \"Way of the Spider\".\nDuring the events of \"Spider-Island\", Shang-Chi and other inhabitants of Manhattan are infected by the Spider-Virus, giving him the same powers and abilities as Spider-Man. Shang-Chi is also plagued by recurring nightmares of himself as a spider attacking innocent civilians. People with spider-powers run amok in the city. When he sees Iron Fist and other heroes fighting Spider-Man impostors and Peter Parker nearby, Shang-Chi protects Parker and confirms Spider-Man's identity to the other heroes. Meanwhile, the Bride of Nine Spiders attacks and abducts her teammates in the Immortal Weapons. Shang-Chi attempts to stop the Bride of Nine Spiders from abducting Iron Fist with his newly acquired powers, but is unsuccessful.\nShang-Chi learns from Silver Sable that she has found possible locations in Manhattan for the Bride of Nine Spiders' lair. Although Shang-Chi defeats the Bride of Nine Spiders and frees Iron Fist, he discovers the real culprit: the demon Ai Apaec, who seeks to feed off the Immortal Weapons. Shang-Chi fights Ai Apeac and mutates into a spider during the battle as a result of his infection, but Iron Fist uses his chi force to cure Shang-Chi. After making sure Iron Fist and the rest of the Immortal Weapons are evacuated, Shang-Chi collapses the mansion hideout on Ai Apeac, leaving him immobilized for the Avengers to put back into custody. Shang-Chi and the Immortal Weapons arrive to join the heroes during the final stand against the Spider Queen.\nMarvel NOW!\nDuring the Marvel NOW! relaunch, Shang-Chi joins the Avengers after being recruited by Captain America and Iron Man.\nDuring the events of \"Infinity\", Shang-Chi and the Avengers join the Galactic Council to fight against the Builders and their crusade against all life in the universe. When several allies were captured by the enemy, Shang forms a rescue team with the Black Widow, Spider-Woman and Manifold. Wielding a pair of energy projecting gauntlets, Shang's timely intervention prevented his friends from being vaporized by an Aleph. After the Builders' defeat, the Avengers return to Earth with their new Galactic Council allies to face off against an even bigger threat back home \u2013 Thanos. Shang is sent along with the Black Widow and Manifold the infiltrate the Peak and shut down Thanos' first line of defense; however, the team is intercepted by Black Dwarf and his guards. As Manifold returned to grab reinforcements, Shang and Natasha managed to defeat the entire security force, save the general who proved to be too much for even the Master of Kung Fu. The combined might of Gladiator, Ronan the Accuser and other Council members eventually made short work of the Black Dwarf and allows Shang and the infiltration team to complete their mission.\nWith the threat of both the Builders and Thanos thwarted, Shang-Chi is sent to Madripoor along with the Black Widow, the Falcon, and Wolverine to stop a full-scale riot that has broken throughout out the island nation. Shang-Chi infiltrates a temple housed by the Hand but is too late to stop the Hand's new leader, the Gorgon, from completing a ritual which raises the island out of the water up upon the head of a massive dragon. When the dragon begins to take flight, Shang-Chi quickly takes out all of the present Hand ninjas at the temple and challenges the Gorgon. Despite a valiant effort, Shang-Chi is defeated by the Gorgon, who throws Shang-Chi from the edge of the dragon's head several hundred feet above the ground. Shang-Chi is rescued by the Chinese intelligence-gathering agency S.P.E.A.R and is taken to their air-bound base, the Circle, to recuperate. Shang-Chi, along with the Avengers and S.P.E.A.R.'s superhuman response team the Ascendants, go to Shanghai to defend the city from the dragon and the Hand's forces. Using Pym Particles supplied to him by S.P.E.A.R. director Xian Zheng, Shang Chi grows to the size of a giant and defeats the dragon in combat, but not before enacting payback by tearing off the Hand's temple (with a screaming Gorgon still trapped inside) from the dragon's head and throwing it several miles away.\nWhen the Illuminati were exposed to have tampered with the mind of Captain America and attempting to destroy worlds threatening Earth as part of the Incursions as seen in the \"Time Runs Out\" storyline, Shang-Chi joined a faction of the Avengers led by Sunspot. Sunspot's Avengers, having taken control over A.I.M., discovered that \"Incursion points\" (points where an Incursion world that is about to hit Earth can be seen) were causing a massive number of physical mutations among those who stumbled upon the locations. Sending Shang-Chi to an Incursion point in Japan, Shang-Chi was exposed to cosmic-level radiation that transformed Shang-Chi into a mutate capable of creating duplicates of himself.\nAfter capturing Crossbones for a mission, Shang-Chi is informed by Captain America about his former lover Leiko Wu's murder at the hands of Razor Fist while working undercover for MI-6 in one of London's triads. Shang-Chi travels to London for Leiko's funeral and while wondering around Chinatown, he is attacked by unknown assailants, one whom reveals that the crime lord the White Dragon was behind the murder. Shang-Chi is approached by triad clan leader and former enemy Skull-Crusher who offers him a truce; Chao Sima alleges he and Leiko became lovers while she was working undercover and had planned to defect from MI-6 for him. With help from Skull-Crusher and the newly arrived Daughters of the Dragon and the Sons of the Tiger, Shang-Chi confirms that Razor Fist was hired by the White Dragon to kill Leiko due to her involvement with his rival Skull-Crusher and discovers that the White Dragon has access to Mao Shan Pai, a powerful Chinese black magic. Shang-Chi and Skull-Crusher infiltrate the White Dragon's estate, where they discover a room displaying the severed heads of missing triad leaders. The two of them fight the White Dragon but are captured by Shang-Chi's brother, Midnight Sun, who reveals himself to be the true mastermind behind the White Dragon. With the Mao Shan Pai spellbook taken by the White Dragon's men, M'Nai plans to use its magic to give him power and influence over the triad clans, finally fulfilling Zheng Zu's legacy. Needing the heads of the clan leaders in order to complete the ritual, Midnight Sun beheads the White Dragon and Skull-Crusher and proceeds to cast the spell. Instead of giving him power, the spell resurrects Leiko from Chao's spilled blood. Since Skull-Crusher made her the leader of his clan before her death, Chao's death violated the ritual and resurrected Leiko to punish Midnight Sun. Shang-Chi is able to knock out Midnight Sun during their fight while Leiko brutally maims Razor Fist. Leiko uses her newfound powers to summon the dead spirits of Skull-Crusher, the White Dragon and the other dead triad leaders, who drag Midnight Sun into their realm. When Leiko attempts to execute Razor Fist, Shang-Chi pleads with his former lover to stop; while he is able to get Leiko to spare Razor Fist, he is unable to bring her back to her normal self. Black Jack Tarr (now director of MI-6) and his men raid the estate; Razor Fist and the White Dragon's men are arrested while Leiko escapes. Before leaving London, Shang-Chi leaves a photo of him and Leiko at her grave, which is later taken by Leiko after he leaves.\n\"The Protectors\".\nShang-Chi joins several other Asian American superheroes (the Hulk (Amadeus Cho), Silk, Ms. Marvel, Jimmy Woo, and S.H.I.E.L.D. agent Jake Oh) for a fundraiser in Flushing, Queens. Later, while the group is spending the night out in Koreatown, Manhattan, they are ambushed by the alien Prince Regent Phalkan and his small army from Seknarf Seven. Shang-Chi and his allies briefly fight off the invaders before they and a large group of bystanders are teleported near Seknarf Seven, where Phalkan demands that the group offer a few people for food within a time limit. Dubbing their group \"the Protectors\", Woo rallies the group and bystanders into working together to escape, while Shang-Chi leads an attack with Silk and Ms. Marvel. The Protectors are eventually able to free themselves and defeat Phalkan and his forces with the help of the bystanders. The Alpha Flight Space Program arrives to rescue the Protectors and bystanders and arrest Phalkan, who Sasquatch reveals was exiled from Seknarf Seven for treason.\n\"Secret Empire\".\nDuring the 2017 \"Secret Empire\" storyline, Shang-Chi is found to have been a prisoner of Hydra in Madripoor following Hydra's takeover of the United States. After Hive and Gorgon are defeated, the Tony Stark A.I. finds him and he states that he does not have the Cosmic Cube shard anymore. A flashback revealed that Emma Frost took the Cosmic Cube shard from him when he was unconscious. Shang-Chi was later seen with the Underground when they and other American superheroes are fighting Hydra forces in Washington, D.C.\n\"Domino\".\nSeeking a way to fight her ability-stealing adversary Topaz, Domino approaches Shang-Chi (who was referred to her by his Protectors teammate Amadeus Cho) at his retreat in Lantau Island for training. After a long training session, the two spend a romantic night out in Hong Kong, only to be ambushed at a night club by a large group of Shang-Chi's enemies, led by Midnight Sun and including Razor Fist, Shen Kuei, Shockwave, Death-Hand, Shadow Stalker, Tiger-Claw and others. Domino and Shang-Chi defeat them with relative ease. The two are eventually confronted by Topaz who Domino defeats using Shang-Chi's teachings. Despite Shang-Chi's pleas for mercy, Domino kills Topaz. Disappointed, Shang-Chi breaks up with Domino and dismisses her as his student.\n\"War of the Realms\".\nIn \"The War of the Realms\" storyline, after taking part in a demonstration for Jimmy Woo's Pan-Asian School for the Unusually Gifted in Mumbai, Shang-Chi and the Protectors are offered membership to Woo's Agents of Atlas. Shang-Chi and the others are suddenly alerted by the news of Malekith's invasion of Earth; most of the New Agents of Atlas head to Seoul while Ms. Marvel joins Jake Oh and the Champions in New York. Shang-Chi and the others defend Seoul from Malekith's ally Queen Sindr and her Fire Goblin forces from Muspelheim with help from the Korean heroes White Fox, Crescent, and Luna Snow. After Sindr threatens to summon a volcano in the middle of the city and kill millions of innocents, Brawn teleports Atlas and their new allies away from the battle, allowing Sindr to peacefully annex South Korea. Brawn eventually summons the Chinese heroes the Sword Master and Aero, Filipina heroine Wave, and the Hawaiian Goddess of Fire and Volcanoes Pele from Shanghai to help assist in the fight against Sindr. The newly summoned heroes are less than pleased for being taken out of their previous battle, but Pele quickly puts a stop to the infighting, warning the group that Sindr plans to melt the polar ice caps if they do not work together. After formulating a plan, Brawn confronts Sindr and her forces directly while Aero, Wave and Luna use Sindr's Black Bifrost to travel to the Arctic to decrease its temperature; Shang-Chi and the others are teleported to Atlas' ally the Monkey King of the Ascendants in Northern China, where Shang-Chi begins training the remaining members for their final fight. As planned by Brawn, the Queen of Cinders arrives in Northern China with a captured Brawn, only to be taken by surprise by Shang-Chi and the others, who defeat Sindr with Shang-Chi's training, although Pele (who is revealed to have been M-41 Zu, a mystically enhanced Atlas android) and the Monkey King sacrifice themselves in the process. Despite given the chance to surrender, Sindr flees using the Black Bifrost, only for Shang-Chi and the others to follow her with Brawn's teleporter, where they help Captain Marvel defeat her and her remaining forces at the Great Wall of China near Beijing. Shang-Chi is later shown fighting the remaining Fire Goblins alongside Wolverine, Hawkeye, and the Warriors Three in Shanghai. After Malekith's defeat, Shang-Chi is seen with the other Agents in Shanghai looking on while the captured Fire Goblins are escorted back to Muspelheim.\nNew Agents of Atlas.\nShortly after the \"War of the Realms\" storyline, Shang-Chi encounters the Sword Master in New York City, who is searching for his missing father. Noticing the upstart hero's inexperience and recklessness, Shang takes Lin Lie under his wing to improve his skills. While Shang-Chi and the Sword Master are continuing their training in Flushing, they are interrupted when white lights begin engulfing the city. The two, who are reunited with the other Atlas agents and Giant-Man discover the cities they were in (along with other Asian, Pacific and predominantly Asian cities outside of Asia) have been merged and connected together with portals. Tech mogul Mike Nguyen of the Big Nguyen Company reveals himself to be behind the newly merged city, \"Pan\", which he states for 24 hours would allow every citizen to easily explore each other's respective cities without any political and economic restrictions.\nSometime later, Shang-Chi and the Sword Master are confronted by Ares, who attempts to take Lin Lie's Fuxi sword. Shang-Chi makes a compromise to Ares: in exchange for Shang-Chi and the Sword Master helping him, Ares would help find Lin Lie's missing father. Ares accepts, explaining that his drakon son Ismenios had been abducted and that he wished to use the sword to kill Ismenios' kidnapper, who Ares believes to be another god. Using Pan Portals, the three are able to track Ismenios to a temple in Madripoor, where they encounter Davi Naka, the Mother Goddess of Madripoor. Naka reveals that Ismenios attempted to plunder Atlantis's treasure hoard during the absence of its sea serpent guardian, but was caught by Namor. Due to her duty to protect all dragons, Naka rescued Ismenios from Namor's wrath and imprisoned the young drakon in her temple for his protection and to placate the king. Naka further warns the group that despite her efforts, Namor is still outraged over the disappearance of his dragon and implores them to find her.\nAmadeus later approaches Shang-Chi and tasks him with locating Jimmy Woo, who has not contacted the team since Pan's creation. Along with Crescent, Shang-Chi infiltrates Woo's office in the Pan-Asian School for the Unusually Gifted in the Mumbai sector of Pan, where he discovers a photograph of Woo and Nguyen together. Shang-Chi and Crescent discover a secret tunnel in Woo's office that takes them to the Atlas Foundation's headquarters in the Pan sector of San Francisco, where they confront Woo and the Atlas Foundation's dragon adviser Mr. Lao, who introduces himself to the Atlas agents. Concurrently, the other Agents find Atlantis' missing sea serpent imprisoned in Nguyen's personal tower, where her magical scales are being harvested to power Pan's portals. Woo and Lao order the team to immediately release her while Nguyen argues that doing so would disrupt Pan's portals. Before a decision can be made, Namor emerges from the waters off of Pan's coast to reclaim his stolen dragon, kickstarting a war between Pan and Atlantis.\n\"Atlantis Attacks\".\nIn the 2020 \"Atlantis Attacks\" storyline, Shang-Chi and the other New Agents of Atlas are summoned by Brawn during his confrontation with Namor. Namor warns the group to return Atlantis' dragon in a day or else face the wrath of Atlantis before retreating. After the skirmish, Shang-Chi and the other New Agents are introduced to the original Agents of Atlas by Woo. When Woo sends Namora, Venus, Aero and Wave to Atlantis for a diplomatic mission, Brawn discretely orders Shang-Chi and the Sword Master to spy on Namora, due to her familial ties with Namor. The dragon is eventually released from captivity, but upon arriving home she unexpectedly goes berserk and attacks the underwater kingdom. Witnessing the destruction caused by the dragon, Shang-Chi relays to Amadeus that Atlantis' scientists discovered an implant embedded in the dragon's scales to be the source of her behavior and that Namor believes Amadeus to be behind the sabotage, prompting the king to resume his attack on Pan. When Amadeus is forcibly transformed into the Hulk and put under Nguyen's control with Sirena tech in a last ditch effort to destroy Atlantis, Shang-Chi is able to remove the device from Amadeus, freeing him from Nguyen's control and reverting him back into Brawn. After the conflict, Shang-Chi admonishes Woo for using the team as his pawns and subsequently quits.\n\"Brothers and Sisters\".\nYearning for an ordinary life, Shang-Chi relocates to San Francisco's Chinatown but crosses paths with Leiko, who had rejoined MI-6. When Leiko informs him that his father's organization might be active again, they are attacked by unknown assailants but are rescued by Brother Sabre and Sister Dagger, who reveal themselves to be Shang-Chi's half-siblings. The two reveal to Shang-Chi that he has been chosen by Zheng Zu's spirit as the next Supreme Commander of the Five Weapons Society, a secret organization created by their father centuries ago, the society has used various names over the years such as Si-Fan, Golden Dawn and Hai-Dai; it is also revealed to Shang-Chi that the Honan retreat he was raised in was the House of the Deadly Hand, one of the Society's five houses, and that he was its designated champion, Brother Hand. Sabre and Dagger ask their half-brother to return to their family and reclaim his rightful place as leader of the Society from its illegitimate leader Sister Hammer, who usurped control from the previous Commander, Brother Staff, and sent Staff's Warriors to kill Shang-Chi to consolidate her rule. Realizing that Hammer is his long-lost full sister, Shi-Hua, Shang-Chi vows to save her from his father's cult.\nShang-Chi arrives at the House of the Deadly Staff in London, where he and Shi-Hua surprisingly have a tearful reunion. Shi-Hua explains to Shang-Chi the history of the Five Weapons Society and its five houses, which had gone through many names, including the Si-Fan, the Golden Dawn and Hai Dai; Shi-Hua reveals that she had been sent to the House of the Deadly Hammer in Russia as its Champion following their separation. Shang-Chi reveals the truth of their father's nature and attempts to convince Shi-Hua to leave the Society, but is rebuked. Mistakenly believing that Shang-Chi murdered Zheng Zu, Shi-Hua is outraged that their father's spirit would choose Shang-Chi over her to succeed him and reveals that she can only be legitimized as the Society's Supreme Commander by killing Shang-Chi. Shang-Chi realizes that his sister had poisoned him and begins to succumb to its effects. Instead of dying, Shang-Chi awakens in one of the House's laboratory, whose panicked scientists unleash a swarm of jiangshi to kill him. Shang-Chi is grievously wounded by a jiangshi and, before losing consciousness, he is rescued by Sabre and Dagger. While recuperating at the House of the Deadly Dagger in France, Shang-Chi is provided with a new ceremonial uniform and trains with Sabre and Dagger (who reveal their birth names to be Takeshi and Esme, respectively, to him) to prepare against Shi-Hua's jiangshi, which are powered by spirit energy and an \"unavenged grievance\". Shang-Chi notices that his wound has begun turning his flesh to resemble a jiangshi's, making him realize that he is slowly turning into one. A dilapidated spirit beckons Shang-Chi to the House's shrine room. Believing him to be his father, Shang-Chi uncovers a shrine dedicated to Zheng Zu's younger brother, Zheng Yi, and a mysterious map. The spirit reveals himself to be Yi and disappears before explaining anything else.\nGuided by the map, Shang-Chi and his siblings are directed to Yi's tomb in Henan, where Yi's spirit appears to him in full flesh. Shang-Chi requests Yi's guidance in stopping Shi-Hua and her jiangshi and to heal his festering wound inflicted by the jiangshi. Instead, Yi's spirit tells Shang-Chi to stop running away from his family, otherwise he would lose his way like his father and that his wounds would lead to something greater. Yi also reveals that Zu did not steal his life essence for immortality, but willingly gave it when Zu tried to save him from dying.\nWhen Shi-Hua and her jiangshi army attack London, Shang-Chi and his siblings arrive as back-up for Leiko and MI-6, providing them with paper amulets to purify the jiangshi. Shang-Chi begins to succumb to his wound and partially transforms into a jiangshi, allowing Shi-Hua to control his body to attack Takeshi and Esme. When Shang-Chi starts resisting, Shi-Hua plants a microchip containing her unavenged grievance on him to put him under her complete control. Instead of resisting, Shang-Chi calms himself, which transports the two to an astral plane where they witness memories of Shi-Hua's harsh upbringing by their father at the House of the Deadly Hand in Russia. Realizing that her anger is at Zheng Zu rather than Shang-Chi, Shi-Hua stops her assault, causing the jiangshi to collapse and Shang-Chi's wounds to heal. However, Shi-Hua blames Shang-Chi for robbing her of her life's purpose and flees before Leiko can apprehend her. On the day of the Lunar New Year, Shang-Chi is named the new Supreme Commander of the Five Weapons Society and with Takeshi and Esme at his side, Shang-Chi vows to keep the Society free of Zheng Zu's influence and to use it to protect all humankind. After the ceremony, Shang-Chi is visited by Zheng Zu's spirit, who congratulates him and comments that he is destined to become like him, unsettling Shang-Chi.\n\"The Equinox Blade\".\nWhile Shang-Chi is still in London, Leiko approaches him on behalf of MI-6 and asks him to steal the mystical Equinox Blade from the British Museum before it could be auctioned off due to the danger the sword poses . Leiko guides Shang-Chi via earpiece through the museum's security systems, but he encounters Lady Deathstrike, who had just stolen the blade and used its power to steal the souls of the museum's guards. After a prolonged struggle and with Leiko's help, Shang-Chi knocks Deathstrike out of a window and destroys the blade, freeing the souls it consumed to return to its victims. For his trouble, Leiko treats Shang-Chi to gelato.\n\"Project Gelsemium\".\nShortly after taking control of the Five Weapons Society, Shang-Chi and Leiko spend vacation together in Seoul, where they witness several gas bombs detonate across the city, turning victims into trees. After helping White Fox rescue civilians from a gas explosion, they receive a broadcast of similar explosions happening in major cities worldwide. The three track the origin of one of the diffusors to an A.I.M. laboratory in London to, where they encounter scientist Jessa Chen, who claims she and other scientists are being forced against their will to create the bioweapon, named the Gelsemium Molecule. Leiko takes Chen to safety while Shang-Chi and White Fox fight A.I.M. guards; however Chen reveals herself as Doctor Gelsemium, the true mastermind behind the Gelsemium Molecule and uses her tree-like physiology to restrain Leiko before exposing her to a Molecule sample, taking her to a laboratory in the Pacific Northwest. With the help of Gelsemium's former co-workers who used to work for his father, Shang-Chi and White Fox find Leiko through her tracker and fight Gelsemium. After Gelsemium is defeated, Leiko is cured with an antidote which later supplied to Gelsemium's victims around the world.\n\"What Is vs. What If\".\nShang-Chi encounters the Ruguo Coin and is faced with an alternate version of himself who remained faithful to his father from \"What If\" #16 (August 1979).\n\"Enter the Phoenix\".\nDuring the \"Enter the Phoenix\" storyline, Shang-Chi is chosen by the Phoenix Force to participate in her tournament alongside many other superheroes and supervillains to decide her next host. Along with the other champions, Shang-Chi is empowered by a spark of the Phoenix's cosmic fire and wins his first match against Hyperion, who is unable to control the Phoenix's power and immediately surrenders without fighting. For his next match, Shang-Chi is pitted against Captain America, who plans to throw the match and help train Shang-Chi into controlling the Phoenix, as he believes Shang-Chi is the ideal choice for the entity's next avatar. Before Shang-Chi can land the final blow, he vows to not use his powers to take another life, causing the Phoenix to intervene and eliminate him from the tournament, giving Captain America the win.\n\"Shang-Chi vs. the Marvel Universe\".\nAs the new Supreme Commander of the Five Weapons Society, Shang-Chi finds himself struggling with balancing his loyalties between the superhero community and his family obligations. Sister Dagger and Brother Sabre become increasingly frustrated with the new direction Shang-Chi has for the Society while his newfound involvement with his father's criminal empire puts his superhero allies on edge. After establishing a new House of the Deadly Hand in New York City's Chinatown to serve as the Society's main headquarters, Shang-Chi is reunited with his exiled mutant half-sister Zheng Zhilan, who rejoins their family as the new Sister Staff, and his biological mother Jiang Li, who had been previously trapped in the Negative Zone for years. After Brother Sabre steals a Cosmic Cube from Captain America without Shang-Chi's knowledge to help his former lover Lady Iron Fan escape Captain America's custody, the Avengers, Spider-Man and Mister Fantastic confront Shang-Chi and the Society to reclaim the Cube. Shang-Chi realizes the truth when Brother Sabre discreetly uses the Cube's power to help Shang-Chi defeat Thor and relinquishes the Cube along with Takeshi as a prisoner to the Avengers. Despite Spider-Man and Jiang Li reassuring him, Shang-Chi's relationship with his siblings becomes strained while his former allies remain unconvinced of his conviction. Unbeknownst to Shang-Chi, these events are being orchestrated by Chieftain Xin, an old enemy of Zheng Zu, who conspires with Zhilan, Lady Iron Fan and former Society allies King Wild Man and the Red Dot Collective to bring an end to Shang-Chi's rule.\n\"Family of Origin\" and \"Blood and Monsters\".\nWhile spending time with his mother at the New House of the Deadly Hand, Jiang Li reveals her past to Shang-Chi, including her history as a Qilin Rider from the mystical dimension of Ta-Lo and how she met and married his father. Shang-Chi and Jiang Li are ambushed by Zhilan, Red Dot, King Wild Man, Lady Iron Fan and their henchmen; Jiang Li uses her psionic abilities to detect that they are being led by Xin, her father. Zhilan reveals that her betrayal is a ruse and helps Shang-Chi and the Society defeat the would-be assassins. Jiang Li explains to Shang-Chi the circumstances surrounding her disappearance and Xin's hatred towards Zu and his bloodline. Unfortunately, the assassins take Jiang Li hostage and escape though a portal created by Xin to Qilin Island. When Shang-Chi proves too difficult to defeat in combat, Xin resorts to creating several \"taotie\" from Shang-Chi's blood to hunt down anyone who possesses the bloodline of Zheng Zu. Shang-Chi rescues Takeshi and Shi-Hua when they are both attacked by \"taotie\" and the Qilin Riders, respectively, and reconciles with both of them. With all five of the Champions of the Five Weapons Society back together, Shang-Chi and his siblings take a makeshift portal to Ta-Lo to rescue his mother and stop his grandfather. The siblings are confronted by the Jade Emperor's guards for trespassing, with the Emperor himself arriving to capture them with his Ten Rings. While imprisoned in the Jade Palace dungeon, Zheng Zu's spirit visits Shang-Chi to convince him to take the Ten Rings to stop Xin from destroying their family. Xin, empowered by a \"taotie\" mask created from Shang-Chi's blood and Shi-Hua's severed hand, arrives at the dungeon to destroy the Zheng bloodline once and for all. Shang-Chi reluctantly allows his father to guide him to the Jade Emperor's vault containing the Ten Rings, donning them to save his siblings from his grandfather. When Shang-Chi tries resisting Zheng Zu's influence, Xin is able to take six of the Rings from him and defeats the Champions before heading to the House of the Deadly Hand to join the Qilin Riders in destroying the Society. Shang-Chi and his siblings are protected by the four remaining Rings, which is witnessed by the Jade Emperor, who allows Shang-Chi and the others to leave Ta-Lo to stop Xin on the condition that he returns the Ten Rings. At the House of the Deadly Hand, Shang-Chi fights Xin again but loses the remaining Ten Rings to his grandfather, who then orders the Riders to destroy New York City. With no other option, Shang-Chi gives in to Zu's influence, allowing him to reclaim all of the Rings from Xin, unlocking their full power and taking on his father's appearance and personality. Shang-Chi then uses the Rings to defeat Xin and all the Qilin Riders. Before a corrupted Shang-Chi can execute Xin, he is talked down by Jiang Li and his siblings, freeing him from Zu's influence. Shang-Chi has the Five Weapons Society repair the damage done to the city and tend to wounded civilians, revealing the Society's existence and his leadership to the public but restores his superhero allies' faith in him. Afterwards, Shang-Chi hands Xin and the Ten Rings to the Jade Emperor, who appoints Jiang Li as the new Chieftain of the Qilin Riders, forcing her to stay in Ta-Lo. Shang-Chi's siblings go their separate ways but leave on good terms with him. One month after the ordeal, Shang-Chi discovers that the Ten Rings have left Ta-Lo and arrived at the House of the Deadly Hand.\n\"Secrets\" and \"Fool Me Twice\".\nSometime before the Ten Rings return to him, Shang-Chi reunites with Jimmy Woo to take down illegal fighting rings organized by Crossfire, where unwilling participants, particularly those of color, are mentally coerced in fighting each other by Crossfire's brainwashing technology. After Crossfire and his brokers apprehended by the two with help from the Agents of Atlas, Five Weapons Society, Champions and Leiko, Shang-Chi and Jimmy reflect on their similar backgrounds and different upbringings before reconciling with each other. Shang-Chi later discovers that the Eyes of the Dragon survived their destruction and were stolen by the Inhuman criminal Kamran. Shang-Chi, Sister Dagger and Sister Staff track down the Eyes to Jersey City, New Jersey, where they prevent Kamran from using the Eyes on Ms. Marvel to sacrifice her life to prolong that of his boss, the Inhuman crimelord Lineage.\n\"Shang-Chi and the Ten Rings\".\nUnable to access the gateways to Ta-Lo, Shang-Chi has the Ten Rings sealed in a vault within the House of the Deadly Hand. Due to the final battle between Shang-Chi and Xin being televised all over the world, the Ten Rings have become public knowledge, prompting several criminal organizations into attacking the House of the Deadly Hand to claim the Rings, forcing Shang-Chi to don them again to fight them off. Shang-Chi leaves the Rings in another vault while accompanying Leiko in rescuing Clive Reston; Shang-Chi discovers the rescue mission is a ruse orchestrated by MI6 to keep him preoccupied while the Ten Rings are stolen by Black Jack Tarr and his men. When MI6 and MI13 accidentally summon an eldritch parasite called the Wyrm of Desolation with the Ten Rings, Shang-Chi saves them and reacquires the Rings, but not before admonishing his former friends for betraying him. These events are witnessed by the Xian Jinzha and Muzha, who question Shang-Chi's worthiness of wielding the Ten Rings, prompting them to host a Game of Rings to find a true Ring Keeper.\nShang-Chi and nine other fighters are summoned to the Meritorious Striving Pagoda in Ta-Lo as participants for the Game of Rings; each player is given one of the Ten Rings and forced to fight against one another in the pagoda, with the winner receiving all Ten Rings. Shang-Chi forms an alliance with Shen Kuei and each are able to claim two Rings apiece before advancing to the pagoda's next floor. On the next floor, Shang-Chi and Shen Kuei meet Jinzha and Muzha, who reveal the history of the Ten Rings to them. Shang-Chi and Shen Keui are attacked by Leiko, who had been possessed by a spawn of the Desolation Wyrm and entered the tournament as a contestant. After Shang-Chi frees her from the Wyrmspawn, Leiko apologizes to Shang-Chi for the theft of the Ten Rings and withdraws from the tournament. However, Shen Kuei betrays Shang-Chi and steals Leiko's Ring from him as both advance to the final floor of the pagoda. As Shang-Chi and Shen Kuei fight in the final round, Shen Kuei willingly consumes the Wrymspawn to defeat Shang-Chi. Shang-Chi is rescued by the other remaining player, Red Cannon, who reveals herself to be Shi-Hua. Shi-Hua destroys the Wyrmspawn but when she is prevented by Shang-Chi from killing Shen Kuei, she gives her Rings to Shang-Chi and withdraws from the tournament. Shang-Chi pleads with Jinzha and Muzha to heal Shen Kuei; the brothers honor his request and send Shen Kuei back to his home dimension. Shang-Chi is declared winner of the Game of Rings and is congratulated by Jiang Li and the Jade Emperor, who reveal themselves to have orchestrated the Game of Rings to test Shang-Chi's worthiness of wielding the Rings. The Emperor warns Shang-Chi of a looming threat to Earth that can only be stopped by a worthy Ring-Keeper on Earth, which was why he entrusted the Ten Rings with Shang-Chi.\nDuring a mission with his siblings to thwart a gang of Zheng Zu's loyalists from summoning an earlier version of their father from the past, Shang-Chi is accidentally sent back in time to the First Opium War where he encounters younger versions of Zheng Zu and Zheng Yi and that era's Deadly Warriors. Shang-Chi is taken aback by Zu's heroic and amiable personality and befriends him. The two work together to apprehend a corrupt constable and part on good terms as Shang-Chi is transported back to the present.\nGang War.\nDuring the events of \"Gang War\", Shang-Chi attends a meeting held by the heads of New York's criminal families following the attempted assassination of Tombstone, claiming that he acting in the best interests of the Five Weapons Society. As Tombstone's coma has left a power vacuum within the criminal underworld, tensions between rival superpowered gangs escalates to a city-wide gang war; due to the close proximities of their organizations' territories, Shang-Chi is forced to intervene during a destructive turf war between Mister Negative and Lady Yulan. Struggling between his commitment to New York's superheroes, maintaining the loyalty of the Society's battle hungry warriors and prioritizing Chinatown's safety, Shang-Chi minimalizes Society's activities as much as possible in the Gang War. Spider-Man confronts Shang-Chi for his involvement with the other crime lords, but Shang-Chi explains that he is only doing so to protect Chinatown's citizens and reassures Spider-Man that he would keep the Society confined to Chinatown. Believing that Shang-Chi's actions are weakening the Society, several members led by Captain Feng stage a coup against him, which Shang-Chi easily fights off. However, several of Feng's sorcerers trap the Ten Rings within a magic prison, robbing Shang-Chi of his weapons. Hoping to find a way to keep Chinatown safe without the Rings, Shang-Chi sends a message to Mr. Negative, Yulan and Diamondback, requesting they each send their best champion to challenge him in a duel for control of Chinatown. The three crimelords accept the challenge but attend the duel themselves. Shang-Chi easily defeats them but discovers they each had sent decoys in their places while focusing their attention on having their forces destroy each other, which Shang-Chi had planned to happen. While Shang-Chi's gambit to pit his biggest rivals against each other while keeping them out of Chinatown succeeds, it creates further destruction throughout the rest of city, prompting Mayor Luke Cage into gathering Spider-Man, Danny Rand, She-Hulk and Tombstone to confront him. Having anticipated this as well that his rivals would eventually team up against him after fighting each other, Shang-Chi manipulates the arriving heroes and villains into fighting each other at the House of the Deadly Hand while tricking Captain Feng and his sorcerers into releasing the Ten Rings, which he then uses to defeat the traitors and villains. With Chinatown safe and the Ten Rings back in his possession, Shang-Chi joins the other heroes in ending the Gang War.\nThunderbolts.\nShang-Chi is recruited by Bucky Barnes into his new Thunderbolts team to eliminate the Red Skull and his enterprises. Using the codename Gamemaster, Shang-Chi and Barnes travel to Hong Kong to intercept U.S. Agent and American Kaiju, who were tricked by the Red Skull's spies within the United States Army into destroying the Skull's remaining secret base to cover his escape. When Red Skull remotely forces American Kaiju to go on a rampage in the city, Shang-Chi orders the Five Weapons Society to protect citizens and provides Barnes with the mystical Ring of Kuafu, allowing Barnes to grow into the size of a giant to subdue American Kaiju. Shang-Chi and the Thunderbolts travel to Latveria to attack the Red Skull at his remaining base, which is successful after the team tricks Doctor Doom into attacking and killing the Skull.\n\"Avengers Assemble\".\nShang-Chi is one of several heroes recruited by Captain America to part of the Avengers Emergency Response Squad and is deployed on the team's first mission to stop Sin from terrorizing R\u00fcgen with her new powers; Shang-Chi and his team ultimately succeed. While later investigating a robbery that had been committed in R\u00fcgen during the fight against Sin, Shang-Chi is ambushed by the culprit Tiger Snake of the Serpent Society. The two fight to a standstill until Shang-Chi is forced to retreat when Tiger Snake poisons him. After recovering at Avengers Mansion, Shang-Chi reports the encounter with Tiger Snake to Captain America. Realizing that the Serpent Society had been using the crises that the AVENG.E.R.S. had been dealing with as cover for several robberies, Shang-Chi joins Captain America's team to confront Tiger Snake and the Serpent Society while they are committing a heist at a mine close to Latveria. They are too late to stop Pit Viper from completing a mysterious substance called the Serpent's Tears. Pit Viper attempts to make Shang-Chi his first test subject with the Serpent's Tears but Captain America jumps in the way; the Tears transform him into a humanoid snake-like monster. Despite this, the AVENG.E.R.S. reunite and rally together to defeat the Serpent Society, destroy the Serpent's Tears and revert Captain America back to human while Shang-Chi defeats Tiger Snake in a rematch.\nPowers and abilities.\nShang-Chi's fighting skills are so great that he has been able to beat numerous superhuman opponents. Shang-Chi is classed as an athlete but he is one of the best non-superhumans in martial arts and has dedicated much of his life to the art, being referred to by some as the greatest empty-hand fighter and practitioner of kung fu alive, with even Ares acknowledging him as one of the few mortals who can hold their own against a god without the use of magic. In addition, Shang-Chi has battled superpowered foes like Thing of the Fantastic Four in hand-to-hand combat and proved a formidable opponent. Many of his physical abilities seem to stem from his mastery of chi, which often allows him to surpass physical limitations of normal athletes. He has also demonstrated the ability to dodge and catch bullets from machine guns and sniper rifles, and is able to deflect gunshots with his bracers. Shang-Chi is also highly trained in concentration and meditation, and is an expert in various hand weapons including swords, staffs, kali sticks, nunchaku, and shuriken.\nHis style is known as the \"Way of the Deadly Hand\", due to his training at the House of the Deadly Hand.\nDue to his martial arts prowess, Shang-Chi is a highly sought out teacher and has mentored many characters in kung fu and hand-to-hand combat. Some of Shang-Chi's most prominent students and sparring partners have included Captain America, Spider-Man, and Wolverine.\nHe is also very in tune with the chi emitted by all living beings, to the point where he was able to detect the psionically masked Jean Grey by sensing her energy.\nDuring his time with the Avengers, Shang-Chi was given special equipment by Tony Stark. This included a pair of gauntlets that allowed him to focus his chi in ways that increased his strength and a pair of repulsor-powered nunchaku. Even without such equipment, his mastery of ki enables him to challenge powerful foes like the Builders or even gamma mutates.\nOriginally having no superpowers, Shang-Chi has temporarily gained superpowers on several occasions. During the events of \"Spider-Island\", he briefly gained the same powers and abilities as Spider-Man after being infected by the Spider-Virus. After mutating into a giant spider, he was cured of his infection by Iron Fist's chi, although at the cost of him losing his spider-powers. In \"Avengers World\" Shang-Chi briefly used Pym Particles to grow to immense size. Following exposure to the cosmic radiation from the Incursions, Shang-Chi was able to create an unlimited number of duplicates of himself.\nShortly after reuniting with his mother, Shang-Chi discovered that he inherited Jiang Li's psionic abilities, allowing him to form psychic bonds with his blood relatives. These bonds allow Shang-Chi to sense their location or feel any pain that is inflicted upon them. Shang-Chi's psionic abilities also extend to his dead relatives, allowing him to communicate and interact with the spirits of his deceased uncle and father.\nWhile adventuring in Ta-Lo, Shang-Chi acquired the heavenly Ten Rings from the Jade Emperor, granting him a variety of powers and abilities, including superhuman strength, speed, durability and stamina, as well as allowing him to fly and levitate. Shang-Chi can control the Rings telepathically which can be used in a variety of ways, including launching them as projectiles, utilizing them as platforms for transportation and generating makeshift chains to grab objects and restrain opponents. The Ten Rings can also alter their size, either shrinking down to fit Shang-Chi's wrists or enlarge themselves to ensnare a human. When Shang-Chi first wore the Ten Rings, his fear of their power corrupting him allowed Chieftain Xin to take control of the Rings away from him. However, when Shang-Chi gave in to his desire, he was able to reclaim the Ten Rings and unlock their potential, increasing his strength and abilities but giving him a similar likeness and personality of his father. Although Shang-Chi was able to completely fight off his father's influence, the Ten Rings still retained their unlocked power and loyalty to him.\nOther versions.\nEarth-79816.\nShang-Chi believes that his Zheng Zu is a benefactor, he is shown to be loyal to Zheng Zu and the Five Weapons Society.\nSecret Wars (2015).\nIn the 2015 \"Secret Wars\" storyline, a version of Shang-Chi resides in the wuxia-inspired K'un-Lun region of Battleworld. In this continuity, he is the exiled son of Emperor Zheng Zu, Master of the Ten Rings, a ruthless martial arts school that uses mystical powers and techniques based on the powers of the Mandarin's ten rings from the mainstream continuity. Shang-Chi is wanted for the murder of Lord Tuan, the master of the Iron Fist school, the main rivals of the Ten Rings school. A drunk vagabond, Shang-Chi is approached by Kitten to help teach her and her group of fellow outcasts who had been exiled from each of their respective schools the techniques of the Ten Rings. Ashamed by his upbringing, Shang-Chi coldly refuses and insults the group, outraging their leader, Callisto, who informs the emperor of Shang-Chi's whereabouts. The gang's hideout raided by K'un Lun's sheriff and Tuan's student Rand-K'ai, the emperor's assassin Red Sai of the Red Hand school and Ten Rings enforcer Laughing Skull but after Laughing Skull kills outcast Cy against Rand-K'ai's orders, Shang-Chi helps the group escape with the Nightbringer technique. A guilt ridden Shang-Chi agrees to take the outcasts as his pupils, dubbing their new school The Lowest Caste. Shang-Chi returns from his exile to represent the Lowest Caste for the tournament held every thirteen years to decide which participating master would be the next ruler of K'un-Lun. Zu allows Shang-Chi to participate but alters the rules so Shang-Chi would have to defeat every representative before facing him in the Thirteen Chambers. After defeating Namor, Drew, Karnak, Lady Mandarin, Ava, Creed, Spector and T'Challa in consecutive matches, Shang-Chi encounters Rand-K'ai and Red Sai in the penultimate match of the Thirteen Chambers. During the fight, Red Sai confesses that Zu had sent her to assassinate his rival Tuan but ultimately failed. To spare his lover and her students from the emperor's wrath, Shang-Chi killed Tuan; Zu implicated and exiled his son for the murder to cover his own involvement. After the truth is revealed, Red Sai and Rand-K'ai let Shang-Chi pass so that he could defeat his father. During the fight between Shang-Chi and Zheng Zu, Zu attempts to kill his son with the Spectral Touch technique, only for the move to pass through him due to Shang-Chi learning Kitten's technique to become intangible. Shang-Chi proceeds to use nine of the Ten Ring techniques against his father and ultimately defeats him with The Gorgon's Eye, which turns him into stone. With Zu's defeat, Shang-Chi becomes the new emperor of K'un-Lun.\nHouse of M.\nIn the alternate timeline of the \"House of M\" storyline, Shang-Chi never realizes his father's evil doings before his death at Magneto's hands. This causes him to become consumed with a desire for vengeance. In this reality, Shang-Chi is the head of the Dragons criminal organization, alongside Colleen Wing, the Swordsman, Mantis, Zaran the Weapons Master and Machete. The Dragons later resolved their rivalry against Luke Cage's gang, but were eventually captured in a trap created by both the Kingpin's assassins and Thunderbird's agents. The Dragons and the Wolfpack were freed by Luke Cage, in which Shang-Chi's gang join the Avengers in their battle against the Brotherhood.\nMarvel Zombies.\nIn the \"Marvel Zombies\" continuity, Shang-Chi is turned into a zombie during a multi-hero effort to rescue surviving civilians. In a mid-Manhattan battle, detailed in \"Ultimate Fantastic Four\" #23, he and dozens of other zombie-heroes attempt to consume the last batch of humans. These humans are defended by that universe's Magneto and the Ultimate Fantastic Four. During a successful rescue attempt, Thing sends Shang-Chi flying through the air with one punch. Shang-Chi is then seen attacking Magneto once again, but he is cut in half by the Master of Magnetism. A different Shang-Chi appears in \"Marvel Zombies Return\" in an alternate universe where he is unaffected by the zombie outbreak. The zombie Wolverine finds him in an underground fight club, engaging with other infamous martial artists. The flesh-hungry mutant slashes him to death.\nUltimate Marvel.\nIn the \"Ultimate Marvel\" universe, Shang-Chi first appeared in \"Ultimate Marvel Team-Up\" #15. He is the son of an international crime lord. Trained from birth to become a living weapon, he became the world's greatest martial artist and being a noble spirit, he eventually came to renounce his father's empire. Seeking to get away from his father's reach, he emigrated to New York where he worked as a floor sweeper at Wu's Fish Market in Chinatown. Feeling that the denizens of New York's Chinatown needed someone to protect them, he and his friend Danny Rand were drawn into the gang war between the Kingpin and Hammerhead after the latter targeted him to win over the Chinatown gangs to his cause. The conflict climaxed when Shang-Chi, Danny Rand, Spider-Man, the Black Cat, the Moon Knight and Elektra ambushed Hammerhead's penthouse, where a battle royale ensued. It ended with an unconscious Elektra, Hammerhead and Moon Knight. The gang members were then arrested by the police.\nThe martial arts warrior disguised himself as a costumed criminal in order to take down the Kingpin. The Kingpin discovered his plan and threatened to kill the hero, but he was rescued by Daredevil, who then recruited him as a part of his team to take down the Kingpin. After the Kingpin's identity is leaked to the New York Police Department, Shang-Chi and the team disbanded and went their separate ways.\nUltimate Universe.\nFollowing the events of \"Ultimate Invasion\", a new Ultimate Universe is created where Maker travels to Earth-6160 and remakes it into his own image. In this new continuity, Shen Qi (\u795e\u5947, \"miraculous\") was the eighth Iron Fist circa 8,000 BC, whose skills and martial arts prowess were even praised by the gods themselves. Shen Qi eventually became disillusioned with violence and instead spent decades preaching his philosophy of pacifism and anti-authoritarianism while using his powers to heal others and the land, which gained him a large following of worshippers. This angered the Xian who killed an elderly Shen Qi in a duel that lasted 1,000 days and nights.\n10,000 years later, Shen Qi reincarnates himself and from his birth performs the same miracles he did in his past life. In the present day, the adolescent-aged Shen Qi is targeted by the Hulk\u2013the current Iron Fist\u2013who feels threatened by his return and sends Uranium Brother #235 to eliminate the boy. Shen Qi and his followers are saved by the Ultimates and Danny Rand as She-Hulk beheads Uranium Brother #235.\nIn other media.\nFilm.\nAccording to Margaret Loesch, former president and CEO of Marvel Productions, in the 1980s Stan Lee considered Brandon Lee for the role of Shang-Chi and met with the actor and his mother Linda Lee to discuss a potential movie or television series starring the character. In 2001, Stephen Norrington announced his intentions to direct a Shang-Chi film entitled \"The Hands of Shang-Chi\". By 2003, the film was in development at DreamWorks Pictures with Yuen Woo-Ping replacing Norrington as director and Bruce C. McKenna hired to write the screenplay. Ang Lee joined the project as a producer in 2004, but the film did not materialize after that point and the rights to the character reverted to Marvel. In 2006, Shang-Chi was chosen as one of the many properties in Marvel Studios' new film deal with Paramount Pictures.\nMarvel Cinematic Universe.\nXu Shang-Chi appears in media set in the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU), portrayed by Simu Liu.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20132", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20132", "title": "Marv Albert", "text": "American sportscaster (born 1941)\nMarv Albert (born Marvin Philip Aufrichtig; June 12, 1941) is an American former sportscaster. Honored for his work by the Basketball Hall of Fame, he was commonly referred to as \"the voice of basketball\". From 1967 to 2004, he was also known as \"the voice of the New York Knicks\". Albert was best known nationally for his work as the lead announcer for both the NBA on NBC and NBA games on TNT. In 2015, he was inducted into the Broadcasting Hall of Fame.\nIn addition to working extensively in both professional and college basketball, he has experience calling a variety of other sports, such as American football, ice hockey, horse racing, boxing, and tennis. Albert has called the play-by-play of eight Super Bowls, nine NBA Finals, and seven Stanley Cup Finals. He has also called the Wimbledon Tennis Championships for TNT with Jim Courier and Mary Carillo and has worked as a co-host and reporter for two World Series (1986 and 1988).\nAlbert hails from a family of broadcasters. His brothers, Al and Steve Albert, and a son, Kenny, are also play-by-play sports commentators.\nEarly life.\nAlbert was born to a Jewish family in Brooklyn, New York City, where he went to Abraham Lincoln High School. His family members owned a grocery store on Brighton Beach Avenue between 3rd and 4th Streets known as Aufrichtig. He attended Syracuse University's Newhouse School of Public Communications from 1960 through 1963. In 1962, he served as the voice of the AAA Syracuse Chiefs. He graduated from New York University in 1965.\nBroadcasting career.\nNational Basketball Association.\nAfter getting his start by being a ball boy for the New York Knicks, Albert worked his first Knicks game as a broadcaster on January 27, 1963, on WCBS Radio. He was filling in for his mentor, Marty Glickman, who was away in Europe. The game was against the Celtics at the Boston Garden. Beginning in 1967 and lasting 37 years, Albert served as the voice of the New York Knicks on radio and television before being let go by James L. Dolan, the chairman of the MSG Network and Cablevision, after Albert criticized the team's poor play on-air in 2004. It was said that Albert's high salary was also a factor. His son, Kenny Albert, has been a part-time play-by-play announcer for the Knicks since 2009, filling in whenever the elder Albert's successor, Mike Breen, is unavailable.\nNBC Sports.\nAlbert was the lead play-by-play announcer for the \"NBA on NBC\" for most of its run from 1990 to 2002, calling every NBA Finals during that timeframe except for 1998, 1999, and 2000, which were called by Bob Costas in the wake of Albert's arrest for sexual assault. Albert resumed his previous position for the 2000\u20132001 season and called Game 4 of the 2002 NBA Finals, which was the final NBA telecast on NBC. During his time on NBC, he continued as the lead play-by-play man for the New York Knicks on local MSG Network telecasts and began calling national games for TNT in 1999, as well. When he regained the lead broadcaster position on NBC, he continued to call play-by-play for both networks until the end of NBC's coverage in 2002.\nTNT.\nAlbert continued to be the lead play-by-play announcer for NBA games on TNT, a position he assumed in 1999. Indeed, TNT had become his primary commitment ever since his longtime employer NBC lost the NBA broadcasting rights in 2002 to ABC and ESPN, which may have played a role in his departure from the Knicks' broadcast booth. The Knicks reportedly wanted Albert to accept a salary commensurate with his reduced Knicks schedule but also weren't happy about Albert making what Knicks management felt were overly critical comments about their team despite their losing record.\nIn basketball, his most famous call is his simple \"Yes!\" for a basket, rendered in many variations of volume and length depending on the situation.\nOn April 17, 2002, shortly after calling a game between the Indiana Pacers and Philadelphia 76ers on TNT, both Albert and color commentator Mike Fratello were injured in a limo accident in Trenton, New Jersey. Albert sustained facial lacerations, a concussion, and a sprained ankle. The 2002 NBA Playoffs was set to begin two days later, with Albert scheduled to call multiple games that week. Bob Costas filled in for those games, and Albert returned to call Game 1 of the Western Conference Semifinals between the Dallas Mavericks and Sacramento Kings.\nOn May 15, 2021, it was reported that Albert had planned on retiring following the 2021 NBA playoffs. The news became official two days later. His last game called was Game 6 of the 2021 NBA Eastern Conference Finals, between the Milwaukee Bucks and Atlanta Hawks.\nNew Jersey Nets (YES).\nIn 2005, Albert officially became the lead play-by-play man for the New Jersey Nets franchise started calling their games on the YES Network, often teaming with Brooklyn native and NBA veteran Mark Jackson. With that, the Nets had employed all three Albert brothers during the franchise's history; Al started his broadcast career with the Nets during their ABA days, while Steve called Nets games during the late 1970s and 1980s. Beginning with the 2008\u201309 season, he was also paired with his TNT broadcast colleague Mike Fratello on the YES Network. However, with the Nets' struggles in the 2009\u201310 season, Nets management relegated him Albert to secondary play-by-play and was replaced by Ian Eagle. In 2011, Albert left the YES Network to join CBS Sports for NFL and NCAA tournament coverage.\nOther basketball-related ventures.\nAlbert hosts a basketball-focused interview show on NBA TV, which also airs on YES.\nAlbert also hosted the \"Dazzling Dunks and Basketball Bloopers\" VHS tape by NBA Entertainment in 1988.\nSince 2003, Albert has also been providing the play-by-play voice on the \"NBA Live\" video-game series from EA Sports, a role he fulfilled until \"NBA Live 10\".\nFrom 2011 to 2015, Albert announced NCAA Men's Division I Basketball Championship tournament games, the result of longtime tournament broadcaster CBS handing off some of its coverage to Turner Sports.\nIn February 2016, Albert and Turner Sports announced that he would no longer call NCAA Tournament basketball games, stating that calling four games in one day during the first round, and a total of six matches in three days during the first two rounds, was too much for his 74-year-old voice to handle. Albert said that he \"felt it was the wiser move to go primarily NBA at this stage.\"\nIn 2022, Albert appeared in the \"Playoffs on NBA Lane\" short film alongside ESPN sideline reporter Malika Andrews.\nOutside basketball.\nNew York Rangers.\nIn addition to the Knicks, Albert had a lengthy tenure (beginning in 1965) calling the games of another Madison Square Garden tenant, the New York Rangers. He handled the radio call of the Rangers' Stanley Cup-clinching victory in 1994.\nHe also famously coined the nickname \"Red Light\" for radio analyst Sal Messina, a former Rangers goaltender. His signature play-by-play phrase was \"kick save and a beauty.\"\nOver his years as the Rangers' broadcaster, Albert missed a large number of games for other commitments. Many other broadcasters filled in, including several who later served long stints for other NHL teams, including Howie Rose, Mike Emrick, and John Kelly, as well as Albert's brothers Al and Steve. It was his absence from Game 7 of the Rangers\u2013Devils Eastern Conference Finals game that led to Rose's famed \"Matteau, Matteau, Matteau\" call.\nAlbert left the Rangers after the 1994\u201395 season. At the same time, Rose took the job as a play-by-play announcer of the New York Islanders. Albert's son, Kenny, replaced him and had been the radio voice of the Rangers until being promoted to the television role for the 2025-26 NHL season. Kenny also calls NHL and Olympic ice hockey for NBC Sports and has served as the national radio voice of the Stanley Cup Finals since 2016.\nNew York Giants.\nFrom 1973 to 1976, Albert called radio broadcasts of New York Giants football games, succeeding Marty Glickman after the latter started broadcasting for the New York Jets.\n\"Monday Night Football\".\nAlbert was also the lead play-by-play voice of the Westwood One radio network's NFL coverage from the 2002 to the 2009 seasons, calling \"Monday Night Football\" as well as numerous playoff games and every Super Bowl from 2003 to 2010. On June 4, 2010, it was announced that Albert was leaving his \"NFL on Westwood One\" duties. He was succeeded by Kevin Harlan.\n\"NFL on CBS\".\nOn June 6, 2011, it was announced Albert was joining CBS Sports to call play-by-play for \"The NFL on CBS\". Albert was usually teamed with Rich Gannon on broadcasts.\nOn May 29, 2014, Albert stepped down from calling \"The NFL on CBS\" to focus more on his basketball duties for TNT and CBS.\nOther network duties.\nOther NBC Sports duties included play-by-play announcing for the NFL (by 1983, Albert was the No. 2 play-by-play man behind Dick Enberg, usually alternating the secondary NFL role year to year with Don Criqui), college basketball (teaming with Bucky Waters on Big East/ECAC games), horse racing, boxing (often working with Ferdie Pacheco and subsequently, Sugar Ray Leonard when NBC relaunched boxing under the \"Premier Boxing Champions\" umbrella), NHL All-Star Games (Albert called the NHL All-Star Game with John Davidson on NBC from 1990 to 1994), and Major League Baseball, as well as hosting baseball (including NBC's coverage of the 1986 and 1988 World Series alongside Bob Costas). He also spent 13 years as the sports director of the network's flagship station, WNBC-TV, in New York.\nAlbert also called regular-season and playoff NHL games for the syndicated NHL Network in the 1976\u201377 season, and, from 2000 to 2002, he helped call TNT's coverage of the Wimbledon Championships tennis tournament.\nIn popular culture.\nAlbert made 53 guest appearances on David Letterman's late-night talk show for NBC and CBS. Each time Albert appeared, he brought with him a group of clips featuring sports bloopers and outstanding plays, which he narrated and dubbed the \"Albert Achievement Awards\". The music accompanying the bloopers was \"Twelfth Street Rag\".\nAlbert was placed as No. 14 on David J. Halberstam's list of Top 50 All-Time Network Television Sports Announcers on Yahoo! Sports.\nHe appears on \"Perfect Sense, Part II\", on Roger Waters' 1992 album, \"Amused to Death\", commentating on a military attack in the manner of a sports report.\nAlbert's voice is imitated in the popular video game \"NBA Jam\". The announcer was modeled on Albert, although there is no mention of Albert in the game and the announcer was actually voiced by Tim Kitzrow.\nJack Black and his bandmate Kyle Gass derived the name of their band 'Tenacious D' from a term used by Albert to describe the tenacious defense of the New York Knicks in 1994.\nSexual assault.\nAlbert was accused of sexually assaulting a 42-year-old woman in 1997. The woman accused Albert of throwing her onto a bed, biting her, then forcing her to perform oral sex after a February 12, 1997 argument in his Pentagon City hotel room. DNA testing linked Albert to genetic material taken from the bite marks and from semen in her underwear. During the trial, another woman, Patricia Masden, testified that Albert had bitten her on two separate occasions, in Miami in 1993 and in Dallas in 1994, which she viewed as unwanted sexual advances. Masden, a VIP liaison for Hyatt Hotels, claimed that Albert called her to help him send a fax from his Dallas hotel room, where she found him wearing \"white panties and garter belt\". Albert's defense team said that the judge blocked most of what they wanted to bring to trial in Albert's defense, prompting them to accept a plea deal from the prosecutors. Albert pleaded guilty to misdemeanor assault and battery charges, while a felony charge of forcible sodomy was dropped. He was given a 12-month suspended sentence. The conviction was expunged from his record a year later, in accordance with the terms of his sentencing. In an interview with Barbara Walters, Albert maintained that his accuser had requested he bite her. He also denied her accusation that he had requested she bring another man into their sexual affair. He described her recorded conversation with the police on the night of the incident as \"an Academy Award performance\".\nNBC \u2013 for which Albert worked for over 20 years \u2013 fired him hours after he entered his guilty plea. His last NFL broadcast for NBC before being fired was the 1997 Baltimore Ravens\u2013New York Giants game alongside Randy Cross and Len Berman. Bob Costas took over for Albert on \"NBA on NBC\" in the 1997\u201398 NBA season. Tom Hammond would eventually move up to the #2 team (behind Dick Enberg, Paul Maguire, and Phil Simms), while Dan Hicks would primarily call games with Hammond's old partner, Jim Kelly. NBC rehired Albert less than two years after firing him, with Chairman of NBC Sports Dick Ebersol stating that, \"Marv has done what he had to do\" since being fired.\nBroadcasting partners.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "20134", "revid": "37371155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20134", "title": "Minnesota Vikings", "text": "National Football League franchise in Minneapolis, Minnesota\nThe Minnesota Vikings are a professional American football team based in Minneapolis. The Vikings compete in the National Football League (NFL) as a member of the National Football Conference (NFC) North division. Founded in 1960 as an expansion team, the team began play the following year. They are named after the Vikings of medieval Scandinavia, reflecting the prominent Scandinavian American culture of Minnesota. The team plays its home games at U.S. Bank Stadium in the Downtown East section of Minneapolis.\nThe Vikings have an all-time overall record of 537\u2013438\u201311, the highest regular season and combined winning percentage among NFL franchises who have not won a Super Bowl, in addition the most playoff runs, division titles, and (tied with the Buffalo Bills) Super Bowl appearances. They also have the most conference championship appearances of non-winning Super Bowl teams, with them being one of four (along with the Pittsburgh Steelers, Denver Broncos and Los Angeles Rams) to appear in a conference championship every decade since the 1970s.\nHistory.\nProfessional football in the Minneapolis\u2013Saint Paul area (the \"Twin Cities\") began with the Minneapolis Marines/Red Jackets, an NFL team that played intermittently in the 1920s and 1930s. A new professional team in the area did not surface again until August 1959, when Minnesota businessmen Bill Boyer, H. P. Skoglund, and Max Winter were awarded a franchise in the new American Football League (AFL). Five months later, in January 1960, after significant pressure from the NFL, the ownership group, along with Bernard H. Ridder, reneged on its agreement with the AFL and then was awarded the National Football League's 14th franchise, with play to begin in 1961. Ole Haugsrud was added to the NFL team ownership because, in the 1920s, when he sold his Duluth Eskimos team back to the league, the agreement allowed him 10 percent of any future Minnesota team. The teams from Ole Haugsrud's high school, Central High School in Superior, Wisconsin, were also called the Vikings and had a similar purple-and-yellow color scheme.\nFrom the team's first season in 1961 to 1981, the team called Metropolitan Stadium in suburban Bloomington home. The Vikings conducted summer training camp at Bemidji State University from 1961 to 1965. In 1966, the team moved to their training camp to Minnesota State University in Mankato. The training camp at Minnesota State was one of the longest continuously running training camp events in the NFL and is remembered as part of the golden era history of the team. The Vikings played their home games at the Hubert H. Humphrey Metrodome in Minneapolis from 1982 to 2013. The Vikings played their last game at the Metrodome on December 29, 2013, defeating the Detroit Lions 14\u201313 to end the season.\nSince the team's first season in 1961, the Vikings have had one of the highest winning percentages in the NFL. As of 2022, they have won at least three games in every season except in 1962, and are one of only seven NFL teams to win at least 15 games in a regular season. The Vikings have won one NFL Championship, in 1969, before the league's merger with the American Football League (AFL) in 1970. Since the merger, the team has qualified for the playoffs 28 times, third-most in the league (trailing only the Dallas Cowboys and Pittsburgh Steelers). The team played in Super Bowls IV, VIII, IX and XI, but failed to win any of them. In addition, they have lost in their last six NFC Championship Game appearances, stretching back to 1978. The Vikings have 15 members in the Pro Football Hall of Fame.\n1960s.\nThe team was officially named the Minnesota Vikings on September 27, 1960; the name is partly meant to reflect Minnesota's place as a center of Scandinavian American culture. From the start, the Vikings embraced an energetic marketing program that produced first-year season ticket sales of nearly 26,000 and an average home attendance of 34,586, about 85 percent of Metropolitan Stadium's capacity of 40,800. Eventually, the capacity of Met Stadium was increased to 47,900. Bert Rose, former public relations director for the Los Angeles Rams, was appointed the team's first general manager. The search for the first head coach saw the team court then-Northwestern University head coach Ara Parseghian, who, according to \"Minneapolis Star\" writer Jim Klobuchar\u2014the Vikings' first beat reporter for that newspaper\u2014visited team management in the Twin Cities under the condition that his visit was to be kept secret from his current employer. His cover was blown by local columnist Sid Hartman, who reported the visit and forced Parseghian to issue denials. Philadelphia Eagles assistant Nick Skorich and a man with Minnesota ties who was working in the CFL, Bud Grant, were also candidates until a different Eagle, quarterback Norm Van Brocklin, was hired on January 18, 1961. Van Brocklin had just finished his career as a player on a high note, having defeated the Green Bay Packers in the 1960 NFL Championship Game.\nAs a new franchise, the Vikings had the first overall selection in the 1961 NFL draft, and they picked running back Tommy Mason of Tulane. They also took a young quarterback from the University of Georgia named Fran Tarkenton in the third round. Notable veterans acquired in the offseason were George Shaw and Hugh McElhenny. The Vikings won their first regular-season game, defeating the Chicago Bears 37\u201313 on Opening Day 1961; Tarkenton came off the bench to throw four touchdown passes and run for another to lead the upset. Reality set in as the expansion team lost its next seven games on their way to a 3\u201311 record. The losing continued throughout much of the 1960s as the Vikings had a combined record of 32 wins, 59 losses, and 7 ties in their first seven seasons with only one winning season (8\u20135\u20131 in 1964).\nOn March 7, 1967, quarterback Fran Tarkenton was traded to the New York Giants for a first-round and second-round draft choice in 1967, a first-round choice in 1968 and a second-round choice in 1969. With the picks, Minnesota selected Clinton Jones and Bob Grim in 1967, Ron Yary in 1968 and Ed White in 1969. On March 10, 1967, the Vikings hired new head coach Bud Grant to replace Van Brocklin, who had resigned on February 11, 1967. Grant came to the Vikings from the Canadian Football League as head coach for the Winnipeg Blue Bombers, whom he led to four Grey Cup Championships in 10 years. Replacing Tarkenton at quarterback was eight-year CFL veteran and Grey Cup champion Joe Kapp. During the late 1960s, the Vikings built a powerful defense known as the Purple People Eaters, led by Alan Page, Carl Eller, Gary Larsen, and Jim Marshall. In 1968, that stingy defense earned the Vikings their first Central Division title and their first playoff berth.\nIn 1969, the Vikings secured a 12\u20132 record. The team had 12 straight regular-season victories after a season-opening loss to the New York Giants, which was the longest single-season winning streak in 35 years. The Vikings defeated the Cleveland Browns 27\u20137 in the last pre-merger NFL Championship Game on January 4, 1970, at Metropolitan Stadium. The Vikings became the first modern NFL expansion team to win an NFL Championship Game, and earned a berth in Super Bowl IV; however, the heavily favored Vikings lost that game to the Kansas City Chiefs, 23\u20137. The team MVP that season was Joe Kapp, who threw for seven touchdowns against the Baltimore Colts \u2013 still an all-time NFL record; however, Kapp refused to accept the award, stating, \"There is not one most valuable Viking... there are 40 most valuable Vikings!\"\n1970s.\nThe team continued to dominate in 1970 (moving into the newly formed NFC Central) and 1971, reaching the playoffs behind the stubborn \"Purple People Eaters\" defensive line. In 1971, Alan Page won the NFL Most Valuable Player Award given by the Associated Press. He was the first defensive player to win the award.\nOn January 27, 1972, the Vikings traded Norm Snead, Bob Grim, Vince Clements and first-round draft picks in 1972 and 1973 to the New York Giants to reacquire the popular Fran Tarkenton. While the acquisitions of Tarkenton and wide receiver John Gilliam improved the passing attack, the running game was inconsistent and the Vikings finished with a disappointing 7\u20137 record. The Vikings addressed the problem by drafting running back Chuck Foreman with their first pick in the 1973 draft. Co-owner Bill Boyer died on February 19, 1973 and was replaced on the team's board of directors by his son-in-law Jack Steele.\nThe Vikings won their first nine games of 1973 and finished the season with a 12\u20132 record. They then advanced to their second Super Bowl in franchise history, Super Bowl VIII, against the Miami Dolphins at Rice Stadium in Houston, Texas; however, the Dolphins prevailed, 24\u20137.\nThe Vikings won the Central Division again in 1974 with a 10\u20134 record. In the playoffs they built on their cold-weather reputation, defeating both the St. Louis Cardinals and the Los Angeles Rams 14\u201310 in frozen Metropolitan Stadium. The Vikings played in their second straight Super Bowl, Super Bowl IX (3rd overall), losing to the Pittsburgh Steelers, 16\u20136, at Tulane Stadium in New Orleans on January 12, 1975.\nLed by Tarkenton and running back Chuck Foreman, the 1975 Vikings got off to a 10\u20130 start and easily won another division title. However, the Vikings lost to the Dallas Cowboys in the , 17\u201314, on a controversial touchdown pass from the Cowboys' quarterback Roger Staubach to wide receiver Drew Pearson that became known as the Hail Mary. The touchdown was controversial because many felt that Pearson pushed off on Vikings defensive back Nate Wright, committing pass interference. As the Metropolitan Stadium crowd was stunned to learn that no penalty was called, debris was thrown on the field for several minutes. A Corby's Whiskey bottle struck game official Armen Terzian, rendering him unconscious.\nThe Vikings played in Super Bowl XI, their third Super Bowl (fourth overall) in four years, against the Oakland Raiders at the Rose Bowl in Pasadena, California, on January 9, 1977. The Vikings, however, lost 32\u201314.\nIn 1977, the Vikings again won the Central Division with a 9\u20135 record and advanced to their 4th NFC Championship Game in 5 years, but were defeated by the eventual Super Bowl Champion Cowboys, 23\u20136, at Texas Stadium.\nBy 1978, age was taking its toll on the Vikings, but they still made the playoffs with an 8\u20137\u20131 record. There was no more playoff magic as the Rams finally defeated the Vikings, 34\u201310 in Los Angeles after having lost in their previous four playoff matchups (in 1969, '74, '76 and '77). Quarterback Fran Tarkenton retired after the season holding league passer records in attempts (6,467), completions (3,686), yards (47,003), and touchdowns (342).\nIn December 1979, ground was broken for construction of the Hubert H. Humphrey Metrodome in downtown Minneapolis.\n1980s.\nOn May 15, 1981, the Vikings moved into a new facility in suburban Eden Prairie that housed the team's offices, locker room and practice fields. The complex was named \"Winter Park\" after Max Winter, one of the Vikings' founders, who served as the team's president from 1965 to 1987. The Vikings played their final game at Metropolitan Stadium on December 20 to conclude the 1981 NFL season by losing to the Kansas City Chiefs, 10\u20136.\nThe Vikings played their first game at the Metrodome in a preseason matchup against the Seattle Seahawks on August 21, 1982, in a game Minnesota won, 7\u20133. The first touchdown in the new facility was scored by Joe Senser on an 11-yard pass from Tommy Kramer. The first regular-season game in the Metrodome was the 1982 opener on September 12, when the Vikings defeated Tampa Bay, 17\u201310. Rickey Young scored the first regular-season touchdown in the facility on a 3-yard run in the 2nd quarter. That year the defense led by Joey Browner began a dominant 10-year run as a premier NFL defensive back. The Vikings beat the St. Louis Cardinals 28\u201310 on August 6, 1983, at Wembley Stadium in London in the first international game in the NFL.\nOn January 27, 1984, Bud Grant retired as head coach of the Vikings. With a career regular-season record of 151\u201387\u20135 (.632) in 17 seasons with Minnesota, Grant led the franchise to 12 playoff appearances, 11 division titles, and four Super Bowls. Les Steckel, who was an offensive assistant with the Vikings for 5 seasons, was then named the 3rd head coach in franchise history. Steckel, who came to the Vikings in 1979 after working as an assistant with the 49ers, was the youngest head coach in the NFL in 1984 at age 38. However, the Vikings lost a franchise-worst 13 games. After the season Steckel was fired, and on December 18, 1984, Bud Grant came out of retirement and was rehired as the head coach of the Vikings.\nOn January 6, 1986, after the 1985 season, Bud Grant re-retired, this time permanently, as head coach of the Vikings. At the time of his retirement he held the 6th best winning record for a coach in NFL history with 168 career wins, including playoffs. In 18 seasons, he led the Vikings to a 158\u201396\u20135 regular-season record. Longtime Vikings assistant coach Jerry Burns was named the fourth head coach in team history on January 7, 1986. He served as the Vikings' offensive coordinator from 1968 to 1985, when the team won 11 division titles and played in four Super Bowls. In his first season, the Vikings, led by the NFL Comeback Player of the Year Tommy Kramer, went 9\u20137, their first winning record in four years. On August 2, 1986, Fran Tarkenton was the first player who played the majority of his career with the Vikings to be inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame.\nAfter the strike-shortened 1987 season, the 8\u20137 Vikings, who had finished 8\u20134 in regular games but 0\u20133 using strike-replacement players, pulled two upsets in the playoffs. They defeated the 12\u20133 New Orleans Saints 44\u201310 at the Louisiana Superdome in the Wild Card game. The following week, in the Divisional Playoff game, they beat the 13\u20132 San Francisco 49ers 36\u201324 at Candlestick Park. During that game, Anthony Carter set the all-time record for most receiving yards in a playoff game with 227 yards. The Vikings played the Washington Redskins in the NFC Championship Game on January 17, 1988, at RFK Stadium. Trailing 17\u201310, the Vikings drove to the Redskins' 6-yard line with a little over a minute left in the game, but failed to get the ball into the end zone. The Vikings' hopes of a Super Bowl ended when Darrin Nelson dropped a pass from Wade Wilson on fourth down at the goal line.\nOn October 12, 1989, the Vikings acquired Herschel Walker from Dallas. The final result of the trade gave the Vikings Walker, third-round choice Mike Jones, fifth-round choice Reggie Thornton and 10th-round choice Pat Newman in 1990 and a third-round choice Jake Reed in 1991. Dallas received Issiac Holt, David Howard, Darrin Nelson, Jesse Solomon, Alex Stewart, a first-, second- and a sixth-round choice in 1990, first- and second-round choices in 1991 and a first-, second- and third-round choice in 1992. Two of those selections turned into Emmitt Smith and Darren Woodson. Walker's performance fell short of expectations in his three seasons with the Vikings, while the Cowboys rode their draft picks to three Super Bowl victories in the early-to-mid-1990s.\n1990s.\nOn December 3, 1991, Jerry Burns announced his retirement effective at the end of the 1991 season. In six seasons as head coach of the Vikings, Burns compiled a career record of 52\u201343 (.547). He also led Minnesota to three playoff appearances, including a division title and an NFC Championship Game. Dennis Green was later named the fifth head coach in team history, after turning around a struggling Stanford University football program as head coach from 1989 to 1991. In his 10 seasons as the coach of the Vikings, Green won four NFC Central division titles, had eight playoff appearances, two NFC Championship Game appearances and an all-time record of 97\u201362. The Vikings therefore had the fifth highest winning percentage among all NFL teams during the regular season in the 1990s.\n1998.\n1998 was a year to remember for the franchise. With a spectacular offense led by quarterback Randall Cunningham (who replaced an injured Brad Johnson), running back Robert Smith, veteran wide receiver Cris Carter, and explosive rookie Randy Moss, the Vikings set a then-NFL record by scoring a total of 556 points, never scoring fewer than 24 in a game. The Vikings finished the season 15\u20131, their only loss was to the Tampa Bay Buccaneers 27\u201324 in Week 9. In the playoffs, the Vikings rolled past the Arizona Cardinals 41\u201321, and came into the Metrodome heavily favored for their NFC title showdown with the Atlanta Falcons, who had gone 14\u20132 in the regular season. After kicker Gary Anderson, who had just completed the first perfect regular season in NFL history (not missing a single extra point or field goal attempt the entire year), missed a 38-yard field goal attempt with just over 2 minutes remaining, the Falcons' ensuing drive tied the game. This led to a controversial decision by head coach Dennis Green to run out the clock and let the game go to overtime. Though the Vikings won the coin toss, Atlanta went on to win it 30\u201327 in overtime on Morten Andersen's 38-yard field goal. The Vikings became the first 15\u20131 team to fail to reach the Super Bowl.\n1999.\nCunningham resumed duties again in 1999, but after a lukewarm 2\u20134 start, Jeff George replaced him as starting quarterback. He finished the season with an 8\u20132 record, and led the Vikings into the postseason once again, with an overall team record of 10\u20136. Minnesota beat Dallas in the Wild Card game 27\u201310, and faced playoff newcomer Kurt Warner and the St. Louis Rams in the Divisional matchup. The game was a shootout that Minnesota led 17\u201314 at halftime, but the Rams outscored Minnesota 35\u201320 in the second half to win 49\u201337.\n2000s.\nThe Vikings entered the decade by winning the divisional championship and an appearance in the 2000 NFC Championship game, where they were defeated 41\u20130 by the New York Giants. The following season, they struggled to a 5\u201311 record. The team made the playoffs again in 2004, but did not win a divisional title again until 2008. Since the merger, the 2000s became the decade with the fewest playoff berths for the franchise.\n2000.\nIn 2000, the Vikings went 11\u20135. The Vikings were 11\u20132 after 14 weeks, but slumped briefly, losing their last three to the Rams, Packers and Colts while starting quarterback Daunte Culpepper was hampered by injury. Nonetheless, the Vikings made the playoffs for the fifth straight year. After easily beating the Saints in the Divisional game 34\u201316, they traveled to New York City to face the Giants in the NFC Championship Game. Though they were the road team, the Vikings were favored to win the game (since most considered their 11\u20132 record with Culpepper more indicative than their 0\u20133 record when he was out); instead, the Vikings were defeated 41\u20130, their worst defeat in playoff history. Robert Smith, who ran for 1,521 yards that season, retired at the end of the year after only playing eight NFL seasons.\n2001\u20132005.\nIn 2001, after a disappointing 5\u201311 season, the Vikings bought out the contract of Dennis Green, despite his successful coaching tenure with the team. Mike Tice coached the final game of 2001, losing to the Ravens 19\u20133. Tice was named the permanent coach after the season, but he would not lead the Vikings back to the playoffs until 2004. In 2002, as part of the league's realignment with the addition of the Houston Texans, the Vikings and their other traditional NFC Central rivals became part of the newly formed NFC North.\nDuring the 2003 season, the Vikings came close to getting into the playoffs. However, the Arizona Cardinals completed a game-winning touchdown on 4th-and-28 with 0:00 left, knocking the Vikings out of the playoffs. The moment of Arizona's touchdown was actually the first moment the entire season in which the Vikings hadn't led their division. The Vikings became the second team in football history to miss the playoffs after getting off to a 6\u20130 start, after the 1978 Washington Redskins.\nIn 2004, Daunte Culpepper amassed MVP-like statistics, throwing for 4,717 passing yards (leading the NFL), 39 passing touchdowns (a Viking record), and 5,123 total yards (an NFL record). In the wild card game, the Vikings the rival Green Bay Packers at Lambeau Field in their first-ever playoff meeting, 31\u201317. In doing so, the Vikings became the second team in NFL history to have a .500 record (8\u20138) in the regular season and win a playoff game (The St. Louis Rams did the same thing only a day earlier). In the divisional round, the Vikings by the eventual NFC champion Philadelphia Eagles.\nOn March 2, 2005, Vikings wide receiver Randy Moss was traded to the Oakland Raiders for linebacker Napoleon Harris and the Raiders' first-round draft pick. After struggling to a disappointing 2\u20135 start to the 2005 season, Vikings lost quarterback Daunte Culpepper to a season-ending knee injury. This injury was a very significant part to this Minnesota Vikings team due to the fact they also lost Moss. The dynamic duo from years earlier was now gone and a new leader would eventually emerge. The Vikings finished the 2005 season with a 9\u20137 record.\nIn October, 17 team members were part of a party of about 90 that went out on a pleasure cruise on local Lake Minnetonka. The incident erupted into scandal when media reported that a number of the players had performed sex acts and that prostitutes had been flown in. Four players were ultimately charged with misdemeanors related to the party.\nMike Tice was fired by owner Zygi Wilf after the 2005 season and was replaced by Brad Childress.\n2006\u20132008.\nMinnesota began the 2006 season 4\u20132 (with Childress becoming the first Vikings coach to start his career 2\u20130), but finished the year at 6\u201310, receiving the 7th pick in the NFL draft; with it, the Vikings selected Adrian Peterson out of the University of Oklahoma.\nPeterson's first career touchdown was a 60-yard screen pass against the Atlanta Falcons in his first career game. When the Vikings played the Chicago Bears in Week 6, Peterson broke the record for single-game All-Purpose (rushing, receiving, kick returning) yards (361 total yards, 224 rushing). In Week 9, Peterson broke the NFL single-game rushing record set by Jamal Lewis in 2003 by rushing for 296 yards against the San Diego Chargers. Despite a strong push in the middle of the season, winning five straight games, the Vikings lost their final two games to finish the season at 8\u20138 and missed the playoffs.\nIn Week 13 of the 2008 season against the Bears, Gus Frerotte hooked up with Bernard Berrian and set the record for longest play in franchise history with a 99-yard touchdown pass. In the 2009 season, Adrian Peterson led the NFL with 1760 rushing yards, breaking the franchise record. The Vikings clinched the NFC North championship for the first time after defeating the New York Giants 20\u201319 in Week 17, when kicker Ryan Longwell made the game-winning field goal. Peterson had 19 carries for 109 yards and added a touchdown during the game.\nOn January 4, 2009, the Vikings hosted the Philadelphia Eagles for the wild-card round, their first home playoff game in eight years. The Eagles led the Viking 16\u201314 at halftime and, coming off a 44\u20136 victory over the Dallas Cowboys, went on to defeat the Vikings 26\u201314.\nSince 2006, the Vikings have been known especially for their strong run defense (#1 in the NFL in 2006, 2007, and 2008; they are the first NFL team to accomplish this since the AFL\u2013NFL merger in 1970), anchored by the Williams Wall consisting of defensive tackle Kevin Williams and nose tackle Pat Williams (no relation). With the addition of sack-leader Jared Allen in 2008, the dominant front four began being called by several nicknames, including \"Thunder and Plunder\" and \"Shock and AWE\" (an acronym of their surname initials).\n2009.\nOn August 18, 2009, after months of speculation and negotiations, twice-retired veteran quarterback Brett Favre, who until 2007 had played 16 years for division archrival Green Bay Packers, signed a two-year, $25\u00a0million deal with the Vikings.\nOn October 5, 2009, the Vikings hosted the Green Bay Packers as Favre played his former team for the first time. With a 30\u201323 victory on Monday Night Football, the Vikings moved to a 4\u20130 record. Favre became the first quarterback in NFL history to defeat all 32 current teams as a starter. Over 21.8\u00a0million viewers tuned in to watch the game, beating the previous record for a cable television program set by a game between the Philadelphia Eagles and the Dallas Cowboys in 2008 (18.6\u00a0million viewers).\nThe Vikings beat the New York Giants, 44\u20137, in Week 17 to help the team clinch the second seed in the conference and a first-round-bye with an Eagles loss later that same day. The Vikings ended the regular season with a 12\u20134 record, their best record since 2000 and the first 11-plus win season since their record-setting 1998 campaign. The Vikings played the Dallas Cowboys in the divisional round on January 17, 2010, and won the game by a score of 34\u20133, advancing the Vikings to the NFC Championship game, the ninth in franchise history. This would also be the first NFC Championship game for the team since the 2000 season. Minnesota would travel to New Orleans the following week to face the top-seeded Saints in the first conference championship game held at the Superdome. Despite out-gaining the Saints on offense by nearly a twofold margin, the Vikings were severely hindered by five turnovers, including a Favre interception in the final minute of the fourth quarter in Saints territory. They were ousted in overtime, 31\u201328, as the Saints won the coin toss and kicked a 40-yard field goal on the first possession of overtime.\n2010s.\nThe Vikings performed similarly in the 2010s, only making the playoffs four times and going 2\u20134 in those games. Additionally, there was inconsistency at the quarterback position, with thirteen quarterbacks starting at least one game for the team during this decade. Despite their performance, the team performed better in the regular season overall after the 2013 season, including an NFC Championship appearance in 2017.\n2010\u20132013.\nIn the first week of the 2010 NFL regular season, the Vikings played the defending Super Bowl champions, the New Orleans Saints. The Vikings lost 14\u20139. In Week 2, the Vikings played the Miami Dolphins and lost 14\u201310. The Vikings defeated the Detroit Lions 24\u201310 in the third week of the season. After a week four bye-week, the Vikings received star wide receiver Randy Moss in a trade with the New England Patriots. Even with the addition of Moss, the Vikings lost to the New York Jets 29\u201320 in Week 5. The Vikings won a crucial victory against another struggling team in the form of the Dallas Cowboys 24\u201321, but in Week 7 the Vikings lost to the arch-rival Green Bay Packers 28\u201324. In Week 9, the Vikings played the Arizona Cardinals at home and won 27\u201324 in overtime, coming back from a 24\u201310 deficit in the final four minutes of regulation. Favre threw for a career-high 446 passing yards. The Vikings then went on to face the Chicago Bears, but were defeated, and then went on to be blown out 31\u20133 at home by the Packers the following game. Head coach Brad Childress was fired the next Monday. With Leslie Frazier filling in for the fired Childress, the Vikings won two games in a row. One against the Washington Redskins on the road, and a blowout win over the Buffalo Bills at home.\nAfter a winter storm dropped nearly of snow in the Minneapolis/St Paul area the Saturday before the Vikings December 12 home game versus the New York Giants and gusts drove snow removers off the dome's roof overnight, several panels were damaged as the weight of the snow caused the roof to collapse. After viewing the damage, Vikings management and the NFL decided to move the game to Monday and play it at Ford Field in Detroit, Michigan. Because of ongoing repairs to the roof of the Metrodome, the Vikings played their December 20 game versus the Chicago Bears at TCF Bank Stadium. Favre threw the final touchdown pass of his career (to Percy Harvin) in this game. On December 26, the NFL announced that the game versus the Philadelphia Eagles was being postponed to Tuesday, December 28, 2010, because of blizzard conditions. This marks the third consecutive venue or date change for a Vikings game and was the first NFL game played on a Tuesday since 1964. The Vikings proceeded to upset the dynamic Eagles offense, led by a resurgent Michael Vick, 24\u201314 with rookie Joe Webb at the helm. The Vikings finished the season 6\u201310 with a 20\u201313 loss against the Detroit Lions.\nThe 2010\u201311 season was a step down for the Minnesota Vikings. After coming within a few plays of Super Bowl XLIV, Minnesota ended the 2010 season with a 6\u201310 record and a last place finish in the NFC North for the first time since 1990. During the season, the Vikings had many distractions, including trading for Randy Moss and then waiving him only a month later, Brett Favre's NFL investigation for allegedly sending inappropriate text messages to Jets' employee Jenn Sterger while he was with the team in 2008, the Metrodome's collapse and resulting venue changes, and finally head coach Brad Childress' firing on November 22 after a 31\u20133 loss at the hands of the rival Green Bay Packers.\nAfter serving as the interim head coach for the final six games of the season (finishing with a 3\u20133 record), defensive coordinator Leslie Frazier was officially named the head coach on January 3, 2011, after signing a three-year contract. On January 17, Brett Favre retired for the third, and officially last, time, leaving the team in search of a long-term replacement at the quarterback position. Wasting no time after being appointed head coach, Frazier began to restructure the team's coaching staff, including letting go of offensive coordinator Darrell Bevell and hiring Mike Singletary as linebackers coach and Bill Musgrave as the new offensive coordinator. Their first-round draft pick was Christian Ponder, a quarterback from Florida State University. The team finished with a 3\u201313 record, tied with the 1984 Vikings for the second-worst record in franchise history.\nDuring the 2012 NFL draft, the team selected USC lineman Matt Kalil with the 4th overall pick after a trade with the Cleveland Browns, and Notre Dame safety Harrison Smith in the first round. Both players were instrumental in helping the Vikings reach the playoffs for the 27th time in franchise history, as was fellow draftee, sixth-round kicker Blair Walsh. After beating the Packers in the final game of 2012 to reach the playoffs as the NFC's sixth seed, the Vikings lost 24\u201310 to the Packers in the rematch at Lambeau Field in the wild-card round. The team was forced to play backup Joe Webb during the game after Ponder was sidelined due to an arm injury sustained from the previous week. Peterson was later named the league's MVP, after rushing for 2,097 yards, the second most rushing yards in a season in NFL history.\nIn the 2013 season, the Vikings finished with five wins, ten losses, and one tie, with no road wins. Notable moments include acquired free agent Matt Cassel outplaying Christian Ponder at the quarterback position and the defense allowing a league-worst 480 points, coming within four points of matching the franchise's worst set in 1984. This was also the last season played at the Metrodome as a new stadium deal was reached. Leslie Frazier was fired after the regular season ended.\n2014\u20132019.\nThe team hired former Cincinnati Bengals defensive coordinator Mike Zimmer to replace Leslie Frazier as head coach on January 16, 2014. Former Cleveland Browns offensive coordinator Norv Turner replaced Bill Musgrave, and George Edwards replaced Alan Williams as defensive coordinator. In the 2014 NFL draft, the Vikings selected Anthony Barr, a linebacker out of UCLA, and Teddy Bridgewater, a quarterback out of the University of Louisville. Bridgewater would later lose the starting job to Matt Cassel only to become the starter for the Vikings when Cassel was lost to a season-ending foot injury in week 3. Star running back Adrian Peterson only played in one regular-season game due to his ongoing child abuse trial, with NFL commissioner Roger Goodell placing Peterson on the Commissioner's Exempt List indefinitely. On April 16, 2015, the league released a statement issuing Peterson's reinstatement to occur on April 17, 2015. The Vikings concluded their season with seven wins and nine losses, winning only one game against a divisional opponent, although Bridgewater set a franchise record for wins by a rookie starting quarterback. On January 3, 2016, the Vikings beat divisional rival Green Bay 20\u201313 to win the NFC North for the first time since 2009. The Vikings, led by their top 5 defense, ended the 2015 season with an 11\u20135 record, and a #3 seed in the playoffs. However, they lost to the Seattle Seahawks 10\u20139 after Blair Walsh missed a 27-yard field goal in the third coldest game in NFL playoff history.\nThe Vikings were responsible for a historic milestone in the late rounds of the 2016 NFL draft. Their sixth-round selection, German wide receiver Moritz B\u00f6hringer, was the first European player ever to be drafted by an NFL team without having previously played at any level in North America. After Teddy Bridgewater went down with a knee injury in the preseason of 2016, the Vikings traded their 2017 first round pick and a conditional fourth round pick to the Philadelphia Eagles for quarterback Sam Bradford, who threw for 20 touchdowns, 5 interceptions, 3,877 yards, and while starting the season a league best 5\u20130, completed the season 3\u20138 for a season total of 8\u20138. After the knee injury, the Vikings declined to pick up the fifth-year option on Bridgewater. Running back Adrian Peterson went down to injury in Week 2 against the Green Bay Packers with a torn meniscus and was placed on the Injured Reserve until Week 15. On February 28, 2017, the Vikings announced they would not exercise Peterson's 2017 contract option which made him a free agent. Had they exercised the option, Peterson would be owed $18\u00a0million for the 2017 season. On April 25, 2017, the New Orleans Saints signed Peterson to a two-year, $7\u00a0million contract, ending his tenure with the Vikings since his debut in 2007 as a rookie. He holds several Vikings records including most career rushing touchdowns, career rushing yards, and most rushing yards in a season.\nIn the summer of 2017, the Vikings ownership announced they would end the 52-year annual tradition of summer training camp in Mankato at Minnesota State University, Mankato as they built a large new headquarters building, training facility and area property development in Eagan on the site of the former Northwest Airlines offices completed in the spring of 2018 in time for the 2018 summer training camp that July.\nThe Vikings won the NFC North for the second time in three years in 2017, finishing with a 13\u20133 record that saw them go into the playoffs as the No. 2 seed in the NFC. In the divisional round, they came up against the New Orleans Saints. With less than 10 seconds remaining in the game and trailing by a single point, the Vikings lined up on 3rd-and-10 on their own 39-yard line. Quarterback Case Keenum threw the ball to wide receiver Stefon Diggs inside field goal range near the right sideline, giving the receiver a chance to get out of bounds with just enough time for a game-winning field goal attempt; however, safety Marcus Williams missed his attempted tackle, allowing Diggs to run down the sideline unopposed for the first walk-off game-winning touchdown in NFL playoff history. On KFAN 100.3, radio announcer Paul Allen called the play the 'Minneapolis Miracle'. The Vikings went on to the NFC Championship for the opportunity to play in Super Bowl LII in their own stadium, only to lose 38\u20137 to the eventual Super Bowl champion Philadelphia Eagles.\nOn March 15, 2018, quarterback Kirk Cousins signed a three-year fully guaranteed $84 million contract with the Vikings. The signing made Cousins the highest paid football player at the time. The Vikings finished with an 8\u20137\u20131 record and missed the playoffs in the 2018 season.\nOn September 22, 2019, the Vikings defeated the Oakland Raiders for their 500th win as a franchise, with an overall record of 500\u2013427\u201311 at that point. The team finished the 2019 season at 10\u20136, clinching a wild card spot. The Vikings went on to pull an upset victory in the wild card round against the New Orleans Saints 26\u201320 in overtime. The victory advanced the team to the divisional round, where they lost to the eventual NFC champions San Francisco 49ers 10\u201327.\n2020s.\n2020.\nThe Vikings used the 22nd overall pick in the 2020 NFL draft on All-Pro wide receiver Justin Jefferson. After falling to the New Orleans Saints on Christmas Day, the Minnesota Vikings were eliminated from the 2020 playoffs. The Vikings finished 7\u20139 in 2020, the first losing season since 2014 and only the second under Zimmer.\n2021.\nIn 2021, the Vikings missed the playoffs for the second straight season after a 37\u201310 loss to the Green Bay Packers in Week 17. After a 31\u201317 win over the Chicago Bears in Week 18 to finish the season 8\u20139, the team fired head coach Mike Zimmer and general manager Rick Spielman on January 10, 2022.\n2022.\nOn January 26, 2022, the Vikings hired Kwesi Adofo-Mensah, former vice president of football operations at the Cleveland Browns and Director of R&amp;D at the San Francisco 49ers, to be the team's new general manager. After the Los Angeles Rams won Super Bowl LVI on February 13, 2022, the Vikings subsequently named then-Rams offensive coordinator Kevin O'Connell as their franchise's 10th head coach on February 16. The Vikings finished the regular season as NFC North champions with a 13\u20134 record. They also set an NFL record by winning 11 one-score games, the most in any NFL season. The Vikings entered the playoffs as the number three seed in the NFC but lost in the wild-card round to the New York Giants 31\u201324.\n2023.\nIn Week 8, the Vikings lost Kirk Cousins for the season to an Achilles injury. The Vikings closed out the year with Jaren Hall, Joshua Dobbs, and Nick Mullens seeing time at quarterback. The team finished the 2023 season with a 7\u201310 record. In the offseason, Cousins departed for the Atlanta Falcons. The Vikings had the 10th overall pick in the 2024 NFL draft and used it on Michigan quarterback J. J. McCarthy.\n2024.\nWhile first-round draft pick JJ McCarthy was originally speculated to have the opportunity to be a starter, battling for the QB1 positions with journeyman backup Sam Darnold, who had been signed in the offseason. However, after encountering knee swelling the day after his NFL debut in a pre-season game, McCarthy underwent knee surgery for his meniscus, ending his season. Darnold became the starter, but there was not much excitement around him. Initial predictions for the Vikings record were shaky, with estimations such as 9\u20138 and 7\u201310. Darnold, however, had a breakout season, leading the Vikings to a 14\u20133 record, becoming the first quarterback in the NFL to win 14 games in their first season with a team.\nLogo and uniforms.\nThe Vikings' trademark horned helmet and purple-and-gold uniforms were designed by \"Los Angeles Examiner\" cartoonist Karl Hubenthal. Bert Rose and Norm Van Brocklin both knew Hubenthal from their days with the Los Angeles Rams organization. Hubenthal also designed the original Norseman logo.\nFrom the team's debut in 1961 to 1995, the Vikings' logos and uniforms essentially remained the same. Reflecting Minnesota's Scandinavian cultural heritage, one of the team's two primary logos consists of a profile of a blond Norseman, while the other consists of a white Viking horn.\nThe team's helmet is purple with a Viking horn logo on each side. Each horn is outlined in gold. The horn logo was slightly revised in 2006. The original uniform design consisted of white pants, gold trim, and either purple or white jerseys. On the jersey's sleeves was the Northwestern stripe pattern in white with gold trim. For the white uniform the stripes were purple with gold trim as well. From 1962 to 1964, the Vikings wore purple pants with their white jerseys (The Vikings, with their current uniform, still wear purple pants with yellow and white trim). In 1969, the design for the white uniforms had changed to a completely different stripe pattern, which was over the shoulders, then the purple ones, which were around the sleeve cuff. These unique shoulder stripes were first worn in 1969, the year they went to their first Super Bowl. There have also been minor changes to the uniform design throughout the years, such as changing the color of the face mask from gray to white in 1980, and then to purple in 1985. In addition, the Norseman logo was added to the sleeves in 1996, and the purple jersey stripes were toned down with that change; the \"TV numbers\", previously located on the jersey sleeves, moved up to the shoulders as well that year. The Vikings continued to wear black shoes until Les Steckel became head coach in 1984; they were the last NFL team to make the change from black to white shoes. In 2006, the team returned to black shoes for the first time since the 1983 season.\nThe Vikings tweaked their Norseman logo, which involved updating the shading, altering the shape and base of the horns, thickening the mustache and face, making the gold tones brighter, and shortening the braid. The new logo was unveiled on February 14, 2013. On March 28, the team reported that new uniforms will be unveiled on April 25.\nOn April 25, 2013, the Minnesota Vikings unveiled the club's new uniforms during its annual NFL draft party.\nFrom 1969 through 1973, the Vikings had an alternate purple jersey without stripes for warm-weather games.\nThe team's uniforms were redesigned in 2006, the first significant change in the franchise's 46-year history. Although the team colors remained the same, trim lines were added to the outside shoulders and sleeves, and the sides of the jerseys and pants. In addition, the horn on the helmet was slightly more defined. Included in the new design are both white and purple pants, the purple pants have not been regularly used since 2007, but resurfaced twice in 2010.\nThe team wore black armbands for the last four games in 1978 in memory of Jack \"Jocko\" Nelson, an assistant coach who died during the season. In 1985 the team wore a 25 years patch on their jerseys. In 1989, they wore a \"40 for 60\" patch honoring the 1969 NFL championship team. They wore a 35 years patch in 1995, 40 years in 2000 and 45 years in 2005. They also wore patches in 1999 for assistant coach Chip Myers who died in the offseason and in 2001 for Korey Stringer. The Vikings, like other teams, wore NFL 50th and 75th-anniversary patches in 1969 and 1994.\nThey also wore \"TS\" decals on their helmets in memory of Tony Sparano in the 2018 NFL season, their offensive-line coach who died before the season started.\nOn December 24, 2022, in a Week 16 game against the New York Giants, the Vikings wore all-white uniforms at home in the regular season for the first time. As part of the \"Winter Whiteout\" event, the team painted its logo and end zones white with purple accents, and encouraged fans at the stadium to wear white. The Vikings again wore the all-white uniforms at home against the Detroit Lions on December 24, 2023. On June 6, 2024, the Vikings unveiled a new alternate \"Winter Warrior\" uniform, which is all-white with purple and silver stripes and a new Vikings wordmark. The uniform is paired with an alternate white helmet, featuring a silver middle stripe and the traditional horn decal in silver trimmed in purple.\nIn 2023, the Vikings unveiled throwback uniforms based on the 1960s purple uniforms, which had gold trim on the numbers. However, the current matte purple helmet would be used, with gray facemasks and throwback horn decals.\nAll-purple uniforms.\nOn October 11, 1964, for a home game against the Detroit Lions, the Vikings decided to wear their road uniform of white jerseys and purple pants; however, the Lions mistakenly only brought their white jerseys to Minnesota. The game began with both teams wearing white, but it proved too confusing, and ahead of the second quarter, the Vikings changed into their purple jerseys; however, they did not change their pants, resulting in the first time the Vikings wore all-purple for a game. It was not until 43 years later, on December 17, 2007 (a Monday Night Football game against the Chicago Bears) that the Vikings again wore both purple jerseys and purple pants\u2014the first time they wore all-purple intentionally. They repeated this three years later, the wearing all-purple for the November 7, 2010, home game against the Arizona Cardinals.\nThe NFL introduced \"Color Rush\" uniforms for all 32 teams in the 2016 season, specifically for \"Thursday Night Football\" games. The Vikings had an all-purple uniform with gold numbers and stripes on the pants, which made its only appearance as a Color Rush uniform in Week 13 at home against the Dallas Cowboys. After the program was discontinued in 2018, these uniforms have become the team's primary alternate and are now known under the name \"Primetime Purple\"; however, the Vikings only wear these uniforms during home Thursday Night games. They wore the uniforms under the Primetime Purple name for the first time during a game against the Washington Redskins in 2019. In the team's Wild Card game against the New Orleans Saints during the 2019 season, the Vikings wore all purple again; however, instead of the regular alternates, they wore the regular home uniforms with the away purple pants. They wore the combination in games against the Saints in 2020 and 2022.\nIn 2020, the Primetime Purple uniforms made an appearance in a late-afternoon game against the Cowboys. The next season, they were worn for a Thursday Night home game against the Pittsburgh Steelers. The uniform was most recently worn during a Thanksgiving Day game against the New England Patriots in 2022.\nAll-white uniform.\nOn June 6, 2024, the Minnesota Vikings unveiled an all-white \"Winter Warrior\" uniform. It features a white helmet with a satin finish and is adorned with a metallic gray stripe inspired by the metal stripping found on traditional Viking helmets. The uniform is based on the team's decision to wear their standard white jerseys and white pants for one game in both the 2022 and 2023 seasons, which the Vikings dubbed \"Winter Whiteouts\". This uniform is the first in Minnesota history to include a white helmet. These uniforms were worn for their 2024 Winter Whiteout game against the Bears.\nTeam culture.\nMascots.\nAfter several failed attempts at developing an official team-owned mascot, the Vikings finally introduced Viktor the Viking during the 2007 Vikings' season. Team officials had long indicated that they were after a mascot concept that would primarily appeal to the team's younger fan base. Viktor the Viking, a muscle-bound, blond-haired and mustachioed character, wears a Vikings' #1 jersey and an oversized Vikings helmet with protruding horns and a small yellow nose guard.\nFrom 1970 to 1992, truck driver Hub Meeds dressed as a Viking and served as the team mascot. Meeds asked to become the mascot after being accidentally let onto the field by security during Super Bowl IV in New Orleans.\nFrom 1994 to 2015, the team mascot was Ragnar (played by Joseph Juranitch) and was based on the legendary Viking Ragnar Lodbrok. Juranitch admits to being somewhat of an eccentric\u2014he holds the current world record for fastest time shaving a beard with an axe, but hasn't shaved his beard since he won the Ragnar job among 3,000 applicants. Ragnar drove onto the field at the beginning of a game dressed in Viking garb, on a motorcycle, while a cheerleader used to ride a snowmobile. Although never one to shy away from confrontations with opposing players, notably Chad \"Ochocinco\" Johnson, he had a soft spot for Brett Favre while the quarterback started for the rival Green Bay Packers. In 2015, the Vikings announced that they were not able to reach a new contract agreement with Juranitch which he wanted $20,000 per game, and released him.\nAnother mascot associated with the Vikings was \"Vikadontis Rex\", a purple foam dinosaur. Vikadontis was the official mascot of the Minnesota Vikings Children's Fund and took part in the 1995 Celebrity Mascot Olympics. Vikadontis was retired starting with the 2000 season. The team also had an NFL Huddles mascot in the mid-1980s (somewhat similar to Viktor the Viking). Krazy George Henderson was also employed as a cheerleader from 1982 to 1985.\nFight song.\n\"Skol, Vikings\" is the fight song of the Minnesota Vikings. It was introduced around the time the team was founded in 1961. It is always played whenever the team scores a touchdown, field goal or safety, at the end of each half, and upon victory.\nThe song \"Purple and Gold\" was recorded in 2010 by Minneapolis native Prince to be used as a fight song for the Minnesota Vikings.\nHelga hats.\nVikings fans are known to dress up in \"Helga hats\", purple hats with white horns and blonde braids, mimicking the helmets popularly believed to have been worn by Viking warriors. The original Helga Hats are still hand assembled in the Twin Cities area.\nVikings horn.\nDuring home games, the Vikings' Gjallarhorn is played during its pre-game ceremonies, a tradition that started in 2007. The ceremony has been an opportunity to honor past Viking greats (most notably Randy Moss) along with Minnesota-related folks (such as the Minnesota Duluth Bulldogs men's ice hockey team when they won the NCAA hockey championship). The first horn broke right before the playing of the 2016 playoff game in Minnesota versus the Seattle Seahawks, owing to below-zero temperatures (at the time, the Vikings were playing at Huntington Bank Stadium, an outdoor stadium) that cracked it. Both the first and second horns were created by Todd Johnson, a general manager at a music store.\nSkol Chant.\nThe Skol Chant is a cheer that is used in U.S. Bank Stadium for Minnesota Vikings games. It involves fans clapping their hands above their heads and yelling \"Skol\", in response to the beat of a drum. The chant is a modified take on the Viking War Cry used at the Iceland national football team's games and popularized by Iceland supporters at UEFA Euro 2016.\n\"Skol\" (written \"sk\u00e5l\" in Danish, Norwegian, and Swedish and \"sk\u00e1l\" in Faroese and Icelandic or \"skaal\" in archaic spellings or transliteration of any of those languages) is the Danish\u2013Norwegian\u2013Swedish word for \"cheers\" or \"good health\", a salute or a toast, as to an admired person or group.\nRivalries.\nDivisional.\nChicago Bears.\nThe Vikings' rivalry with the Chicago Bears began when the Vikings entered the league as an expansion team in 1961. The first time these two teams met, the Vikings managed an upset over the Bears 37\u201313 in Minnesota. Both teams are members of the NFC North, and play at least twice a year. The Vikings lead the overall series 65\u201357\u20132. The teams have met once in the postseason, a 35\u201318 Bears win in the 1994 Wild Card Round.\nDetroit Lions.\nThe Vikings and Detroit Lions have played twice annually since the Vikings entered the league's Western Conference in 1961. The two teams moved to the NFC Central after the AFL-NFL merger in 1970, which became the NFC North after the NFL's 2002 realignment. This is the only NFC North rivalry without any head-to-head postseason meetings. The Vikings lead the all-time series 80\u201341\u20132.\nGreen Bay Packers.\nThe rivalry between the Vikings and the Green Bay Packers began in 1961, similarly to their other divisional rivalries. Much like other Minnesota-Wisconsin sports rivalries, such as that between the Wisconsin Badgers and Minnesota Golden Gophers. It is also considered to be the most widely acknowledged rivalry within NFC North. Events such as Randy Moss mooning the Green Bay crowd in the first playoff game between these two teams (won by the Vikings), and former Packer great Brett Favre's move to the Vikings have created more resentment between these teams. The Packers lead the all-time series 66\u201360\u20133, despite the two teams splitting their two playoff contests.\nConference.\nNew Orleans Saints.\nThe Vikings have developed a heated NFC rivalry with the New Orleans Saints, who have become known as the Vikings' biggest out-of-division rival. The Vikings lead the overall series 23\u201313, including 4\u20131 in the playoffs. This rivalry has featured many notable playoff matchups, such as the 2009 NFC Championship Game and the 2017 NFC Divisional Round game.\nHistoric.\nDallas Cowboys.\nThe rivalry between the Cowboys and the Vikings heated up during the 1970s, with several of their games impacting the NFC playoff race during that decade. The Cowboys lead the all-time series 19\u201315, including a 4\u20133 record against the Vikings in the playoffs.\nLos Angeles Rams.\nThe Vikings' rivalry with the Los Angeles Rams was most heated in the 1970s when the two teams faced off in many consequential playoff games. To-date, the Vikings are the Rams' second most played playoff opponent with seven games, and the Rams are tied with the Cowboys as the most played playoff opponent for the Vikings.\nThe Vikings lead the all-time series 27\u201318\u20131 and are 5\u20132 in the playoffs.\nPlayers.\nPro Football Hall of Famers.\n\"Italics\" = played only a minor portion of their career with the Vikings, and are recognized primarily based upon achievements with other teams\n25th Anniversary Team (1985).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n40th Anniversary Team (2000).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n50 Greatest Vikings (2010).\nIn connection with the team's 50th anniversary, the Vikings announced a group of 50 top players on December 19, 2010.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAll-Mall of America Field Team (2013).\nIn 2013, in recognition of their final season at the Metrodome, the Vikings organized a fan vote to determine the best players at each position to play for the team in their time at the stadium. They named 12 players on offense, 11 on defense, four special teams players and a head coach.\nOffense\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDefense\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSpecial teams\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHead coach\nCoaches.\nHead coaches.\nThe Vikings have had ten head coaches in franchise history. Bud Grant served two non-consecutive stints as head coach.\nRadio and television.\nThe Vikings' flagship radio station is KFXN-FM (100.3), which uses the branding \"KFAN\" based on its former calls on 1130 AM before a format flip between the AM and FM stations before the 2011 season; 1130 AM also continues to broadcast game play-by-play as KTLK.\nThe games are also heard on the \"KFAN Radio Network\" in Minnesota, Wisconsin, Iowa, South Dakota, and North Dakota, as well as many other outlets. Paul Allen has been the play-by-play announcer since the 2002 NFL season with Pete Bercich filling in as analyst, who began his first season in 2007.\nTelecasts of preseason games not shown on national networks are aired on KMSP (Channel 9) in the Twin Cities with a simulcast of KFAN's radio broadcast while Fox Sports North shows a tape delay later.\nRadio affiliates.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSource:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "20135", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20135", "title": "Marines (disambiguation)", "text": ""}
{"id": "20136", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20136", "title": "Machine-guns", "text": ""}
{"id": "20137", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20137", "title": "Machine Gun", "text": ""}
{"id": "20142", "revid": "48037460", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20142", "title": "Mixmaster Morris", "text": "English DJ and musician\nMixmaster Morris (born Morris Gould; 30 December 1960) is an English electronica DJ and underground musician who has also recorded as The Irresistible Force. His work in the 1990s blended ambient music and chill-out influences with UK dance styles.\nLife and career.\nMorris Gould was born in Brighton, Sussex, England, but grew up in Lincolnshire and was educated at Millfield in Somerset, and King's College London. At 15 he founded a punk rock band, The Ripchords, whose sole release, an eponymous EP with four tracks, was championed by the BBC Radio One DJ John Peel. After leaving university, he began working as a DJ in 1985 with his \"Mongolian Hip Hop Show\" on pirate radio station Network 21 in London \u2013 the handle Mixmaster Morris was suggested by the station director. After a year of managing a club called \"The Gift\" in New Cross, which had been founded by Keith Gallagher and named after a Velvet Underground song, Morris began releasing material as The Irresistible Force in 1987 in collaboration with singer-songwriter Des de Moor. He became involved with the emerging UK acid house scene, after organising Madhouse at The Fridge, Brixton in 1988 \u2013 which was the subject of a piece by Peel in \"The Observer\".\nA show with the band Psychic TV led to him becoming full-time DJ with The Shamen, and touring with them on their 'Synergy' tours for nearly two years.\nThe first release as The Irresistible Force was the single, \"I Want To\" (1988), but success came with the first album, \"Flying High\", released in 1992 on Rising High Records. In 1994, Morris released the second album \"Global Chillage\" which featured a holographic sleeve, and was released in the US on Astralwerks. After a period of legal problems, the third album \"It's Tomorrow Already\" came out on Ninja Tune.\nIn 1990, he made one of the first chillout compilations, \"Give Peace a Dance 2: The Ambient Collection\" for the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, followed by the series \"Chillout or Die\" for Rising High Records. A mix tape for \"Mixmag\" shared with Alex Patterson was also released as a CD. \"The Morning After\" became his first major-label mix album, followed by \"Abstract Funk Theory\" for Obsessive.\nThrough the 1990s he was a regular DJ in the chill out room at Return to the Source parties in London, around the UK and abroad. In 2003 he released the mix CD \"God Bless the Chilled\" for the Return to the Source Ambient Meditations series.\nHe has produced many remixes since 1985, including Coldcut's \"Autumn Leaves\". This remix was nominated by Norman Cook as his favourite chillout track on BBC Television. His mix for INXS was a Top 20 hit in the UK. Other early remixes were of Lloyd Cole, Dave Howard Singers, Bang Bang Machine, Stump, Higher Intelligence Agency, Sven V\u00e4th and Rising High Collective.\nIn the early 1990s his key residencies were alongside the Detroit masters at Lost, Megatripolis at London's Heaven, and also the Tribal Gathering parties. He became known for wearing holographic suits, produced by the company Spacetime, which he modelled for \"Vogue\" magazine. Throughout the decade, Morris wrote about electronic music for the \"NME\", \"Mixmag\", and \"i-D\". He was resident on Kiss FM for several years, and then a regular on Solid Steel, the Ninja Tune syndicated radio show. He made his film debut in \"Modulations\" (Caipirinha Films), and his music was used in a number of other films including \"Groove\" and \"Hey Happy\".\nMorris has played in over fifty countries at nightclubs and parties, and particularly music festivals such as the Full Moon parties in the Mojave Desert, Glastonbury Festival, Rainbow 2000 and Mother SOS in Japan, Chillits in Northern California, and Berlin's Love Parade. He also ran the downtempo night Nubient in Brixton. In 1995, he played at the first The Big Chill festival, and then became a resident for the next 16 years.\nHe also collaborated with the German musician Pete Namlook under the name Dreamfish, recording two albums. Also with SF-based musician Jonah Sharp and Haruomi Hosono of Yellow Magic Orchestra he made the album \"Quiet Logic\" for the Japanese label Daisyworld.\nIn 1998 he joined the UK's Ninja Tune record label, with whom he toured as a DJ and made three releases. 1999 saw him win 'Best Chillout DJ' at the Ibiza DJ Awards at Pacha, Ibiza, and in 2001 he won the title for a second time, becoming the first DJ to achieve this. He has appeared in many lists of the world's top DJ's including the Ministry of Sound book \"The Annual\" and 2003's \"DJs by Lopez\", and \"URB Magazine\"'s Top 100 DJ list. Morris records regular radio shows for the Japanese internet radio station Samurai FM. In 2006 he started a new club at the Big Chill House in Kings Cross, London, and did a guest mix for BBC Radio 1's \"The Blue Room\" show. His essay about jazz was published in the book, \"Crossfade\", and he made a one-off appearance reading it aloud.\nIn March 2007, together with Coldcut, he organised a tribute show to the writer and philosopher Robert Anton Wilson, which they performed at the Queen Elizabeth Hall. He also played in Goa for the first time with The Big Chill, and started a new residency at The Prince in Brixton. In May 2008 Morris undertook an ambient mix on BBC Radio 1, and put a The Irresistible Force band together to play at The Big Chill festival. In 2009, he compiled a podcast for Tate Britain to accompany their Altermodern exhibition, and opened a new AV night called MMMTV in Camden. The mix CD, \"Calm Down My Selector\" was released in January by Wakyo Records, and he made a tour of Japan to promote it.\nIn 2010, he won another Ibiza DJ Award, for the third time. In October that year, he was announced as Head of A+R for Apollo Records. 2011 saw him rejoin Bestival as part of their \"Ambient Forest\" team.\n2017 saw Morris continue to stay at the top of the psybient/downtempo movement and charts, especially Mixcloud where he held top positions in most categories relating to ambient music for the full year. 2017 also saw the triumphant return of Mixmaster Morris with his acclaimed release \"Kira Kira\", a lush soundscape that was received well by many publications and listeners and earned a spot in \"Extreme Chill's\" top twenty of 2017 along with releases by Brian Eno and Steve Roach.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20143", "revid": "51065404", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20143", "title": "Manx language", "text": "Goidelic Celtic language of the Isle of Man\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nManx \n( or , ),\nalso known as Manx Gaelic, is a Gaelic language of the insular Celtic branch of the Celtic language family, itself a branch of the Indo-European language family. Manx is the heritage language of the Manx people.\nAlthough few children native to the Isle of Man speak Manx as a first language, there has been a steady increase in the number of speakers since 1974, when Ned Maddrell, considered the last speaker to grow up in a Manx-speaking community environment, died. Despite this, the language has never fallen completely out of use, with a minority having some knowledge of it as a heritage language, and it is still an important part of the island's culture and cultural heritage.\nManx is often cited as a good example of language revitalization efforts; in 2015, around 1,800 people had varying levels of second-language conversational ability. Since the late 20th century, Manx has become more visible on the island, with increased signage, radio broadcasts and a Manx-medium primary school. The revival of Manx has been made easier because the language was well recorded, e.g. the Bible and the \"Book of Common Prayer\" had been translated into Manx, and audio recordings had been made of native speakers.\nNames.\nIn Manx.\nThe endonym of the language is /, which shares the same etymology as the word \"Gaelic\", as do the endonyms of its sister languages: Irish (; , and ) and Scottish Gaelic (). Manx frequently uses the forms / (with definite article), as do Irish () and Scottish Gaelic ().\nTo distinguish it from the two other forms of Gaelic, the phrases \"Gaelic of Mann\" and \"Manx Gaelic\" are also used. In addition, the nickname , lit. \"the mother's tongue\" is occasionally used.\nIn English.\nThe language is usually referred to in English as \"Manx\". The term \"Manx Gaelic\" is often used, for example when discussing the relationship between the three Goidelic languages (Irish, Scottish Gaelic, and Manx) or to avoid confusion with Manx English, the form of English spoken on the island. A feature of Manx English deriving from Gaelic is the use of the definite article, e.g. \"the Manx\", \"the Gaelic\", in ways not generally seen in standard English.\nThe word \"Manx\", often spelled historically as \"Manks\" (particularly by natives of the island), means \"Mannish\" and originates from Old Norse . The Isle of Man is named after the Irish god Manann\u00e1n mac Lir, thus (\"Mannan\u00e1n's Island\", \"Mannan\u00e1n's Island\").\nHistory.\nManx is a Goidelic language, closely related to Irish and Scottish Gaelic. On the whole it is partially mutually intelligible with these, and native speakers of one find it easy to gain passive, and even spoken, competency in the other two.\nIt has been suggested that a little-documented Brythonic language (i.e. related to modern Welsh, Cornish and Breton) may have been spoken on the Isle of Man before the arrival of Christian missionaries from Ireland in the early Middle Ages. However, there is little surviving evidence about the language spoken on the island at that time.\nManx (like Irish and Scottish Gaelic) is descended from Primitive Irish. The island either lends its name to or takes its name from \"Manann\u00e1n\", the Brythonic and Gaelic sea god who is said in myth to have once ruled the island. Primitive Irish is first attested in Ogham inscriptions from the 4th century AD. These writings have been found throughout Ireland and the west coast of Great Britain. Primitive Irish transitioned into Old Irish through the 5th century. Old Irish, dating from the 6th century, used the Latin script and is attested mainly in marginalia to Latin manuscripts, but there are no extant examples from the Isle of Man.\nLatin was used for ecclesiastical records from the establishment of Christianity in the Isle of Man in the 5th century AD. Many words concerning religion, writing and record keeping entered Manx at this time.\nThe Isle of Man was conquered by Norse Vikings in the 9th century. Though there is some evidence in the form of runic inscriptions that Norse was used by some of these settlers, the Vikings who settled around the Irish Sea and West Coast of Scotland soon became Gaelic-speaking Norse\u2013Gaels. During the 9th century AD, the Gaelic of the inhabitants of the Isle of Man, like those of Scotland and the North of Ireland, may have been significantly influenced by Norse speakers. While Norse had very little impact on the Manx language overall, a small number of modern place names on the Isle of Man are Norse in origin, e.g. Laxey (Laksaa) and Ramsey (Rhumsaa). Other Norse legacies in Manx include loanwords and personal names.\nBy the 10th century, it is supposed that Middle Irish had emerged and was spoken throughout Ireland, Scotland and the Isle of Man.\nThe island came under Scottish rule in 1266, and alternated between Scottish and English rule until finally becoming the feudal possession of the Stanley family in 1405. It is likely that until that point, except for scholarly knowledge of Latin and courtly use of Anglo-Norman, Manx was the only language spoken on the island. Since the establishment of the Stanleys on the Isle of Man, first Anglo-Norman and later the English language have been the chief external factors in the development of Manx, until the 20th century, when Manx speakers became able to access Irish and Scottish Gaelic media.\n17th to 19th centuries.\nManx had diverged considerably from the Gaelic languages of Scotland and Ireland between 1400 and 1900. The 17th century Plantation of Ulster, the decline of Irish in Leinster and the extinction of Galloway Gaelic led to the geographic isolation of Manx from other dialects of Gaelic. The development of a separate orthography also led Manx to diverge from Irish and Scottish Gaelic.\nIn the 17th century, some university students left the Isle of Man to attend school in England. At the same time, teaching in English was required in schools founded by governor Isaac Barrow. Barrow also promoted the use of English in churches; he considered that it was a superior language for reading the Bible; however, because most ministers were monolingual Manx speakers, his views had little practical impact.\nThomas Wilson began his tenure as Bishop of Mann in 1698 and was succeeded by Mark Hildesley. Both men held positive views of Manx; Wilson was the first person to publish a book in Manx, a translation of \"The Principles and Duties of Christianity\" (), and Hildesley successfully promoted the use of Manx as the language of instruction in schools. The New Testament was first published in Manx in 1767. In the late 18th century, nearly every school was teaching in English. This decline continued into the 19th century, as English gradually became the primary language spoken on the Isle of Man.\nIn 1848, J.G. Cumming wrote, \"there are ... few persons (perhaps none of the young) who speak no English.\" Henry Jenner estimated in 1874 that about 30% of the population habitually spoke Manx (12,340 out of a population of 41,084). According to official census figures, 9.1% of the population claimed to speak Manx in 1901; in 1921 the percentage was only 1.1%. Since the language was used by so few people, it had low linguistic \"prestige\", and parents tended not to teach Manx to their children, thinking it would be useless to them compared with English.\nAccording to Brian Stowell, \"In the 1860s there were thousands of Manx people who couldn't speak English, but barely a century later it was considered to be so backwards to speak the language that there were stories of Manx speakers getting stones thrown at them in the towns.\"\nRevival.\nFollowing the decline in the use of Manx during the 19th century, (The Manx Language Society) was founded in 1899. By the mid-20th century, only a few elderly native speakers remained (the last of them, Ned Maddrell, died 27 December 1974), but by then a scholarly revival had begun and a few people had started teaching it in schools. The Manx Language Unit was formed in 1992, consisting of three members and headed by Manx Language Officer Brian Stowell, a language activist and fluent speaker, \"which was put in charge of all aspects of Manx language teaching and accreditation in schools.\" This led to an increased interest in studying the Manx language and encouraged a renewed sense of ethnic identity. The revival of Manx was aided by the recording work done in the 20th century by researchers. Most notably, the Irish Folklore Commission was sent in with recording equipment in 1948 by \u00c9amon de Valera. Also important in preserving the Manx language was work conducted by the late Brian Stowell, who is considered personally responsible for the current revival of the Manx language. The Manx Language Strategy was released in 2017, outlining a five-year plan for the language's continued revitalisation. Culture Vannin employs a Manx Language Development Officer () to encourage and facilitate the use of the language.\nIn 2009, UNESCO's \"Atlas of the World's Languages in Danger\" declared Manx an extinct language, despite the presence of hundreds of speakers on the Isle of Man. Historian and linguist Jennifer Kewley Draskau reacted to this declaration, saying that saying that \"Unesco ought to know better than to declare Manx a dead language. There are hundreds of speakers of Manx and while people are able to have productive conversations in the language then it is very much alive and well.\" Since then, UNESCO's classification of the language has changed to \"critically endangered\".\nIn the 2011 census, 1,823 out of 80,398 Isle of Man residents, or 2.27% of the population, claimed to have knowledge of Manx, an increase of 134 people from the 2001 census. These individuals were spread roughly uniformly over the island: in Douglas 566 people professed an ability to speak, read or write Manx; 179 in Peel, 146 in Onchan, and 149 in Ramsey.\nTraditional Manx given names have experienced a marked resurgence on the island, especially and (Mary), (William), (from the Manx king Godred Crovan of Norse origin), (Bridget), (Alice), (Jack), (John), (Joan), (Fionnuala), (Patrick) and (from the Norse goddess) remain popular.\nEstimated number of speakers by year.\n &lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Isle of Man population\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Manx speakers\nStatus.\nManx is not officially recognised by any national or regional government, although its contribution to Manx culture and tradition is acknowledged by some governmental and non-governmental bodies.\nThe Standing Orders of the House of Keys provide that: \"The proceedings of the House shall be in English; but if a Member at any point pronounces a customary term or sentence in Manx Gaelic or any other language, the Speaker may call upon the Member for a translation.\" An example was at the sitting on 12 February 2019, when an MHK used the expression , stated to mean \"nonsense\".\nManx is used in the annual Tynwald ceremony and Manx words are used in official Tynwald publications.\nFor the purpose of strengthening its contribution to local culture and community, Manx is recognised under the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages and in the framework of the British-Irish Council.\nThe Isle of Man comprised the one site for the Manx language in the Atlas Linguarum Europae, a project that compared dialects and languages across all countries in Europe.\nManx is taught as a second language at all of the island's primary and secondary schools. The lessons are optional and instruction is provided by the Department of Education's Manx Language Team which teach up to A Level standard.\nThe Bunscoill Ghaelgagh, a primary school at St John's, has 67 children, as of September 2016, who receive nearly all of their education through the medium of the language. Children who have attended the school have the opportunity to receive some of their secondary education through the language at Queen Elizabeth II High School in Peel.\nThe playgroup organisation Mooinjer Veggey, which operates the , runs a series of preschool groups that introduce the language.\nBilingual road, street, village and town boundary signs are common throughout the Isle of Man. All other road signs are in English only.\nBusiness signage in Manx is gradually being introduced but is not mandated by law; however, the 1985 Tynwald Report on the use of Manx states that signage should be bilingual except where a Manx phrase is the norm.\nClassification and dialects.\nManx is one of the three daughter languages of Old Irish (via Middle Irish), the other two being Irish and Scottish Gaelic. It shares a number of developments in phonology, vocabulary and grammar with its sisters (in some cases only with certain dialects) and shows a number of unique changes. There are two attested historical dialects of Manx, Northern Manx and Southern Manx. A third dialect may have existed in-between, around Douglas.\nSimilarities to and differences from Irish and Scottish Gaelic.\nManx and Scottish Gaelic share the partial loss of phonemic palatalisation of labial consonants; while in Irish velarised consonants contrast phonemically with palatalised . A consequence of this phonemic merger is that Middle Irish unstressed word-final (-\u27e8(a)ibh, (a)imh\u27e9 in Irish and Gaelic) has merged with (-\u27e8(e)abh, (e)amh\u27e9 in Irish and Gaelic), in Manx; both have become (-\u27e8oo, u(e)\u27e9), e.g. \"to stand\" (Irish ), \"religion\" (Irish ), \"fainting\" (Early Modern Irish , lit. \"in clouds\"), and \"on you (pl.)\" (Irish ).\nMedial and final *\u27e8bh, mh\u27e9 have generally become and in Manx, thus 'you pl.' (Irish and Scottish Gaelic ; Lewis Gaelic ), \"bitter\" (Scottish , Irish (Northern/Western) , (Southern) ), \"river\" (Scottish , Irish (Northern) ) (Western) (Southern) , \"hand\" (Scottish , Irish (Northern) , (Western) , (Southern) ), \"summer\" (Scottish , Irish (Northern) , (Western/Southern) ). Rare retentions of the older pronunciation of \u27e8bh\u27e9 include , \"Dublin\", Middle Irish \"Duibhlind\" .\nMoreover, similarly to Munster Irish, historical \u27e8bh\u27e9 () and \u27e8mh\u27e9 (nasalised ) tend to be lost word medially or finally in Manx, either with compensatory lengthening or vocalisation as resulting in diphthongisation with the preceding vowel, e.g. \"winter\" (Irish (Southern) ) and \"mountains\" (Irish (Southern) ). Another similarity to Munster Irish is the development of the Old Irish diphthongs before velarised consonants (\u27e8ao\u27e9 in Irish and Scottish Gaelic) to , as in \"carpenter\" and \"narrow\" (Irish and Scottish and ).\nLike Connacht and Ulster Irish (cf. Irish phonology) and most dialects of Scottish Gaelic, Manx has changed the historical consonant clusters to , e.g. Middle Irish \"mockery\" and \"women\" have become and respectively in Manx. The affrication of slender \"\u27e8d, t\u27e9\" sounds is also common to Manx, Northern Irish, and Scottish Gaelic.\nUnstressed Middle Irish word-final syllable (-\u27e8(a)idh, (a)igh\u27e9) has developed to (-\u27e8ee\u27e9) in Manx, as in \"buy\" (cf. Irish ) and \"apparatus\" (cf. Gaelic ), like Northern/Western Irish and Southern dialects Scottish Gaelic (e.g. Arran, Kintyre).\nAnother property Manx shares with Ulster Irish and some dialects of Scottish Gaelic is that rather than appears in unstressed syllables before (\u27e8agh\u27e9 in Manx), e.g. \"straight\" (Irish ), \"to remember\" (Scottish Gaelic ).\nLike Southern and Western Irish and Northern Scottish Gaelic, but unlike the geographically closer varieties of Ulster Irish and Arran and Kintyre Gaelic, Manx shows vowel lengthening or diphthongisation before the Old Irish fortis and lenis sonorants, e.g. \"children\" , \"brown\" and \"butter\" correspond to Irish/Scottish Gaelic , , and respectively, which have long vowels or diphthongs in Western and Southern Irish and in the Scottish Gaelic dialects of the Outer Hebrides and Skye, thus Western Irish , Southern Irish/Northern Scottish , , ), but short vowels and 'long' consonants in Ulster Irish, Arran, and Kintyre, , and .\nAnother similarity with Southern Irish is the treatment of Middle Irish word-final unstressed (-\u27e8(e)adh\u27e9 in Irish and Scottish Gaelic). In nouns (including verbal nouns), this became in Manx, as it did in Southern Irish, e.g. \"war\" , \"to praise\" (cf. Irish and (Southern Irish) and ). In finite verb forms before full nouns (as opposed to pronouns) became in Manx, as in Southern Irish, e.g. \"would praise\" (cf. Irish (Southern Irish) ).\nDialects.\nLinguistic analysis of the last few dozen native speakers reveals a number of dialectal differences between the North and the South of the island. Northern Manx () was spoken from Maughold in the northeast to Peel on the west coast. Southern Manx was spoken in the sheading of Rushen. It is possible that written Manx represents a 'midlands' dialect of Douglas and surrounding areas.\nIn Southern Manx, older \u27e8\u00e1\u27e9, and in some cases \u27e8\u00f3\u27e9, became . In Northern Manx the same happened, but \u27e8\u00e1\u27e9 sometimes remained as well, e.g. \"day\" (cf. Irish ) was in the South but or in the North. Old \u27e8\u00f3\u27e9 is always in both dialects, e.g. \"young\" (cf. Irish ) is in both dialects. \u27e8\u00e1, \u00f3\u27e9 and lengthened \u27e8a\u27e9 before \u27e8rt, rd, rg\u27e9 became , as in \"paayrt\" '\"part\" , \"ard\" \"high\" , \"jiarg\" \"red\" , \"argid\" \"money, silver\" and \"aarey\" \"gold gen.\" .\nIn Northern Manx, older \u27e8(e)a\u27e9 before \u27e8nn\u27e9 in the same syllable is diphthongized, while in Southern Manx it is lengthened but remains a monophthong, e.g. \"head\" (cf. Irish ) is in the North but in the South.\nWords with \u27e8ua\u27e9, and in some cases \u27e8ao\u27e9, in Irish and Scottish are spelled with \u27e8eay\u27e9 in Manx. In Northern Manx, this sound was , while in Southern Manx it was , , or , e.g. \"wind\" (cf. Irish ) is in the north and in the South, while \"coal\" (cf. Irish ) is in the North and , , or in the South.\nIn both the North and the South, there is a tendency to insert a short before a word-final in monosyllabic words, as in for \"whole\" and for \"woman\". This is known as pre-occlusion. In Southern Manx, however, there is also pre-occlusion of before and of before , as in for \"walking\" and for \"ship\". These forms are generally pronounced without pre-occlusion in the North. Pre-occlusion of before , on the other hand, is more common in the North, as in \"heavy\", which is in the North but in the South. This feature is also found in Cornish.\nSouthern Manx tended to lose word-initial before , which was usually preserved in the North, e.g. \"glen\" and \"knee\" are and in the South but and in the North.\nIn modern times, the small size of the island and the improvement in communications precludes any regional dialect variations.\nPhonology.\nStress.\nStress generally falls on the first syllable of a word in Manx, but in many cases, stress is attracted to a long vowel in the second syllable. Examples include:\nConsonants.\nThe consonant phoneme inventory of Manx:\nThe voiceless plosives are aspirated. The dental, postalveolar and palato-velar plosives affricate to in many contexts.\nManx has an optional process of lenition of plosives between vowels, where voiced plosives and voiceless fricatives become voiced fricatives and voiceless plosives become either voiced plosives or voiced fricatives. This process introduces the allophones . The voiced fricative may be further lenited to , and may disappear altogether. Examples include:\nVoiceless plosive to voiced plosive:\nVoiceless plosive to voiced fricative:\nVoiced plosive to voiced fricative:\nVoiceless fricative to voiced fricative:\nAnother optional process is pre-occlusion, the insertion of a very short plosive before a sonorant consonant. In Manx, this applies to stressed monosyllabic words. The inserted consonant is homorganic with the following sonorant, which means it has the same place of articulation. Long vowels are often shortened before pre-occluded sounds. Examples include:\nThe trill is realised as a one- or two-contact flap at the beginning of syllable, and as a stronger trill when preceded by another consonant in the same syllable. At the end of a syllable, can be pronounced either as a strong trill or, more frequently, as a weak fricative , which may vocalise to a nonsyllabic or disappear altogether. This vocalisation may be due to the influence of Manx English, which is non-rhotic. Examples of the pronunciation of include:\nVowels.\nThe vowel phoneme inventory of Manx:\nThe status of and as separate phonemes is debatable, but is suggested by the allophony of certain words such as \"is\", \"women\", and so on. An alternative analysis is that Manx has the following system, where the vowels and have allophones ranging from through to . As with Irish and Scottish Gaelic, there is a large amount of vowel allophony, such as that of . This depends mainly on the 'broad' and 'slender' status of the neighbouring consonants:\nWhen stressed, is realised as .\nManx has a large inventory of diphthongs and triphthongs, some of which tended to merge or monophthongise in Late Manx.\nGrammar.\nSyntax.\nLike most Insular Celtic languages, Manx is a VSO language. However, most finite verbs are formed periphrastically, using an auxiliary verb in conjunction with the verbal noun. In this case, only the auxiliary verb precedes the subject, while the verbal noun comes after the subject. The auxiliary verb may be a modal verb rather than a form of (\"be\") or (\"do\"). Particles like the negative (\"not\") precede the inflected verb. Examples:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWhen the auxiliary verb is a form of (\"do\"), the direct object precedes the verbal noun and is connected to it with the particle :\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAs in Irish (cf. Irish syntax#The forms meaning \"to be\"), there are two ways of expressing \"to be\" in Manx: with the substantive verb , and with the copula. The substantive verb is used when the predicate is an adjective, adverb, or prepositional phrase. Examples:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWhere the predicate is a noun, it must be converted to a prepositional phrase headed by the preposition (\"in\") + possessive pronoun (agreeing with the subject) in order for the substantive verb to be grammatical:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOtherwise, the copula is used when the predicate is a noun. The copula itself takes the form or in the present tense, but it is often omitted in affirmative statements:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn questions and negative sentences, the present tense of the copula is :\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMorphology.\nInitial consonant mutations.\nLike all modern Celtic languages, Manx shows initial consonant mutations, processes whereby the initial consonant of a word is altered according to its morphological and/or syntactic environment. Manx has two mutations: lenition and eclipsis, found on nouns and verbs in a variety of environments; adjectives can undergo lenition but not eclipsis. In the late spoken language of the 20th century the system was breaking down, with speakers often failing to use mutation in environments where it was called for, and occasionally using it in environments where it was not called for.\nIn the corpus of the late spoken language, there is also one example of the eclipsis (nasalization) of : the sentence (\"I have found the lamb\"), where \u27e8ng\u27e9 is pronounced . However, this is probably a mis-transcription; the verbal noun in this case is not \"get, fetch\", but rather \"find\".\nNouns.\nManx nouns display gender, number and sometimes case, for instance, for feminine \"foot\".\nPronouns.\nIn addition to regular forms, personal pronouns also have emphatic versions.\nVerbs.\nManx verbs generally form their finite forms by means of periphrasis: inflected forms of the auxiliary verbs \"to be\" or \"to do\" are combined with the verbal noun of the main verb. Only the future, conditional, preterite, and imperative can be formed directly by inflecting the main verb, but even in these tenses, the periphrastic formation is more common in Late Spoken Manx.\nThe fully inflected forms of the regular verb \"to throw\" are as follows. In addition to the forms below, a past participle may be formed using : \"thrown\".\n1. First person singular, making the use of a following subject pronoun redundant\n2. First person plural, making the use of a following subject pronoun redundant\n3. Used with all other persons, meaning an accompanying subject must be stated, e.g. \"he will throw\", \"they will throw\"\n4. Singular subject.\n5. Plural subject.\nThere are a few peculiarities when a verb begins with a vowel, i.e. the addition of in the preterite and in the future and conditional dependent. Below is the conjugation of \"to grow\".\nThere is a small number of irregular verbs, the most irregular of all being \"be\".\nPrepositions.\nLike the other Insular Celtic languages, Manx has inflected prepositions, contractions of a preposition with a pronominal direct object, as the following common prepositions show. Note the sometimes identical form of the uninflected preposition and its third person singular masculine inflected form.\nNumbers.\nNumbers are traditionally vigesimal in Manx, e.g. \"twenty\", \"forty\" (\"two twenties\"), \"sixty\" (\"three twenties\").\nOrthography.\nManx orthography is based on Elizabethan English, and to a lesser extent Middle Welsh, developed by people who had an education in English (and Welsh until the 16th century). The result is an inconsistent and only partly phonemic spelling system, similar to English orthography and completely incomprehensible to readers of Irish and Scottish Gaelic. This is because both Irish and Scottish Gaelic use spelling systems derived from Classical Gaelic, the common literary language of Man, Ireland, and Scotland until the Bardic schools closed down in the 17th century, which makes them very etymological. Both Irish and Scottish Gaelic use only 18 letters to represent around 50 phonemes. While Manx uses 24 letters (the ISO basic Latin alphabet, excluding \u27e8x\u27e9 and \u27e8z\u27e9), covering a similar range of phonemes, all three make use of many digraphs and trigraphs. In 1932, Celticist T.\u00a0F. O'Rahilly expressed the opinion that Manx orthography is inadequate, as it is neither traditional nor phonetic. Therefore, if a form of Classical Gaelic orthography adapted to Manx had survived or if one based on the reforms of Theobald Stapleton were to be developed and introduced, the very close relationship between Manx, Irish, and Scottish Gaelic would be obvious to readers at first sight and Manx would be much easier for other Gaels to read and understand.\nHowever, evidence of Gaelic type ever having been used on the island has not been found.\nDiacritics.\nManx uses only one diacritic, a cedilla, which is (optionally) used to differentiate between the two phonemes spelled \u27e8ch\u27e9:\nExample.\nThe following examples are taken from Broderick 1984\u201386, 1:178\u201379 and 1:350\u201353. The first example is from a speaker of Northern Manx, the second from Ned Maddrell, a speaker of Southern Manx.\nVocabulary.\nManx vocabulary is predominantly of Goidelic origin, derived from Old Irish and has cognates in Irish and Scottish Gaelic. However, Manx itself, as well as the languages from which it is derived, borrowed words from other languages, especially Latin, Old Norse, French (particularly Anglo-Norman), and English (both Middle English and Modern English).\nThe following table shows a selection of nouns from the Swadesh list and indicates their pronunciations and etymologies.\nSee Celtic Swadesh lists for the complete list in all the Celtic languages.\nLoanwords.\nLoanwords are primarily Norse and English, with a smaller number coming from French. Some examples of Norse loanwords are \"garden\" (from \"enclosure\") and \"sea rock\" (from ). Examples of French loanwords are \"danger\" (from ) and \"advantage\" (from ).\nEnglish loanwords were common in late (pre-revival) Manx, e.g. \"boy\", \"badger\", rather than the more usual native Gaelic and . In more recent years, there has been a reaction against such borrowing, resulting in coinages for technical vocabulary. Despite this, calques exist in Manx, not necessarily obvious to its speakers. To fill gaps in recorded Manx vocabulary, revivalists have referred to modern Irish and Scottish Gaelic for words and inspiration.\nSome religious terms come ultimately from Latin, Greek and Hebrew, e.g. \"holy\" (from Latin ), \"church\" (from Greek / \"assembly\") and \"abbot\" (from Hebrew / \"father\"). These did not necessarily come directly into Manx, but via Old Irish. In more recent times, has been borrowed from modern Hebrew. Many Irish and English loanwords also have a classical origin, e.g. \"television\" (Irish ) and \"telephone\". Foreign language words (usually via English) are used occasionally especially for ethnic food, e.g. chorizo and spaghetti.\nGoing in the other direction, Manx Gaelic has influenced Manx English (Anglo-Manx). Common words and phrases in Anglo-Manx originating in the language include \"tholtan\" \"ruined farmhouse\", \"quaaltagh\" \"first-foot\", \"keeill\" \"(old) church\", \"cammag\", \"traa-dy-liooar\" \"time enough\", and Tynwald (\"tinvaal\"), which is ultimately of Norse origin, but comes from Manx. It is suggested that the House of Keys takes its name from \"Kiare as Feed\" (four and twenty), which is the number of its sitting members.\nVocabulary comparison examples.\nGaelic versions of the Lord's Prayer.\nThe Lord's Prayer has been translated into all of the Gaelic languages (and Old Irish). Although not direct, it is a good demonstration of the differences between their orthographies.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nExample text.\nArticle 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in Manx:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMedia.\nTwo weekly programmes in Manx are available on medium wave on Manx Radio: on Monday and on Friday. The news in Manx is available online from Manx Radio, who have three other weekly programmes that use the language: ; and . Several news readers on Manx Radio also use a good deal of incidental Manx.\nThe \"Isle of Man Examiner\" has a monthly bilingual column in Manx.\nThe first film to be made in Manx, 22-minute-long \"The Sheep Under the Snow\", premiered in 1983 and was entered for the 5th Celtic Film and Television Festival in Cardiff in 1984. It was directed by Shorys Y Creayrie (George Broderick) for Foillan Films of Laxey, and is about the background to an early 18th-century folk song. In 2013, a short film, Solace in Wicca, was produced with financial assistance from Culture Vannin, CinemaNX and Isle of Man Film. A series of short cartoons about the life of C\u00fa Chulainn which was produced by BBC Northern Ireland is available as are a series of cartoons on Manx mythology. Most significant is a 13-part DVD series Manx translation of the award-winning series \"https://\".\nLiterature.\nManx never had a large number of speakers, so it would not have been practical to mass-produce written literature. However, a body of oral literature did exist. The \"Fianna\" tales and others like them are known, including the Manx ballad , commemorating Finn MacCumhail and Ois\u00edn. With the coming of Protestantism, Manx spoken tales slowly disappeared, while a tradition of carvals, Christian ballads, developed with religious sanction. Even so, Bishop Mark Hildesley, after his gardener overheard him discussing the \"Ossian\" poems of James Macpherson and admitted to known of Fionn and Oisin, the Bishop collected from the local oral tradition multiple lays in Manx from the Fenian Cycle of Celtic Mythology, which were accordingly preserved for the future.\nThere is no record of literature written distinctively in Manx before the Reformation. By that time, any presumed literary link with Ireland and Scotland, such as through Irish-trained priests, had been lost. The first published literature in Manx was \"The Principles and Duties of Christianity ()\", translated by Bishop of Sodor and Man Thomas Wilson.\nThe \"Book of Common Prayer\" was translated by John Phillips, the Welsh-born Anglican Bishop of Sodor and Man from 1605 to 1633. The early Manx script has some similarities with orthographical systems found occasionally in Scotland and in Ireland for the transliteration of Gaelic, such as the Book of the Dean of Lismore, as well as some extensive texts based on English and Scottish English orthographical practices of the time. Little secular Manx literature has been preserved.\nThe New Testament was first published in 1767. When the Anglican church authorities started to produce written literature in the Manx language in the 18th century, the system developed by John Philips was further \"anglicised\"; the one feature retained from Welsh orthography was the use of \u27e8y\u27e9 to represent (e.g. \"horse\" and \"help\" as well as (e.g. \"knowledge\"), though it is also used to represent , (e.g. \"John\" (vocative), \"fish\").\nOther works produced in the 18th and 19th centuries include catechisms, hymn books and religious tracts. A translation of \"Paradise Lost\" was made by Rev. Thomas Christian of Marown in 1796.\nA considerable amount of secular literature has been produced in the 20th and 21st centuries as part of the language revival. In 2006, the first full-length novel in Manx, (\"The Vampire Murders\") was published by Brian Stowell, after being serialised in the press. There is an increasing amount of literature available in the language, and recent publications include Manx versions of the \"Gruffalo\" and \"Gruffalo's Child\".\nAntoine de Saint-Exup\u00e9ry's \"The Little Prince\" was translated into Manx by Rob Teare in 2019.\nManx and Christianity.\nThe Manx Bible.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Bible was first produced in Manx by a group of Anglican clergymen on the island. The Gospel of Matthew was printed in 1748. The Gospel and were produced in 1763 and 1767, respectively, by the Society for the Propagation of Christian Knowledge (SPCK). In 1772 the Old Testament was printed, together with the Wisdom of Solomon and Ecclesiasticus (Sirach) from the Apocrypha.\n \"The Holy Bible\" of the Old and New Testaments was published as one book by the SPCK in 1775, effectively fixing the modern orthography of Manx, which has changed little since. Jenner claims that some bowdlerisation had occurred in the translation, e.g. the occupation of Rahab the prostitute is rendered as \"a hostess, female inn-keeper.\" The bicentenary was celebrated in 1975 and included a set of stamps from the Isle of Man Post Office.\nThere was a translation of the (\"Psalms of David\") in metre in Manx by the Rev John Clague, vicar of Rushen, which was printed with the Book of Common Prayer of 1768. Bishop Hildesley required that these Metrical Psalms were to be sung in churches. These were reprinted by in 1905.\nThe British and Foreign Bible Society (BFBS) published the \"New Testament\" in 1810 and reprinted it in 1824. \"The Holy Bible\" of the Old Testament and New Testament (without the two books of the Apocrypha) was first printed as a whole in 1819. BFBS last printed anything on paper in Manx in 1936 when it reprinted \"the Gospel of St John\"; this was reprinted by in 1968. The Manx Bible was republished by Shearwater Press in July 1979 as (Manx Family Bible), which was a reproduction of the BFBS 1819 Bible.\nSince 2014 the BFBS 1936 Manx Gospel of John has been available online on YouVersion and Bibles.org.\nChurch.\nManx has not been used in Mass since the late 19th century, though holds an annual Christmas service on the island.\nIn a move towards the Catholic Church in the Isle of Man having a Bishop of its own, in September 2023 St. Mary of the Isle Church in Douglas was granted Co-Cathedral status by Pope Francis. During the Mass of dedication by Malcolm McMahon, the Archbishop of Liverpool, the Lord's Prayer was recited in Manx and the Manx National Anthem was also performed.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20144", "revid": "48743579", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20144", "title": "Marcomanni", "text": "Ancient Germanic tribe of modern Bohemia\nThe Marcomanni were a Germanic people who lived close to the border of the Roman Empire, north of the River Danube, and are mentioned in Roman records from approximately 60 BC until about 400 AD. They were one of the most important members of the powerful cluster of allied Suebian peoples in this region, which also included the Hermunduri, Varisti, and Quadi along the Danube, and the Semnones and Langobardi to their north. \nThe Marcomanni were first reported by Julius Caesar among the Germanic peoples who were attempting to settle in Gaul in 58 BC under the leadership of Ariovistus, but he did not explain where their homeland was. After a major defeat to the Romans in about 9 BC, the Marcomanni somehow received a new king named Maroboduus, who had grown up in Rome. He subsequently led his people and several others into a region surrounded by forests and mountains in what is now the Czech Republic. Before 9 BC the homeland of the Marcomanni is not known, but archaeological evidence suggests that they lived near the central Elbe river and Saale, or possibly to the southwest of this region in Franconia.\nFrom his base in Bohemia, Maroboduus built up a Rome-aligned Suebian empire, but the Langobardi and Semnones left when Maroboduus failed to support the rebellion of Arminius against Rome. The subsequent war among the Germanic peoples was damaging to both sides. This damaged Maroboduus's reputation, and he was eventually toppled from power, and died in exile in Ravenna. This suited the empire because despite their neutrality towards Rome, Roman rulers saw the Marcomanni as a potential threat to them, within striking distance of Italy. Over the centuries the Romans sought to control their leaders, and disrupt their relationships with neighbouring peoples. Despite long periods of peace and prosperity there were also several periods of intense warfare between them, often triggered by the actions of peoples living further from the Roman frontier. \nIn the second century AD, during the reign of Marcus Aurelius and his co-emperors, the Romans pursued a major series of bloody wars against the Marcomanni and their allies which are called the Marcomannic wars. At one point the Marcomanni and their allies invaded Italy itself. Eventually defeated, the Marcomanni were weakened, and many were moved into the Roman empire, but the tensions behind this war were never resolved, and their neighbours such as the Quadi continued to come into conflict with Rome. This ended only when Goths, Alans and Huns moved from the east into the Middle Danube region and took effective control of it in the late 4th century. The region subsequently came under the rule of Attila, who died in 453. By this time many Marcomanni apparently already lived within Pannonia in the Roman empire, and at least some of these had converted to Christianity. There are indications that a significant number apparently came to live to the south between the Sava and Drava rivers in what is now Slovenia and Croatia. More generally, although the details are now unclear, many Marcomanni and other Suebian communities from the region of the Elbe and Danube are believed to have joined the Langobardi who moved southwards into the Middle Danube region, replacing the short-lived kingdoms which arose after Attila's death, and subsequently moved into Italy under pressure from the arrival of the Avars from the east. Other Marcomanni are likely to have joined the Alemanni, and Bavarians to their west, or even to have left the region entirely with the Suebi who founded the Kingdom of the Suebi in what is now Portugal and Spain.\nName.\nIt is believed that the name of the Marcomanni comes from a Germanic language. The first part derives from a Proto-Germanic word reconstructed as \"\" meaning \"border, boundary\", which is also the origin of the English words \"march\" and \"mark\", meaning \"frontier\", or \"border\", as for example in the term \"Welsh marches\". They were therefore \"border men\". The Marcomanni already had this name before they encountered the Romans in Gaul in 58 BC, where both the Romans and the Marcomanni were foreigners. Their homeland up until that time, and therefore the frontier or march they originally lived near, is unknown.\nThe time of Caesar and Ariovistus (58 BC).\nThe Marcomanni first appear in historical records among the confederates of Ariovistus who fought against Julius Caesar in Gaul. Ariovistus led a large group of \"Germani\" settlers who had crossed the Rhine from what is now Germany, into what is now France. Caesar's report of his battles mentions the Marcomanni among them only once, in his account of his victory in 58 BC. Caesar wrote that he approached the Germanic camp and forced them to draw up their forces. They \"arranged them by tribe (\"generatim\", by \"gens\"), at equal distances, the Harudes, Marcomanni, Tribocci, Vangiones, Nemetes, Sedusii, Suebi; and surrounded their whole army with their chariots and wagons, that no hope might be left in flight. On these they placed their women, who, with outstretched hand and in tears, entreated the soldiers, as they went forward to battle, not to deliver them into slavery to the Romans.\" According to Caesar the Tribocci, Vangiones and Nemetes came from homelands nearby to the Rhine itself, but the others apparently came from further east.\nThe exact position of the Marcomanni homelands east of the Rhine at this time is not known. Although there is no scholarly consensus, one of the most common proposals is that they came from the Mainfranken region in northwestern Bavaria. It is generally accepted that they lived near to, or even among the Suebi, because later Roman writers connect the two peoples, and because of archaeological evidence showing Elbe Germanic peoples first entering present day central Germany and later entering the modern Bohemian area at the right time to match the Marcomanni. Caesar understood the country of the Suebi he faced to be in or near present day Hesse, Franconia, and Thuringia. Caesar himself made no mention of any special connection between the Suebi and Marcomanni, because he only mentioned the Marcomanni once in a list. It is nevertheless possible the Marcomanni were already seen as a branch of the Suebi, although this categorization is only made explicit in much later authors such as Strabo and Tacitus. Alternatively, between Caesar and Strabo there may have been changes in the relationship between the Suebi and Marcomanni, or in the terminology that was used. Caesar described the Suebi he encountered as the largest and the most warlike Germanic people (\"gens\"), who were divided into 100 districts (\"pagi\") which supplied 1000 men each during war. The forces of these \"pagi\" were distinct within the Suevi forces, and it is sometimes suggested that the Marcomanni could have been one of these \"pagi\". The Suebi were also able to call upon other countries (\"nationes\") to supply infantry and cavalry reinforcements.\nA later Roman historian, Cassius Dio, mentioned that part of a country where the Marcomanni had recently lived was settled by the Hermunduri in 7 BC with Roman permission, and this was apparently west of the Elbe, if we can assume that the events he described happened in one campaign. However this area is also not easy to identify. This is partly because the Hermunduri themselves were pushed east of the Elbe soon after, by the time of Strabo, who was writing around 20 AD. (Generations later, in the time of Tacitus around 100 AD, the Hermunduri were again friendly with Rome, and once again living west of the Elbe, stretching to the Danube in Raetia, apparently near present day Regensburg and Passau, to the \"sources\" of the Elbe, which may include the Vltava. However, it can't be assumed that this is the same region they settled in 7 BC.) \nIn terms of archaeological evidence the Marcomanni and their Suebian neighbours are strongly associated with the Grossromstedter archaeological culture of the Middle Elbe and Saale river regions. The area of this culture expanded southwest into the region between the Rhine and Werra before the Roman empire entered the region. And after the Roman conquests began it can be found expanding southeast into the Bohemian region. It was influenced not only by the older Jastorf culture of the central Elbe region, but notably also by the Przeworsk culture from further east in present day Poland. The variant which subsequently developed in the old Boii lands is called the Pla\u0148any-Group, and shows the influence of their older Celtic La T\u00e8ne culture associated with earlier Celtic peoples of these regions, such as the Boii and Volcae Tectosages. The present day Czech region had itself already come under Przeworsk influence in the generations before the Germanic influx. The name of the Marcomanni, which refers to a frontier, may echo an earlier demarcation somewhere between such Germanic and Celtic cultures.\nThe Marcomanni are archaeologically difficult to distinguish among the various Suebian groups such as the Quadi and Hermunduri who were bringing the Grossromstedter culture southwards and westwards. Furthermore, the Grossromstedter culture already began to have some influence in the Bohemian area after Caesar's victories, and before the Marcomanni defeat in 9 BC.\nNear extermination by the Romans (9 BC).\nIn the time of Augustus (reigned 27 BC \u2013 14 AD), major invasions of Germania were launched, giving the Romans effective control of the part between the Rhine and Elbe rivers, until the rebellion of Arminius in 9 AD. During this period the Marcomanni suffered at least one major defeat and subsequently moved themselves into a more remote area surrounded by mountains and forests.\nIn the \"Res Gestae Divi Augusti\" which celebrates the reign of Augustus, it is boasted that among the many kings who took refuge with Augustus as suppliants, there was a king of the Marcomanni Suebi. The name of this king is no longer legible on the \"Monumentum Ancyranum\", but it ended with \"-rus\".\nThe Roman historians Florus and Orosius reported that Drusus the elder almost wiped out the Marcomanni as part of a bloody and difficult campaign, and then erected a mound of Marcomanni spoils. This was during his campaigns of 12\u20139 BC, happening after he had defeated the Tencteri and Chatti, and before next turning to confront an alliance of the Cherusci, Suevi, and Sicambri. Another Roman source, Cassius Dio, describes the sequence of events somewhat differently, but does not mention the Marcomanni by name:\nDrusus, [...] invaded the country of the Chatti and advanced as far as that of the Suebi, conquering with difficulty the territory traversed and defeating the forces that attacked him only after considerable bloodshed. From there he proceeded to the country of the Cherusci, and crossing the Weser, advanced as far as the Elbe, pillaging everything on his way. [...] Drusus undertook to cross this river, but failing in the attempt, set up trophies and withdrew. \nThere are doubts, therefore, about the exact sequence of events, and also about the locations of the battles. Scholars are not unanimous about whether the victory over the Marcomanni happened in 9 BC, which was the year of the victory over the Cherusci, Suebi and Sugambri, and also the year that Drusus died after reaching the Elbe. The location of the Marcomanni battle is often assumed to be in Franconia but an alternative hypothesis is that it was closer to the Cherusci, in the area of northeastern Hesse and western Thuringia. There are also scholars who propose that the Suebi defeated in the 9 BC campaign were in fact the same as the Marcomanni.\nThe move to \"Bohemia\".\nIn 7 BC, a later Roman historian, Cassius Dio, implies that the Romans settled the Hermunduri where the Marcomanni had previously been living, suggesting that the Marcomanni had left a previous homeland in the period 9-7 BC. According to the accounts of Tacitus, Velleius Paterculus, and Strabo the Marcomanni indeed moved into a part of the large area that had been occupied by the Boii, a region called \"Baiohaemum\", where their allies and fellow Suevi lived, the Quadi. Scholars interpret this placename as clear early evidence of a Germanic language being used. \"Haemum\" corresponds to English \"home\" and German \"Heim\" (Proto-Germanic \"*haimaz\"), while the change from \"boi\"- to \"bai\"- corresponds to normal evolutions in Germanic languages. This ancient term is the origin of the modern regional name Bohemia, although the boundaries of this region were likely quite different from medieval and modern versions. These classical authors place the new settlement area of the Marcomanni within the Hercynian Forest, in an area near present day Bohemia, and probably within it. By 6 BC, their king, Maroboduus, had established a powerful kingdom there that Augustus came to perceive as a threat to the Roman Empire. The archaeological evidence of this period, including both a number of cremation and inhumation burials, hints at a stratified society which gave special importance to its warrior class.\nThe empire of Maroboduus.\nMaroboduus built up a Rome-aligned Suebian empire. According to Strabo, it included the Lugii, Semnones, and Hermunduri, and he also mentioned otherwise unknown peoples: Zumi, Butones (perhaps the Gutones), Mugilones and Sibini. Velleius and Tacitus made it clear that by 5 AD it also included the Langobardi. According to Velleius he could call upon 70,000 experienced infantry and 4,000 cavalry, although these were probably not only Marcomanni. \nIn 6 AD, Augustus aimed to eliminate the last power center in Germania and sent two Roman army groups under Sentius Saturninus and Tiberius to attack the Marcomanni in a pincer movement starting from Roman camps or bases which were in or near in present day Marktbreit to the west and Carnuntum on the Danube. This did not go ahead because a major revolt started in Pannonia, south of the Danube, which had also only recently been conquered. Maroboduus remained neutral.\nIn 9 AD, Arminius of the Cherusci began his major revolt against the Romans. He sent the head of the defeated Roman general Publius Quinctilius Varus to Maroboduus, but Maroboduus sent it to Rome. The Langobardi and Semnones, Suebians living near to the Cherusci on the Elbe, defected from this kingdom in the name of freedom, both because Maroboduus did not support the revolt, and because he held royal power.\nIn 17 AD war broke out among these two alliances of Germanic peoples, led by Arminius and Maroboduus. Maroboduus requested help from Rome but the Romans reject him. According to Tacitus the Romans claimed that Maroboduus \"had no right to invoke the aid of Roman arms against the Cherusci, when he had rendered no assistance to the Romans in their conflict with the same enemy\". After an indecisive battle, Maroboduus withdrew into the hilly forests of Bohemia in 18 AD. According to Tacitus, the Romans reacted by deliberately sowing discord among the Germani, \"urging them to complete the destruction of the now broken power of Maroboduus\". This was all in line with the new foreign policy of the emperor Tiberius.\nAlready in 19 AD, Maroboduus was deposed and exiled by Catualda, who was a prince who had been living in exile among the Gutones, living near the Baltic coast, in what is now northern Poland. Maroboduus went into exile among the Romans and lived another 18 years in Ravenna.\nThe Vannius regime.\nCatualda's victory was short-lived. He was in turn deposed by Vibilius of the Hermunduri that same year he came to power, 19 AD. The subjects of Maroboduus and Catualda, presumably mainly Marcomanni, were moved by the Romans to an area near the Danube, between the Morava and \"Cusus\" rivers, and placed under the control of the Quadian king Vannius. There are proposals that the Romans were deliberately trying to create a buffer state with this settlement, but there is no consensus about this. The area where Vannius ruled over the Marcomanni exiles is generally considered to have been a state distinct from the old Quadi kingdom itself. Unfortunately the Cusus river has not been identified with certainty. However, Slovak archaeological research locates a core area of the Vannius kingdom was probably in the fertile southwestern Slovakian lowlands around Trnava, east of the Little Carpathians. On the other hand, at the same time there were similar increases in activity west of the Little Carpathians near the Morava.\nVannius personally benefitted from the new situation and became very wealthy and unpopular. He was himself eventually also deposed by Vibilius and the Hermunduri, working together with the Lugii from the north, in 50/51 AD. Vannius's soldiers during this conflict are described here as infantry, but he also called for cavalry from his Sarmatian allies and neighbours, the Iazyges, who lived in what is now Hungary. This revolt by Vibilius was coordinated with the nephews of Vannius, Vangio and Sido, who then divided his realm between themselves as loyal Roman client kings. Vannius was defeated and fled with his followers across the Danube, where they were assigned land in Roman Pannonia. This settlement is associated with Germanic finds from the 1st century AD in Burgenland, west of Lake Neusiedl. \nThe Marcomanni are not specifically mentioned much in subsequent generations, possibly because they were now politically part of the Vannian regime which was centred around the Quadian powerbases closer to the Danube. Archaeological and other evidence indicates that the Marcomanni population also more generally moved, or at least became more active, to the southeast near the Morava river, while the Quadi and the Vannian kingdom expanded further east in the direction of what is now Hungary. Archaeological evidence shows further increase in the Germanic population just north of the Danube after the fall of Vannius, in present day Lower Austria, Moravia and western Slovakia. At the same time this region also received increasing amounts of imports from within the empire. The organization of the Marcomanni and Quadi states into different kingdoms is not made clear by surviving evidence, but it is believed that by this time the Marcomanni kingdom now came to stretch into this Danubian area, probably including areas in Moravia and Lower Austria, west of the Little Carpathians.\nIn 69 AD, the \"Year of the Four Emperors\", two kings Sido and Italicus, the latter perhaps the son of Vangio, fought on the side of Vespasian in a Roman civil war. Tacitus described them as kings of the Suebians, and emphasized their loyalty to Rome. They were present at the second battle of Bedriacum in 69 AD at Cremona.\nThe Quadi and Marcomanni had a long and relatively stable relationship with the Romans but this was interrupted under emperor Domitian during the years 89-97 AD, after the Quadi and Marcomanni refused to assist in a conflict against the Dacians. In 89 AD, according to Dio Cassius, Domitian entered Pannonia to make war, killed the peace envoys sent to him, and was then defeated by the Marcomanni. This campaign was referred to as the war against the Suebi, or the Suebi and Sarmatians, or the Marcomanni, Quadi and Sarmatians. The relationship then stabilized again in the time of emperor Nerva (reigned 96-98).\nMarcomannic Wars.\nThe relationship between the Romans and the Quadi and their neighbours was far more seriously and permanently disrupted during the long series of conflicts called the Marcomannic or Germanic wars, which were fought mainly during the rule of emperor Marcus Aurelius (reigned 161-180 AD). \nIn the 150s or 160s AD, 6000 Langobardi (Lombards originally from present-day north Germany) and Obii (whose identity is uncertain) crossed the Lower Danube into Roman territory where they were quickly defeated. Dio Cassius reports that these events worried several of the barbarian nations. A group of them selected Ballomarius, king of the Marcomanni, and ten other representatives of the other nations, in a peace mission to the governor of Roman Pannonia. Oaths were sworn and the envoys returned home. Some scholars think the Quadi may have been involved in this raid, or at least allowed it to happen. However the Quadi and their neighbours were facing their own problems with raiders from further north, and had been trying for some time to get more support from the empire. On their side, the Romans were apparently planning for a Germania campaign, and knew that Italy itself was threatened by these pressures, but were deliberately diplomatic while they were occupied with the Parthian campaign in the Middle East, and badly affected by the Antonine plague. However, the \"Historia Augusta\" especially blames the Marcomanni and Victohali for throwing everything into confusion while other tribes had been driven on by the more distant barbarians.\nAlthough a Roman offensive could not start in 167 AD, two new legions were raised and in 168 AD the two emperors, Lucius Verus and Marcus Aurelius, set out to cross the alps. Either in 167 AD, \"before\" the Romans setting, or in 169 AD, \"after\" the Romans came to a stop when Verus died, the Marcomanni and Quadi led a crossing of the Danube, and an attack into Italy itself. They destroyed Opitergium (present-day Oderzo) and put the important town of Aquileia under siege. Whatever the exact sequence of events, the \"Historia Augusta\" says that with the Romans in action several kings of the barbarians retreated, and some of the barbarians put anti-Roman leaders to death. In particular, the Quadi, having lost their king, announced they would not confirm an elected successor without approval from the emperors.\nMarcus Aurelius returned to Rome but headed north again in the autumn of 169. He established a Danubian headquarters in Carnuntum between present-day Vienna and Bratislava. From here he could receive embassies from the different peoples north of the Danube. Some were given the possibility to settle in the empire, others were recruited to fight on the Roman side. The Quadi were pacified, and in 171 AD they agreed to leave their coalition, and returned deserters, and 13,000 prisoners of war. They supplied horses and cattle as war contributions, and promised not to allow Marcomanni or Iazyges passage through their territory. By 173 AD the Quadi had rebelled again, and they expelled their Roman-approved king Furtius, replacing with Ariogaisos. In a major battle between 172 and 174 AD, a Roman force was almost defeated, until a sudden rainstorm allowed them to defeat the Quadi. The incident is well-known because of the account given by Dio Cassius, and on the Column of Marcus Aurelius in Rome. By 175 AD the cavalry from the Marcomanni, Naristae, and Quadi were forced to travel to the Middle East, and in 176 AD Marcus Aurelius and his son Commodus held a triumph as victors over Germania and Sarmatia.\nThe situation remained disturbed in subsequent years. The Romans declared a new war in 177 AD and set off in 178 AD, naming the Marcomanni, Hermunduri, Sarmatians, and Quadi as specific enemies. Rome executed a successful and decisive battle against them in 179 AD at Laugaricio (present-day Tren\u010d\u00edn in Slovakia) under the command of legate and procurator Marcus Valerius Maximianus. By 180 AD the Quadi and Marcomanni were in a state of occupation, with Roman garrisons of 20,000 men each permanently stationed in both countries. The Romans even blocked the mountain passes so that they could not migrate north to live with the Semnones. Marcus Aurelius was considering the creation of a new imperial province called Marcomannia when he died in 180.\nCommodus the son of Marcus Aurelius made peace soon after the death of his father in 180 AD, but he did not go ahead with plans to create a new Roman province. Some Marcomanni were subsequently settled in Italy and other parts of the empire, while others were forced to serve in the military.\nThird century.\nAround 214/215 AD, Dio Cassius reports that because of raids into Pannonia, the emperor Caracalla invited the Quadi king Gaiobomarus to meet him, and then had him executed. According to this report Caracalla \"claimed that he had overcome the recklessness, greed, and treachery of the Germans by deceit, since these qualities could not be conquered by force\", and he was proud of the \"enmity with the Vandili and the Marcomani, who had been friends, and in having executed Ga\u00efobomarus\".\nThe centre of activity of the Suebians along the Danube shifted east during the third century, towards what is now the Slovakia-Hungary border. This apparently reflects the increased importance of the Quadi, and the decreased importance of the Marcomanni.\nDuring the reign of the Roman emperor Philip the Arab (reigned 244-249 AD), who cut off gifts which were being paid to Ukrainian Goths under the rule of Ostrogotha, the 6th century writer Jordanes believed that the Marcomanni were also paying tribute to this same Gothic king, and the princes of the Quadi were effectively slaves of the Goths.\nDuring the reign of Valerian (253-260 AD) the historian Zosimus reported that the Marcomanni made excursions at the same time as \"Scythians\" (Goths and allied peoples from Ukraine), making inroads into all the countries adjacent to the empire, laying Thessalonica waste. Valerian's son Gallienus (reigned 253-268 AD) settled the Marcomanni within the Roman province of Pannonia Superior, south of the Danube. He also took Pipa or Pipara, the daughter of the Marcomanni king, Attalus, as a concubine.\nAlthough the details are not clear, the emperor Diocletian claimed a triumph over the Marcomanni in 299 AD.\nFourth century and later.\nAlthough the Quadi and other allies continued to be mentioned by historians in the fourth century, the records say little about the Marcomanni until after the death of Valentinian I during a period of conflict with the Quadi in 375 AD, and after the great Roman defeat to the Goths, Alans and Huns at the Battle of Adrianople in 378 AD. It seems that the Rugii and Heruli may have already moved into the Marcomanni's traditional region during this period. The \"Laterculus Veronensis\" shows that Heruli and Rugii were already present somewhere in western Europe in about 314. Similar listings from later in the 4th century, the \"Cosmographia\" of Julius Honorius, and probably also the \"Liber Generationis\", both listed the Heruli together with the Marcomanni and Quadi, in whose traditional region the Herule kingdom would later be found.\nThe defeat at Adrianople had a major impact upon the Pannonian/Danubian region. Although there is no consensus about the details, the Romans now quickly tried new approaches to settling newcomers in large numbers. One of the armed groups responsible for the defeat, led by Alatheus and Saphrax, were settled into the Pannonian part of the Roman empire, near the Marcomanni homeland, and expected to do military service for Rome. In effect however, Rome seems to have lost effective control of the region. The Goths, Alans and Huns suddenly came to dominate several such regions, supposedly still within the empire, and also became massively important within the Roman military.\nAfter the death of emperor Theodosius I in 395, Saint Jerome listed the Marcomanni, Quadi, Vandals and Sarmatians, together with several of the new eastern peoples causing devastation in the Roman provinces stretching from Constantinople to the Julian Alps, including Dalmatia, and all the provinces of Pannonia: \"Goths and Sarmatians, Quadi and Alans, Huns and Vandals and Marcomanni\". Claudian describes them crossing the frozen Danube with wagons, and then setting wagons around themselves like a wall at the approach of the Roman commander Stilicho. He says that all the fertile lands between the Black Sea and Adriatic were subsequently like uninhabited deserts, specifically including Dalmatia and Pannonia. At the same time, the Gothic general Alaric I, who had loyally served with his Gothic troops under Theodosius I at the Battle of Frigidus only a few months early, was beginning his famous rebellion, and started leading his army south, first towards Constantinople, and later towards Greece. This was triggered by internal Roman conflicts after the death of Theodosius. Claudian claimed that they were all incited by an Eastern Roman consul and enemy of Stilicho, Rufinus. The exact connection between Alaric and the groups who crossed the Danube at the same time remains unclear.\nSoon after this, Ambrose, bishop of Milan 374-397, corresponded with a Christian Marcomanni queen named Fritigil, initiating a peace treaty between the Marcomanni and the western Roman military leader Stilicho. The \"Notitia Dignitatum\", which lists Roman office-holders around 420 AD, also mentions a tribune of the Marcomanni \"gens\" (non Roman people) who answered to the \"dux\" of northern Noricum and Pannonia I, two districts situated on the Danube. These are the last clear of the Marcomanni having a polity, which was probably now on the Roman side of the Danube, in Pannonia. Soon afterward, the Pannonian and Danubian area went into a long period of turmoil, under the influence of peoples from the east including the Huns, Goths and Alans. Nevertheless, there are records indicating that Marcomanni continued to exist within Roman territory, where it seems that they were given initially responsibility for defence of parts of the Upper Danube. The \"Notitia Dignitatum\" also lists palatine auxiliaries (court troops) of the \"Marcomanni Honoriani seniores\" and \"iuniores\" for Italy, as well as the \"Equites Marcomanni\" for the mobile army in North Africa. \nSome of the Marcomanni may have been among the Suebi who invaded Iberia in about 409, and established the kingdom in the Roman province of Gallaecia. These Suevi were probably a mix of Suevian groups from the area north of Danube and Pannonian basin such as the Marcomanni, Quadi and Buri.\nIn the Danubian area, Attila came to be acknowledged as ruler. There is no direct \"contemporary\" evidence that any Marcomanni or Quadi continued to exist as his subjects or allies under their old names. However, centuries later Paulus Diaconus listed the subject peoples who Attila could call upon, in addition to the better-known Goths and Gepids, and mentioned \"Marcomanni, Suebi, Quadi\", alongside the expected \"Herules, Thuringi and Rugii\". This implies that the Marcomanni might for example have been present at the Battle of the Catalaunian Plains in 451. However, modern scholars have doubts about whether the Marcomanni or Quadi would still have been identified under those names under Attila in 451, because contemporary sources don't mention them.\nWhile it is not clear what happened to the Marcomanni and other Suebi during Attila's time, after he died in 453 a Suebian kingdom appeared which was ruled by a man named Hunimund and existed in or near north-eastern Pannonia. This may have been made up of Quadi, or a mixture of Suebians. After being defeated by the Ostrogoths, Hunimund and some of his people seem to have moved west and joined the Alemanni. The record which mentions the Suebi joining the Alemanni is also one of the first records mentioning the early Bavarians, or Baiuvarii, who were also living south of the Danube, to the east of the Alemanni, in what had been Roman territory. It is generally believed that their name is Germanic, and that it indicates an origin in the nearby regions to the east, including Roman Pannonia, which were once inhabited by the Boii. It is therefore considered very likely that the Baiuvarii included Marcomanni.\nPossibly distinct from the Suebi led by Hunimund, the \"Ravenna Cosmography\", a much later document which used sources which are in many cases now lost, indicates that a Marcannori people (\"Marcannorum gens\") lived in the mountainous southwest of Pannonia near the Sava river. A Sava or Suavia province between the Sava and Drava rivers, continued to exist during the time when the Ostrogoths ruled Italy, and may have been named after these Suebi (Suavi). It is possible that the Suebi moved into this more southern area after the defeat of Hunimund, or they may have been a separate group. During the Ostrogothic period, these Suebi were legally distinguished from the native populations under the term \"old barbarians\" (\"antiqui barbari\"), which also distinguished them legally from the new non-Romans, the Goths. Unusually, they were legally permitted to marry the provincial residents, and could therefore become part of the land owning class. Some scholars believe these were descendants of the Christian Marcomanni of Queen Fritigil. During the time of Theoderic the Great a group of Alemanni crossed the alps with cattle and wagons to seek refuge with these \"antiqui barbari\". Procopius noted that in 537, the Ostrogoths recruited an army of these Suebi to launch an attack against areas held by the Eastern Roman empire. In 540 Ostrogothic rule in the Sava region came to an end, and the Suebi came under the authority of Eastern Roman emperor Justinian.\nIn the 530s the Langobardi (Lombards), who had been moving southwards in steps over several generations, entered the Sava area, and in the 540s the Eastern empire ceded control of it to them. The Suebi of the Sava region were among the peoples who were allowed to assimilate into Lombard society, if they accepted to live as Lombards under Lombard law. The Lombards, facing pressure from the arrival of the Avars into the area, moved into Italy and began taking control of it, bit by bit.\nOther.\nThere is a runic alphabet called the Marcomannic runes, but they are not believed to be related to the Marcomanni.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20145", "revid": "12521734", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20145", "title": "Maroboduus", "text": "Early 1st century AD king of the Marcomanni\nMaroboduus (d. AD 37), also known as Marbod, was a king of the Marcomanni, who were a Germanic Suebian people. He spent part of his youth in Rome, and returning, found his people under pressure from invasions by the Roman Empire between the Rhine and Elbe. He led them into the forests of Bohemia, near to the Quadi who already lived nearby, and established a large alliance.\nName.\nThe name appears in Latin and Greek texts spelt variously: \"Maroboduus, Marobodus, Maraboduus, Meroboduus, Morobuduus, Moroboduus, Marbodus\" and \"Marabodus\" in Latin sources; \"Maroboudos\" and \"Baroboudos\" in Greek ones.\nAccording to linguist Xavier Delamarre, the personal name \"Maroboduus\" is a latinized form of Gaulish \"Maro-boduos\", from \"maro\"- ('great') attached to \"boduos\" ('crow'; cf. Middle Irish \"bodb\" 'scald-crow, war-divinity', Old Breton \"bodou\" 'ardea'; also Common Brittonic \"Boduoci\" (Boudica)). The Celtic personal names \"Boduus\", \"Teuto-boduus\" (Teutobod), \"Ate-boduus\", \"Soli-boduus\", \"Boduo-genus\", and \"Buduo-gnatus\" are related. Philologist John T. Koch argues that Middle Irish \"bodb\" must be understood as the 'bird on the battlefield and manifestation of the war-goddess'.\nThe second element of the name, \"boduos\", is a term shared by Celtic and Germanic languages, where it is found as the common noun *\"badw\u014d\" ('battle'; cf. ON \"b\u01eb\u00f0\", OE \"beado\", OS \"badu\"-\",\" OHG \"batu-\") and in the name of the war goddess \"Baduhenna\". The original meaning of Celtic\u2013Germanic *\"bhodhwo\"- must have been 'battle, fight', later metaphorised in Celtic as 'crow', a bird symbolizing the carnage in battle.\nBiography.\nMaroboduus was born into a noble family of the Marcomanni. As a young man, he lived in Italy and was reportedly regarded well by the Emperor Augustus. \nIn 10 BC, the Marcomanni reportedly suffered a significant defeat at the hands of the Roman Empire. Afterwards, in about 9 BC, Maroboduus returned to Germania and became ruler of his people. To deal with the threat of Roman expansion into the Rhine-Danube basin, he led the Marcomanni to the area later known as Bohemia to be outside the range of the Roman influence. There, he took the title of king and organized a confederation of several neighboring Germanic tribes. He was the first documented ruler of Bohemia with a government.\nAugustus planned in 6 AD to destroy the kingdom of Maroboduus, which he considered to be too dangerous for the Romans. The future emperor Tiberius commanded 12 legions to attack the Marcomanni, but the outbreak of a revolt in Illyria, and the need for troops there, forced Tiberius to conclude a treaty with Maroboduus and to recognize him as king.\nWar with Arminius and death.\nHis rivalry with Arminius, the Cheruscan leader who inflicted the devastating defeat at the Battle of the Teutoburg Forest on the Romans under Publius Quinctilius Varus in 9 AD, prevented a concerted attack on Roman territory across the Rhine in the north (by Arminius) and in the Danube basin in the south (by Maroboduus).\nHowever, according to the first-century AD historian Marcus Velleius Paterculus, Arminius sent Varus's head to Maroboduus, but the king of the Marcomanni sent it to Augustus. In the revenge war of Tiberius and Germanicus against the Cherusci, in 16 AD, Maroboduus stayed neutral.\nIn 17 AD, war broke out between Arminius and Maroboduus, and after an indecisive battle, Maroboduus withdrew into the hilly forests of Bohemia in 18 AD. In the next year, Catualda, a young Marcomannic nobleman living in exile among the Gutones, returned, perhaps by a subversive Roman intervention, and defeated Maroboduus. The deposed king had to flee to Italy, and Tiberius detained him for 18 years in Ravenna. There, Maroboduus died in 37 AD. Catualda was, in turn, defeated by the Hermunduri Vibilius, after which the realm was ruled by the Quadian Vannius. Vannius was himself also deposed by Vibilius, in coordination with his nephews Vangio and Sido, who then ruled as Roman client kings.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20146", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20146", "title": "Muon", "text": "Subatomic particle\nA muon ( ; from the Greek letter mu (\u03bc) used to represent it) is an elementary particle similar to the electron, with an electric charge of \u22121\u00a0\"e\" and a spin of \u00a0\"\u0127\", but with a much greater mass. It is classified as a lepton. As with other leptons, the muon is not thought to be composed of any simpler particles.\nThe muon is an unstable subatomic particle with a mean lifetime of , much longer than many other subatomic particles. As with the decay of the free neutron (with a lifetime around 15 minutes), muon decay is slow (by subatomic standards) because the decay is mediated only by the weak interaction (rather than the more powerful strong interaction or electromagnetic interaction), and because the mass difference between the muon and the set of its decay products is small, providing few kinetic degrees of freedom for decay. Muon decay almost always produces at least three particles, which must include an electron of the same charge as the muon and two types of neutrinos. \nLike all elementary particles, the muon has a corresponding antiparticle of opposite charge (+1\u00a0\"e\") but equal mass and spin: the antimuon (also called a \"positive muon\"). Muons are denoted by and antimuons by . Formerly, muons were called \"mu mesons\", but are not classified as mesons by modern particle physicists (see &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;), and that name is no longer used by the physics community.\nMuons have a mass of , which is approximately \u200d times that of the electron, \"m\"e. There is also a third lepton, the tau, approximately 17 times heavier than the muon.\nDue to their greater mass, muons accelerate more slowly than electrons in electromagnetic fields, and emit less bremsstrahlung (deceleration radiation). This allows muons of a given energy to penetrate far deeper into matter because the deceleration of electrons and muons is primarily due to energy loss by the bremsstrahlung mechanism. For example, so-called secondary muons, created by cosmic rays hitting the atmosphere, can penetrate the atmosphere and reach Earth's land surface and even into deep mines.\nBecause muons have a greater mass and energy than the decay energy of radioactivity, they are not produced by radioactive decay. Nonetheless, they are produced in great amounts in high-energy interactions in normal matter, in certain particle accelerator experiments with hadrons, and in cosmic ray interactions with matter. These interactions usually produce pi mesons initially, which almost always decay to muons.\nAs with the other charged leptons, the muon has an associated muon neutrino, denoted by , which differs from the electron neutrino and participates in different nuclear reactions.\nHistory of discovery.\nMuons were discovered by Carl D. Anderson and Seth Neddermeyer at Caltech in 1936 while studying cosmic radiation. Anderson noticed particles that curved differently from electrons and other known particles when passed through a magnetic field. They were negatively charged but curved less sharply than electrons, but more sharply than protons, for particles of the same velocity. It was assumed that the magnitude of their negative electric charge was equal to that of the electron, and so to account for the difference in curvature, it was supposed that their mass was greater than an electron's but smaller than a proton's. Thus Anderson initially called the new particle a \"mesotron\", adopting the prefix \"meso-\" from the Greek word for \"mid-\". The existence of the muon was confirmed in 1937 by J. C.\u00a0Street and E. C.\u00a0Stevenson's cloud chamber experiment.\nA particle with a mass in the meson range had been predicted before the discovery of any mesons, by theorist Hideki Yukawa:\nIt seems natural to modify the theory of Heisenberg and Fermi in the following way. The transition of a heavy particle from neutron state to proton state is not always accompanied by the emission of light particles. The transition is sometimes taken up by another heavy particle.\nBecause of its mass, the mu meson was initially thought to be Yukawa's particle and some scientists, including Niels Bohr, originally named it the \"yukon\". \nThe fact that the mesotron (i.e. the muon) was not Yukawa's particle was established in 1946 by an experiment conducted by Marcello Conversi, Oreste Piccioni, and Ettore Pancini in Rome. In this experiment, which Luis Walter Alvarez called the \"start of modern particle physics\" in his 1968 Nobel lecture, they showed that the muons from cosmic rays were decaying without being captured by atomic nuclei, contrary to what was expected of the mediator of the nuclear force postulated by Yukawa. Yukawa's predicted particle, the pi meson, was finally identified in 1947 (again from cosmic ray interactions).\nWith two particles now known with the intermediate mass, the more general term \"meson\" was adopted to refer to any such particle within the correct mass range between electrons and nucleons. Further, in order to differentiate between the two different types of mesons after the second meson was discovered, the initial mesotron particle was renamed the \"mu meson\" (the Greek letter \"\u03bc\" [\"mu\"] corresponds to \"m\"), and the new 1947 meson (Yukawa's particle) was named the \"pi meson\".\nAs more types of mesons were discovered in accelerator experiments later, it was eventually found that the mu meson significantly differed not only from the pi meson (of about the same mass), but also from all other types of mesons. The difference, in part, was that mu mesons did not interact with the nuclear force, as pi mesons did (and were required to do, in Yukawa's theory). Newer mesons also showed evidence of behaving like the pi meson in nuclear interactions, but not like the mu meson. Also, the mu meson's decay products included both a neutrino and an antineutrino, rather than just one or the other, as was observed in the decay of other charged mesons.\nIn the eventual Standard Model of particle physics codified in the 1970s, all mesons other than the mu meson were understood to be hadrons \u2013 that is, particles made of quarks \u2013 and thus subject to the nuclear force. In the quark model, a \"meson\" was no longer defined by mass (for some had been discovered that were very massive \u2013 more than nucleons), but instead were particles composed of exactly two quarks (a quark and antiquark), unlike the baryons, which are defined as particles composed of three quarks (protons and neutrons were the lightest baryons). Mu mesons, however, had shown themselves to be fundamental particles (leptons) like electrons, with no quark structure. Thus, mu \"mesons\" were not mesons at all, in the new sense and use of the term \"meson\" used with the quark model of particle structure.\nWith this change in definition, the term \"mu meson\" was abandoned, and replaced whenever possible with the modern term \"muon\", making the term \"mu meson\" only a historical footnote. In the new quark model, other types of mesons sometimes continued to be referred to in shorter terminology (e.g., \"pion\" for pi meson), but in the case of the muon, it retained the shorter name and was never again properly referred to by older \"mu meson\" terminology.\nThe eventual recognition of the muon as a simple \"heavy electron\", with no role at all in the nuclear interaction, seemed so incongruous and surprising at the time, that Nobel laureate I.\u00a0I.\u00a0Rabi famously quipped, \"Who ordered that?\".\nIn the Rossi\u2013Hall experiment (1941), muons were used to observe the time dilation (or, alternatively, length contraction) predicted by special relativity, for the first time.\nMuon sources.\nMuons arriving on the Earth's surface are created indirectly as decay products of collisions of cosmic rays with particles of the Earth's atmosphere.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;About 10,000\u00a0muons reach every square meter of the earth's surface a minute; these charged particles form as by-products of cosmic rays colliding with molecules in the upper atmosphere. Traveling at relativistic speeds, muons can penetrate tens of meters into rocks and other matter before attenuating as a result of absorption or deflection by other atoms.\nWhen a cosmic ray proton impacts atomic nuclei in the upper atmosphere, pions are created. These decay within a relatively short distance (meters) into muons (their preferred decay product), and muon neutrinos. The muons from these high-energy cosmic rays generally continue in about the same direction as the original proton, at a velocity near the speed of light. Although their lifetime \"without\" relativistic effects would allow a half-survival distance of only about 456\u00a0m at most (as seen from Earth), the time dilation effect of special relativity (from the viewpoint of the Earth) allows cosmic ray secondary muons to survive the flight to the Earth's surface, since in the Earth frame the muons have a longer half-life due to their velocity. From the viewpoint (inertial frame) of the muon, on the other hand, it is the length contraction effect of special relativity that allows this penetration, since in the muon frame its lifetime is unaffected, but the length contraction causes distances through the atmosphere and Earth to be far shorter than these distances in the Earth rest-frame. Both effects are equally valid ways of explaining the fast muon's unusual survival over distances.\nSince muons are unusually penetrative of ordinary matter, like neutrinos, they are also detectable deep underground (700\u00a0m at the Soudan 2 detector) and underwater, where they form a major part of the natural background ionizing radiation. Like cosmic rays, as noted, this secondary muon radiation is also directional.\nThe same nuclear reaction described above (i.e. hadron\u2013hadron impacts to produce pion beams, which then quickly decay to muon beams over short distances) is used by particle physicists to produce muon beams, such as the beam used for the muon \"g\"\u22122 experiment.\nMuon decay.\nMuons are unstable elementary particles and are heavier than electrons and neutrinos but lighter than all other matter particles. They decay via the weak interaction. Because leptonic family numbers are conserved in the absence of an extremely unlikely immediate neutrino oscillation, one of the product neutrinos of muon decay must be a muon-type neutrino and the other an electron-type antineutrino (antimuon decay produces the corresponding antiparticles, as detailed below).\nBecause charge must be conserved, one of the products of muon decay is always an electron of the same charge as the muon (a positron if it is a positive muon). Thus all muons decay to at least an electron, and two neutrinos. Sometimes, besides these necessary products, additional other particles that have no net charge and spin of zero (e.g., a pair of photons, or an electron-positron pair), are produced.\nThe dominant muon decay mode (sometimes called the Michel decay after Louis Michel) is the simplest possible: the muon decays to an electron, an electron antineutrino, and a muon neutrino. Antimuons, in mirror fashion, most often decay to the corresponding antiparticles: a positron, an electron neutrino, and a muon antineutrino. In formulaic terms, these two decays are:\n \u2192 + +\nThe mean lifetime, , of the (positive) muon is . The equality of the muon and antimuon lifetimes has been established to better than one part in 104.\nProhibited decays.\nCertain neutrino-less decay modes are kinematically allowed but are, for all practical purposes, forbidden in the Standard Model, even given that neutrinos have mass and oscillate. Examples forbidden by lepton flavour conservation are:\nand\nTaking into account neutrino mass, a decay like \u2192 + is technically possible in the Standard Model (for example by neutrino oscillation of a virtual muon neutrino into an electron neutrino), but such a decay is extremely unlikely and therefore should be experimentally unobservable. Fewer than one in 1050 muon decays should produce such a decay.\nObservation of such decay modes would constitute clear evidence for theories beyond the Standard Model. Upper limits for the branching fractions of such decay modes were measured in many experiments starting more than years ago. The current upper limit for the \u2192 + branching fraction was measured 2009\u20132013 in the MEG experiment and is .\nTheoretical decay rate.\nThe muon decay width that follows from Fermi's golden rule has dimension of energy, and must be proportional to the square of the amplitude, and thus the square of Fermi's coupling constant (formula_1), with over-all dimension of inverse fourth power of energy. By dimensional analysis, this leads to Sargent's rule of fifth-power dependence on \"m\"\u03bc,\n formula_2 is the fraction of the maximum energy transmitted to the electron.\nThe decay distributions of the electron in muon decays have been parameterised using the so-called Michel parameters. The values of these four parameters are predicted unambiguously in the Standard Model of particle physics, thus muon decays represent a good test of the spacetime structure of the weak interaction. No deviation from the Standard Model predictions has yet been found.\nFor the decay of the muon, the expected decay distribution for the Standard Model values of Michel parameters is\n formula_3\nwhere formula_4 is the angle between the muon's polarization vector formula_5 and the decay-electron momentum vector, and formula_6 is the fraction of muons that are forward-polarized. Integrating this expression over electron energy gives the angular distribution of the daughter electrons:\n formula_7\nThe electron energy distribution integrated over the polar angle (valid for formula_8) is\n formula_9\nBecause the direction the electron is emitted in (a polar vector) is preferentially aligned opposite the muon spin (an axial vector), the decay is an example of non-conservation of parity by the weak interaction. This is essentially the same experimental signature as used by the original demonstration. More generally in the Standard Model, all charged leptons decay via the weak interaction and likewise violate parity symmetry.\nMuonic atoms.\nThe muon was the first elementary particle discovered that does not appear in ordinary atoms.\nNegative muon atoms.\n\"Negative\" muons can form muonic atoms (previously called mu-mesic atoms), by replacing an electron in ordinary atoms. Muonic hydrogen atoms are much smaller than typical hydrogen atoms because the much larger mass of the muon gives it a much more localized ground-state wavefunction than is observed for the electron. In multi-electron atoms, when only one of the electrons is replaced by a muon, the size of the atom continues to be determined by the other electrons, and the atomic size is nearly unchanged. Nonetheless, in such cases, the orbital of the muon continues to be smaller and far closer to the nucleus than the atomic orbitals of the electrons.\nSpectroscopic measurements in muonic hydrogen have been used to produce a precise estimate of the proton radius. The results of these measurements diverged from the then accepted value giving rise to the so called proton radius puzzle. Later this puzzle found its resolution when new improved measurements of the proton radius in the electronic hydrogen became available. \nMuonic helium is created by substituting a muon for one of the electrons in helium-4. The muon orbits much closer to the nucleus, so muonic helium can therefore be regarded like an isotope of helium whose nucleus consists of two neutrons, two protons and a muon, with a single electron outside. Chemically, muonic helium, possessing an unpaired valence electron, can bond with other atoms, and behaves more like a hydrogen atom than an inert helium atom.\nMuonic heavy hydrogen atoms with a negative muon may undergo nuclear fusion in the process of muon-catalyzed fusion, after the muon may leave the new atom to induce fusion in another hydrogen molecule. This process continues until the negative muon is captured by a helium nucleus, where it remains until it decays.\nNegative muons bound to conventional atoms can be captured (muon capture) through the weak force by protons in nuclei, in a sort of electron-capture-like process. When this happens, nuclear transmutation results: The proton becomes a neutron and a muon neutrino is emitted.\nPositive muon atoms.\nA \"positive\" muon, when stopped in ordinary matter, cannot be captured by a proton since the two positive charges can only repel. The positive muon is also not attracted to the nucleus of atoms. Instead, it binds a random electron and with this electron forms an exotic atom known as muonium (mu) atom. In this atom, the muon acts as the nucleus. The positive muon, in this context, can be considered a pseudo-isotope of hydrogen with one ninth of the mass of the proton. Because the mass of the electron is much smaller than the mass of both the proton and the muon, the reduced mass of muonium, and hence its Bohr radius, is very close to that of hydrogen. Therefore this bound muon-electron pair can be treated to a first approximation as a short-lived \"atom\" that behaves chemically like the isotopes of hydrogen (protium, deuterium and tritium).\nBoth positive and negative muons can be part of a short-lived pi\u2013mu atom consisting of a muon and an oppositely charged pion. These atoms were observed in the 1970s in experiments at Brookhaven National Laboratory and Fermilab.\nAnomalous magnetic dipole moment.\nThe anomalous magnetic dipole moment is the difference between the experimentally observed value of the magnetic dipole moment and the theoretical value predicted by the Dirac equation. The measurement and prediction of this value is very important in the precision tests of QED. The E821 experiment at Brookhaven and the Muon g-2 experiment at Fermilab studied the precession of the muon spin in a constant external magnetic field as the muons circulated in a confining storage ring. The Muon \"g\"\u22122 collaboration reported in 2021:\n formula_10\nThe prediction for the value of the muon anomalous magnetic moment includes three parts:\n \"a\"\u03bcSM = \"a\"\u03bcQED + \"a\"\u03bcEW + \"a\"\u03bchad.\nThe difference between the \"g\"-factors of the muon and the electron is due to their difference in mass. Because of the muon's larger mass, contributions to the theoretical calculation of its anomalous magnetic dipole moment from Standard Model weak interactions and from contributions involving hadrons are important at the current level of precision, whereas these effects are not important for the electron. The muon's anomalous magnetic dipole moment is also sensitive to contributions from new physics beyond the Standard Model, such as supersymmetry. For this reason, the muon's anomalous magnetic moment is normally used as a probe for new physics beyond the Standard Model rather than as a test of QED. Muon\u00a0\"g\"\u22122, a new experiment at Fermilab using the E821 magnet improved the precision of this measurement.\nIn 2020 an international team of 170 physicists calculated the most accurate prediction for the theoretical value of the muon's anomalous magnetic moment.\nMuon g\u22122.\nMuon g-2 is a particle physics experiment at Fermilab to measure the anomalous magnetic dipole moment of a muon to a precision of 0.14\u00a0ppm, which is a sensitive test of the Standard Model. It might also provide evidence of the existence of entirely new particles.\nIn 2021, the Muon \"g\"\u22122 Experiment presented their first results of a new experimental average that increased the difference between experiment and theory to 4.2 standard deviations.\nElectric dipole moment.\nThe current experimental limit on the muon electric dipole moment, &lt; , set by the E821 experiment at the Brookhaven, is orders of magnitude above the Standard Model prediction. The observation of a non-zero muon electric dipole moment would provide an additional source of CP violation. An improvement in sensitivity by two orders of magnitude over the Brookhaven limit is expected from the experiments at Fermilab.\nMuon radiography and tomography.\nSince muons are much more deeply penetrating than X-rays or gamma rays, muon imaging can be used with much thicker material or, with cosmic ray sources, larger objects. One example is commercial muon tomography used to image entire cargo containers to detect shielded nuclear material, as well as explosives or other contraband.\nThe technique of muon transmission radiography based on cosmic ray sources was first used in the 1950s to measure the depth of the overburden of a tunnel in Australia and in the 1960s to search for possible hidden chambers in the Pyramid of Chephren in Giza. In 2017, the discovery of a large void (with a length of 30\u2009metres minimum) by observation of cosmic-ray muons was reported.\nIn 2003, the scientists at Los Alamos National Laboratory developed a new imaging technique: \"muon scattering tomography\". With muon scattering tomography, both incoming and outgoing trajectories for each particle are reconstructed, such as with sealed aluminum drift tubes. Since the development of this technique, several companies have started to use it.\nIn August\u00a02014, Decision Sciences International Corporation announced it had been awarded a contract by Toshiba for use of its muon tracking detectors in reclaiming the Fukushima nuclear complex. The Fukushima Daiichi Tracker was proposed to make a few months of muon measurements to show the distribution of the reactor cores. In December\u00a02014, Tepco reported that they would be using two different muon imaging techniques at Fukushima, \"muon scanning method\" on Unit\u00a01 (the most badly damaged, where the fuel may have left the reactor vessel) and \"muon scattering method\" on Unit\u00a02. The International Research Institute for Nuclear Decommissioning IRID in Japan and the High Energy Accelerator Research Organization KEK call the method they developed for Unit\u00a01 the \"muon permeation method\"; 1200\u00a0optical fibers for wavelength conversion light up when muons come into contact with them. After a month of data collection, it is hoped to reveal the location and amount of fuel debris still inside the reactor. The measurements began in February 2015.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20149", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20149", "title": "Mike Muuss", "text": "American computer programmer and author\nMichael John Muuss (October 16, 1958 \u2013 November 20, 2000) was the American author of the freeware network tool ping, as well as the first interactive ray tracing program.\nCareer.\nA graduate of Johns Hopkins University, Muuss was a senior scientist specializing in geometric solid modeling, ray-tracing, MIMD architectures and digital computer networks at the United States Army Research Laboratory at Aberdeen Proving Ground, Maryland when he died. He wrote a number of software packages (including BRL-CAD) and network tools (including ttcp and the concept of the default route or \"default gateway\") and contributed to many others (including BIND).\nHowever, the thousand-line ping, which he wrote in December 1983 while working at the Ballistic Research Laboratory, is the program for which he is most remembered. Due to its usefulness, ping has been implemented on a large number of operating systems, initially Berkeley Software Distribution (BSD) and Unix, but later others including Windows and Mac OS X.\nIn 1993, the USENIX Association gave a Lifetime Achievement Award (\"Flame\") to the Computer Systems Research Group at University of California, Berkeley, honoring 180 individuals, including Muuss, who contributed to the CSRG's 4.4BSD-Lite release.\nMuuss is mentioned in two books, \"The Cuckoo's Egg\" () and \"Cyberpunk: Outlaws and Hackers on the Computer Frontier\" (), for his role in tracking down crackers. He is also mentioned in Peter Salus's \"A Quarter Century of UNIX\" and a link to his website\u2019s ping page is included in \"How Linux Works\" ().\nMuuss died in an automobile collision on Interstate 95 on November 20, 2000. The Michael J. Muuss Research Award, set up by friends and family of Muuss, memorializes him at Johns Hopkins University.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20150", "revid": "248739", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20150", "title": "Maus (disambiguation)", "text": "Maus is a series of Pulitzer Prize\u2013winning graphic novel style books written by Art Spiegelman.\nMaus may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "20151", "revid": "19540414", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20151", "title": "Mousse", "text": "Soft creamy prepared food using air bubbles for texture\nA mousse (, ; lit.\u2009'foam') is a soft, prepared food that incorporates air bubbles to give it a light and airy texture. Depending on preparation techniques, it can range from light and fluffy to creamy and thick. A mousse may be sweet or savory.\nHistory.\nVarious desserts consisting of whipped cream in pyramidal shapes with coffee, liqueurs, chocolate, fruits, and so on either in the mixture or poured on top were called ('cream in a foam'), ('foamy cream'), ('foam'), and so on, as early as 1768. Modern mousses are a continuation of this tradition.\nTypes.\nSweet.\nSweet mousses are typically made with whipped egg whites, whipped cream, or both, and flavored with one or more of chocolate, coffee, caramel, pur\u00e9ed fruits, or various herbs and spices, such as mint or vanilla. In the case of some chocolate mousses, egg yolks are often stirred into melted chocolate to give the final product a richer mouthfeel. Mousses are also typically chilled before being served, which gives them a denser texture. Additionally, mousses are often frozen into silicone molds and unmolded to give the mousse a defined shape. Sweetened mousse is served as a dessert or used as an airy cake filling. It is sometimes stabilized with gelatin. When making a new flavor of mousse, an important rule is the body is formed of whipping cream and either separated egg yolks or whites (almost never both in the same dish), and frequently, gelatin.\nSavory.\nSavory mousses can be made from meat, fish, shellfish, foie gras, cheese, or vegetables. Hot mousses often receive their light texture from the addition of beaten egg whites.\nMolded and shaped fish mousse with bread and butter remains a popular meal of American cuisine, if not a party dip, although it is not as common as it was in the 1950s.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; at the Wikibooks Cookbook subproject\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20152", "revid": "50512162", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20152", "title": "Milwaukee Brewers", "text": "Major League Baseball franchise in Milwaukee, Wisconsin\nThe Milwaukee Brewers are an American professional baseball team based in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. The Brewers compete in Major League Baseball (MLB) as a member club of the Central Division of the National League (NL). The team's name alludes to the city's association with the brewing industry and has been used by several other baseball teams that have called Milwaukee home. Since 2001, the Brewers have played their home games at American Family Field, which was named Miller Park through the 2020 season and has a seating capacity of 41,900 people.\nThe team was founded as the Seattle Pilots, an expansion team that joined the American League (AL) and began play in Seattle, Washington, as part of the 1969 MLB expansion. The Pilots played their home games at Sick's Stadium. After one season, the team relocated to Milwaukee and started playing their home games at Milwaukee County Stadium as the Milwaukee Brewers. They remained in the American League through the 1997 season before joining the National League in 1998.\nFrom 1969 through 2025, the Brewers' overall regular-season win\u2013loss record is 4,405\u20134,595\u20134 (). Since moving to Milwaukee in 1970, they have an overall win\u2013loss record of 4,341\u20134,497\u20133 () through the end of 2025. The Brewers have qualified for the postseason 11 times, having won one AL pennant, seven division titles, and three wild card berths. They met the St. Louis Cardinals in the 1982 World Series, their only World Series appearance, losing 4\u20133. The Brewers are one of five current MLB teams that have never won the World Series. They and the San Diego Padres are the oldest MLB teams to never win the World Series; at 57 seasons, Milwaukee has the second-longest active championship drought in MLB behind the Cleveland Guardians.\nHistory.\nMilwaukee had been an American League city, albeit briefly, when the original Milwaukee Brewers became an AL charter team in 1901 before moving to St. Louis to become the Browns the following season. Between 1902 and 1952, Milwaukee was home to the Milwaukee Brewers of the American Association (AAA) and the Milwaukee Bears of the Negro National League. Both clubs played at Borchert Field. It became a National League city when its team was the Milwaukee Braves (1953\u20131965). \nToday's Milwaukee Brewers originated as an expansion team in 1969, in Seattle, Washington. The Seattle Pilots played for one season in the American League West Division before being acquired in bankruptcy court by Bud Selig, who moved the team to Milwaukee. Renamed the Brewers, they played in the West Division for three years. Before the 1972 season, the Brewers agreed to switch to the American League East Division to make room for the Texas Rangers who, as the Washington Senators, had moved from Washington, D.C.\nIn 1981, Milwaukee won the American League East in the second half of the strike-shortened season. Rollie Fingers became the first Brewer and first relief pitcher in the history of the American League to win the MVP Award. In the playoffs, they lost the Division Series to the New York Yankees, three games to two. In 1982, Milwaukee, led by AL MVP Robin Yount, won the American League East Division and the American League Pennant, earning their first World Series appearance and only American League pennant. In the Series, they lost to the St. Louis Cardinals in seven games. This would be the last playoff appearance for the team for the next two decades, during which they won 90 games just twice. In 1994, the Brewers moved to the new American League Central division.\nIn 1998, the Brewers moved to the National League. The 2007 season saw them miss out on the NL Central title by two games, their closest finish to a division title since 1988 and also their first winning season since 1992. In 2008, under interim manager Dale Sveum (who won seven of 12 games) for the first time in the 26\u00a0years since their World Series appearance, the Brewers advanced to postseason play by winning the National League wild card. They were eliminated in the National League Division Series by the eventual World Series champion Philadelphia Phillies.\nOn September 23, 2011, the Milwaukee Brewers clinched their first division title in 29\u00a0years. They won the National League Division Series in five games over the Arizona Diamondbacks, but lost the National League Championship Series to the eventual World Series champion St. Louis Cardinals in six games. \nIn 2018, the Brewers clinched a spot in the post-season for the first time since 2011 with a 2\u20131 victory over the St. Louis Cardinals on September 26, 2018.\nOn September 29, they tied with the Cubs for first place in the National League Central, with a record of 95\u201367; at the end of the day on September 30, the Cubs and Brewers were still tied. This tie was broken on October 1, when the Brewers defeated the Cubs 3\u20131 in the NL Central tiebreaker to improve to 96\u201367 and win the division by one game. They went on to defeat the Colorado Rockies 3\u20130 to win the NLDS, but in the following NLCS, they lost out to the Los Angeles Dodgers in 7 games.\nIn 2019, the Brewers returned to the postseason, where they were defeated in the National League Wild Card Game, 4-3, by the eventual World Series champion Washington Nationals.\nIn 2020, the club made the postseason for a third consecutive year, making the expanded Playoffs as the 8th seed losing both games to the eventual champion Dodgers.\nIn 2021, Giannis Antetokounmpo became a minority owner of the Brewers.\nIn 2021, the Brewers clinched the NL Central title with a 95\u201367 record. However, they lost to the eventual World Series champions Atlanta Braves in 4 games in the NLDS.\nUniforms.\n1970\u20131977.\nThe first Brewers uniforms were \"hand-me-downs\" from the Seattle Pilots. Because the move to Milwaukee received final approval less than a week before the start of the season, there was no time to order new uniforms. Selig had originally planned to change the Brewers' colors to navy blue and red in honor of the minor league American Association's Milwaukee Brewers (and are the colors of the Braves), but was forced to simply remove the Seattle markings from the Pilots' blue-and-gold uniforms and sew \"BREWERS\" on the front. However, the outline of the Pilots' logo remained visible. The uniforms had unique striping on the sleeves left over from the Pilots days. The cap was an updated version of the Milwaukee Braves cap: solid blue, with a yellow block \"M\" on the front. Ultimately, it was decided to keep blue and gold as the team colors, and they have remained so ever since (even though the team darkened the shades of both colors in 1994).\nThe Brewers finally got their own flannel design in 1971, but only for their home jerseys. This design was essentially the same as the one used in 1970, but with blue and yellow piping on the sleeves and collar. Meanwhile, the road jerseys did not add the trim around the collar and kept the wide-banded striping on the sleeves from the Pilots era. Additionally, player numbers were added to the front of both jerseys for 1971.\nIn 1972, the Brewers entered the double-knit era with uniforms based upon their flannels: all white with \"BREWERS\" on the front and blue and yellow trim on the sleeves, neck, waistband and down the side of the pants; the uniform took on the form of a pullover jersey and an elastic waistband. The road uniforms remained blue, although a darker shade than those of 1970 and '71. In 1974, a yellow-paneled cap was added to the road uniforms, and the \"sanitation sock\" on the road uniforms were also changed from white to yellow. This is the uniform that Hank Aaron wore with the club in his final seasons and that Robin Yount wore in his first. During this period, the logo of the club was the Beer Barrel Man, which had been used by the previous minor league Brewers since at least the 1940s. The Brewers mascot, Bernie Brewer (a man with a large yellow mustache wearing a Brewers hat) was introduced in 1973.\n1978\u20131993 (ball-in-glove logo).\nThe Brewers unveiled new uniforms for the 1978 season. The uniforms continued to use the pullover jersey/beltless pants combo, and featured pinstripes with a solid-blue collar and waistband. The road uniforms continued to be powder blue, but for the first time the city name, \"Milwaukee\", graced the chest in an upward slant in script form (It was the first time \"Milwaukee\" appeared on any MLB jersey; the Braves never displayed the city name on their road jerseys during their 13 seasons in the city).\nIn addition, the Brewers introduced the ball-in-glove logo that contained an \"M\" and \"B\" in the shape of a baseball glove. The logo was designed by Tom Meindel, an art history student at the University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire. The home cap was solid blue, and the road cap was blue with a yellow front panel. Additionally, their batting helmets had a white front panel. The club wore these uniforms in their pennant-winning season of 1982. Only minor changes were made until 1990; the color of the road uniforms changed to gray in 1985 while the blue-yellow-blue road cap and white-paneled batting helmets were abandoned at the same time.\nIn 1990, the Brewers made significant modifications to their uniforms, switching from pullover to button-down jerseys (the last American League team to do so; four National League teams still wore pullovers in 1990). Their individual uniforms showed other changes as well; at home, the blue piping was removed and the block lettered \"BREWERS\" was changed to a script version with a tail similar to the script used on road uniforms, while those outfits had their piping changed from blue-yellow-blue to blue-yellow. The road jerseys were the first uniforms in franchise history to feature player names on the back, introduced in the first year of this uniform set; names were added to the home jerseys beginning in 1993, the last year of this set.\n1994\u20131999.\nIn 1994, to commemorate the Brewers' 25th year in Milwaukee, the team completely redesigned their uniforms. The ball-in-glove logo was removed and replaced with a stylized interlocking \"M\" and \"B\" set on a pair of crossed bats and a diamond background. The royal blue changed to navy blue, while the yellow changed to a metallic gold. Forest green was added as a third color. The jerseys swapped pinstripes for retro-themed piping around the collar, buttons, and sleeves, following a trend that was popular in the 1990s. The uniforms' lettering had the same style of letters as the new cap logo with heavily stylized \"BREWERS\" lettering on the home jerseys and \"MILWAUKEE\" on the road grays. For the first time, an alternative jersey was introduced. It was navy blue with the home \"BREWERS\" lettering on the front and featured the Brewers' logo on the lower left side. On all three jerseys, the first and last letters were larger than the rest. The caps featured the interlocking \"MB\" logo (without the bats or diamond) on both the home and away versions. The home cap was completely navy blue, while the away cap featured a navy blue crown and a forest green bill.\nIn 1997, the uniforms were slightly modified, with the main logo being removed from the caps and replaced with an \"M\". All navy caps were worn with both the home and away uniforms; the home hats featured a white \"M\" and the road caps had a gold \"M.\" The green socks that had previously been worn on the road were changed to navy blue. The blue alternate jersey placed the player's number on the lower left side instead of the logo, and numbers were also added to the lower left side of the white and gray jerseys. Also, all letters were made the same size.\n2000\u20132019.\nBefore the 2000 season, to coincide with the anticipated opening of Miller Park, the Brewers changed their uniforms again. The block letters on the front were replaced with \"Brewers\" in a flowing script, and green was removed as the third color. The cap logo was a script \"M\", similar in style to the Miller logo, with a head of barley underlining it, symbolizing Milwaukee's beer-making industry. The home uniforms also featured a patch on the left sleeve consisting of the cap logo with a gold outline of the state of Wisconsin behind it, showing the Brewers statewide appeal. The road uniforms were grey and featured the same script \"Brewers\" on the front, with a simple patch on the left sleeve bearing a script \"Milwaukee\". There was also an alternate navy blue jersey that had the same features as the home jersey.\nThe debut of the new uniforms was supposed to coincide with the opening of Miller Park, but a crane collapse in July 1999 which killed three workers and damaged the incomplete stadium delayed its opening until 2001.\nIn 2006, the Brewers introduced Retro Sundays, when the Brewers would wear uniforms featuring the \"ball-in-glove\" logo. The uniforms are similar to the uniforms worn from 1978 to 1989, but with some modern modifications, such as the uniforms having a button-down front instead of being a pullover jersey, displaying players' last names on the backs of the jerseys, and a \"ball-in-glove\" logo patch on the left sleeve. In 2007, the Retro day was changed from Sunday to Friday, though they may also be worn outside of those days if a starting pitcher chooses the retro uniforms to wear during his start. In 2010, the Brewers debuted a new alternate road jersey which, like the other alternate jersey, is navy blue, but bears a script \"Milwaukee\" on the front. In 2013, a gold alternate jersey with \"Brewers\" on the front was introduced, as well.\nDuring the off-season before the 2013 season, the Brewers allowed fans to design their own Milwaukee Brewers uniforms. Three finalists were chosen, which fans were given the opportunity to vote for their favorite through the Brewers website. The winning uniform was designed by Ben Peters of Richfield, Minnesota, and was worn by the Brewers for two spring training games.\nIn 2016, the Brewers replaced their road navy and home gold alternates with a new navy alternate jersey. The uniform is similar to the previous road navy alternate but with yellow replacing gold as the trim color, and is paired with a navy cap featuring the \"ball-and-glove\" logo. From 2017 to 2019, both alternate navy uniforms were used for both home and away games, and each were worn more often than the traditional white and gray tops.\n2020\u2013present.\nOn November 18, 2019, the Brewers published \"Glove Story\", a series of videos and written work showcasing the new branding of the team, with a uniform unveiling event at Miller Park occurring the same evening. The look throws back to past iterations of designs used for the team, with a modernized version of the classic \"ball-in-glove\" logo being the centerpiece of the new identity. The navy blue from the previous logo and uniform set was retained, but the metallic gold was replaced with mustard gold, and royal blue was returned to the team's color scheme for the first time since 1993.\nThe set included a cream home uniform with \"Brewers\" and numbers in stylized block letters (a nod to Milwaukee's \"Cream City\" nickname), a home alternate pinstriped white uniform which shares the same features as the cream uniforms, a grey road uniform with \"Milwaukee\" and numbers in stylized block letters, and a road alternate navy uniform with \"Milwaukee\" in script letters and numbers in stylized block letters. The home sleeve patch features a navy baseball with stylized barley seams, while the road sleeve patch features the gold Wisconsin map with Cream City bricks and a baseball to represent Milwaukee's location. Initially, the gold-paneled navy cap was only used with the navy alternate uniform whereas the other uniforms were paired with the all-navy cap. However, beginning in 2022, the alternate gold-paneled cap was used exclusively on the road, with the all-navy cap worn only on home games. Both designs have the modernized \"ball-in-glove\" logo in front.\nIn 2022, the Brewers added a \"City Connect\" uniform in conjunction with Nike. The uniform is powder blue with white pants and features the \"Brew Crew\" nickname in stylized gold letters and navy trim. A stylized baseball shaped like an enclosed grill is emblazoned on the right sleeve. Caps are powder blue with navy brim and features both the \"MKE\" abbreviation in gold and the city's \"414\" area code in navy.\nIn 2023, the Brewers added a uniform sponsor in Northwestern Mutual, with the company's logo patch recolored to the Brewers' navy and white. The patch was prominently featured on either sleeve depending on a player's handedness; the other sleeve accommodated the team's \"baseball and barley\" logo on the home uniforms, and the \"Wisconsin brick\" logo on the road uniform.\nFor the 2025 season, the Brewers' uniforms will have a commemorative patch on the right sleeve, honoring former Brewers radio broadcaster Bob Uecker, who died on January 16, 2025. The patch is circular, with the outer part featuring a plaid pattern, referring to the distinctive plaid sport coats Uecker wore in television commercials in the 1980s and 1990s, an inner circle with a baseball design, and Uecker's signature running through the center of the patch.\nAchievements.\nAwards.\nFour Brewers have won the MLB Most Valuable Player Award during their careers with the team: Rollie Fingers (1981), Robin Yount (1982 and 1989), Ryan Braun (2011), and Christian Yelich (2018). Three pitchers have won the Cy Young Award: Rollie Fingers (1981), Pete Vuckovich (1982), and Corbin Burnes (2021). Three players have been named Rookie of the Year: Pat Listach (1992), Ryan Braun (2007), and Devin Williams (2020). Pat Murphy (2024) is the only Brewer to have won the Manager of the Year Award.\nTwo Brewers have won the Hank Aaron Award: Prince Fielder (2007) and Christian Yelich (2018 and 2019). Dave Parker (1990) is the only Brewer to have won the Edgar Mart\u00ednez Award. Four players have been recognized with top relief pitcher honors. Rollie Fingers (1981) and John Axford (2011) won the Rolaids Relief Man Award, and Josh Hader (2018, 2019, and 2021) and Devin Williams (2020 and 2023) won the Trevor Hoffman NL Reliever of the Year Award. Cecil Cooper (1983) is the only Brewer to win the Roberto Clemente Award. Eight Brewers have won the Rawlings Gold Glove Award, two have won the Wilson Defensive Player of the Year Award, and 11 have won the Silver Slugger Award. Seventy-three Brewers have been selected to play in the Major League Baseball All-Star Game, and eight have been named to All-MLB Teams.\nHall of Famers.\nTen Brewers have been inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame after spending some or all of their careers with the team. None of them were affiliated with the franchise when it was the Seattle Pilots. Robin Yount is the only member to have played his entire career with Milwaukee.\nMilwaukee Brewers Hall of Famers\nAffiliation according to the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum\nMilwaukee Brewers\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Plainlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFord C. Frick Award recipients.\nTwo Brewers broadcasters have won the Ford C. Frick Award.\nMilwaukee Brewers Ford C. Frick Award recipients\nAffiliation according to the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Plainlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRetired numbers.\nThe Brewers have retired five uniform numbers and a microphone in honor of former players and team personnel. This ensures that the number will be associated with one person of particular importance to the team. Additionally, the number 42 has been retired throughout professional baseball in honor of Jackie Robinson. Two numbers have also been unofficially retired by the Brewers, Number 17 has not been issued since Jim Gantner's retirement in 1992. Gantner, however, later wore the number from 1996 to 1997 when he returned as the Brewers' first base coach. Number 8 has also not been issued since the retirement of Ryan Braun in 2021.\nWisconsin Athletic Hall of Fame.\nNine individuals associated with the Brewers have been inducted in the Wisconsin Athletic Hall of Fame.\nFranchise leaders.\nThese are records of players with the best performance in distinct statistical categories during their career with the Brewers.\nManagers.\nThrough 57\u00a0seasons of play, the Brewers franchise has employed 20\u00a0managers. The records of the last five managers are shown below.\nMinor league affiliations.\nThe Milwaukee Brewers farm system consists of seven minor league affiliates.\nRadio and television.\nThe Brewers' flagship radio station is WTMJ (620 AM/103.3 FM). Bob Uecker, a winner of the Ford C. Frick Award from the Baseball Hall of Fame, joined the Brewers in 1970, when the team moved from Seattle, and served as the team's play-by-play broadcaster for 54 seasons from 1971 until his death after the 2024 season. Jeff Levering and Lane Grindle served alongside Uecker. Levering joined the team's radio broadcast in 2015 as a fill-in for Uecker on select road games and Grindle joined the team in 2016, replacing Joe Block, who had left to join the Pittsburgh Pirates after the 2015 season. Block replaced Cory Provus who had left to become the Minnesota Twins lead broadcaster on radio after the 2011 season. Provus, formerly of WGN radio in Chicago, replaced Jim Powell, who left Milwaukee for the Atlanta Braves radio network. Powell in turn replaced Pat Hughes, who departed to do play-by-play for the Cubs on WGN in 1996. The Brewers radio broadcasts usually featured a 2-2-2-1-2 format where Uecker did solo play-by-play for the first, middle and last 2 innings, while Levering did innings 3\u20134 and 7, and both doing analysis throughout and varied presentation for extra innings games. Starting with the 2014 season Uecker cut back on the number of road games he works due to health concerns, mainly involving West Coast trips and distant road games in Colorado and Atlanta; Block handled the play-by-play, with former Brewer and Met Darryl Hamilton on color for the first series at Atlanta.\nSelect daytime home games were formerly broadcast in Spanish over Waukesha-licensed ESPN Deportes Radio affiliate WRRD (1510), with Jaime Cano serving as play-by-play announcer. In 2017 the station was purchased by another party which instituted an English-language talk format, effectively ending that arrangement.\nMost of the team's television broadcasts air on FanDuel Sports Network Wisconsin. Brian Anderson, who has worked on The Golf Channel, took over as the Brewers' play-by-play announcer for the 2007 season. He replaced Daron Sutton, who joined the Arizona Diamondbacks. The color commentator is Bill Schroeder, a former major league catcher who played six of his eight seasons for the Brewers. As of 2014 Schroeder is in his 20th season as the Brewers' color commentator. The 2010 season was the first year where all of Fox Sports Wisconsin's games were broadcast in high definition. Anderson (who also is a part of TBS playoff coverage) also provided play-by-play for the 2011 NLCS due to Ernie Johnson stepping aside for the year due to a medical situation with his son. Since 2014, as Anderson's TNT Sports duties have increased along with the addition of NCAA college basketball and NBA on TNT play-by-play duties, Wisconsin Badgers football and men's college basketball radio announcer Matt Lepay has served as play-by-play man on days when Anderson has other assignments for TNT Sports. In 2022, Levering became the primary play-by-play television announcer with Anderson now calling only 50 games per season due to increased duties with both MLB and the NBA national broadcasts. In October 2024, as a result of bankruptcy proceedings involving former broadcaster Diamond Sports Group, Major League Baseball's local media division announced that it would take over the production and distribution of Brewers games starting with the 2025 season, with no changes in personnel, as all on-air staff are employed by the Brewers themselves. However, on December 31, 2024, the Brewers announced that they would return to FanDuel Sports Network for the 2025 season.\nFrom 2007 to 2011, the Brewers and FSN Wisconsin subcontracted to Weigel Broadcasting a package of 15 games and one spring training game over-the-air on WMLW-CA (then-Channel 41/58.2) in Milwaukee each season with FSN Wisconsin producing the telecasts and Weigel selling air time for each of those games and additional games added depending on weather postponements and pennant race standings (WMLW-CA games would air on the outstate FSN Wisconsin network for the remainder of the state). The deal was ended before the 2012 season in order to facilitate full-season HD coverage on FSN Wisconsin and distribution complications, along with the addition of a \"Plus\" channel for Milwaukee Bucks play-by-play conflict situations. Weigel continues to air a few Sunday home broadcasts per year with Spanish language play-by-play on Telemundo affiliate WYTU-LD (Channels 63/58.4), which produces their own broadcasts using FSN's camera positions with Hector Molina on play-by-play and bilingual WDJT sports anchor Kevin Holden on color.\nFive of the six major network television stations in Milwaukee, along with WMLW-CA, have carried game broadcasts over the years, with WTMJ-TV being the original broadcaster in the 1970s. WVTV carried the team for the bulk of the 1980s and early 1990s, with WCGV-TV following from 1994 until 2004, and WISN-TV carrying select Sunday games at the beginning of the 2000s. Before 2025, WITI was the only station not to have carried local coverage of the team through its history (though former WITI sports anchor and current Bucks play-by-play man Jim Paschke was the team's TV announcer during its time with WVTV and portions of WCGV's coverage contract), although it has aired national games from CBS and Fox involving the Brewers through the years. \nOn March 19, 2025, the team announced that through a deal made with WTMJ owner Good Karma Brands and FanDuel Sports Network Wisconsin, WITI, along with a state network of stations within the team's territory, would carry three spring training and ten regular season games in the 2025 season locally in a simulcast with FanDuel Sports Network Wisconsin.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20153", "revid": "22979213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20153", "title": "Montreal Expos", "text": "Former MLB team in Canada, predecessor of the current Washington Nationals (1969\u20132004)\nThe Montreal Expos () were a Canadian professional baseball team based in Montreal. The Expos were the first Major League Baseball (MLB) franchise located outside the United States. They played in the National League (NL) East division from 1969 until 2004. After the 2004 season, the franchise moved to Washington, D.C., and became the Washington Nationals.\nImmediately after the minor league Triple-A Montreal Royals folded in 1960, political leaders in Montreal sought an MLB franchise, and when the National League evaluated expansion candidates for the 1969 season, it awarded a team to Montreal. Named after the Expo 67 World's Fair, the Expos originally played at Jarry Park Stadium before moving to Olympic Stadium in 1977. The Expos failed to post a winning record in any of the franchise\u2019s first 10 seasons. The team won its only division title in the strike-shortened season, but lost the 1981 National League Championship Series (NLCS) to the Los Angeles Dodgers. The team was sold in 1991 by its majority, founding owner, Charles Bronfman, to a consortium headed by Claude Brochu. Felipe Alou was promoted to the team's field manager in 1992, becoming MLB's first Dominican-born manager. He led the team to four winning seasons, including , where the Expos had the best record in baseball before a players' strike ended the season. Alou became the Expos leader in games managed (1,409).\nAfter the 1994 strike, the Expos chose to sell off their best players, and attendance and interest in the team declined. After a failed attempt to disband the team, then a failure to secure funding for a new ballpark, Major League Baseball bought the team ahead of the 2002 season. In their final two seasons, the team played 22 home games each year at Hiram Bithorn Stadium in San Juan, Puerto Rico. On September 29, 2004, MLB announced the franchise would move to Washington, D.C., for the season, and the Expos played their final home game in Montreal.\nThe Expos posted an overall win\u2013loss record of 2,753\u20132,943\u20134 () during their 36 years in Montreal. Vladimir Guerrero led the franchise in both home runs and batting average, and Steve Rogers in wins and strikeouts. Three pitchers threw four no-hitters: Bill Stoneman (twice), Charlie Lea, and Dennis Mart\u00ednez, who pitched the 13th perfect game in Major League Baseball history. The Expos retired four numbers in Montreal, and nine former members have been elected to the National Baseball Hall of Fame, with Gary Carter, Andre Dawson and Tim Raines' plaques depicting them with Expos caps.\nHistory.\nFounding (1960\u20131968).\nProfessional baseball in Montreal dates back to 1890 when teams briefly played in the International Association. A second attempt at hosting a pro team failed in 1895. The Montreal Royals of the Eastern League were subsequently founded in 1897 and played 20 seasons. The Royals were revived in 1928 and were purchased by the Brooklyn Dodgers in 1939 to serve as one of their Triple-A affiliates. Under Dodgers' management, the Royals won seven International League championships and three Junior World Series titles between 1941 and 1958. In 1946, Jackie Robinson joined the Royals and led the team to a Junior World Series title in advance of his breaking baseball's color line one year later. By the late 1950s, the Royals' championship years were past, and faced with declining attendance, the team was sold and moved after the 1960 season as the Dodgers reduced the number of teams they maintained at the AAA level.\nAlmost immediately upon the Royals' demise, Montreal mayor Jean Drapeau and city executive committee chairman Gerry Snyder began their campaign for a Major League Baseball (MLB) team. The city had in 1933 been considered a leading candidate to acquire the St. Louis Browns and was late to submit its candidacy for a team before the National League's (NL) 1962 expansion. In 1967, they presented their bid to the league's owners at the winter meetings. Aiding Montreal's bid was the fact that Walter O'Malley, who owned the Dodgers and formerly oversaw the Montreal Royals, was the chairman of the NL's expansion committee. On May 27, 1968, National League president Warren Giles announced the league would add expansion teams in San Diego and Montreal at a cost of US$10 million each.\nWith the franchise secured, Snyder built an ownership group of six partners led by financier Jean-Louis L\u00e9vesque and Seagram heir Charles Bronfman. L\u00e9vesque was originally tapped as chairman and the public face of the ownership group since he was a francophone. However, he bowed out, and Bronfman took over as chairman. The new group was faced with the immediate problem of finding a suitable facility in which to play for at least two years. Drapeau had promised the NL that a domed stadium\u2013thought to be a must due to Montreal's cold weather in April, October and sometimes September\u2013would be built by 1971. However, Snyder's successor as executive committee chairman, Lucien Saulnier, told Bronfman that Drapeau could not make such a guarantee on his own authority. As 1968 dragged on without movement from the city on a facility, Bronfman and his group threatened to walk away. While they had more than enough money between them to pay the first installment of the expansion fee, they wanted assurances that a park would be built before proceeding any further with the effort. Delorimier Stadium, which hosted the Royals, was rejected even as a temporary facility; it could not be expanded beyond its 20,000-seat capacity because it was in a residential area. The Autostade, home of the Canadian Football League's Montreal Alouettes, was ruled out due to the prohibitive cost of expanding it and adding a dome, as well as doubts that the city even had the right to make the needed renovations to the federally owned facility.\nBy August 1968, the NL owners had grown increasingly concerned about the unresolved stadium question, putting the franchise's future in doubt. There were rumours of awarding the franchise to Buffalo, New York, instead, whose War Memorial Stadium was ready to host a team. League president Warren Giles was reassured of Montreal's viability when shown a 3,000-seat community field in the centrally located Jarry Park that Drapeau proposed expanding to 30,000 seats as a temporary home for the Expos, at a cost of over C$1 million.\nSeveral options for a team name were considered: \"Royals\" was a popular option with fans in honour of the minor-league Royals, but the name had already been taken by the Kansas City Royals. Other names considered included \"Voyageurs\" and \"Nationals\". The team settled on \"Expos\", a name with the same spelling in French and English, in recognition of the recently concluded Expo 67 World's Fair. Less than a year after the city was awarded a team, the Expos took to the field to begin the season.\nJarry Park years (1969\u20131976).\nWith Gene Mauch as their inaugural manager, the Expos made their debut on April 8, 1969: an 11\u201310 victory over the New York Mets at Shea Stadium. The team played its first home game\u2014and the first Major League game outside the United States\u2014on April 14; it was an 8\u20137 victory over the St. Louis Cardinals before 29,184 fans at Jarry Park Stadium. Three days later, on April 17, in just the team's ninth game played in their history up to that point, Bill Stoneman pitched the first no-hitter in Expos history with a 7\u20130 victory over the Philadelphia Phillies. The excitement of the early-season heroics quickly gave way to the realities of being an expansion team as the Expos struggled for much of their inaugural season. Montreal tied their expansion cousins, the San Diego Padres for the worst record in the NL with a record of 52\u2013110 (). The team fared little better in the following seasons; the Expos went 73\u201389 in 1970 and 71\u201390 in 1971.\nThe team's best player, and first star, in its early seasons was Rusty Staub. Acquired from the Houston Astros in a trade before the Expos' inaugural season, he led the Expos with 30 home runs in 1970 and, owing to his red hair, was nicknamed \"Le Grand Orange\". Staub was Montreal's lone representative at the All-Star Game in the team's first three seasons, and endeared himself to the local fans by learning French. Also popular was pitcher Claude Raymond, who completed his major league career with Montreal in 1972 and was the team's first French-Canadian star. Pitcher Carl Morton, who posted an 18\u201311 record in 1970, was the first player in franchise history to be named National League Rookie of the Year. Bill Stoneman threw his second no-hitter, and the first pitched outside the United States, in a 7\u20130 win over the New York Mets in Montreal on October 2, 1972.\nThe team failed to post a winning season in its first ten years and finished fifth or sixth in the six-team NL East eight times. Attendance declined as the initial excitement of having a team wore off. It recovered briefly in 1973 as the Expos mounted an unsuccessful charge at the NL East pennant, before declining sharply in 1974 and beyond. By 1976, attendance had dropped to just over 600,000 fans over the course of the season, less than half of what the Expos drew in their inaugural season.\nThe on-field performance was not the only concern for the Expos. Jarry Park was only intended to serve as a temporary home until 1971 at the latest. Even allowing for this, it left much to be desired as a baseball venue. The grandstands were completely exposed to the elements, forcing the Expos to postpone a number of early-season games. Additionally, the sun set directly in the face of first basemen, forcing delays. Due to numerous delays and cost overruns with its intended replacement, Olympic Stadium, the Expos were forced to stay in Jarry through 1976.\nThe team's future was also placed in doubt after an angry speech by Bronfman in which he threatened to move his family and the Seagram company outside Quebec if the separatist Parti Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois (PQ) won a majority government in the 1976 Quebec election. The Parti Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois did win the election; however, Bronfman and the Expos remained in Quebec.\nThe Big O and Blue Monday (1977\u20131981).\nFor the season, the Expos moved into their new ballpark, Olympic Stadium, six years later than originally scheduled. For a time in the 1976\u201377 offseason, however, it appeared that the Expos would have to play at least the early part of the season at Jarry Park due to delays in securing a lease for Olympic Stadium. The team broke off negotiations not long after the PQ's landslide victory in the 1976 provincial election. Negotiations dragged out through the winter, leading the Expos to begin selling 1977 season tickets under the assumption they would have to play at Jarry. However, an agreement was finally reached in early 1977. A total of 57,592 fans attended Montreal's opening day 7\u20132 loss to Philadelphia.\nThe new facility was a significant upgrade, although weather-related issues created by Montreal's harsh climate persisted until the stadium's roof was installed in 1987. Over the years, the stadium became notorious for its poor playing conditions. Players were frequently at risk for injury due to thin padding on the outfield fences, as well as the original artificial turf that remained in place for over two decades. Ultimately, the park became viewed as a white elephant. On the field, the Expos continued to fare poorly; the team won 75 games in 1977, and 76 in .\nThough the losing seasons mounted, the Expos built a solid core of players, led by Gary Carter, who went on to become one of baseball's best hitting catchers, pitcher Steve Rogers and outfielders Andre Dawson and Tim Raines. They supplemented their young roster with veteran acquisitions such as future Hall of Famer Tony P\u00e9rez, and in 1977, the Expos also hired Dick Williams as the team's manager. Williams had developed a reputation for nurturing young talent; he had managed a young Boston Red Sox team to the American League pennant in and the Oakland Athletics to back-to-back World Series titles in 1972 and 1973. In , Montreal had its first winning season in franchise history; in mid-July, the Expos led the NL East by 6.5 games, before finishing second to the Pittsburgh Pirates by two games with a 95\u201365 record. The fans responded: Montreal drew two million fans for the first time in franchise history and it was the first of five consecutive seasons that the team was in the top-four of National League attendance. Though they won five fewer games in than the previous season, the Expos finished merely one game behind the Philadelphia Phillies for the division lead. In both seasons, the Expos were in the hunt for the division title into the last weekend of the season before losing to the ultimate World Series champion.\nIn , Charlie Lea pitched the third no-hitter in franchise history. He defeated the San Francisco Giants by a 4\u20130 score on May 10, 1981. The Expos were in third place in the NL East with a 30\u201325 record when the season was halted for two months by a players' strike. By the time the strike ended, 713 games had been lost and could not possibly be made up. Major League Baseball chose to adopt a split-season schedule, which gave the Expos a fresh start in the second half of the season. With the team languishing near the .500 mark in post-strike play, the club fired Williams and replaced him with scouting director Jim Fanning. The team continued to struggle, though, and had a 19\u201319 record with 15 games left to play. Montreal won 11 of the remaining games and finished in first place, a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 game ahead of the Pittsburgh Pirates, thereby qualifying for the franchise's first post-season berth. Terry Francona caught the final out \u2013 a fly ball hit by Dave Kingman \u2013 to seal a 5\u20134 victory over the New York Mets in the clinching game.\nIn the 1981 National League Division Series, the Expos faced the first-half winners, the defending world champion Phillies. Montreal won the first two games, at Olympic Stadium, by identical 3\u20131 scores before dropping the following two games in Philadelphia. In the deciding fifth game, Montreal's Steve Rogers faced Steve Carlton in a pitchers' duel. Rogers pitched a complete-game shutout as Montreal advanced to the 1981 National League Championship Series with a 3\u20130 win. Facing the Los Angeles Dodgers, Montreal split the first two games of the best-of-five series in Los Angeles before returning home for the final three games. Montreal won game three, but failed in their first attempt to close out the series by losing game four and set up a deciding fifth game. The deciding game, postponed by a day due to rain, was played October 19, 1981, in near-freezing temperatures. The game was tied at 1 entering the ninth inning when Fanning opted to have his top starter, Steve Rogers, come out of the bullpen to pitch. Rogers retired the first two batters before facing Rick Monday. What followed was the defining moment in Expos history: on a 3\u20131 count, Rogers hung a sinking fastball that Monday hit over the centrefield fence for the game-winning and series-clinching home run. The moment, and game, became known to Expos fans as \"Blue Monday\". The dramatic loss was a bitter defeat for a franchise who by that time had been adopted as Canada's most popular baseball team.\n\"The team of the '80s\" (1982\u20131988).\nBy the end of the 1979 season, the Expos had earned a reputation for having one of the strongest player development systems in baseball; the team had stockpiled young talent throughout its roster including four starting pitchers below the age of 23, and was hailed as \"the team of the '80s\". When Montreal hosted the 1982 Major League Baseball All-Star Game on July 13, 1982, Expos fans voted four of their own into the starting lineup: Carter, Dawson, Raines and Rogers, while Al Oliver was named as a reserve. It was only the second time since 1969 the host team had four starters. The National League claimed a 4\u20131 victory in front of 59,057 fans in the first All-Star Game held outside the United States; Rogers was the winning pitcher. Baseball historian and author Jonah Keri argued in his book \"Up, Up and Away\" that \"no one at the stadium could know it then, but baseball in Montreal peaked that night at the Big O.\"\nThe Expos were widely predicted to win the NL East in ; \"Sports Illustrated\", \"Baseball Digest\" and \"The Sporting News\" were among the publications that favoured Montreal. However, the team disappointed. Montreal finished third in the division with 86 wins. The Expos replaced Fanning with Bill Virdon in 1983, and under their new manager, led the division in mid-July. However, the team faded down the stretch and finished with an 82\u201380 record. The Expos won more games between 1979 and 1983 than any other team in the NL East, but had only one postseason appearance to show for it.\nHoping to turn the team's fortunes around, the Expos signed 42-year-old veteran Pete Rose, who was second all-time in base hits to Ty Cobb, to a one-year contract in 1984. Rose reached a career milestone in Montreal's home opener by recording the 4,000th hit of his career in a 5\u20131 victory over Philadelphia on April 13. Though players and management had praised the acquisition of Rose and predicted he would help the team win the division, he was ineffective for Montreal. Rose batted only .259 and failed to hit a home run in 95 games before he was traded back to his original team, Cincinnati, and Montreal finished with a losing record on the season.\nMontreal's failed 1984 season resulted in a 31 percent decrease in attendance at the same time salaries were escalating throughout baseball. As a consequence, the Expos completed a major trade after the season, sending Gary Carter to the New York Mets on December 10, 1984, in exchange for four players. In trading Carter, the Expos gave up a team icon who, like Rusty Staub before him, endeared himself to the fans by learning French and being one of the most accessible players on the team. The trade came one year after Bronfman had called the seven-year, US$12.6 million contract Carter signed in 1981 \"the biggest mistake he had made in his life\".\nThe economics of Major League Baseball also resulted in the departure of Andre Dawson after the 1986 season. Throughout that off-season, MLB owners colluded at the behest of Commissioner Peter Ueberroth to drive salaries for free agents down. Dawson, who should have been one of the most valuable free agents on the market that year, discovered that not only was there little interest in signing him, but that the Expos were publicly commenting about his knee problems in an effort to further drive interest down. Angered by these actions, Dawson walked into the Chicago Cubs' training camp with a signed, blank contract. The Cubs agreed to sign Dawson to a one-year, $500,000 contract, less than half of his previous salary.\nDawson hit 49 home runs and drove in 137 runs in 1987, attaining the honour of NL Most Valuable Player.\nTim Raines was also affected by collusion: after receiving no offer worth more than the $1.5 million he earned in 1986, Raines returned to the Expos on a three-year, $5 million contract. He had one of the best seasons of his career in 1987, leading the NL with 123 runs (in 139 games), stealing 50 bases, batting .330 and hitting 18 home runs. He was also named the most valuable player of the 1987 Major League Baseball All-Star Game, as he drove in the game's only two runs with a triple in the 13th inning. Raines was ultimately traded to the Chicago White Sox in 1990.\n\"El Presidente, El Perfecto!\" (1989\u20131993).\nOn the field, the Expos won just four games more than they lost between 1986 and 1991 as the organization set about rebuilding its development system and acquiring a new generation of players. The team struggled to attract free agents to Montreal, and Bronfman had grown disillusioned with both the business of baseball and the challenge of drawing fans to Olympic Stadium for a middling ball club. He hoped to take one more chance at winning a title, however, and in 1989, the Expos made a push for a division title by acquiring starting pitcher and pending free agent Mark Langston from the Seattle Mariners. The price would ultimately prove to be a high one as the Expos gave up future Hall of Famer Randy Johnson and two other pitchers. The trade helped propel the Expos to first place in the NL East by the All-Star break. They held the top spot into August before Langston and the team collapsed. The Expos finished fourth in the division with an 81\u201381 record, and Langston left Montreal as a free agent.\nBronfman grew increasingly uneasy about the reckless spending of his fellow team owners, increased strife with the players, and overall direction of MLB. According to then-team president Claude Brochu, the team's late-season decline in 1989 proved too much for Bronfman, who asked him to seek a buyer for the team.\nBronfman hoped to sell the team for around $50 million, but both he and Brochu found it impossible to find a local businessman willing to take primary ownership of the team. Groups from American cities were interested, however. One group offered to buy the club for $135 million and move it to Miami; however, Bronfman viewed a move as a last resort. Robert E. Rich Jr. offered to buy the club for $100 million and move it to the new Pilot Field in Buffalo, but received the same response. Instead, Brochu opted to lead a group himself. The city and the province agreed to fund $33 million of the $100 million sales price Bronfman had settled on, after which he and partner Jacques M\u00e9nard convinced 11 other Canadian businesses and businessmen\u2014such as Bell Canada, Desjardins Group, the Jean Coutu Group and Loblaw Companies\u2014to buy minority stakes. The sale was completed on November 29, 1990. However, many of the investors Brochu cajoled into joining the partnership made it clear that they considered their investments to be the equivalent of charitable donations, and were not interested in providing additional funding.\nWith a new ownership group in place, the Expos traded Tim Raines to the Chicago White Sox in a five-player deal.\nGeneral manager David Dombrowski fired manager Buck Rodgers, who had managed the team since 1985, after the team started the 1991 season with a 20\u201329 record, replacing him with Tom Runnells.\nMark Gardner pitched nine no-hit innings in a July 26, 1991 game before losing 1\u20130 in the 10th inning to the Los Angeles Dodgers. Two days later, also in Los Angeles, Dennis Mart\u00ednez achieved a rare feat, throwing the 13th official perfect game in Major League Baseball history (based on MLB's 1991 redefinition of a perfect game), winning 2\u20130. Dave Van Horne's iconic call of \"El Presidente, El Perfecto!\" after the final out became a hallmark of Expos lore. Martinez's catcher, Ron Hassey, also caught Len Barker's perfect game ten years earlier and remains the only player to catch two perfect games in MLB history. The euphoria of the pitching feats did not last, as the Expos were rendered homeless for the final month of the season after a 50-ton beam collapsed from Olympic Stadium's structure and fell nine metres onto a public concourse hours before a motocross event on September 13. The Expos hinted that they would have to open the 1992 season elsewhere unless Olympic Stadium was certified safe. While the stadium itself was given a clean bill of health by engineers in November, it took longer to get one for the roof since it had been badly ripped in a June windstorm. Ultimately, it was decided to keep the roof closed at all times; it had only been opened 88 times in a little more than four years and could not be used in winds greater than 25 mph.\nThe Expos finished 1991 with a 71\u201390 record, sixth in the NL East, and drew fewer than one million fans for the first time since 1976. However, the future was brighter: Larry Walker, Marquis Grissom and Delino DeShields had joined the team, which then acquired Mois\u00e9s Alou in a trade with Pittsburgh. Moises' father Felipe, who had been a longtime employee of the Expos, was promoted to manager during the season and became the first native of the Dominican Republic to manage an MLB team. In , DeShields was sent to Los Angeles in exchange for Pedro Mart\u00ednez; the deal was initially pilloried by the \"Montreal Gazette\" and other local publications as a move designed to save money rather than improve the ball club. Nonetheless, the Expos improved on the field; they won 87 games in 1992, 94 in 1993 and finished second in the NL East both seasons.\n1994 and the players' strike.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Most of my career, you'd go to the park that night, and hope you were going to win it. In '94, we pretty much knew were going to win it. Losing wasn't part of the equation. After the [All-Star] break, we played the Braves and beat 'em again. I remember leaving Atlanta, and we were just laughing. Like, 'This is our competition?!'\"\n\u2014Larry Walker's retrospective of the 1994 Expos.\nThe Expos were recognized as having a strong team entering the season, but their hopes of winning the division were significantly impacted by realignment, as the three-time defending West Division champion Atlanta Braves were shifted to the East. Atlanta opened the season with 13 wins in 14 games, and quickly opened up an &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;8+1\u20442-game lead on Montreal. By late June, the Expos had moved to &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2+1\u20442 games back when they hosted the Braves. Montreal won two out of three games in the series, including a late-game victory in the opener over future-Hall-of-Fame pitcher Greg Maddux that the players viewed as the turning point of their season. Montreal then embarked on a west coast road trip in which they won the final five games and entered the All-Star break in first place. The Expos pulled away from the Braves after the break; between July 18 and August 11, Montreal won 20 games and lost only three. For the second time in team history, five players were named all-stars: Mois\u00e9s Alou, Wil Cordero, Darrin Fletcher, Marquis Grissom and Ken Hill.\nAn offence led by Marquis Grissom, Moises Alou, Larry Walker and Wil Cordero scored more than 5 runs per game. With a record of 74\u201340, on pace for a 106-win season as the pitching staff with Butch Henry, Ken Hill, Jeff Fassero and a young Pedro Martinez put up the National League's best ERA. The Expos had the best record in baseball on the morning of August 12, when MLB's players went on strike. The season began without a collective bargaining agreement as MLB's owners could not agree on how to share revenue between teams. Many teams were unwilling to agree to revenue sharing unless a salary cap was put in place, something which the Major League Baseball Players' Association (MLBPA) adamantly opposed. Unable to come to an agreement, the owners attempted to unilaterally force their system into effect, prompting the players to walk out. Most of the players believed they would be back on the field by Labour Day (celebrated on the same date in the U.S. as Labor Day) at the latest. On September 14, after a month of fruitless negotiations, the remainder of the season was cancelled. The franchise would never reach the playoffs as the Expos again.\nFrom Brochu's perspective, a salary cap was not a major concern for the Expos as they could not afford to spend the maximum value of any negotiated cap. But when the strike ended eight months later, by the order of United States federal judge Sonia Sotomayor, the failure to implement strong revenue sharing was a major blow to the Expos. The team had already built a reputation as a penny-pinching organization (Larry Walker once complained in the media that the team asked the players to buy their own vitamins), with the second-lowest payroll in MLB in 1994. After the strike, the team launched a fire sale of players: Ken Hill, John Wetteland and Marquis Grissom were traded while Larry Walker was allowed to leave as a free agent. Mois\u00e9s Alou, Pedro Mart\u00ednez and Mel Rojas would eventually follow. In his book, \"My Turn At Bat\", Brochu argued that the fire sale was the only viable option, since his partners in the ownership group were not interested in financing the team's losses. Brochu estimated that had he tried to keep the 1994 team together, the Expos would have lost $25 million in 1995, which would have pushed the franchise to the edge of bankruptcy. He claimed that he would have certainly kept Hill, Wetteland, Grissom and Walker had the partners been willing to put up the money necessary to keep them in Montreal. When Brochu told general manager Kevin Malone that Hill, Wetteland, Grissom and Walker all had to go, Malone tried to persuade Brochu to keep at least one of them. It was to no avail; Brochu told Malone that they all had to be off the roster by the deadline for salary arbitration\u2014even though this made it all but impossible to get any leverage in possible deals. As a result, the Expos got almost nothing in return.\nDecline (1995\u20132000).\nThe strike and ensuing fire sale left fans in Montreal livid. The Expos finished last in the NL East in , and average game attendance fell by nearly 26%, from 24,543 to 18,189. Interest in the Expos continued to decline in the years that followed; they would never average more than 20,000 fans per game in a season again during their tenure in Montreal. While noting the Atlanta Braves went on to win 11 consecutive NL East titles after the strike, Jonah Keri expressed the viewpoint of the fans as it related to Brochu and the team's owners: \"Expos fans couldn't help but wonder if that could have been \"them\" celebrating every year ... had Brochu convinced the team's cheapskate owners to spend a few damn dollars, or taken a leap of faith that short-term financial pain would lead to long-term success.\" The media, meanwhile, had taken to calling the Expos a \"Triple-A team\" as the team seemed to enter a period where they would develop players only to move them on to other organizations.\nIn spite of a sharp decline in attendance, Brochu claimed the Expos turned a small profit in 1995. While ticket sales increased in other markets in the seasons after the strike, though, Montreal's fan base continued to erode. Even with the loss of most of their best players, the Expos were competitive in , achieving second place in the NL East with an 88\u201374 record. The team fared poorly in the following five seasons, however, finishing with a losing record in each year and no higher than fourth in the division. Individually, Pedro Mart\u00ednez became the first native of the Dominican Republic\u2014and only Expo\u2014to win the National League Cy Young Award. He won the award in after recording an 18\u20137 record with an earned run average (ERA) of 1.90. One week after he was announced as the NL Cy Young winner, Mart\u00ednez was traded to the Boston Red Sox as part of another salary purge.\nAs the 1990s wore on, interest in the Expos dwindled to the point that they were barely part of Montreal's sports landscape. Alou recalled in the latter part of the decade, an old friend of his who owned a team in the Dominican Republic came to Montreal for a visit and couldn't find any downtown store that sold Expos caps, nor did he see anyone wearing an Expos cap during his weeklong stay in the city. When he took a taxi to a game at Olympic Stadium, the driver couldn't find the entrance, and there were no signs anywhere touting games. According to Alou's friend, with such lackluster marketing, it was no surprise that the Expos couldn't attract any fans. Keri later wrote that the Expos would not have been in this position had a better-financed \"champion\" with the resources and the patience to shepherd the team through the 1990s bought the team.\nBrochu attempted to convince his partners that the only long-term solution to keep the Expos in Montreal was to replace Olympic Stadium. In addition to being poorly located\u2014far from population centres, restaurants, and bars\u2014fans perceived it as cavernous and unsafe. Additionally, free agents were letting it be known they were not willing to play for the Expos because of Olympic Stadium's poor playing conditions. A proposed 35,000-seat downtown facility, to be called Labatt Park, was announced in 1997 with a budgeted cost of $250 million and an anticipated opening date of 2001. It would have been a retro-classic park with a facade reminiscent of historic Bonaventure Station. According to a Montreal Gazette editorial supporting the new park, Brochu's threat to move the team unless Olympic Stadium was replaced was \"simple logic\". Brochu sought $150 million in funding from the provincial government, but Premier Lucien Bouchard refused, saying he could not authorize public funding for a stadium when the province was being forced to close hospitals and had still not paid the Olympic Stadium debt. Many members of the consortium instead favoured selling the team. Hoping to pressure a sale, some members began to feed anonymous tips to the French press to make internal discord between Brochu and his partners public. Attendance continued to fall, decreasing by 39 percent in to an average of 11,295 spectators per game. It was the first of five consecutive seasons in which Montreal drew fewer than one million fans. One of the few bright spots of this time was the blossoming of Vladimir Guerrero into a star; he made four consecutive All-Star Games from 1999 to 2002, each time as the Expos' sole representative. Guerrero would eventually be elected to the National Baseball Hall of Fame in 2018.\nBy 1999, the partners publicly began to question Brochu's fitness to lead the organization and he was criticized by the media. Brochu was also accused of having a secret deal with MLB commissioner Bud Selig to move the Expos to Washington, D.C., charges he denied in a spring press conference held to answer the accusations of his partners. Brochu's rebuttals fell on deaf ears as fans sided with the consortium's smear campaign against Brochu. He was ultimately replaced as managing general partner by American art dealer Jeffrey Loria, who was initially hailed as the franchise's saviour. Loria had originally bid for the team in 1991, but Brochu and M\u00e9nard had balked at his demand for controlling interest.\nFailed contraction and move (2001\u20132004).\nWhen Loria took control, he let it be known that Brochu's low-budget approach\u2014or as he called it, \"business as usual\"\u2014was over. He promised to rebuild the Expos with \"a winning attitude and winning players\" in an effort to bring the team back to where it had been only six years earlier. To that end, he drafted a new partnership agreement that gave him the right to call for cash investments in exchange for team equity\u2014an option that had been unavailable to Brochu. Most of the minority partners, though, continued to treat their participation as a public-relations gesture and remained uninterested in investing additional money. When Loria issued a cash call in May 2000, the only other partners to increase their contributions were Coutu, Loblaw, and Stephen Bronfman. Rather than contribute more money, the minority partners proposed trading Guerrero. Loria instantly vetoed this suggestion.\nAs Loria increased his own financial contribution over the next two years, most of the other partners failed to do likewise, which resulted in Loria raising his share in the franchise to 92 percent. Speaking in retrospect, one of the minority partners, Mark Routtenberg, said that he was both \"fooled\" and \"used\" by Loria, and called him a carpetbagger.\nThe team payroll for 2000 increased to $33 million, nearly double the $17.9 million from the previous season. However, Loria's options for rebuilding the team were somewhat limited. Even with the team's renewed willingness to spend more on talent, most elite players were reluctant to play in Montreal, given the franchise's uncertain future and Olympic Stadium's poor playing conditions. As a result, most of the increased payroll came from the signings of free agent pitchers Graeme Lloyd and Hideki Irabu, as well as a three-way trade with the Rangers and Blue Jays that brought Rangers first baseman Lee Stevens to Montreal. These moves failed to translate into on-field success: Lloyd missed the entire season due to arthroscopic surgery, Irabu posted a 7.24 ERA, and Stevens only batted .265. The Expos lost 95 games. Interest in the team continued to decline, as both fans and businesses were unwilling to lend their support to a noncompetitive team.\nLoria continued to pursue the construction of a new ballpark. He sought support from Major League Baseball, the Quebec government, and architectural firm HOK Sport for a cheaper and re-designed version of Labatt Park that eschewed the retro-classic concept in favour of a more modern design with curved contours and glass. HOK and MLB both thought Loria's proposed design was structurally unsound. More seriously, although Loria had been led to believe that M\u00e9nard had convinced the provincial government to contribute funding, in reality no agreement had been reached.\nTo bolster the team's finances, Loria tried to renegotiate the Expos' broadcasting deals, which were far less valuable than that of any other team. He broke off negotiations with The Sports Network, the largest English-language cable sports network in Canada, when it only offered the Expos $5,000 per game. Even allowing for the Expos' greatly reduced home territory compared to that of the Blue Jays (see below), TSN's offer was still a pittance compared to the $200,000 it paid the Blue Jays at the time. Loria had similar issues with prospective radio partners; the only interested parties would only air Expos games as part of a brokerage agreement in which the team paid for the airtime. The Alouettes and Canadiens had similar arrangements, which was considered highly unusual for the time.\nAlthough the team continued its French radio coverage on the Telemedia network\u2014whose flagship, CKAC, had carried the Expos since 1973\u2014the Expos were unable to reach an agreement for English radio broadcasts. This resulted in the end of the Expos' longtime run on CIQC (formerly CFCF), which had been the Expos' English radio outlet for all but four years of their existence. No television coverage was available in either language. This left English-speaking fans relying on Internet audiocasts. Local fans accused Loria and his stepson, David Samson, of sabotage. In truth, though, according to longtime Montreal sportscaster Mitch Melnick, there was no anglophone radio for the 2000 season \"because nobody wanted to pay for it.\" Years later, Samson said that he had initially hoped that if the Expos got off to a hot start, local broadcasters would initiate new negotiations, but further discussions never materialized. Dave Van Horne, the team's English-language play-by-play announcer since the team's inception, left at the season's end to work for the Florida Marlins.\nIn , the Expos drew only 642,748 fans, one of the smallest totals in MLB in decades. The minority partners, whose interest was now reduced to a combined seven percent, became convinced that Loria had planned his moves to force them out. When pleas to Selig and MLB officials fell on deaf ears, the group became convinced that Selig and Loria had conspired to force the Expos out of Montreal. At the same time, MLB took steps to vote on contraction of the leagues, with the Expos and the Minnesota Twins slated for elimination. On November 6, 2001, MLB's owners voted 28\u20132 in favour of contraction, with only the Expos and Twins opposed. Initial plans called for the Expos and Twins to play a lame-duck season in before their franchises were revoked. Both teams were saved after a legal challenge filed in Minnesota that forced MLB to honour the Twins' lease with the Metrodome, as well as challenges by the MLBPA. As MLB was unable to find another candidate team to eliminate, the immediate threat for the Expos diminished, as MLB needed to keep an even number of teams to maintain its schedule.\nShortly afterward, Loria sold the Expos to MLB and used the money he received from the sale to purchase the Florida Marlins from John Henry, who had recently purchased the Boston Red Sox. As a result of the transaction, Loria turned a significant profit on his initial $16 million investment\u2014MLB bought the Expos from him for $120 million and gave him a $38.5 million interest free loan to complete the purchase of the Marlins. After the sale, Loria took virtually everything of value with him to Miami, including the Expos' computers and scouting reports. His departure also marked the final end of the proposed Labatt Park, though any realistic chance of the park being built ended when the Bouchard government repeated its previous refusal to commit any public money to the project.\nMLB formed Expos Baseball L.P., a partnership of the other 29 clubs, to operate the team. It appointed former Anaheim Angels president Tony Tavares as team president to oversee business operations and oversee a future move of the team, and Mets assistant general manager Omar Minaya as vice-president, general manager and operating head of the franchise. MLB's chief disciplinarian Frank Robinson was appointed as the team's manager.\nMinaya, the first Latino general manager in baseball history, inherited a difficult situation. He was hired only 72 hours before the start of spring training, and there were only six other employees in baseball operations; most of the others had either followed Loria to the Marlins or taken jobs with other clubs. As the Expos began what many assumed at the time to be their final season in 2002, the mood in the Olympic Stadium for the home opener\u2014a victory over the Marlins\u2014was ugly. Montreal's home opener drew 34,000 fans, many of which came not only to say \"goodbye\" to the franchise, but also to express their disgust and anger at Loria.\nLoria's minority partners, who had gone from collectively owning 76 percent of the Expos to less than seven percent of the Marlins, filed a Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO) lawsuit against Major League Baseball, Selig and Loria. The partners contended that Loria and the commissioner's office had conspired to deprive them of their shares by issuing cash calls, and thus deliberately undermined the franchise's future in Montreal. The partners were ultimately unsuccessful in their suit, as it was dismissed in 2005 after an arbitration panel rejected their claims.\nOn the field, the 2002 Expos exceeded expectations and were in playoff contention for much of the season. As they were owned by the other teams, including their direct competitors, the Expos did not have any flexibility to increase their payroll for a last-ditch postseason drive. Operating under the belief that the Expos were playing their last season in Montreal, Minaya completed a blockbuster trade with the Cleveland Indians in late June to make a final run at bringing postseason success to the city, acquiring Bartolo Col\u00f3n, one of baseball's top pitchers, in exchange for several star prospects and without increasing payroll. Remembering how the Seattle Mariners had revived a stalled bid for what became Safeco Field with a playoff run in 1995, Minaya believed that if the Expos made the playoffs, the renewed public and private sector support would lead to a viable owner stepping forward who would keep the team in Montreal. Minaya made several smaller moves, but the team lost its early-season momentum; they went seven games under .500 in July and August. The Expos finished with an 83\u201379 record\u2014their first winning season since 1996\u2014but finished second in the NL East, 19 games out of both the division lead and the wild card.\nThe Expos franchise was saved by a new collective bargaining agreement between the owners and players that forbade contraction until at least 2006. Speculation of contraction was replaced by rumours of a move, as it was obvious MLB did not intend to keep the team in Montreal. While MLB was not ready to move the Expos right away, in it sought to increase revenues by having the team play 22 of its 81 home games in San Juan, Puerto Rico. The Expos again found themselves in contention for the playoffs: on August 29, the team was tied with four other clubs for the National League Wild Card spot. When MLB's rosters expanded on September 1, Selig announced that the Expos would not be recalling any additional players from the minor leagues: the other owners had decided against spending a few extra thousand dollars, a small fraction of the team's $35 million payroll, to bolster the team. Several players, including relief pitcher Eric Knott, were sent back to the minors due to budget constraints. The team faded again, finishing 18 games out of first in the East and eight games out of the wild card spot. Later, Minaya said that the denial of the September call-ups was \"a message to the players\" and \"a momentum killer\". Keri later wrote that MLB's refusal to authorize the September call-ups eroded what goodwill the Expos still had among the Montreal fanbase. After the season, Guerrero was lost to free agency, while staff ace Javier V\u00e1zquez was traded to the Yankees.\nThe final season of the Montreal Expos came in , and was again split between Montreal and San Juan. The team never recovered from an April win\u2013loss record of 5\u201319, and finished the season with a 67\u201395 record, the second-worst record in the National League. On September 29, 2004, Major League Baseball announced that the franchise would move to Washington, D.C., for the season. That same night, the team played its final game in Montreal: a 9\u20131 loss to the Florida Marlins before 31,395 fans. The team then played its final games as the Expos on the road, ending on October 3 against the New York Mets, the team they had faced in the franchise's inaugural game in 1969. In the Expos' last-ever game, the New York Mets defeated Montreal 8\u20131 at Shea Stadium. Jamey Carroll scored the last Expos run and Endy Ch\u00e1vez became the final Expos batter in history when he grounded out in the top of the ninth to end the game. The team ended their 36-year run with an all-time record of 2,753 wins, 2,943 losses and four ties.\nThe last active former Montreal Expos player in the major leagues was Bartolo Col\u00f3n, who played his last MLB game with the Texas Rangers in 2018.\nThe Nationals won the 2019 World Series, the franchise's first title in its 51 seasons, under manager Dave Martinez, who had played with the Expos from 1988 to 1991.\nTeam identity.\nThe Expos logo consists of the stylized letters \"eb\", which stands for \"Expos Baseball\". When taken as a whole, the logo forms a large \"M\", representing \"Montreal\".\nIn 1972, the Telemedia radio network brought in Jacques Doucet and Claude Raymond to serve as the Expos' French language broadcast team. Carling O'Keefe brewery, the title sponsor for the French-language broadcasts, convened a meeting of writers and broadcasters across Quebec to establish a French language glossary of baseball terminology. From 1908, there had been a gradual introduction of French baseball terms in the French-language media. The use of French terms gained greater predominance with the resurrection of the Montreal Royals franchise in 1928. However English terms were still in use. Through the efforts of Doucet and Raymond, a more complete French language baseball lexicon was created, including terms such as \"\" (knuckleball, literally \"butterfly ball\"), \" (lineup), \" (foul tip), \"\" (hit, literally \"sure hit\"), and \"\" (home run, literally \"circuit hit\", as in a hit resulting in one lap of the bases).\nUniforms.\nThe Expos' original uniforms featured the team logo above the word \"expos\" in lowercase letters on the left chest, and blue rounded serif numbers on the right chest. White served as the home uniform base, while powder blue served as the road uniform base. Both designs were worn with a tricolour cap that had a white crown, blue brim and back panel, and red side panels, with the Expos logo in front. The original design endured a few slight changes over the years, such as a change to red letters on the road uniform, and the addition of shoulder and side stripes.\nIn 1992, the Expos overhauled their design. On the home uniform, blue pinstripes were added and a script \"Expos\" in blue with red trim was emblazoned in front. On the road uniform, grey became the base colour, and featured \"Montreal\" in red script letters with blue and white trim. A blue fleur-de-lis was also added above the road uniform script in the place where the acute accent would appear in the French spelling \"Montr\u00e9al\". Both designs featured the team logo on the left sleeve and left chest numbers below the script, and were worn with an all-blue cap featuring the Expos logo in front.\nYouppi!\nThe Expos introduced their first mascot, Souki, during the 1978 season. He resembled Mr. Met with a futuristic looking uniform but was met with such a negative reaction that the team immediately retired him after one season. Souki was once attacked by a father of children frightened by him. Seeking a replacement, the Expos found a design for a mascot similar to the Phillie Phanatic in the inventory of an American mascot company that had gone bankrupt. The mascot was designed by Bonnie Erickson, who created the Phanatic as well as several Muppets characters, including Miss Piggy. The team named the new mascot \"Youppi!\", which is French for \"Yippee!\" Unlike Souki, Youppi! was immediately popular with fans upon his introduction in 1979, particularly children, and he became a fixture at children's hospitals during his 25 years as the Expos mascot.\nYouppi! made history in 1989 when he became the first mascot in Major League history to be ejected from a game. The incident occurred during the 11th inning of a game against the Los Angeles Dodgers when Youppi! was dancing and parading on top of the Dodgers' dugout. Dodgers manager Tommy Lasorda complained to the umpires, who ejected Youppi! from the game. Youppi! was eventually allowed to return with the condition that he remain away from the Dodgers' dugout. The game was also the longest in Expos history as the Dodgers won 1\u20130 in 22 innings.\nThe Expos' move to Washington left Youppi! in limbo. Several organizations expressed interest in taking over the character, including other Montreal sports teams. After a year in storage, the mascot was sold to the National Hockey League's Montreal Canadiens. The Canadiens claim Youppi! is the first mascot in professional sports to change leagues; he made his re-debut with the Canadiens on October 18, 2005.\nRelationship with the Toronto Blue Jays.\nThe Toronto Blue Jays joined the American League as an expansion franchise in 1977, and one year later met the Expos for the first time in an exhibition contest, the first of an annual series that became known as the Pearson Cup. The Expos won that first game, 5\u20134, in front of 20,221 fans on June 29. Eight annual exhibitions (except for 1981, due to the strike) were played between 1978 and 1986, as each team won three games, with two contests ending as ties. The teams did not meet again until 1997 which was the advent of interleague play that year and the first regular season meetings were held between the two ballclubs. The games boosted attendance in both Montreal and Toronto.\nJohn McHale, then president of the Expos, was a strong proponent of adding a second Canadian Major League team, in Toronto. The Expos remained Canada's most popular team until their mid-1980s downturn coincided with the Blue Jays' rise, culminating in the Jays' first American League East division championship, in 1985. At the same time, the Blue Jays grew perturbed that the Expos were able to air most of their games in several markets in southern Ontario\u2014such as Windsor, Belleville, and Toronto itself. The Jays lobbied MLB to designate southern Ontario as their exclusive home television territory. Bronfman opposed the request, as he feared that shutting the Expos out of Canada's largest and most lucrative television market would limit the team's fan base. MLB sided with the Blue Jays as a part of the territorial changes, allowing the Expos to air only 15 games in the Jays' television market for free and having to purchase the rights to air additional games. For the remainder of their existence, the Expos only had full broadcast rights in Quebec and Atlantic Canada. The loss of viewership in southern Ontario diminished the Expos' ability to attract sponsors and corporate partners. Longtime Expos play-by-play broadcaster Dave Van Horne later argued that the loss of badly needed corporate support \"really started a long, downward spiral\" for the team. Indeed, Keri later wrote that the Expos miscalculated when they considered the Blue Jays an ally rather than a potential threat, and missed a chance to cement their right to air their games across Canada. Keri added that the loss of this revenue stream, along with \"many other poor business decisions\" over the years, made it difficult for the Expos to be viable in Montreal.\nRegardless of their disagreements over television rights, when the Blue Jays reached the 1992 World Series, the team honoured Bronfman's contributions in bringing Major League Baseball to the country by having him throw the ceremonial first pitch for the first World Series game played in Canada. However, and while Blue Jays president Paul Godfrey again acknowledged the Expos' role in his own team's existence, Godfrey nonetheless voted with the other teams to support contracting the Expos in 2001 and moving them in 2004: \"I know if it wasn't for the success of the Expos in those early years there would not be major-league baseball in Toronto. That wasn't an emotional or a baseball vote. It was a business decision.\" The Blue Jays' failure to stand with their fellow Canadian team offended many Expos fans.\nTen years after the Expos moved to Washington, a two-game exhibition series between the Toronto Blue Jays and New York Mets was held at the Olympic Stadium to conclude the spring training schedule before the season. For the Blue Jays, the series was intended, in part, to increase the team's following in Quebec. For others, the goal was to demonstrate that Montreal had an interest in returning to Major League Baseball. Former Expos player Warren Cromartie, who leads the Montreal Baseball Project, was among the organizers. The series was a success: A combined 96,350 fans, frequently chanting \"Let's go Expos!\" and \"We want baseball!\", attended the two games. The Blue Jays returned for a two-game series in , against the Cincinnati Reds, which was attended by a combined total of 96,545 fans. The success of the series' bolstered the Montreal Baseball Project's efforts: retiring commissioner Bud Selig was impressed by the fans in 2014 and said the city would be an \"excellent candidate\" for a new team. His replacement, Rob Manfred, echoed those comments in 2015. Olympic Stadium again hosted two spring training games before the 2016 season between the Toronto Blue Jays and the Boston Red Sox, with a combined attendance of over 106,000 fans. Since 2014, the Blue Jays have made it an annual tradition to host two spring training games in Montreal before the start of each season. In 2018, Vladimir Guerrero Jr. of the Blue Jays - whose father, Vladimir Guerrero, starred for the Expos in the 1990s - hit a game-winning home run against the St. Louis Cardinals in an exhibition game, to the delight of the Montreal crowd.\nPlayers.\nBaseball Hall of Famers.\nMontreal Expos Hall of Famers\nAffiliation according to the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum\nMontreal Expos\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Plainlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTen people who represented the Expos organization have subsequently gone on to gain election to the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Gary Carter was inducted in 2003 and was the first player whose Hall of Fame plaque depicted him with an Expos cap. The Hall's choice for his plaque logo followed initial statements by Carter that he preferred to be enshrined as a New York Met, with whom he won the 1986 World Series. He accepted the Hall's decision with grace, stating: \"The fact I played 11 years in Montreal and the fact that the majority of my statistics and accomplishments were achieved there, it would be wrong, probably, to do it any other way.\"\nAndre Dawson became the second depicted as an Expos player when he was elected in 2010. Although he had played the majority of his 21-year career with Montreal, Dawson also preferred his plaque to display a different logo: when the decision was made, he publicly expressed his disappointment, saying it was \"a little gut-wrenching\" to find out he would not go in as a Chicago Cub. Dawson's reluctance to be enshrined as an Expos player stemmed, in part, from the breakdown of his relationship with the team during MLB's collusion scandal of 1986\u201387, when he claims the team not only \"threw him out\" of Montreal, but tried to prevent other teams from signing him as a free agent.\nThe third player with an Expos logo on his Hall of Fame plaque is Tim Raines, who was inducted in 2017, his final year of eligibility.\nOn January 24, 2018, the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum announced Vladimir Guerrero as an inductee into the Hall of Fame. Guerrero played eight of his 16 seasons with the Expos, being named to the MLB All-Star Game three times and winning the Silver Slugger Award three times while with the team. Nearly half of his career 2,590 hits were with Montreal (1,215), while having 234 of his 449 home runs and 702 of his 1,496 RBIs with the Expos in 1,004 games. Guerrero announced his Hall of Fame plaque will display him wearing an Angels cap.\nFor the five other inductees, their time in Montreal played lesser roles in their careers. Manager Dick Williams was a member of the Expos between 1977 and 1981 as part of a 21-year managerial career in which he took three different teams to the World Series. Tony P\u00e9rez played three years with the Expos but was primarily known for being a member of Cincinnati's \"Big Red Machine\" teams of the 1970s. Pitchers Pedro Mart\u00ednez (1994\u201397) and Randy Johnson (1988\u201389), who both played in Montreal early in their careers but spent the majority of their playing days elsewhere, were both elected to the Hall in 2015. Frank Robinson managed the team from 2002 to 2006 (spanning the franchise's move to Washington), but was elected based on his accomplishments as a player, including being the first player to win Most Valuable Player honours in both the AL and NL, a triple crown in 1966, and a rookie-record of 38 home runs while winning the NL Rookie of the Year award.\nWhen the Washington Nationals unveiled their \"Ring of Honor\" at Nationals Park in 2010, the franchise recognized its roots in Montreal. The ring was created to honour Hall-of-Fame players associated with Washington, D.C., baseball or the Montreal-Washington franchise, later expanded to include anyone who has made a significant contribution to the game of baseball in Washington, D.C. Two Expos players \u2013 Gary Carter and Andre Dawson \u2013 were named among the inaugural members. Frank Robinson was added to the Ring of Honor in 2015, as was Tim Raines in 2017.\nFord C. Frick Award recipients.\nMontreal Expos Ford C. Frick Award recipients\nAffiliation according to the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Plainlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLongtime broadcaster Dave Van Horne was named the recipient of the Ford C. Frick Award in 2011. The award is presented by the National Baseball Hall of Fame to honour broadcasters who make \"major contributions to baseball\".\nMontreal Expos Hall of Fame.\nThe team created the Montreal Expos Hall of Fame to celebrate the franchise's 25th season in 1993. Charles Bronfman was inducted as its inaugural member. In a pre-game ceremony on August 14, 1993, a circular patch on the right field wall was unveiled with Bronfman's name, the number 83 (which he used to wear during spring training), and the words \"FONDATEUR / FOUNDER\". A total of 23 people were honoured by the club.\nExpos records.\nThe players listed here represent the statistical leaders for the franchise's time in Montreal only. For the record holders of the franchise overall, see List of Washington Nationals team records.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNo-hitters and cycles.\nThree pitchers in Expos history threw no-hitters. Bill Stoneman threw the first during the team's inaugural 1969 season. He threw a second no-hitter in 1972. Charlie Lea threw the third, nine years later in 1981. A decade after that, on July 28, 1991, Dennis Mart\u00ednez threw the 13th official perfect game in Major League Baseball history. Two other pitchers threw no-hitters in shortened games which, after a 1992 rule change, were no longer recognized by MLB as official no-hitters. David Palmer pitched a perfect five innings in a rain-shortened game against the St. Louis Cardinals on April 22, 1984. Pascual P\u00e9rez threw a five-inning no-hitter on September 24, 1988, against the Philadelphia Phillies.\nSix batters hit for the cycle in Montreal's history. Tim Foli was the first to do it in 1976, and Vladimir Guerrero was the last to do so, in 2003.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20154", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20154", "title": "Metallocene", "text": "Type of compound having a metal center\nA metallocene is a compound typically consisting of two cyclopentadienyl anions (C5H5\u2212, abbreviated Cp) bound to a metal center (M) in the oxidation state II, with the resulting general formula (C5H5)2M. Closely related to the metallocenes are the metallocene derivatives, e.g. titanocene dichloride or vanadocene dichloride. Certain metallocenes and their derivatives exhibit catalytic properties, although metallocenes are rarely used industrially. Cationic group 4 metallocene derivatives related to [Cp2ZrCH3]+ catalyze olefin polymerization.\nSome metallocenes consist of metal plus two cyclooctatetraenide anions (C8H82\u2212, abbreviated cot2\u2212), namely the lanthanocenes and the actinocenes (uranocene and others).\nMetallocenes are a subset of a broader class of compounds called sandwich compounds.\nIn the structure shown at right, the two pentagons are the cyclopentadienyl anions with circles inside them indicating they are aromatically stabilized. Here they are shown in a staggered conformation.\nHistory.\nThe first metallocene to be classified was ferrocene, and was discovered simultaneously in 1951 by Kealy and Pauson, and Miller et al. Kealy and Pauson were attempting to synthesize fulvalene through the oxidation of a cyclopentadienyl salt with anhydrous FeCl3 but obtained instead the substance C10H10Fe At the same time, Miller \"et al\" reported the same iron product from a reaction of cyclopentadiene with iron in the presence of aluminum, potassium, or molybdenum oxides. The structure of \"C10H10Fe\" was determined by Geoffrey Wilkinson et al. and by Ernst Otto Fischer et al. These two were awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1973 for their work on sandwich compounds, including the structural determination of ferrocene. They determined that the carbon atoms of the cyclopentadienyl (Cp) ligand contributed equally to the bonding and that bonding occurred due to the metal d-orbitals and the \u03c0-electrons in the p-orbitals of the Cp ligands. This complex is now known as ferrocene, and the group of transition metal dicyclopentadienyl compounds is known as metallocenes. Metallocenes have the general formula [(\"\u03b7\"5-C5H5)2M]. Fischer et al. first prepared the ferrocene derivatives involving Co and Ni. Often derived from substituted derivatives of cyclopentadienide, metallocenes of many elements have been prepared.\nOne of the very earliest commercial manufacturers of metallocenes was Arapahoe Chemicals in Boulder, Colorado\nDefinition.\nThe general name metallocene is derived from ferrocene, (C5H5)2Fe or Cp2Fe, systematically named bis(\"\u03b7\"5-cyclopentadienyl)iron(II). According to the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry definition, a metallocene contains a transition metal and two cyclopentadienyl ligands coordinated in a sandwich structure, i.e., the two cyclopentadienyl anions are on parallel planes with equal bond lengths and strengths. Using the nomenclature of \"hapticity\", the equivalent bonding of all 5 carbon atoms of a cyclopentadienyl ring is denoted as \"\u03b7\"5, pronounced \"pentahapto\". There are exceptions, such as uranocene, which has two cyclooctatetraene rings sandwiching a uranium atom.\nIn metallocene names, the prefix before the \"-ocene\" ending indicates what metallic element is between the Cp groups. For example, in ferrocene, iron(II), ferrous iron is present.\nIn contrast to the more strict definition proposed by International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry, which requires a d-block metal and a sandwich structure, the term metallocene and thus the denotation \"-ocene\", is applied in the chemical literature also to non-transition metal compounds, such as barocene (Cp2Ba), or structures where the aromatic rings are not parallel, such as found in manganocene or titanocene dichloride (Cp2TiCl2).\nSome metallocene complexes of actinides have been reported where there are three cyclopentadienyl ligands for a monometallic complex, all three of them bound \u03b75.\nClassification.\nThere are many (\"\u03b7\"5-C5H5)\u2013metal complexes and they can be classified by the following formulas:\nCp-based complexes can also be classified by type:\nSynthesis.\nThree main routes are normally employed in the formation of these types of compounds:\nUsing a metal salt and cyclopentadienyl reagents.\nSodium cyclopentadienide (NaCp) is the preferred reagent for these types of reactions. It is most easily obtained by the reaction of molten sodium and dicyclopentadiene. Traditionally, the starting point is the cracking of dicyclopentadiene, the dimer of cyclopentadiene. Cyclopentadiene is deprotonated by strong bases or alkali metals.\nMCl2 + 2\u00a0NaC5H5 \u2192 (C5H5)2M + 2\u00a0NaCl (M = V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co; solvent = THF, DME, NH3)\nCrCl3 + 3\u00a0NaC5H5 \u2192 [(C5H5)2Cr] + &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442\u00a0\"C10H10\" + 3\u00a0NaCl\nNaCp acts as a reducing agent and a ligand in this reaction.\nUsing a metal and cyclopentadiene.\nThis technique provides using metal atoms in the gas phase rather than the solid metal. The highly reactive atoms or molecules are generated at a high temperature under vacuum and brought together with chosen reactants on a cold surface.\nM + C5H6 \u2192 MC5H5 + &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442\u00a0H2 (M = Li, Na, K)\nM + 2\u00a0C5H6 \u2192 [(C5H5)2M] + H2 (M = Mg, Fe)\nUsing cyclopentadienyl reagents.\nA variety of reagents have been developed that transfer Cp to metals. Once popular was thallium cyclopentadienide. It reacts with metal halides to give thallium chloride, which is poorly soluble, and the cyclopentadienyl complex. Trialkyltin derivatives of Cp\u2212 have also been used.\nMany other methods have been developed. Chromocene can be prepared from chromium hexacarbonyl by direct reaction with cyclopentadiene in the presence of diethylamine; in this case, the formal deprotonation of the cyclopentadiene is followed by reduction of the resulting protons to hydrogen gas, facilitating the oxidation of the metal centre.\nCr(CO)6 + 2\u00a0C5H6 \u2192 Cr(C5H5)2 + 6\u00a0CO + H2\nMetallocenes generally have high thermal stability. Ferrocene can be sublimed in air at over 100\u00a0\u00b0C with no decomposition; metallocenes are generally purified in the laboratory by vacuum sublimation. Industrially, sublimation is not practical so metallocenes are isolated by crystallization or produced as part of a hydrocarbon solution. For Group IV metallocenes, donor solvents like ether or THF are distinctly undesirable for polyolefin catalysis. Charge-neutral metallocenes are soluble in common organic solvents. Alkyl substitution on the metallocene increases the solubility in hydrocarbon solvents.\nStructure.\nA structural trend for the series MCp2 involves the variation of the M-C bonds, which elongate as the valence electron count deviates from 18.\nIn metallocenes of the type (C5R5)2M, the cyclopentadienyl rings rotate with very low barriers. Single crystal X-ray diffraction studies reveal both eclipsed or staggered rotamers. For non-substituted metallocenes the energy difference between the staggered and eclipsed conformations is only a few kJ/mol. Crystals of ferrocene and osmocene exhibit eclipsed conformations at low temperatures, whereas in the related bis(pentamethylcyclopentadienyl) complexes the rings usually crystallize in a staggered conformation, apparently to minimize steric hindrance between the methyl groups.\nSpectroscopic properties.\nVibrational (infrared and Raman) spectroscopy of metallocenes.\nInfrared and Raman spectroscopies have proved to be important in the analysis of cyclic polyenyl metal sandwich species, with particular use in elucidating covalent or ionic M\u2013ring bonds and distinguishing between central and coordinated rings. Some typical spectral bands and assignments of iron group metallocenes are shown in the following table:\nNMR (1H and 13C) spectroscopy of metallocenes.\nNuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) is the most applied tool in the study of metal sandwich compounds and organometallic species, giving information on nuclear structures in solution, as liquids, gases, and in the solid state. 1H\u00a0NMR chemical shifts for paramagnetic organotransition-metal compounds is usually observed between 25 and 40\u00a0ppm, but this range is much more narrow for diamagnetic metallocene complexes, with chemical shifts usually observed between 3 and 7\u00a0ppm.\nMass spectrometry of metallocenes.\nMass spectrometry of metallocene complexes has been very well studied and the effect of the metal on the fragmentation of the organic moiety has received considerable attention and the identification of metal-containing fragments is often facilitated by the isotope distribution of the metal. The three major fragments observed in mass spectrometry are the molecular ion peak, [C10H10M]+, and fragment ions, [C5H5M]+ and M+.\nDerivatives.\nAfter the discovery of ferrocene, the synthesis and characterization of derivatives of metallocene and other sandwich compounds attracted researchers\u2019 interests.\nMetallocenophanes.\nMetallocenophanes feature linking of the cyclopentadienyl or polyarenyl rings by the introduction of one or more heteroannular bridges. Some of these compounds undergo thermal ring-opening polymerizations to give soluble high molecular weight polymers with transition metals in the polymer backbone. Ansa-metallocenes are derivatives of metallocenes with an intramolecular bridge between the two cyclopentadienyl rings.\nMulti-decker sandwich compounds.\nTriple-decker complexes are composed of three Cp anions and two metal cations in alternating order. The first triple-decker sandwich complex, , was reported in 1972. Many examples have been reported subsequently, often with boron-containing rings.\nMetallocenium ions.\nThe most famous example is ferrocenium, , the blue iron(III) complex derived from oxidation of orange iron(II) ferrocene. The lithocene anion, [Li(C5H5)2]\u2013, is the best-documented example of a metallocene anion; otherwise such ions are little known.\nApplications.\nMany derivatives of early metal metallocenes are active catalysts for olefin polymerization. Unlike traditional and still dominant heterogeneous Ziegler\u2013Natta catalysts, metallocene catalysts are homogeneous. Early metal metallocene derivatives, e.g. Tebbe's reagent, Petasis reagent, and Schwartz's reagent are useful in specialized organic synthetic operations.\nPotential applications.\nThe ferrocene/ferrocenium biosensor has been discussed for determining the levels of glucose in a sample electrochemically through a series of connected redox cycles.\nMetallocene dihalides [Cp2MX2] (M = Ti, Mo, Nb) exhibit anti-tumor properties, although none have proceeded far in clinical trials.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20155", "revid": "39450321", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20155", "title": "Marcus Aurelius", "text": "Roman emperor (161\u2013180)\nMarcus Aurelius Antoninus ( , ; 26 April 121 \u2013 17 March 180) was Roman emperor from 161 to 180 and a Stoic philosopher. He was a member of the Nerva\u2013Antonine dynasty, the last of the rulers later known as the Five Good Emperors and the last emperor of the Pax Romana, an age of relative peace, calm, and stability for the Roman Empire lasting from 27 BC to 180 AD. He served as Roman consul in 140, 145, and 161.\nMarcus Aurelius was the son of the praetor Marcus Annius Verus and his wife, Domitia Calvilla. He was related through marriage to the emperors Trajan and Hadrian. Marcus was three when his father died, and was raised by his mother and paternal grandfather. After Hadrian's adoptive son, Aelius Caesar, died in 138, Hadrian adopted Marcus's uncle Antoninus Pius as his new heir. In turn, Antoninus adopted Marcus and Lucius, the son of Aelius. Hadrian died that year, and Antoninus became emperor. Now heir to the throne, Marcus studied Greek and Latin under tutors such as Herodes Atticus and Marcus Cornelius Fronto. He married Antoninus's daughter Faustina in 145.\nAfter Antoninus died in 161, Marcus acceded to the throne alongside his adoptive brother, who took the regnal name Lucius Aurelius Verus. Under the reign of Marcus Aurelius, the Roman Empire witnessed much military conflict. In the East, the Romans fought the Parthian War of Lucius Verus with a revitalised Parthian Empire and the rebel Kingdom of Armenia. Marcus defeated the Marcomanni, Quadi, and Sarmatian Iazyges in the Marcomannic Wars. These and other Germanic peoples began to represent a troubling reality for the Empire. He reduced the silver purity of the Roman currency, the denarius. The persecution of Christians in the Roman Empire appears to have increased during his reign, although his involvement is unlikely since there are no Christian sources ascribing him the blame, and he was praised by Justin Martyr and Tertullian. The Antonine Plague broke out in 165 or 166 and devastated the population of the Roman Empire, causing the deaths of five to ten million people. Lucius Verus may have died from the plague in 169. When Marcus himself died in 180, he was succeeded by his son Commodus.\nCommodus's succession after Marcus has been a subject of debate among both contemporary and modern historians. The Column of Marcus Aurelius and Equestrian Statue of Marcus Aurelius still stand in Rome, where they were erected in celebration of his military victories. As a philosopher, his work \"Meditations\" is one of the most important sources for the modern understanding of ancient Stoic philosophy. These writings have been praised by fellow writers, philosophers, monarchs, and politicians centuries after his death.\nSources.\nThe major sources depicting the life and rule of Marcus Aurelius are patchy and frequently unreliable. The most important group of sources, the biographies contained in the \"Historia Augusta\", claimed to be written by a group of authors at the turn of the 4th century AD, but it is believed they were in fact written by a single author (referred to here as 'the biographer') from about 395. The later biographies and the biographies of subordinate emperors and usurpers are unreliable, but the earlier biographies, derived primarily from now-lost earlier sources (Marius Maximus or Ignotus), are considered to be more accurate. For Marcus's life and rule, the biographies of Hadrian, Antoninus, Marcus, and Lucius are largely reliable, but those of Aelius Verus and Avidius Cassius are not.\nA body of correspondence between Marcus's tutor Fronto and various Antonine officials survives in a series of patchy manuscripts, covering the period from c. 138 to 166. Marcus's own \"Meditations\" offer a window on his inner life, but are largely undateable and make few specific references to worldly affairs. The main narrative source for the period is Cassius Dio, a Greek senator from Bithynian Nicaea who wrote a history of Rome from its founding to 229 in eighty books. Dio is vital for the military history of the period, but his senatorial prejudices and strong opposition to imperial expansion obscure his perspective. Some other literary sources provide specific details: the writings of the physician Galen on the habits of the Antonine elite, the orations of Aelius Aristides on the temper of the times, and the constitutions preserved in the \"Digest\" and \"Codex Justinianeus\" on Marcus's legal work. Inscriptions and coin finds supplement the literary sources.\nEarly life.\nName.\nMarcus was born in Rome on 26 April 121. His birth name is sometimes given as Marcus Annius Verus, but sources assign this name to him upon his father's death and unofficial adoption by his grandfather, upon his coming of age. He may have been known as \"Marcus Annius Catilius Severus\", at birth or some point in his youth, or \"Marcus Catilius Severus Annius Verus\". Upon his adoption by Antoninus as heir to the throne, he was known as \"Marcus Aelius Aurelius Verus Caesar\" and, upon his ascension, he was \"Marcus Aurelius Antoninus Augustus\" until his death; Epiphanius of Salamis, in his chronology of the Roman emperors included in his \"On Weights and Measures\", calls him \"Marcus Aurelius Verus\".\nFamily origins.\nThe father of Marcus Aurelius was Marcus Annius Verus (III). His \"gens Annia\" was of Italic origin, but settled at some point in the small colony of Ucubi (Colonia Claritas Iulia Ucubi) south-east of C\u00f3rdoba in Iberian Baetica (modern Andalusia, Spain); the \"gens\" had legendary claims of descendance from Numa Pompilius. The \"Annii Veri\" rose to prominence in Rome in the late 1st century AD. Marcus's great-grandfather Marcus Annius Verus (I) was a senator and (according to the \"Historia Augusta\") ex-praetor; his grandfather Marcus Annius Verus (II) was made patrician in 73\u201374. Through his grandmother Rupilia Faustina, Marcus was related to the Nerva-Antonine dynasty; Rupilla was the step-daughter of Salonia Matidia, who was the niece of the emperor Trajan.\nMarcus's mother, Domitia Lucilla Minor (also known as Domitia Calvilla), was the daughter of the Roman patrician P. Calvisius Tullus and inherited a great fortune (described at length in one of Pliny's letters) from her parents and grandparents. Her inheritance included large brickworks on the outskirts of Rome \u2013 a profitable enterprise in an era when the city was experiencing a construction boom \u2013 and the \"Horti Domitia Calvillae\" (or \"Lucillae\"), a villa on the Caelian hill of Rome. Marcus himself was born and raised in the \"Horti\" and referred to the Caelian hill as 'My Caelian'.\nThe adoptive family of Marcus was the gens Aurelia, an old Roman gens. His adoptive father Antoninus Pius came from the Aurelii Fulvi, a branch of the Aurelii settled in the colony of Nemausus in Roman Gaul.\nChildhood.\nMarcus's sister, Annia Cornificia Faustina, was probably born in 122 or 123. His father probably died in 125 or 126 when Marcus was three years old during his praetorship. Though he can hardly have known his father, Marcus wrote in his \"Meditations\" that he had learned 'modesty and manliness' from his memories of his father and the man's posthumous reputation. His mother Lucilla did not remarry and, following prevailing aristocratic customs, probably did not spend much time with her son. Instead, Marcus was in the care of 'nurses', and was raised after his father's death by his grandfather Marcus Annius Verus (II), who had always retained the legal authority of \"patria potestas\" over his son and grandson. Technically this was not an adoption, the creation of a new and different \"patria potestas\". Lucius Catilius Severus, described as Marcus's maternal great-grandfather, also participated in his upbringing; he was probably the elder Domitia Lucilla's stepfather. Marcus was raised in his parents' home on the Caelian Hill, an upscale area with few public buildings but many aristocratic villas. Marcus's grandfather owned a palace beside the Lateran, where he would spend much of his childhood. Marcus thanks his grandfather for teaching him 'good character and avoidance of bad temper'. He was less fond of the mistress his grandfather took and lived with after the death of his wife Rupilia. Marcus was grateful that he did not have to live with her longer than he did.\nFrom a young age, Marcus displayed enthusiasm for wrestling and boxing. He trained in wrestling as a youth and into his teenage years, learned to fight in armour and joined the Salii, an order of priests dedicated to the god Mars that were responsible for the sacred shields, called Ancilia, and possibly for heralding war season's beginning and end. Marcus was educated at home, in line with contemporary aristocratic trends; he thanks Catilius Severus for encouraging him to avoid public schools. One of his teachers, Diognetus, a painting master, proved particularly influential; he seems to have introduced Marcus Aurelius to the philosophic way of life. In April 132, at the behest of Diognetus, Marcus took up the dress and habits of the philosopher: he studied while wearing a rough Greek cloak, and would sleep on the ground until his mother persuaded him to sleep on a bed. A new set of tutors \u2013 the Homeric scholar Alexander of Cotiaeum along with Trosius Aper and Tuticius Proculus, teachers of Latin \u2013 took over Marcus's education in about 132 or 133. Marcus thanks Alexander for his training in literary styling. Alexander's influence \u2013 an emphasis on matter over style and careful wording, with the occasional Homeric quotation \u2013 has been detected in Marcus's \"Meditations\".\nSuccession to Hadrian.\nIn late 136, Hadrian almost died from a haemorrhage. Convalescent in his villa at Tivoli, he selected Lucius Ceionius Commodus, Marcus's intended father-in-law, as his successor and adopted son, according to the biographer 'against the wishes of everyone'. While his motives are not certain, it would appear that his goal was to eventually place the then-too-young Marcus on the throne. As part of his adoption, Commodus took the name, Lucius Aelius Caesar. His health was so poor that, during a ceremony to mark his becoming heir to the throne, he was too weak to lift a large shield on his own. After a brief stationing on the Danube frontier, Aelius returned to Rome to make an address to the Senate on the first day of 138. However, the night before the scheduled speech, he grew ill and died of a haemorrhage later in the day.\nOn 24 January 138, Hadrian selected Aurelius Antoninus, the husband of Marcus's aunt Faustina the Elder, as his new successor. As part of Hadrian's terms, Antoninus, in turn, adopted Marcus and Lucius Commodus, the son of Lucius Aelius. Marcus became M. Aelius Aurelius Verus, and Lucius became L. Aelius Aurelius Commodus. At Hadrian's request, Antoninus's daughter Faustina was betrothed to Lucius. Marcus reportedly greeted the news that Hadrian had become his adoptive grandfather with sadness, instead of joy. Only with reluctance did he move from his mother's house on the Caelian to Hadrian's private home.\nAt some time in 138, Hadrian requested in the Senate that Marcus be exempt from the law barring him from becoming \"quaestor\" before his twenty-fourth birthday. The Senate complied, and Marcus served under Antoninus, the consul for 139. Marcus's adoption diverted him from the typical career path of his class. If not for his adoption, he probably would have become \"triumvir monetalis\", a highly regarded post involving token administration of the state mint; after that, he could have served as tribune with a legion, becoming the legion's nominal second-in-command. Marcus probably would have opted for travel and further education instead. As it was, Marcus was set apart from his fellow citizens. Nonetheless, his biographer attests that his character remained unaffected: 'He still showed the same respect to his relations as he had when he was an ordinary citizen, and he was as thrifty and careful of his possessions as he had been when he lived in a private household'.\nAfter a series of suicide attempts, all thwarted by Antoninus, Hadrian left for Baiae, a seaside resort on the Campanian coast. His condition did not improve, and he abandoned the diet prescribed by his doctors, indulging himself in food and drink. He sent for Antoninus, who was at his side when he died on 10 July 138. His remains were buried quietly at Puteoli. The succession to Antoninus was peaceful and stable: Antoninus kept Hadrian's nominees in office and appeased the senate, respecting its privileges and commuting the death sentences of men charged in Hadrian's last days. For his dutiful behaviour, Antoninus was asked to accept the name 'Pius'.\nHeir to Antoninus Pius (138\u2013145).\nImmediately after Hadrian's death, Antoninus approached Marcus and requested that his marriage arrangements be amended: Marcus's betrothal to Ceionia Fabia would be annulled, and he would be betrothed to Faustina, Antoninus's daughter, instead. Faustina's betrothal to Ceionia's brother Lucius Commodus would also have to be annulled. Marcus consented to Antoninus's proposal. He was made consul for 140 with Antoninus as his colleague, and was appointed as a \"sevir\", one of the knights' six commanders, at the order's annual parade on 15 July 139. As the heir apparent, Marcus became \"princeps iuventutis\", head of the equestrian order. He now took the name Marcus Aelius Aurelius Verus Caesar. Marcus would later caution himself against taking the name too seriously: 'See that you do not turn into a Caesar; do not be dipped into the purple dye \u2013 for that can happen'. At the senate's request, Marcus joined all the priestly colleges (\"pontifices\", \"augures\", \"quindecimviri sacris faciundis\", \"septemviri epulonum\", etc.); direct evidence for membership, however, is available only for the Arval Brethren.\nAntoninus demanded that Marcus reside in the House of Tiberius, the imperial palace on the Palatine, and take up the habits of his new station, the \"aulicum fastigium\" or 'pomp of the court', against Marcus's objections. Marcus would struggle to reconcile the life of the court with his philosophic yearnings. He told himself it was an attainable goal \u2013 'Where life is possible, then it is possible to live the right life; life is possible in a palace, so it is possible to live the right life in a palace' \u2013 but he found it difficult nonetheless. He would criticise himself in the \"Meditations\" for 'abusing court life' in front of company.\nAs quaestor, Marcus would have had little real administrative work to do. He would read imperial letters to the senate when Antoninus was absent and would do secretarial work for the senators. But he felt drowned in paperwork and complained to his tutor, Marcus Cornelius Fronto: 'I am so out of breath from dictating nearly thirty letters'. He was being 'fitted for ruling the state', in the words of his biographer. He was required to make a speech to the assembled senators as well, making oratorical training essential for the job.\nOn 1 January 145, Marcus was made consul a second time. Fronto urged him in a letter to have plenty of sleep 'so that you may come into the Senate with a good colour and read your speech with a strong voice'. Marcus had complained of an illness in an earlier letter: 'As far as my strength is concerned, I am beginning to get it back; and there is no trace of the pain in my chest. But that ulcer [...] I am having treatment and taking care not to do anything that interferes with it'. Never particularly healthy or strong, Marcus was praised by Cassius Dio, writing of his later years, for behaving dutifully in spite of his various illnesses. In April 145, Marcus married Faustina, legally his sister, as had been planned since 138. Little is specifically known of the ceremony, but the biographer calls it 'noteworthy'. Coins were issued with the heads of the couple, and Antoninus, as \"Pontifex Maximus\", would have officiated. Marcus makes no apparent reference to the marriage in his surviving letters, and only sparing references to Faustina.\nFronto and further education.\nAfter taking the \"toga virilis\" in 136, Marcus probably began his training in oratory. He had three tutors in Greek (Aninus Macer, Caninius Celer, and Herodes Atticus) and one in Latin (Marcus Cornelius Fronto). The latter two were the most esteemed orators of their time, but probably did not become his tutors until his adoption by Antoninus in 138. The preponderance of Greek tutors indicates the importance of the Greek language to the aristocracy of Rome. This was the age of the Second Sophistic, a renaissance in Greek letters. Although educated in Rome, in his \"Meditations\" Marcus would write his inmost thoughts in Greek.\nAtticus was controversial: an enormously rich Athenian (probably the richest man in the eastern half of the empire), he was quick to anger and resented by his fellow Athenians for his patronising manner. Atticus was an inveterate opponent of Stoicism and philosophic pretensions. He thought the Stoics' desire for apatheia was foolish: they would live a 'sluggish, enervated life', he said. In spite of the influence of Atticus, Marcus would later become a Stoic. He would not mention Herodes at all in his \"Meditations\", in spite of the fact that they would come into contact many times over the following decades.\nFronto was highly esteemed: in the self-consciously antiquarian world of Latin letters, he was thought of as second only to Cicero, perhaps even an alternative to him. He did not care much for Atticus, though Marcus was eventually to put the pair on speaking terms. Fronto exercised a complete mastery of Latin, capable of tracing expressions through the literature, producing obscure synonyms, and challenging minor improprieties in word choice.\nA significant amount of the correspondence between Fronto and Marcus has survived. The pair were very close, using intimate language such as 'Farewell my Fronto, wherever you are, my most sweet love and delight. How is it between you and me? I love you and you are not here' in their correspondence. Marcus spent time with Fronto's wife and daughter, both named Cratia, and they enjoyed light conversation.\nHe wrote Fronto a letter on his birthday, claiming to love him as he loved himself, and calling on the gods to ensure that every word he learnt of literature, he would learn 'from the lips of Fronto'. His prayers for Fronto's health were more than conventional, because Fronto was frequently ill; at times, he seems to be an almost constant invalid, always suffering \u2013 about one-quarter of the surviving letters deal with the man's sicknesses. Marcus asks that Fronto's pain be inflicted on himself, 'of my own accord with every kind of discomfort'.\nFronto never became Marcus's full-time teacher and continued his career as an advocate. One notorious case brought him into conflict with Atticus. Marcus pleaded with Fronto, first with 'advice', then as a 'favour', not to attack Atticus; he had already asked Atticus to refrain from making the first blows. Fronto replied that he was surprised to discover Marcus counted Atticus as a friend (perhaps Atticus was not yet Marcus's tutor), and allowed that Marcus might be correct, but nonetheless affirmed his intent to win the case by any means necessary: '[T]he charges are frightful and must be spoken of as frightful. Those in particular that refer to the beating and robbing I will describe so that they savour of gall and bile. If I happen to call him an uneducated little Greek it will not mean war to the death'. The outcome of the trial is unknown.\nBy the age of twenty-five (between April 146 and April 147), Marcus had grown disaffected with his studies in jurisprudence, and showed some signs of general malaise. His master, he writes to Fronto, was an unpleasant blowhard, and had made 'a hit at' him: 'It is easy to sit yawning next to a judge, he says, but to \"be\" a judge is noble work'. Marcus had grown tired of his exercises, of taking positions in imaginary debates. When he criticised the insincerity of conventional language, Fronto took to defend it. In any case, Marcus's formal education was now over. He had kept his teachers on good terms, following them devotedly. It 'affected his health adversely', his biographer writes, to have devoted so much effort to his studies. It was the only thing the biographer could find fault with in Marcus's entire boyhood.\nFronto had warned Marcus against the study of philosophy early on: \"It is better never to have touched the teaching of philosophy [...] than to have tasted it superficially, with the edge of the lips, as the saying is\". He disdained philosophy and philosophers and looked down on Marcus's sessions with Apollonius of Chalcedon and others in this circle. Fronto put an uncharitable interpretation of Marcus's 'conversion to philosophy': 'In the fashion of the young, tired of boring work', Marcus had turned to philosophy to escape the constant exercises of oratorical training. Marcus kept in close touch with Fronto, but would ignore Fronto's scruples.\nApollonius may have introduced Marcus to Stoic philosophy, but Quintus Junius Rusticus would have the strongest influence on the boy. He was the man Fronto recognised as having 'wooed Marcus away' from oratory. He was older than Fronto and twenty years older than Marcus. As the grandson of Arulenus Rusticus, one of the martyrs to the tyranny of Domitian (\"r\". 81\u201396), he was heir to the tradition of 'Stoic Opposition' to the 'bad emperors' of the 1st century; the true successor of Seneca (as opposed to Fronto, the false one). Marcus thanks Rusticus for teaching him \"not to be led astray into enthusiasm for rhetoric, for writing on speculative themes, for discoursing on moralising texts\u00a0... To avoid oratory, poetry, and 'fine writing'\".\nPhilostratus describes how even when Marcus was an old man, in the latter part of his reign, he studied under Sextus of Chaeronea:\nThe Emperor Marcus was an eager disciple of Sextus the Boeotian philosopher, being often in his company and frequenting his house. Lucius, who had just come to Rome, asked the Emperor, whom he met on his way, where he was going to and on what errand, and Marcus answered, 'it is good even for an old man to learn; I am now on my way to Sextus the philosopher to learn what I do not yet know.' And Lucius, raising his hand to heaven, said, ' O Zeus, the king of the Romans in his old age takes up his tablets and goes to school.'\nBirth and death.\nOn 30 November 147, Faustina gave birth to a girl named Domitia Faustina. She was the first of at least thirteen children (including two sets of twins) that Faustina would bear over the next twenty-three years. The next day, 1 December, Antoninus gave Marcus the tribunician power and the \"imperium\" \u2013 authority over the armies and provinces of the emperor. As tribune, he had the right to bring one measure before the senate after the four Antoninus could introduce. His tribunician powers would be renewed with Antoninus's on 10 December 147. The first mention of Domitia in Marcus's letters reveals her as a sickly infant. 'Caesar to Fronto. If the gods are willing we seem to have a hope of recovery. The diarrhoea has stopped, the little attacks of fever have been driven away. But the emaciation is still extreme and there is still quite a bit of coughing'. He and Faustina, Marcus wrote, had been 'pretty occupied' with the girl's care. Domitia would die in 151.\nIn 149, Faustina gave birth again, to twin sons. Contemporary coinage commemorates the event, with crossed cornucopiae beneath portrait busts of the two small boys, and the legend \"temporum felicitas\", 'the happiness of the times'. They did not survive long. Before the end of the year, another family coin was issued: it shows only a tiny girl, Domitia Faustina, and one boy baby. Then another: the girl alone. The infants were buried in the Mausoleum of Hadrian, where their epitaphs survive. They were called Titus Aurelius Antoninus and Tiberius Aelius Aurelius. Marcus steadied himself: 'One man prays: 'How I may not lose my little child', but you must pray: 'How I may not be afraid to lose him'. He quoted from the \"Iliad\" what he called the \"briefest and most familiar saying [...] enough to dispel sorrow and fear\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\nAnother daughter was born on 7 March 150, Annia Aurelia Galeria Lucilla. At some time between 155 and 161, probably soon after 155, Marcus's mother Domitia Lucilla died. Faustina probably had another daughter in 151, but the child, Annia Galeria Aurelia Faustina, might not have been born until 153. Another son, Tiberius Aelius Antoninus, was born in 152. A coin issue celebrates \"fecunditati Augustae\", 'to Augusta's fertility', depicting two girls and an infant. The boy did not survive long, as evidenced by coins from 156, only depicting the two girls. He might have died in 152, the same year as Marcus's sister Cornificia. By 28 March 158, when Marcus replied, another of his children was dead. Marcus thanked the temple synod, 'even though this turned out otherwise'. The child's name is unknown. In 159 and 160, Faustina gave birth to daughters: Fadilla and Cornificia, named respectively after Faustina's and Marcus's dead sisters.\nAntoninus Pius's last years.\nLucius started his political career as a quaestor in 153. He was consul in 154, and was consul again with Marcus in 161. Lucius had no other titles, except that of 'son of Augustus'. Lucius had a markedly different personality from Marcus: he enjoyed sports of all kinds, but especially hunting and wrestling; he took obvious pleasure in the circus games and gladiatorial fights. He did not marry until 164.\nIn 156, Antoninus turned 70. He found it difficult to keep himself upright without stays. He started nibbling on dry bread to give him the strength to stay awake through his morning receptions. As Antoninus aged, Marcus would take on more administrative duties, more still when he became the praetorian prefect (an office that was as much secretarial as military) when Marcus Gavius Maximus died in 156 or 157. In 160, Marcus and Lucius were designated joint consuls for the following year. Antoninus may have already been ill.\nTwo days before his death, the biographer reports, Antoninus was at his ancestral estate at Lorium, in Etruria, about 19 kilometres (12\u00a0mi) from Rome. He ate Alpine cheese at dinner quite greedily. In the night he vomited; he had a fever the next day. The day after that, 7 March 161, he summoned the imperial council, and passed the state and his daughter to Marcus. The emperor gave the keynote to his life in the last word that he uttered when the tribune of the night-watch came to ask the password \u2013 'aequanimitas' (equanimity). He then turned over, as if going to sleep, and died. His death closed out the longest reign since Augustus, surpassing Tiberius by a couple of months.\nEmperor.\nAccession of Marcus Aurelius and Lucius Verus (161).\nAfter Antoninus died in 161, Marcus was effectively sole ruler of the Empire. The formalities of the position would follow. The Senate would soon grant him the name Augustus and the title \"imperator\", and he would soon be formally elected as \"pontifex maximus\", chief priest of the official cults. Marcus made some show of resistance: the biographer writes that he was 'compelled' to take imperial power. This may have been a genuine \"horror imperii\", 'fear of imperial power'. Marcus, with his preference for the philosophic life, found the imperial office unappealing. His training as a Stoic however, had made the choice clear to him that it was his duty.\nAlthough Marcus showed no personal affection for Hadrian (significantly, he does not thank him in the first book of his \"Meditations\"), he presumably believed it his duty to enact the man's succession plans. Thus, although the Senate planned to confirm Marcus alone, he refused to take office unless Lucius received equal powers. The Senate accepted, granting Lucius the \"imperium\", the tribunician power, and the title Augustus. Marcus became, in official titulature, Imperator Caesar Marcus Aurelius Antoninus Augustus; Lucius, forgoing his name Commodus and taking Marcus's family name Verus, became Imperator Caesar Lucius Aurelius Verus Augustus. It was the first time that Rome was ruled by two emperors.\nIn spite of their nominal equality, Marcus held more \"auctoritas\", or 'authority', than Lucius. He had been consul once more than Lucius, he had shared in Antoninus's rule, and he alone was \"pontifex maximus\". It would have been clear to the public which emperor was the more senior. As the biographer wrote: \"Verus obeyed Marcus [...] as a lieutenant obeys a proconsul or a governor obeys the emperor\".\nImmediately after their Senate confirmation, the emperors proceeded to the Castra Praetoria, the camp of the Praetorian Guard. Lucius addressed the assembled troops, which then acclaimed the pair as \"imperatores\". Then, like every new emperor since Claudius, Lucius promised the troops a special \"donativum\". This donative, however, was twice the size of those past: 20,000 sesterces (5,000 denarii) per capita, with more to officers. In return for this bounty, equivalent to several years' pay, the troops swore an oath to protect the emperors. The ceremony was perhaps not entirely necessary, given that Marcus's accession had been peaceful and unopposed, but it was good insurance against later military troubles. Upon his accession he also devalued the Roman currency. He decreased the silver purity of the denarius from 83.5% to 79% \u2013 the silver weight dropping from to .\nAntoninus's funeral ceremonies were, in the words of the biographer, 'elaborate'. If his funeral followed those of his predecessors, his body would have been cremated on a pyre at the Campus Martius, and his spirit would have been seen as ascending to the gods' home in the heavens. Marcus and Lucius nominated their father for deification. In contrast to their behaviour during Antoninus's campaign to deify Hadrian, the Senate did not oppose the emperors' wishes. A \"flamen\", or cultic priest, was appointed to minister the cult of the deified Divus Antoninus. Antoninus's remains were laid to rest in Hadrian's mausoleum, beside the remains of Marcus's children and of Hadrian himself. The temple he had dedicated to his wife, Diva Faustina, became the Temple of Antoninus and Faustina. It survives as the church of San Lorenzo in Miranda.\nIn accordance with his will, Antoninus's fortune passed on to Faustina. (Marcus had little need of his wife's fortune. Indeed, at his accession, Marcus transferred part of his mother's estate to his nephew, Ummius Quadratus.) Faustina was three months pregnant at her husband's accession. During the pregnancy she dreamed of giving birth to two serpents, one fiercer than the other. On 31 August, she gave birth at Lanuvium to twins: T. Aurelius Fulvus Antoninus and Lucius Aurelius Commodus. Aside from the fact that the twins shared Caligula's birthday, the omens were favourable, and the astrologers drew positive horoscopes for the children. The births were celebrated on the imperial coinage.\nEarly rule.\nSoon after the emperor's accession, Marcus's eleven-year-old daughter, Annia Lucilla, was betrothed to Lucius (in spite of the fact that he was, formally, her uncle). At the ceremonies commemorating the event, new provisions were made for the support of poor children, along the lines of earlier imperial foundations. Marcus and Lucius proved popular with the people of Rome, who strongly approved of their \"civiliter\" (\"lacking pomp\") behaviour. The emperors permitted free speech, evidenced by the fact that the comedy writer Marullus was able to criticise them without suffering retribution. As the biographer wrote, \"No one missed the lenient ways of Pius\".\nMarcus replaced a number of the empire's major officials. The \"ab epistulis\" Sextus Caecilius Crescens Volusianus, in charge of the imperial correspondence, was replaced with Titus Varius Clemens. Clemens was from the frontier province of Pannonia and had served in the war in Mauretania. Recently, he had served as procurator of five provinces. He was a man suited for a time of military crisis. Lucius Volusius Maecianus, Marcus's former tutor, had been prefectural governor of Egypt at Marcus's accession. Maecianus was recalled, made senator, and appointed prefect of the treasury (\"aerarium Saturni\"). He was made consul soon after. Fronto's son-in-law, Gaius Aufidius Victorinus, was appointed governor of Germania Superior.\nFronto returned to his Roman townhouse at dawn on 28 March, having left his home in Cirta as soon as news of his pupils' accession reached him. He sent a note to the imperial freedman Charilas, asking if he could call on the emperors. Fronto would later explain that he had not dared to write the emperors directly. The tutor was immensely proud of his students. Reflecting on the speech he had written on taking his consulship in 143, when he had praised the young Marcus, Fronto was ebullient: \"There was then an outstanding natural ability in you; there is now perfected excellence. There was then a crop of growing corn; there is now a ripe, gathered harvest. What I was hoping for then, I have now. The hope has become a reality\". Fronto called on Marcus alone; neither thought to invite Lucius.\nLucius was less esteemed by Fronto than his brother, as his interests were on a lower level. Lucius asked Fronto to adjudicate in a dispute he and his friend Calpurnius were having on the relative merits of two actors. Marcus told Fronto of his reading \u2013 Coelius and a little Cicero \u2013 and his family. His daughters were in Rome with their great-great-aunt Matidia; Marcus thought the evening air of the country was too cold for them. He asked Fronto for 'some particularly eloquent reading matter, something of your own, or Cato, or Cicero, or Sallust or Gracchus \u2013 or some poet, for I need distraction, especially in this kind of way, by reading something that will uplift and diffuse my pressing anxieties.' Marcus's early reign proceeded smoothly; he was able to give himself wholly to philosophy and the pursuit of popular affection. Soon, however, he would find he had many anxieties. It would mean the end of the \"felicitas temporum\" ('happy times') that the coinage of 161 had proclaimed.\nIn either autumn 161 or spring 162, the Tiber overflowed its banks, flooding much of Rome. It drowned many animals, leaving the city in famine. Marcus and Lucius gave the crisis their personal attention. In other times of famine, the emperors are said to have provided for the Italian communities out of the Roman granaries.\nFronto's letters continued through Marcus's early reign. Fronto felt that, because of Marcus's prominence and public duties, lessons were more important now than they had ever been before. He believed Marcus was 'beginning to feel the wish to be eloquent once more, in spite of having for a time lost interest in eloquence'. Fronto would again remind his pupil of the tension between his role and his philosophic pretensions: 'Suppose, Caesar, that you can attain to the wisdom of Cleanthes and Zeno, yet, against your will, not the philosopher's woolen cape'.\nThe early days of Marcus's reign were the happiest of Fronto's life: Marcus was beloved by the people of Rome, an excellent emperor, a fond pupil, and perhaps most importantly, as eloquent as could be wished. Marcus had displayed rhetorical skill in his speech to the senate after an earthquake at Cyzicus. It had conveyed the drama of the disaster, and the Senate had been awed: \"Not more suddenly or violently was the city stirred by the earthquake than the minds of your hearers by your speech\". Fronto was hugely pleased.\nWar with Parthia (161\u2013166).\nOn his deathbed, Antoninus spoke of nothing but the state and the foreign kings who had wronged him. One of those kings, Vologases IV of Parthia, made his move in late summer or early autumn 161. Vologases entered the Kingdom of Armenia (then a Roman client state), expelled its king and installed his own \u2013 Pacorus, an Arsacid like himself. The governor of Cappadocia, the frontline in all Armenian conflicts, was Marcus Sedatius Severianus, a Gaul with much experience in military matters.\nConvinced by the prophet Alexander of Abonoteichus that he could defeat the Parthians easily and win glory for himself, Severianus led a legion (perhaps the IX Hispana) into Armenia, but was trapped by the Parthian general Chosrhoes at Elegeia, a town just beyond the Cappadocian frontiers, high up past the headwaters of the Euphrates. After Severianus made some unsuccessful efforts to engage Chosrhoes, he committed suicide, and his legion was massacred. The campaign had lasted only three days.\nThere was threat of war on other frontiers as well \u2013 in Britain, and in Raetia and Upper Germany, where the Chatti of the Taunus mountains had recently crossed over the \"limes\". Marcus was unprepared. Antoninus seems to have given him no military experience; the biographer writes that Marcus spent the whole of Antoninus's twenty-three-year reign at his emperor's side and not in the provinces, where most previous emperors had spent their early careers.\nMore bad news arrived: the Syrian governor's army had been defeated by the Parthians, and retreated in disarray. Reinforcements were dispatched for the Parthian frontier. P. Julius Geminius Marcianus, an African senator commanding X Gemina at Vindobona (Vienna), left for Cappadocia with detachments from the Danubian legions. Three full legions were also sent east: I Minervia from Bonn in Upper Germany, II Adiutrix from Aquincum, and V Macedonica from Troesmis.\nThe northern frontiers were strategically weakened; frontier governors were told to avoid conflict wherever possible. M. Annius Libo, Marcus's first cousin, was sent to replace the Syrian governor. His first consulship was in 161, so he was probably in his early thirties, and as a patrician, he lacked military experience. Marcus had chosen a reliable man rather than a talented one.\nMarcus took a four-day public holiday at Alsium, a resort town on the coast of Etruria. He was too anxious to relax. Writing to Fronto, he declared that he would not speak about his holiday. Fronto replied: 'What? Do I not know that you went to Alsium with the intention of devoting yourself to games, joking, and complete leisure for four whole days?' He encouraged Marcus to rest, calling on the example of his predecessors (Antoninus had enjoyed exercise in the \"palaestra\", fishing, and comedy), going so far as to write up a fable about the gods' division of the day between morning and evening \u2013 Marcus had apparently been spending most of his evenings on judicial matters instead of at leisure. Marcus could not take Fronto's advice. 'I have duties hanging over me that can hardly be begged off', he wrote back. Marcus Aurelius put on Fronto's voice to chastise himself: ''Much good has my advice done you', you will say!' He had rested, and would rest often, but 'this devotion to duty! Who knows better than you how demanding it is!'\nFronto sent Marcus a selection of reading material, and, to settle his unease over the course of the Parthian war, a long and considered letter, full of historical references. In modern editions of Fronto's works, it is labelled \"De bello Parthico\" (\"On the Parthian War\"). There had been reverses in Rome's past, Fronto writes, but in the end, Romans had always prevailed over their enemies: 'Always and everywhere [Mars] has changed our troubles into successes and our terrors into triumphs'.\nOver the winter of 161\u2013162, news that a rebellion was brewing in Syria arrived and it was decided that Lucius should direct the Parthian war in person. He was stronger and healthier than Marcus, the argument went, and thus more suited to military activity. Lucius's biographer suggests ulterior motives: to restrain Lucius's debaucheries, to make him thrifty, to reform his morals by the terror of war, and to realise that he was an emperor. Whatever the case, the senate gave its assent, and, in the summer of 162, Lucius left. Marcus would remain in Rome, as the city 'demanded the presence of an emperor'.\nLucius spent most of the campaign in Antioch, though he wintered at Laodicea and summered at Daphne, a resort just outside Antioch. Critics decried Lucius's luxurious lifestyle, saying that he had taken to gambling, would 'dice the whole night through', and enjoyed the company of actors. Libo died early in the war; perhaps Lucius had murdered him.\nIn the middle of the war, perhaps in autumn 163 or early 164, Lucius made a trip to Ephesus to be married to Marcus's daughter Lucilla. Marcus moved up the date; perhaps he had already heard of Lucius's mistress Panthea. Lucilla's thirteenth birthday was in March 163; whatever the date of her marriage, she was not yet fifteen. Lucilla was accompanied by her mother Faustina and Lucius's uncle (his father's half-brother) M. Vettulenus Civica Barbarus, who was made \"comes Augusti\", 'companion of the emperors'. Marcus may have wanted Civica to watch over Lucius, the job Libo had failed at. Marcus may have planned to accompany them all the way to Smyrna (the biographer says he told the senate he would), but this did not happen. He only accompanied the group as far as Brundisium, where they boarded a ship for the east. He returned to Rome immediately thereafter, and sent out special instructions to his proconsuls not to give the group any official reception.\nThe Armenian capital Artaxata was captured in 163. At the end of the year, Lucius took the title \"Armeniacus\", despite having never seen combat; Marcus declined to accept the title until the following year. When Lucius was hailed as \"imperator\" again, however, Marcus did not hesitate to take the \"Imperator II\" with him.\nOccupied Armenia was reconstructed on Roman terms. In 164, a new capital, Kaine Polis ('New City'), replaced Artaxata. A new king was installed: a Roman senator of consular rank and Arsacid descent, Gaius Julius Sohaemus. He may not even have been crowned in Armenia; the ceremony may have taken place in Antioch, or even Ephesus. Sohaemus was hailed on the imperial coinage of 164 under the legend Rex armeniis Datus: Lucius sat on a throne with his staff while Sohaemus stood before him, saluting the emperor.\nIn 163, the Parthians intervened in Osroene, a Roman client in upper Mesopotamia centred on Edessa, and installed their own king on its throne. In response, Roman forces were moved downstream, to cross the Euphrates at a more southerly point. Before the end of 163, however, Roman forces had moved north to occupy Dausara and Nicephorium on the northern, Parthian bank. Soon after the conquest of the north bank of the Euphrates, other Roman forces moved on Osroene from Armenia, taking Anthemusia, a town southwest of Edessa.\nIn 165, Roman forces moved on Mesopotamia. Edessa was re-occupied, and Mannus, the king deposed by the Parthians, was re-installed. The Parthians retreated to Nisibis, but this too was besieged and captured. The Parthian army dispersed in the Tigris. A second force, under Avidius Cassius and the III Gallica, moved down the Euphrates, and fought a major battle at Dura.\nBy the end of the year, Cassius's army had reached the twin metropolises of Mesopotamia: Seleucia on the right bank of the Tigris and Ctesiphon on the left. Ctesiphon was taken and its royal palace set to flame. The citizens of Seleucia, still largely Greek (the city had been commissioned and settled as a capital of the Seleucid Empire, one of Alexander the Great's successor kingdoms), opened its gates to the invaders. The city was sacked nonetheless, leaving a black mark on Lucius's reputation. Excuses were sought, or invented: the official version had it that the Seleucids broke faith first.\nCassius's army, although suffering from a shortage of supplies and the effects of a plague contracted in Seleucia, made it back to Roman territory safely. Lucius took the title Parthicus Maximus, and he and Marcus were hailed as \"imperatores\" again, earning the title 'imp. III'. Cassius's army returned to the field in 166, crossing over the Tigris into Media. Lucius took the title 'Medicus', and the emperors were again hailed as \"imperatores\", becoming 'imp. IV' in imperial titulature. Marcus took the Parthicus Maximus now, after another tactful delay. On 12 October of that year, Marcus proclaimed two of his sons, Annius and Commodus, as his heirs.\nWar with Germanic tribes (166\u2013180).\nDuring the early 160s, Fronto's son-in-law Victorinus was stationed as a legate in Germany. He was there with his wife and children (another child had stayed with Fronto and his wife in Rome). The condition on the northern frontier looked grave. A frontier post had been destroyed, and it looked like all the peoples of central and northern Europe were in turmoil. There was corruption among the officers: Victorinus had to ask for the resignation of a legionary legate who was taking bribes.\nExperienced governors had been replaced by friends and relatives of the imperial family. Lucius Dasumius Tullius Tuscus, a distant relative of Hadrian, was in Upper Pannonia, succeeding the experienced Marcus Nonius Macrinus. Lower Pannonia was under the obscure Tiberius Haterius Saturnius. Marcus Servilius Fabianus Maximus was shuffled from Lower Moesia to Upper Moesia when Marcus Iallius Bassus had joined Lucius in Antioch. Lower Moesia was filled by Pontius Laelianus' son. The Dacias were still divided in three, governed by a praetorian senator and two procurators. The peace could not hold long; Lower Pannonia did not even have a legion.\nStarting in the 160s, Germanic tribes, and other nomadic people launched raids along the northern border, particularly into Gaul and across the Danube. This new impetus westwards was probably due to attacks from tribes further east. A first invasion by the Chatti in the province of Germania Superior was repulsed in 162.\nFar more dangerous was the invasion of 166, when the Marcomanni of Bohemia, clients of the Roman Empire since AD 19, crossed the Danube together with the Lombards and other Germanic tribes. Soon thereafter, the Iranian Sarmatian Iazyges attacked between the Danube and the Theiss rivers.\nThe Costoboci, coming from the Carpathian area, invaded Moesia, Macedonia, and Greece. After a long struggle, Marcus managed to push back the invaders. Numerous members of Germanic tribes settled in frontier regions like Dacia, Pannonia, Germany, and Italy itself. This was not a new thing, but this time the numbers of settlers required the creation of two new frontier provinces on the left shore of the Danube, Sarmatia and Marcomannia, including today's Czech Republic, Slovakia, and Hungary. Some Germanic tribes who settled in Ravenna revolted and managed to seize possession of the city. For this reason, Marcus decided not only against bringing more barbarians into Italy, but even banished those who had previously been brought there. In 168, the two emperors embarked on a new military campaign, expelling the invading Marcomanni and Quadi from Aquileia. Lucius Verus fell ill and died on his way back to Rome, probably due to the plague, in January or February 169.\nLegal and administrative work.\nLike many emperors, Marcus spent most of his time addressing matters of law such as petitions and hearing disputes, but unlike many of his predecessors, he was already proficient in imperial administration when he assumed power. He took great care in the theory and practice of legislation. Professional jurists called him \"an emperor most skilled in the law\" and \"a most prudent and conscientiously just emperor\". He showed marked interest in three areas of the law: the manumission of slaves, the guardianship of orphans and minors, and the choice of city councillors (\"decuriones\").\nMarcus showed a great deal of respect to the Roman Senate and routinely asked them for permission to spend money even though he did not need to do so as the absolute ruler of the Empire. In one speech, Marcus himself reminded the Senate that the imperial palace where he lived was not truly his possession but theirs. In 168, he revalued the denarius, increasing the silver purity from 79% to 82% \u2013 the actual silver weight increasing from . However, two years later he reverted to the previous values because of the military crises facing the empire.\nTrade with Han China and outbreak of plague.\nA possible contact with the Chinese Han dynasty (202\u00a0BC\u00a0\u2013 220\u00a0AD) occurred in 166 when a Roman traveller visited the Han court, claiming to be an ambassador representing \"Andun\" (), ruler of Daqin, who can be identified either with Marcus or his predecessor Antoninus. In addition to Republican-era Roman glasswares found at Guangzhou along the South China Sea, Roman golden medallions made during the reign of Antoninus and perhaps even Marcus have been found at \u00d3c Eo, Vietnam, then part of the Kingdom of Funan near the Chinese province of Jiaozhi (in northern Vietnam). This may have been the port city of Kattigara, described by Ptolemy (c. 150) as being visited by a Greek sailor named Alexander and lying beyond the Golden Chersonese (i.e. Malay Peninsula). Roman coins from the reigns of Tiberius to Aurelian have been found in Xi'an, the site of the Han capital Chang'an, although the far greater amount of Roman coins in India suggests the Roman maritime trade for purchasing Chinese silk was centred there, not in China or even the overland Silk Road running through Persia.\nThe Antonine Plague started in Mesopotamia in 165 or 166 at the end of Lucius's campaign against the Parthians. It may have continued into the reign of Commodus. Galen, who was in Rome when the plague spread to the city in 166, mentioned that \"fever, diarrhoea, and inflammation of the pharynx, along with dry or pustular eruptions of the skin after nine days\" were among the symptoms. It is believed that the plague was smallpox. In the view of historian Rafe de Crespigny, the plagues afflicting the Eastern Han empire of China during the reigns of Emperor Huan of Han (r. 146\u2013168) and Emperor Ling of Han (r. 168\u2013189), which struck in 151, 161, 171, 173, 179, 182, and 185, were perhaps connected to the plague in Rome. Raoul McLaughlin writes that the travel of Roman subjects to the Han court in 166 may have started a new era of Roman\u2013Far East trade. However, it was also a \"harbinger of something much more ominous\". According to McLaughlin, the disease caused \"irreparable\" damage to the Roman maritime trade in the Indian Ocean as proven by the archaeological record spanning from Egypt to India, as well as significantly decreased Roman commercial activity in Southeast Asia.\nDeath and succession (180).\nMarcus Aurelius died at the age of 58 on 17 March 180 of unknown causes in his military quarters either in the city of Vindobona (province of Pannonia Superior, today Vienna) or near Sirmium (province of Pannonia Inferior, modern Sremska Mitrovica). He was immediately deified and his ashes were returned to Rome, where they rested in Hadrian's mausoleum (modern Castel Sant'Angelo) until the Visigoth sack of the city in 410. His campaigns against Germans and Sarmatians were also commemorated by a column and a temple built in Rome. Some scholars consider his death to be the end of the \"Pax Romana\".\nMarcus was succeeded by his son Commodus, whom he had named Caesar in 166 and with whom he had jointly ruled since 177. Biological sons of the emperor, if there were any, were considered heirs; however, it was only the second time that a \"non-adoptive\" son had succeeded his father, the only other having been a century earlier when Vespasian was succeeded by his son Titus. Historians have criticised the succession to Commodus, citing Commodus' erratic behaviour and lack of political and military acumen. At the end of his history of Marcus's reign, Cassius Dio wrote an encomium to the emperor, and described the transition to Commodus in his own lifetime with sorrow:\n[Marcus] did not meet with the good fortune that he deserved, for he was not strong in body and was involved in a multitude of troubles throughout practically his entire reign. But for my part, I admire him all the more for this very reason, that amid unusual and extraordinary difficulties he both survived himself and preserved the empire. Just one thing prevented him from being completely happy, namely, that after rearing and educating his son in the best possible way he was vastly disappointed in him. This matter must be our next topic; for our history now descends from a kingdom of gold to one of iron and rust, as affairs did for the Romans of that day.\n\u2013Dio lxxi. 36.3\u20134\nDio adds that from Marcus's first days as counsellor to Antoninus to his final days as emperor of Rome, \"he remained the same [person] and did not change in the least.\"\nMichael Grant, in \"The Climax of Rome\", writes of Commodus:\nThe youth turned out to be very erratic, or at least so anti-traditional that disaster was inevitable. But whether or not Marcus ought to have known this to be so, the rejections of his son's claims in favour of someone else would almost certainly have involved one of the civil wars which were to proliferate so disastrously around future successions.\nAttitude towards Christians.\nIn the first two centuries of the Christian era, local Roman officials were largely responsible for the persecution of Christians. In the second century, the emperors treated Christianity as a local problem to be dealt with by their subordinates. The number and severity of persecutions of Christians in various locations of the empire seemingly increased during the reign of Marcus Aurelius. The extent to which the emperor himself directed, encouraged, or was aware of these persecutions is unclear and much debated by historians.\nMarcus Aurelius mentions Christians only once in his personal writings, the \"Meditations\". In Book XI.3, he criticizes what he perceives as their theatrical approach to martyrdom, writing that readiness for death \"must spring from a man's inner judgment, and not be the result of mere opposition [as is the case with the Christians]. It must be associated with deliberation and dignity and, if others too are to be convinced, with nothing like stage-heroics.\"\nA letter purportedly from Marcus Aurelius to the Roman Senate, included in Justin Martyr's \"First Apology\", describes a battlefield incident where Marcus allegedly credited Christian prayer with saving his army when \"water poured from heaven,\" and subsequently requested that the Senate cease persecution of Christians. However, modern scholars widely consider this letter to be inauthentic, likely composed by Justin Martyr or another Christian author rather than by Marcus Aurelius himself. Contemporary non-Christian sources, including the historian Cassius Dio, attribute the same \"rain miracle\" to an Egyptian magician named Harnuphis who accompanied the Roman legions.\nMarriage and issue.\nMarcus and his wife Faustina had at least 14 children during their 30-year marriage, including two sets of twins. One son and four daughters outlived their father. Their children included:\nWritings and legacy.\n\"Meditations\".\nWhile on campaign between 170 and 180, Marcus wrote his \"Meditations\" in Greek as a source for his own guidance and self-improvement. The original title of this work, if it had one, is unknown. 'Meditations' \u2013 as well as other titles including 'To Himself' \u2013 were adopted later. According to Hays, the book was a favourite of Frederick the Great, John Stuart Mill, Matthew Arnold, and Goethe. It has been considered by many commentators to be one of the greatest works of philosophy. \"Meditations\" sold 16,000 copies in 2012. In 2019, 100,000 copies were sold.\nIt is not known how widely Marcus's writings were circulated after his death. There are stray references in the ancient literature to the popularity of his precepts, and Julian the Apostate was well aware of his reputation as a philosopher, though he does not specifically mention \"Meditations\". It survived in the scholarly traditions of the Eastern Church, and the first surviving quotes of the book, as well as the first known reference to it by name ('Marcus's writings to himself') are from Arethas of Caesarea in the 10th century and in the Byzantine Suda (perhaps inserted by Arethas himself). It was first published in 1558 in Zurich by Wilhelm Xylander (n\u00e9 Holzmann), from a manuscript reportedly lost shortly afterwards. The oldest surviving complete manuscript copy is in the Vatican library and dates to the 14th century.\nMarcus acquired the reputation of a philosopher king within his lifetime, and the title would remain after his death; both Dio and the biographer call him \"the philosopher\". Christians such as Justin Martyr, Athenagoras, and Eusebius also gave him the title. The last went so far as to call him \"more philanthropic and philosophic\" than Antoninus and Hadrian, and set him against the persecuting emperors Domitian and Nero to make the contrast bolder.\nThe historian Herodian wrote:\nAlone of the emperors, he gave proof of his learning not by mere words or knowledge of philosophical doctrines but by his blameless character and temperate way of life.\nIain King says Marcus's legacy was tragic:\n[The emperor's] Stoic philosophy \u2013 which is about self-restraint, duty, and respect for others \u2013 was so abjectly abandoned by the imperial line he anointed on his death.\nEquestrian Statue.\nThe Equestrian Statue of Marcus Aurelius in Rome is the only Roman equestrian statue which has survived into the modern period. Crafted of bronze in c.\u2009175, it stands and is now located in the Capitoline Museums of Rome. The emperor's hand is outstretched in an act of clemency offered to a bested enemy, while his weary facial expression due to the stress of leading Rome into nearly constant battles perhaps represents a break with the classical tradition of sculpture.\nColumn.\nMarcus's victory column, established in Rome either in his last few years of life or after his reign and completed in 193, was built to commemorate his victory over the Sarmatians and Germanic tribes in 176. A spiral of carved reliefs wraps around the column, showing scenes from his military campaigns. A statue of Marcus had stood atop the column but disappeared during the Middle Ages. It was replaced with a statue of Saint Paul in 1589 by Pope Sixtus V. The column of Marcus and the column of Trajan are often compared by scholars given how they are both Doric in style, had a pedestal at the base, had sculpted friezes depicting their respective military victories, and a statue on top.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\nAll citations to the \"Historia Augusta\" are to individual biographies, and are marked with a \"'HA'\". Citations to the works of Fronto are cross-referenced to C.R. Haines's Loeb edition.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nAncient.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTrapp, Michael B. \"Orations. 1: Orationes 1\u20132\". Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 2017. .\nBird, H.W. \"De Caesaribus\". Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 1994. .\nCary, Earnest, trans. \"Roman History\". 9 vols. Loeb ed. London: Heinemann, 1914\u201327. . Online at https:// .\nScott, S.P., trans. \"The Digest or Pandects\" in \"The Civil Law\". 17 vols. Cincinnati: Central Trust Company, 1932. . Online at the http:// .\nDean, James Elmer, ed. \"https://\". Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1935. .\nHaines, Charles Reginald, trans. \"The Correspondence of Marcus Cornelius Fronto: With Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, Lucius Verus, Antoninus Pius, and Various Friends\". 2 vols. Loeb ed. London: Heinemann, 1920. . Online at the Internet Archive: Vol. https://, https://.\nRolfe, J.C., trans. \"The Attic nights of Aulus Gellius\". 3 vols. Loeb ed. London: Heinemann, 1927\u201328. (Vol. 1), (Vol. 2), (Vol. 3). Vols. 1 and 2 online at https://.\nEchols, Edward C., trans. \"Herodian of Antioch's History of the Roman empire: From the death of Marcus Aurelius to the accession of Gordian III\". Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1961. . Online at http:// and https:// .\nFowler, F.G.; Fowler, H.W., trans. \"The works of Lucian of Samosata\". Oxford: Clarendon P., 1949. .\n\"Alexander\" (in Latin). Translation online at http:// .\nTranslations (from Latin) of http:// , http:// , and http:// online at Sacred Texts, based on the https:// e-text.\nFarquharson, A.S.L., trans. \"Meditations\". New York: Knopf, 1946, rept. 1992. .\nMagie, David, trans. \"Historia Augusta\". 3 vols. Loeb ed. London: Heinemann, 1921\u201332. Online at https:// .\nMagie, David; Birley, Anthony R. \"Lives of the later Caesars\". London: The Folio Society, 2005. .\nPenella, Robert J. \"The private orations of Themistius\". Berkeley: University of California Press, 2000. .\nModern.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20158", "revid": "38205273", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20158", "title": "Maria Eleonora of Brandenburg", "text": "Queen of Sweden from 1620 to 1632\nMaria Eleonora of Brandenburg (11 November 1599 \u2013 28 March 1655) was Queen of Sweden from 1620 to 1632 as the wife of King Gustav II Adolph (\"Gustavus Adolphus\"). She was born a German princess as the daughter of John Sigismund, Elector of Brandenburg, and Anna, Duchess of Prussia, daughter of Albert Frederick, Duke of Prussia.\nIn 1620, Maria Eleonora married Gustavus Adolphus with her mother's consent, but against the will of her brother George William, Elector of Brandenburg, who had just succeeded her father. She bore her husband a daughter, Christina, in 1626, who later became the Queen of Sweden.\nEarly life.\nBorn on 11 November 1599 in K\u00f6nigsberg, in the Duchy of Prussia, Maria Eleonora was the third child and second daughter of John Sigismund, Elector of Brandenburg, and his wife, Duchess Anna of Prussia, the Electress of Brandenburg. \nMarie Eleonores's maternal grandparents were Marie Eleonore of Cleves and Albert Frederick of Prussia, while her paternal grandparents were Joachim Frederick, Margrave of Brandenburg and his first wife Catherine of Brandenburg-K\u00fcstrin.\nMaria Eleonora's upbringing, and that of her siblings, was largely governed by their mother.\nThe relationship between Marie Eleonore's parents was said to be occasionally volatile; her father was prone to drunken rages and her mother reportedly threw plates and glasses at her spouse during arguments. Although Anna was described as intellectually superior to her spouse, she was also considered temperamental and strong-willed.\nEngagement.\nIn 1616, the 22-year-old Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden started looking for a Protestant bride. He had since 1613 tried to get his mother's permission to marry the noblewoman Ebba Brahe, but this was not allowed, and he had to give up his wishes to marry her, though he continued to be in love with her. He received reports with the most flattering descriptions of the physical and mental qualities of the beautiful 17-year-old princess Maria Eleonora. Maria Eleonora\u2019s father, the Elector John Sigismund, was favorably inclined towards the Swedish king, but he had become very infirm after an apoplectic stroke in the autumn of 1617. His determined Prussian wife showed a strong dislike for this Swedish suitor, because Prussia was a Polish fief and the Polish King Sigismund III Vasa still resented his loss of Sweden to Gustavus Adolphus' father Charles IX.\nMaria Eleonora had additional suitors in the young William of Orange (?), Wladislaw Vasa of Poland, Adolf Friedrich of Mecklenburg and even the future Charles I of England. Maria Eleonora's brother George William was flattered by the offer of the British Crown Prince and proposed their younger sister Catherine (1602\u20131644) as a more suitable wife for the Swedish king. Maria Eleonora, however, seems to have had a preference for Gustavus Adolphus. For him it was a matter of honour to acquire the hand of Maria Eleonora and none other.\nHe had the rooms of his castle in Stockholm redecorated and started making preparations to leave for Berlin to press his suit in person, when a letter arrived from Maria Eleonora's mother to his mother. The Electress demanded in no uncertain terms that the Queen Dowager should prevent her son's journey, as \"being prejudicial to Brandenburg's interests in view of the state of war existing between Sweden and Poland\". Her husband, she wrote, was \"so enfeebled in will by illness that he could be persuaded to agree to anything, even if it tended to the destruction of the country\". It was a rebuff that verged on an insult.\nQueen of Sweden.\nThe Elector John Sigismund, Maria Eleonora's father, died on 23 December 1619, and the prospect of a Swedish marriage seemed gone with him. In the spring of 1620, however, stubborn Gustavus Adolphus arrived in Berlin. The Electress Dowager Anna maintained an attitude of reserve and even refused to grant the Swedish king a personal meeting with Maria Eleonora. All those who were present, however, noticed the princess's interest in the young king. Afterwards, Gustavus Adolphus made a round of other Protestant German courts with the professed intention of inspecting a few matrimonial alternatives.\nOn his return to Berlin, the Electress Dowager seems to have become completely captivated by the charming Swedish king. After plighting his troth to Maria Eleonora, Gustavus Adolphus hurried back to Sweden to make arrangements for the reception of his bride.\nThe new Elector, George William, who resided in Prussia, was appalled when he heard of his mother's independent action. He wrote to Gustavus Adolphus to refuse his consent to the marriage until Sweden and Poland had settled their differences. It was the Electress Dowager, however, who, in accordance with Hohenzollern family custom, had the last word in bestowing her daughter's hand in marriage. She sent Maria Eleonora to territory outside of George William's reach and concluded the marriage negotiations herself.\nOn 7 October 1620, Maria Eleonora, her mother and her sister Catherine left Brandenburg. Anna of Prussia provided herself with a selection of objects of value from the exchequer before she joined Maria Eleonora in Brunswick. A detachment of the Swedish fleet took the women over to Kalmar, where Gustavus Adolphus was impatiently awaiting them. The wedding took place in Stockholm on 25 November 1620. A comedy was performed based on the history of Olof Sk\u00f6tkonung. Gustavus Adolphus - in his own words - finally \"had a Brandenburg lady in his marriage bed\". Anna of Prussia actually stayed with her daughter in Sweden for several years after the marriage.\nGustavus Adolphus shared Maria Eleonora's interest in architecture and her love of music, while she was sentimentally devoted to her husband. Often, she lamented that she never had her hero for herself. Foreign ambassadors found her gracious and beautiful and she had good taste, although her character showed some extravagant traits. Maria Eleonora had a definite liking for entertainment and sweetmeats, and she soon succumbed to the current fashionable craze for buffoons and dwarfs. She spoke French, the court language of the age, but never bothered to learn to write German or Swedish correctly.\nWithin six months of their marriage, Gustavus Adolphus left to command the siege of Riga, leaving Maria Eleonora in the early stages of her first pregnancy. She lived exclusively in the company of her German ladies-in-waiting and had difficulty in adapting herself to the Swedish people, countryside and climate. She disliked the bad roads, sombre forests and wooded houses, roofed with turf. She also pined for her husband.\nA year after their wedding she had a miscarriage and became seriously ill. She was tempestuous, excessive, neurotic and jealous. She was often given to harsh language, and she did not spare her husband, even when strangers were present. Her emotional life lacked balance, and everything Maria Eleonora undertook on her own initiative needed careful watching. Soon Gustavus Adolphus' intimates knew that his married life was a source of grief and anxiety.\nIn the autumn of 1623 Maria Eleonora gave birth to a daughter, Christina, but the baby died the next year. At that time, the only surviving male heirs were the hated king of Poland and his sons. With Gustavus Adolphus risking his life in battles, an heir to the throne was anxiously awaited. In the autumn Maria Eleonora was pregnant for a third time. In May 1625 she was in good spirits and insisted on accompanying her husband on the royal yacht to review the fleet. There seemed to be no danger, as the warships were moored just opposite the castle, but a sudden storm nearly capsized the yacht. The queen was hurried back to the castle, but when she got there she was heard to exclaim: \"Jesus, I cannot feel my child!\". Shortly afterwards the longed-for son was stillborn.\nBirth of Christina.\nWith the renewal of the war with Poland, Gustavus Adolphus had to leave his wife again. It is likely that she gave way to depression and grief, as we know she did in 1627, and it is probably for this reason that the king let his queen join him in Livonia after the Poles had been defeated in January 1626. By April, Maria Eleonora found she was again pregnant. No risks were taken this time and the astrologers predicted the birth of a son and heir.\nDuring a lull in the warfare, Gustavus Adolphus hurried back to Stockholm to await the arrival of the baby. The birth was a difficult one. On 7 December, a baby was born with a fleece (lanugo), which enveloped it from its head to its knees, leaving only its face, arms and lower part of its legs free. Moreover, it had a large nose and was covered with hair. Thus, it was assumed the baby was a boy, and so the King was told. Closer inspection, however, determined that the baby was a girl. Gustavus Adolphus' half-sister Catherine informed him that the child was a girl. She \"carried the baby in her arms to the king in a condition for him to see and to know and realise for himself what she dared not tell him\". Gustavus Adolphus remarked: \"She is going to be clever, for she has taken us all in.\" His disappointment did not last long, and he decided that she would be called Christina after his mother. He gave orders for the birth to be announced with all the solemnity usually accorded to the arrival of a male heir. This seems to indicate that Gustavus Adolphus, at the age of 33, had little hope of having other children. Maria Eleonora's state of health seems to be the most likely explanation for this. Her later portraits and actions, however, do not indicate that she was physically fragile.\nShortly after the birth, Maria Eleonora was in no condition to be told the truth about the baby's sex, and the king and court waited several days before breaking the news to her. She screamed: \"Instead of a son, I am given a daughter, dark and ugly, with a great nose and black eyes. Take her from me, I will not have such a monster!\" She may have suffered from a post-natal depression. In her agitated state, the queen tried to injure the child.\nIn Christina's early childhood, she had frequent accidents. Once a beam fell mysteriously upon the cradle. Another time, she fell from a flight of stairs, apparently by accident. On another occasion the nursemaid was blamed for dropping the baby onto a stone floor, injuring a shoulder that ever afterwards remained a little crooked.\nIn the year after Christina's birth, Maria Eleonora was described as being in a state of hysteria owing to her husband's absences. In 1632 Gustavus Adolphus described his wife as being \"a very sick woman\". There was some excuse for her; she had lost three babies and still felt herself an isolated foreigner in a hostile land, even more so after 1627 when her brother joined Sweden's enemies. Meanwhile, her husband's life was constantly in danger when he was on campaign. In 1627 Gustavus Adolphus was both ill and wounded. Two years later he had a narrow escape at Stuhm.\nGustavus Adolphus was devoted to his daughter and tried to raise Christina like a boy. At the age of two, she clapped her hands and laughed with joy when the great cannons of Kalmar Castle boomed out the royal salute. Afterwards, Gustavus Adolphus often took his daughter with him to military reviews. Maria Eleonora showed little affection for her daughter and was not allowed any influence in Christina's upbringing. The princess was placed in the care of Gustavus Adolphus' half-sister Catherine and the Chancellor Axel Oxenstierna.\nIn 1630 Gustavus Adolphus concluded that Habsburg designs for Baltic supremacy threatened Sweden's very existence and also its religious freedom. Before he left to join the Thirty Years' War, he discussed a possible regency with members of the government and admitted to them that his wife was \"a miserable woman\". Even so, Gustavus Adolphus could not bring himself to nominate a regency council in which her name did not appear. To Axel Oxenstierna, he confessed: \"If anything happens to me, my family will merit your pity [..], the mother lacking in common sense, the daughter a minor - hopeless, if they rule, and dangerous, if others come to rule over them.\"\nQueen dowager.\nDuring the next two years Gustavus Adolphus marched across a devastated Germany, conquering Pomerania and Mecklenburg. In early November 1632 he went to Erfurt to say goodbye to Maria Eleonora, who had been in Germany since the previous winter. In the Battle of L\u00fctzen, the 37-year-old Gustavus Adolphus was shot in the back. He fell and was dragged for some distance by his horse. He managed to free himself from the stirrup, but while lying on the ground \"The Lion of the North\" was killed by another shot through his head. By nightfall both armies were exhausted, but Bernard of Saxe-Weimar and the Swedes had captured all the Imperial artillery and were in possession of the key position. The king's body was found lying face downwards in the mud, plundered of everything but his shirt.\nMaria Eleonora was not included in the regency government during the minority of her daughter, as the council of the state did not consider her suitable as regent. The king had never actually left any instructions that she should not be included in the case of a minor regency, but they supported their grounds for excluding her by the claim that the late king had said to them that she should never be entrusted with matters of state, though he never left any papers to confirm this. When she was informed that the regency government had been formed in May 1633 and that she had been excluded from it, Maria Eleonora was reportedly offended, and pointed out that her late mother-in-law, Christina of Holstein-Gottorp, had served as regent during the minority of her late spouse. In reply, however, the representative of the regency council, Gabriel Gustafsson Oxenstierna, responded that her information of the regency of queen dowager Christina was highly exaggerated, and that Sweden actually had no tradition to include queen dowagers in minor regencies. This was in fact a lie: not only had the queen dowager Christina in fact been regent, but king Gustav I of Sweden had proclaimed his queen Margaret Leijonhufvud regent in case of a minor regency in 1544, and John III of Sweden had provided for such a regency for both his first queen, Catherine Jagiellon, as well as for his second, Gunilla Bielke. Maria Eleonora, however, accepted the response, and declared that she would satisfied to entrust politics to others and to be in control of the custody of her daughter.\nIn 1633 Maria Eleonora returned to Sweden with the embalmed body of her husband. In Nyk\u00f6ping, 7-year-old Queen Christina came in solemn procession to the ship to receive her mother. Later she wrote: \"I embraced the queen my mother, she drowned me with her tears and practically smothered me in her arms.\" For more than a year Maria Eleonora condemned Christina to a mourning seclusion in rooms draped with black and lit by candles day and night, from which every ray of light was excluded. She made her daughter sleep with her in a bed over which her father's heart was hung in a golden casket. Things were made worse by Maria Eleonora's continual weeping. Christina, who also was somewhat malformed with one shoulder higher than the other, also detested her mother's dwarfs and buffoons. She became seriously ill; an ulcer appeared on her left breast, causing her terrible pain and a high fever until it burst. In the summer of 1634 the funeral procession finally wound its way to Stockholm. Queen Christina later wrote about her mother: \"She carried out her role of mourning to perfection.\"\nMaria Eleonora had plunged into a prolonged period of emotional dysregulation due to grief. She found it more difficult than ever to conceal her dislike of Swedish \"rocks and mountains, the freezing air, and all the rest of it\". During the rest of her life she preserved the memory of her husband, weeping for hours and even days on end. When the regency council tried to separate Christina from her mother, Maria Eleonora wept and protested so bitterly that nothing was done.\nRelationship with Queen Christina.\nIn 1636 Maria Eleonora was taken to Gripsholm castle and officially lost her parental rights to her daughter, because at times she was completely out of her mind. In 1639 a letter written by her and intended for Sweden's archenemy, the King Christian IV of Denmark, was intercepted. After a summons, Maria Eleonora appeared at her daughter's court in a flood of tears in the summer of 1640. Queen Christina, 13 years old, reasoned with her mother and dissuaded her from taking up residence at Nyk\u00f6ping near Denmark. Afterwards, Maria Eleonora returned to Gripsholm. To undertake one of her periodic fasts, she retired to the seclusion of her own apartment, accompanied by only one of her ladies-in-waiting, Anna Sofia von B\u00fclow. Maria Eleonora wrote regularly to her daughter Christina. She and her German court wanted to leave their exile at Gripsholm castle. Christina replied tactfully, knowing that the Council would not permit the queen mother any leave. Eventually her mother asked to leave Sweden altogether. Christina invited her to Stockholm, attempting to persuade her to stay in the country. At night the two ladies let themselves down from a window and were rowed in a boat to the other side of the nearby lake, where a carriage was waiting for them. They drove to Nyk\u00f6ping, where they boarded a Danish ship. King Christian IV had intended the ship to take her home to Brandenburg, but she convinced the captain to bring her to Denmark instead. She was well received by the Danish king, but Maria Eleonora wanted to go home to Brandenburg. The electoral prince there demanded financial compensation from Sweden, where on the contrary the Council expected to withdraw her appanage as well as her properties. Finally the teenage Christina succeeded in negotiating a certain alimony for her mother, adding to this from her own purse.\nIn Denmark, Maria Eleonora became the guest of King Christian IV. The Elector George William refused to receive his sister in Brandenburg, so Maria Eleonora had to wait until his death in December that year before her nephew gave her permission to visit Brandenburg. Still, the new Elector insisted that Sweden should provide for his aunt's upkeep. She received a small pension of 30,000 \u00e9cus a year. After a while Maria Eleonora surprisingly started to long for Sweden, and in 1648 she returned. \nQueen Christina went to meet her mother's ship. It was delayed by a storm and the young queen slept in the open for two nights and contracted a fever, which kept her in bed for some days. In October 1650 Maria Eleonora attended her daughter's postponed coronation ceremony. Christina then bought the newly erected castle \"Makal\u00f6s\" (\"Unequalled\") for her, close to the royal castle in Stockholm. It would have been enormously expensive, but Christina never paid. Instead she handed it back in 1652.\nIn June 1654, Christina shocked everyone when she decided to abdicate in favour of her cousin Charles Gustav. Maria Eleonora had grave doubts about her daughter's abdication and its possible effect upon her own finances. Christina and Charles Gustav visited her at Nyk\u00f6ping in April 1654 and promised the Queen Dowager that she would be provided for. Christina abdicated June 5, 1654. Maria Eleonora died in March 1655. At that time, ex-Queen Christina was living in Brussels; she converted to Catholicism in December 1655.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20161", "revid": "3382231", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20161", "title": "Maze", "text": "Puzzle game\nA maze is a path or collection of paths, typically from an entrance to a goal. The word is used to refer both to branching tour puzzles through which the solver must find a route, and to simpler non-branching (\"unicursal\") patterns that lead unambiguously through a convoluted layout to a goal. The term \"labyrinth\" is generally synonymous with \"maze\", but can also connote specifically a unicursal pattern. The pathways and walls in a maze are typically fixed, but puzzles in which the walls and paths can change during the game are also categorised as mazes or tour puzzles.\nConstruction.\nMazes have been built with a variety of materials. Some are relatively permanent, like hedges, turf, walls, rooms, tiles, and paving stones or bricks. Others are deliberately transitory, like corn stalks, straw bales, books, snow, or in fields of crops such as corn or maize. Maize mazes can be very large; they are usually kept only for one growing season, so they can be different each year, and are promoted as seasonal tourist attractions.\nIndoors, mirror mazes are another form of maze, in which many of the apparent pathways are imaginary routes seen through multiple reflections in mirrors. Another type of maze consists of a set of rooms linked by doors (so a passageway is just another room in this definition). Players enter at one spot, and exit at another, or the idea may be to reach a certain spot in the maze. Mazes can also be printed or drawn on paper to be followed by a pencil or fingertip. \nGeneration.\nMaze generation is the act of designing the layout of passages and walls within a maze. There are many different approaches to generating mazes, with various maze generation algorithms for building them, either by hand or automatically by computer.\nThere are two main mechanisms used to generate mazes. In \"carving passages\", one marks out the network of available routes. In building a maze by \"adding walls\", one lays out a set of obstructions within an open area.\nSolution.\nMaze solving is the act of finding a route through the maze from the start to finish. Some maze solving methods are designed to be used inside the maze by a traveler with no prior knowledge of the maze, whereas others are designed to be used by a person or computer program that can see the whole maze at once.\nThe mathematician Leonhard Euler was one of the first to analyze plane mazes mathematically, and in doing so made the first significant contributions to the branch of mathematics known as topology.\nMazes containing no loops are known as \"standard\", or \"perfect\" mazes, and are equivalent to a \"tree\" in graph theory. Thus many maze solving algorithms are closely related to graph theory. Intuitively, if one pulled and stretched out the paths in the maze in the proper way, the result could be made to resemble a tree.\nPsychology experiments.\nMazes are often used in psychology experiments to study spatial navigation and learning. Such experiments typically use rats or mice. Examples are:\n A maze that features one-way doors. The doors can lead to the correct path or create traps that divert you from the correct path and lead you to the starting point. The player may not return through a door through which he has entered, so dead ends may be created. The path is a series of loops interrupted by doors. Through the use of reciprocal doors, the correct path can intersect the incorrect path on a single plane.\nPublic attractions.\nAsia.\nDubai.\nIndia\nSouth Africa.\nChartwell Castle in Johannesburg claims to have the biggest known uninterrupted hedgerow maze in the Southern world, with over 900 conifers. It covers about 6000 sq.m. (approximately 1.5 acres), which is around 5 times bigger than The Hampton Court Maze. The center is about 12m \u00d7 12m. The maze was designed and laid out by Conrad Penny.\nCaribbean.\nCuba.\nThe colonial city of Camag\u00fcey, Cuba, founded in 1528, layout resembles a real maze, with narrow, short streets always turning in one direction or another. After pirate Henry Morgan burned the city in the 17th century, it was designed like a maze so attackers would find it hard to move around inside the city. It is a UNESCO World Heritage Site.\nIn popular culture.\nVideo games.\nMaze game is a video game genre first described by journalists during the 1980s to describe any game in which the entire playing field is a maze. The player must escape monsters, outrace an opponent, or navigate the maze within a time limit. After the release of Namco's \"Pac-Man\" in 1980, many maze games followed its conventions of completing a level by traversing all paths and a way of temporarily turning the tables on pursuers.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20162", "revid": "191875", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20162", "title": "Mammoth", "text": "Extinct genus of mammals\nA mammoth is any species of the extinct elephantid genus \"Mammuthus.\" They lived from the late Miocene epoch (from around 6.2\u00a0million years ago) into the Holocene until about 4,000 years ago, with mammoth species at various times inhabiting Africa, Asia, Europe, and North America. Mammoths are distinguished from living elephants by their (typically large) spirally twisted tusks and in some later species, the development of numerous adaptions to living in cold environments, including a thick layer of fur.\nMammoths and Asian elephants are more closely related to each other than they are to African elephants. The oldest mammoth representative, \"Mammuthus subplanifrons\", appeared around 6 million years ago during the late Miocene in what is now southern and Eastern Africa.\"\" Later in the Pliocene, by about three million years ago, mammoths dispersed into Eurasia, eventually covering most of Eurasia before migrating into North America around 1.5\u20131.3\u00a0million years ago, becoming ancestral to the Columbian mammoth (\"M. columbi\"). The woolly mammoth (\"M. primigenius\") evolved about 700\u2013400,000 years ago in Siberia, with some surviving on Russia's Wrangel Island in the Arctic Ocean until as recently as 4,000 years ago, still extant during the existence of the earliest civilisations in ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia.\nEtymology and early observations.\nAccording to \"The American Heritage Dictionary,\" the word \"mammoth\" likely originates from *m\u0101n-o\u014bt, a word in the Mansi languages of western Siberia meaning \"earth horn\", in reference to mammoth tusks. Mammoths appear in the folklore of the indigenous people of Siberia, who were impressed by the great size of their remains. In the mythology of the Evenk people, mammoths were responsible for the creation of the world, digging up the land from the ocean floor with their tusks. The Selkup believed that mammoths lived underground and guarded the underworld, while the Nenets and the Mansi (the latter of whom, along with the Khanty, conceived mammoths as giant birds) believed that mammoths were responsible for the creation of mountains and lakes, while the Yakuts regarded mammoths as water spirits.\nThe word \"mammoth\" was first used in Europe during the early 17th century, when referring to \"maimanto\" tusks discovered in Siberia, as recorded in the 1618 edition of the \"Dictionariolum Russico-Anglicum.\" The earliest scientific research paper on mammoths was by Vasily Tatishchev in 1725. John Bell, who was on the Ob River in 1722, said that mammoth tusks were well known in the area. They were called \"mammon's horn\" and were often found in washed-out river banks. Bell bought one and presented it to Hans Sloan who pronounced it an elephant's tooth.\nIn the American colonies around 1725, enslaved Africans digging in the vicinity of the Stono River in South Carolina unearthed molar teeth recognised in modern times to belong to Columbian mammoths, with the remains subsequently examined by the British naturalist Mark Catesby, who visited the site, and later published an account of his visit in 1743. While the slave owners were puzzled by the objects and suggested that they originated from the great flood described in the Bible, Catesby noted that the slaves unanimously agreed that the objects were the teeth of elephants similar to those from their African homeland, to which Catesby concurred, marking the first technical identification of any fossil animal in North America.\nIn 1796, French biologist Georges Cuvier was the first to identify woolly mammoth remains not as modern elephants transported to the Arctic, but as an entirely new species. He argued this species had gone extinct and no longer existed, a concept that was not widely accepted at the time. Following Cuvier's identification, German naturalist Johann Friedrich Blumenbach gave the woolly mammoth its scientific name, \"Elephas primigenius\", in 1799, placing it in the \"Elephas,\" the genus which today contains the Asian elephant (\"Elephas maximus\"). Originally the African elephants, as well as the American mastodon (described in 1792) were also placed in \"Elephas\". Cuvier coined the synonym \"Elephas mammonteus\" for the woolly mammoth a few months later, but \"E. primigenius\" became the widely used name for the species, including by Cuvier. The genus name \"Mammuthus\" was coined by British anatomist Joshua Brookes in 1828, as part of a survey of his museum collection.\nThomas Jefferson, who famously had a keen interest in paleontology, is partially responsible for transforming the word \"mammoth\" from a noun describing the prehistoric elephant to an adjective describing anything of surprisingly large size. The first recorded use of the word as an adjective was in a description of a large wheel of cheese (the \"Cheshire Mammoth Cheese\") given to Jefferson in 1802.\nEvolution.\nThe earliest known proboscideans, the clade that contains the elephants, arose about 55 million years ago on the landmass of Afro-Arabia. The closest relatives of the Proboscidea are the sirenians and the hyraxes. The family Elephantidae arose a million years ago in Africa, including the living elephants and mammoths. Among many now-extinct clades, the mastodon is only a distant relative of the mammoths and part of the separate Mammutidae family, which diverged 25 million years before the mammoths evolved.\nFollowing the publication of the woolly mammoths mitochondrial genome sequence in 1997, it has since become widely accepted that mammoths and Asian elephants share a closer relationship with each other than either do to African elephants.\nThe following cladogram shows the placement of the genus \"Mammuthus\" among other proboscideans, based on hyoid characteristics and genetics:\nIt is possible to reconstruct the evolutionary history of the genus through morphological studies. Mammoth species can be identified from the number of enamel ridges/lamellae on their molars; the primitive species had few ridges, which increased gradually as new species evolved and replaced the former ones. At the same time, the crowns of the teeth became longer, and the skulls became higher from top to bottom and shorter from the back to the front over time to accommodate this.\nThe earliest mammoths, assigned to the species \"Mammuthus subplanifrons\", are known from southern and eastern Africa, with the earliest records dating to the Late Miocene, around 6.2\u20135.3 million years ago. By the Late Pliocene, mammoths had become confined to the northern portions of the African continent with remains from this time assigned to \"Mammuthus africanavus.\" During the Late Pliocene, by 3.2 million years ago, mammoths dispersed into Eurasia via the Sinai Peninsula. The earliest mammoths in Eurasia are assigned to the species \"Mammuthus rumanus\". The youngest remains of mammoths in Africa are from A\u00efn Boucherit, Algeria dating to the Early Pleistocene, around 2.3\u20132 million years ago (with a possible later record from A\u00efn Hanech, Algeria, dating to 1.95\u20131.78 million years ago).\"\"\n\"Mammuthus rumanus\" is thought to be the ancestor of \"Mammuthus meridionalis,\" which first appeared at the beginning of the Pleistocene, around 2.6 million years ago. \"Mammuthus meridionalis\" subsequently gave rise to \"Mammuthus trogontherii\" (the steppe mammoth) in Eastern Asia around 1.7 million years ago. Around 1.5\u20131.3 million years ago, \"M. trogontherii\" crossed the Bering Land Bridge into North America, becoming ancestral to \"Mammuthus columbi\" (the Columbian mammoth). At the end of the Early Pleistocene \"Mammuthus trogontherii\" migrated into Europe, replacing \"M. meridionalis\" around 1\u20130.8 million years ago. \"Mammuthus primigenius\" (the woolly mammoth) had evolved from \"M. trogontherii\" in Siberia by around 600,000\u2013500,000 years ago, replacing \"M. trogontherii\" in Europe by around 200,000 years ago, and migrated into North America during the Late Pleistocene.\nSeveral dwarf mammoth species, with small body sizes, evolved on islands as a result of insular dwarfism. These include \"Mammuthus lamarmorai\" on Sardinia (late Middle-Late Pleistocene), \"Mammuthus exilis\" on the Channel Islands of California (Late Pleistocene), and \"Mammuthus creticus\" on Crete (Early Pleistocene).\nDescription.\nLike living elephants, mammoths typically had large body sizes. The largest known species like \"Mammuthus meridionalis\" and \"Mammuthus trogontherii\" (the steppe mammoth) were considerably larger than modern elephants, with mature adult males having an average height of approximately at the shoulder and weights of , while exceptionally large males may have reached at the shoulder and in weight. However, woolly mammoths were considerably smaller, only about as large as modern African bush elephants with males around high at the shoulder, and in weight on average, with the largest recorded individuals being around tall and in weight. The insular dwarf mammoth species were considerably smaller, with the smallest species \"M. creticus\" estimated to have a shoulder height of only around and a weight of about , making it one of the smallest elephantids known.\nThe number of lamellae (ridge-like structures) on the molars, particularly on the third molars, substantially increased over the course of mammoth evolution. The earliest Eurasian species \"M. rumanus\" have around 8\u201310 lamellae on the third molars, while Late Pleistocene woolly mammoths have 20\u201328 lamellae on the third molars. These changes also corresponded with reduced enamel thickness and increasing tooth height (hypsodonty). These changes are thought to be adaptations to increasing abrasion resulting from the shift in the diet of mammoths from a browsing based diet in \"M. rumanus\", towards a grazing diet in later species.\nBoth sexes bore tusks. A first, small set appeared at about the age of six months, and these were replaced at about 18 months by the permanent set. Growth of the permanent set was at a rate of about per year. The tusks display a strong spiral twisting. Mammoth tusks are among the largest known among proboscideans with some specimens over in length and likely in weight with some historical reports suggesting tusks of Columbian mammoths could reach lengths of around , substantially surpassing the largest known modern elephant tusks.\nThe heads of mammoths were prominently domed. The first several thoracic vertebrae of mammoths typically had long neural spines. The back was typically sloping, with the body being wider than that of African elephants. The tails of mammoths were relatively short compared to living elephants.While early mammoth species like \"M. meridionalis\" were probably relatively hairless, similar to modern elephants, \"M. primigenius\" and likely \"M. trogontherii\" had a substantial coat of fur, among other physiological adaptations for living in cold environments. Genetic sequencing of \"M. trogontherii\"-like mammoths, over 1 million years old from Siberia suggests that they had already developed many of the genetic changes found in woolly mammoths responsible for tolerance of cold conditions. Scientists discovered and studied the remains of a mammoth calf, and found that fat greatly influenced its form, and enabled it to store large amounts of nutrients necessary for survival in temperatures as low as . The fat also allowed the mammoths to increase their muscle mass, allowing the mammoths to fight against enemies and live longer. Woolly mammoths evolved a suite of adaptations for arctic life, including morphological traits such as small ears and tails to minimize heat loss, a thick layer of subcutaneous fat, and numerous sebaceous glands for insulation, as well as a large brown-fat hump like deposit behind the neck that may have functioned as a heat source and fat reservoir during winter.\nBehaviour and palaeoecology.\nBased on studies of their close relatives, the modern elephants and mammoths probably had a gestation period of 22 months, resulting in a single calf being born. Their social structure was probably the same as that of living elephants, with females and juveniles residing in herds headed by a matriarch, whilst bulls lived solitary lives or formed loose groups after sexual maturity, with analysis of testosterone levels in tusks indicating that adult males experienced periods of musth like modern elephants, where they entered a state of heightened aggression.\nThe earliest mammoth species like \"M. subplanifrons\" and \"M. rumanus\" were mixed feeders (both browsing and grazing) to browsers. Throughout mammoth evolution in Eurasia, their diet shifted towards mixed feeding-grazing in \"M. trogontherii,\" culminating in the woolly mammoth, which was largely a grazer, with stomach contents of woolly mammoths suggesting that they largely fed on grass and forbs. \"M. columbi\" is thought to have been a mixed feeder.\nLike living elephants, mammoth adults may have been largely invulnerable to non-human predation, though evidence has been found for the hunting of mammoth calves by predators, such as by the scimitar-toothed cat (\"Homotherium\").\nIn living proboscideans, broken tusks sometimes occur during, for example, fights between males or when elephants of both sexes shove each other to reach critical resources such as water. The fracture surface of the remaining (rooted) tooth then becomes smoothed from use. It is very likely that this also occurred in extinct proboscideans such as mammoths as seen from a tusk found at Fenstanton Gravels (Cambs, UK) which still had some of the outer layers of cementum preserved and had a smooth, polished surface on an old, fractured surface ('faceting').\nRelationship with early humans.\nEvidence that humans interacted with mammoths extends back to around 1.8 million years ago, with a number of bones of \"Mammuthus meridionalis\" from the Dmanisi site in Georgia having marks suggested to be the result of butchery by archaic humans, likely as a result of scavenging. During the Last Glacial Period, modern humans hunted woolly mammoths, used their remains to create art and tools, and depicted them in works of art. Woolly mammoth bones were used as construction material for dwellings by both Neanderthals and modern humans during the ice age. More than 70 such dwellings are known, mainly from the East European Plain. The huts' bases were circular, ranging from . Large bones were used as foundations for the huts, tusks for the entrances, and the roofs were probably skins held in place by bones or tusks. Remains of Columbian mammoths at a number of sites suggest that they were hunted by Paleoindians, the first humans to inhabit the Americas. A probable bone engraving of a Columbian mammoth made by Paleoindians is known from Vero Beach, Florida.\nExtinction.\nFollowing the end of the Last Glacial Maximum, the range of the woolly mammoth began to contract, disappearing from most of Europe by 14,000 years ago. By the Younger Dryas (around 12,900-11,700 years Before Present), woolly mammoths were confined to the northernmost regions of Siberia. This contraction is suggested to have been caused by the warming induced expansion of unfavourable wet tundra and forest environments at the expense of the preferred dry open mammoth steppe, with the possible additional pressure of human hunting. The last woolly mammoths in mainland Siberia became extinct around 10,000 years ago, during the early Holocene. The final extinction of mainland woolly mammoths may have been driven by human hunting. Relict populations survived on Saint Paul island in the Bering Strait until around 5,600 years ago, with their extinction likely due to the degradation of freshwater sources, and on Wrangel Island off the coast of Northeast Siberia until around 4,000 years ago. \nThe last reliable dates of the Columbian mammoth date to around 12,500 years ago. Columbian mammoths became extinct as part of the end-Pleistocene extinction event where most large mammals across the Americas became extinct approximately simultaneously at the end of the Late Pleistocene. Hunting of Columbian mammoths by Paleoindians may have been a contributory factor in their extinction. The timing of the extinction of the dwarf Sardinian mammoth \"Mammuthus lamarmorai\" is difficult to constrain precisely, though the youngest specimen likely dates to sometime around 57\u201329,000 years ago. The youngest records of the pygmy mammoth (\"Mammuthus exillis\") date to around 13,000 years ago, coinciding with the reducing of the area of the Californian Channel Islands as a result of rising sea level, the earliest known humans in the Channel Islands, and climatic change resulting in the decline of the previously dominant conifer forest ecosystems and expansion of scrub and grassland.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20163", "revid": "27822", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20163", "title": "Maze generation algorthims", "text": ""}
{"id": "20164", "revid": "122", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20164", "title": "Maze generation algorithms", "text": ""}
{"id": "20165", "revid": "43007828", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20165", "title": "MIPS", "text": "MIPS may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "20166", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20166", "title": "Minimal statism", "text": ""}
{"id": "20167", "revid": "15181583", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20167", "title": "Mexican cuisine", "text": "Culinary traditions of Mexico\nMexican cuisine consists of the cuisines and associated traditions of the modern country of Mexico. Its earliest roots lie in Mesoamerican cuisine. Mexican cuisine's ingredients and methods arise from the area's first agricultural communities, such as those of the Olmec and Maya, who domesticated maize, created the standard process of nixtamalization, and established foodways. Successive waves of other Mesoamerican groups brought with them their cooking methods. These included the Teotihuacanos, Toltec, Huastec, Zapotec, Mixtec, Otomi, Pur\u00e9pecha, Totonac, Mazatec, Mazahua, and Nahua. With the Mexica formation of the multi-ethnic Triple Alliance (Aztec Empire), culinary foodways became infused (Aztec cuisine).\nToday's food staples native to the land include corn (maize), turkey, beans, squash, amaranth, chia, avocados, tomatoes, tomatillos, cacao, vanilla, agave, spirulina, sweet potato, cactus, and chili pepper. Its history over the centuries has resulted in regional cuisines based on local conditions, including Baja Med, Chiapas, Veracruz, Oaxacan, Lebanese Mexican and the American cuisines of New Mexican and Tex-Mex.\nAfter the Spanish Conquest of the Aztec empire and the rest of Mesoamerica, Spaniards introduced a number of other foods, the most important of which were meats from domesticated animals (beef, pork, chicken, goat, and sheep), dairy products (especially cheese and milk), rice, sugar, olive oil and various fruits and vegetables. Various cooking styles and recipes were also introduced from Spain both throughout the colonial period and by Spanish immigrants who continued to arrive following independence. Spanish influence in Mexican cuisine is also noticeable in its sweets, such as alfajores, alfeniques, borrachitos and churros.\nAfrican influence was also introduced during this era as a result of African slavery in New Spain through the Atlantic slave trade and the Manila-Acapulco Galleons.\nMexican cuisine is an important aspect of the culture, social structure and popular traditions of Mexico. An example of this connection is the use of mole for special occasions and holidays, particularly in the south and central regions of the country. For this reason and others, traditional Mexican cuisine was inscribed in 2010 on the Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity by UNESCO.\nIn American English, this is sometimes referred to as \"Mex-Mex cuisine\", contrasting with \"Tex-Mex\".\nBasic elements.\nMexican cuisine is a complex and ancient cuisine, with techniques and skills developed over thousands of years of history. It is created mostly with ingredients native to Mexico, as well as those brought over by the Spanish conquistadors, with some new influences since then.\nIn addition to staples such as corn and chili peppers, native ingredients include squashes, avocados, cocoa and vanilla, as well as ingredients not generally used in other cuisines, such as edible flowers, vegetables like huauzontle and papaloquelite, or small criollo avocados, whose skin is edible. Chocolate originated in Mexico and was prized by the Aztecs. It remains an important ingredient in Mexican cookery.\nVegetables play an important role in Mexican cuisine. Common vegetables include zucchini, cauliflower, corn, potatoes, spinach, Swiss chard, mushrooms, jitomate (red tomato), and green tomato. Other traditional vegetable ingredients include chili pepper, huitlacoche (corn fungus), huauzontle, and nopal (cactus pads).\nEuropean contributions include pork, chicken, beef, cheese, herbs and spices, as well as some fruits.\nTropical fruits, many of which are indigenous to the Americas, such as guava, prickly pear, sapote, mangoes, bananas, pineapple and cherimoya (custard apple) are popular, especially in the center and south of the country.\nEdible insects have been enjoyed in Mexico for millennia. Entemophagy or insect-eating is becoming increasingly popular outside of poor and rural areas for its unique flavors, sustainability, and connection to pre-Hispanic heritage. Popular species include chapulines (grasshoppers or crickets), escamoles (ant larvae), cumiles (stink bugs) and (water bug eggs).\nMaize.\nDespite the introduction of wheat and rice to Mexico, maize is the most commonly consumed grain in almost all areas of the country and serves as the main ingredient in many local recipes (such as maize tortillas, atole, pozole, menudo, and tamal). While also eaten fresh, most maize is dried, nixtamalized and ground into a dough called \"masa\". This dough is used both fresh and fermented to make a wide variety of dishes, from drinks (such as atole and pozole) to tamales, sopes, and many other foods. However, the most common way to eat maize in Mexico is in the form of tortillas, which accompany almost every dish. Tortillas are made of maize in most of the country, but other regional versions exist, such as wheat in the north or plantain, yuca and wild greens in Oaxaca.\nChile peppers.\nThe other basic ingredient in all parts of Mexico is the chile pepper. Mexican food has a reputation for being very spicy, but it has a wide range of flavors and while many spices are used for cooking, not all are spicy. Many dishes also have subtle flavors. Chiles are indigenous to Mexico and their use dates back thousands of years. They are used for their flavors and not just their heat, with Mexico using the widest variety. If a savory dish or snack does not contain chile pepper, hot sauce is usually added, and chile pepper is often added to fresh fruit and sweets.\nThe importance of the chile goes back to the Mesoamerican period, where it was considered to be as much of a staple as corn and beans. In the 16th century, Bartolom\u00e9 de las Casas wrote that, without chiles, the indigenous people did not think they were eating. Even today, most Mexicans believe that their national identity would be at a loss without chiles and the many varieties of sauces and salsas created using chiles as their base.\nMany dishes in Mexico are defined by their sauces and the chiles those sauces contain (which are usually very spicy), rather than the meat or vegetable that the sauce covers. These dishes include entomatada (in tomato sauce), adobo or adobados, pipians and moles. A hominy soup called pozole is defined as white, green or red depending on the chile sauce used or omitted. Tamales are differentiated by the filling which is again defined by the sauce (red or green chile pepper or mole). Dishes without a sauce are rarely eaten without salsa or without fresh or pickled chiles. This includes street foods, such as tacos, tortas, soup, sopes, tlacoyos, tlayudas, gorditas and sincronizadas. For most dishes, it is the type of chile used that gives it its main flavor. Chipotle, smoked-dried jalape\u00f1o pepper, is very common in Mexican cuisine.\nBeans.\nIn addition to corn, common beans (\"Phaseolus vulgaris\") are a historical component of the Mexican diet. Genetic evidence indicates domestication occurred in Mesoamerica as well as South America Common bean varieties and cultivars used in Mexican cuisine include the pinto bean and the black turtle bean. Beans and corn are deficient in different essential amino acids but complement each other. When eaten in combination, they provide a complete protein source.\nSpanish contributions.\nTogether with Mesoamerica, Spain is the second basis of Mexican cuisine, contributing in two fundamental ways: Firstly, they brought with them old world staples and ingredients which did not exist in the Americas such as sugar, wheat, rice, onions, garlic, limes, cooking oil, dairy products, pork, beef and many others. Secondly, they brought various culinary traditions from the Iberian peninsula which have become prevalent in Mexico. Equally, the discovery of the incorporation of New World ingredients to Spanish cuisine has led to the shared naming of foods such as chorizo, which uses paprika.\nSpanish cuisine was in turn heavily influenced by its Moorish heritage and this created one of the earliest instances of fusion cuisine. The Spanish also introduced the technique of frying in pork fat. Today, the main meats found in Mexico are pork, chicken, beef, goat, and sheep. Fish and other seafood are also popular, especially along the coasts, and the cooking method commonly has a Spanish origin such as with Huachinango a la vizcaina.\nCheesemaking in Mexico has evolved its specialties, although Spanish-style cheese such as Manchego is also produced in Mexico. It is an important economic activity, especially in the north, and is frequently done at home. The main cheese-making areas are Chihuahua, Oaxaca, Quer\u00e9taro, and Chiapas. Goat cheese is still made, but it is not as popular and is harder to find in stores.\nChurros are a common snack originating in Spain and because sugar cane was brought to the Americas through Spanish colonization, all of Mexico's sweets have a Hispanic origin, often with a Muslim heritage such as Alfe\u00f1iques.\nFood and society.\nHome cooking.\nIn most of Mexico, especially in rural areas, much of the food is consumed in the home. Cooking for the family is usually considered to be women's work, and this includes cooking for celebrations as well. Traditionally girls have been considered ready to marry when they can cook, and cooking is considered a main talent for housewives.\nThe main meal of the day in Mexico is the \"comida\", meaning 'meal' in Spanish. Meals eaten are as follows: the early morning meal, or breakfast, is called \"desayuno\", which entails coffee/atole (maize drink) and a light meal, in some areas; the \"almuerzo\", around 11 a.m., which includes a snack and drink; followed by \"comida\", or lunch, taken between noon and 2 p.m., usually the heaviest meal of the day. It sometimes begins with soup, often chicken broth with pasta or a \"dry soup\", which is pasta or rice flavored with onions, garlic or vegetables. The main course is meat served in a cooked sauce with salsa on the side, accompanied with beans and tortillas and often with a fruit drink in some areas. The last meal of the day is \"cena\", or supper, which varies greatly by region, and is usually eaten between 6 p.m. and 9 p.m.\nIn the evening, it is common to eat leftovers from the comida or sweet bread accompanied by coffee or chocolate. Breakfast can consist of meat in broth (such as pancita), tacos, enchiladas or meat with eggs. This is usually served with beans, tortillas, and coffee or juice.\nFood and festivals.\nMexican cuisine is elaborate and often tied to symbolism and festivals, which is one reason it was named as an example of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity by UNESCO. Many of the foods of Mexico are complicated because of their relation to the social structure of the country. Food preparation, especially for family and social events, is considered to be an investment in order to maintain social relationships. Even the idea of flavor is considered to be social, with meals prepared for certain dinners and certain occasions when they are considered the most tasty.\nThe ability to cook well, called \"saz\u00f3n\" (lit. seasoning) is considered to be a gift generally gained from experience and a sense of commitment to the diners. For the Day of the Dead festival, foods such as tamales and mole are set out on altars and it is believed that the visiting dead relatives eat the essence of the food. If eaten afterwards by the living it is considered to be tasteless. In central Mexico, the main festival foods are mole, barbacoa, carnitas and mixiotes. They are often prepared to feed hundreds of guests, requiring groups of cooks. The cooking is part of the social custom meant to bind families and communities.\nMexican regional home cooking is completely different from the food served in most Mexican restaurants outside Mexico, which is usually some variety of Tex-Mex. The original versions of Mexican dishes are vastly different from their Tex-Mex variation.\nSome of Mexico's traditional foods involved complex or long cooking processes, including cooking underground (such as cochinita pibil). Before industrialization, traditional women spent several hours a day boiling dried corn then grinding it on a metate to make the dough for tortillas, cooking them one-by-one on a comal griddle. In some areas, tortillas are still made this way. Sauces and salsas were also ground in a mortar called a molcajete. Today, blenders are more often used, though the texture is a bit different. Most people in Mexico would say that those made with a molcajete taste better, but few do this now.\nThe most important food for festivals and other special occasions is mole, especially mole poblano in the center of the country. Mole is served at Christmas, Easter, Day of the Dead and at birthdays, baptisms, weddings and funerals, and tends to be eaten only for special occasions because it is such a complex and time-consuming dish. While still dominant in this way, other foods have become acceptable for these occasions, such as barbacoa, carnitas and mixiotes, especially since the 1980s. This may have been because of economic crises at that time, allowing for the substitution of these cheaper foods, or the fact that they can be bought ready-made or may already be made as part of the family business.\nAnother important festive food is the tamale, also known as \"tamal\" in Spanish. This is a filled cornmeal dumpling, steamed in a wrapping (usually a corn husk or banana leaf) and one of the basic staples in most regions of Mexico. It has its origins in the pre-Hispanic era and today is found in many varieties in all of Mexico. Like a mole, it is complicated to prepare and best done in large amounts. Tamales are associated with certain celebrations such as Candlemas. They are wrapped in corn husks in the highlands and desert areas of Mexico and in banana leaves in the tropics.\nStreet food.\nMexican street food can include tacos, quesadillas, pambazos, tamales, huaraches, alambres, al pastor, and food not suitable to cook at home, including barbacoa, carnitas, and since many homes in Mexico do not make use of ovens, roasted chicken. One attraction of street food in Mexico is the satisfaction of hunger or craving without all the social and emotional connotation of eating at home, although longtime customers can have something of a friendship/familial relationship with a chosen vendor.\nTacos are the top-rated and most well-known street Mexican food. It is made up of meat or other fillings wrapped in a tortilla often served with cheese added. Vegetarian fillings include mushrooms, potatoes, rice, or beans.\nThe origin of tacos is based on the pre-Hispanic custom of picking up other foods with tortillas as utensils were not used. The origin of the word is in dispute, with some saying it is derived from Nahuatl and others from various Spanish phrases. It possible that the term taco comes from the term tlaco or tlacatl, which means middle or half in nahuatl. Tacos are not eaten as the main meal; they are generally eaten before midday or late in the evening. Just about any other foodstuff can be wrapped in a tortilla, and, in Mexico, it varies from rice, to meat (plain or in sauce), to cream, to vegetables, to cheese, or simply to plain chile peppers or fresh salsa. Preferred fillings vary from region to region with pork generally found more often in the center and south, beef in the north, seafood along the coasts, and chicken and lamb in most of the country.\nAnother popular street food, especially in Mexico City and the surrounding area is the torta. It consists of a roll of some type, stuffed with several ingredients. This has its origins in the 19th century, when the French introduced a number of new kinds of bread. The torta began by splitting the roll and adding beans. Today, refried beans can still be found on many kinds of tortas. In Mexico City, the most common roll used for tortas is called \"telera\", a relatively flat roll with two splits on the upper surface. In Puebla, the preferred bread is called a cemita, as is the sandwich. In both areas, the bread is stuffed with various fillings, especially if it is a hot sandwich, with beans, cream (mayonnaise is rare), and some kind of hot chile pepper.\nThe influence of American fast food on Mexican street food grew during the late 20th century. One example of this is the invention of the Sonoran hot dog in the late 1980s. The frankfurters are usually boiled then wrapped in bacon and fried. They are served in a bolillo-style bun, typically topped by a combination of pinto beans, diced tomatoes, onions and jalape\u00f1o peppers, and other condiments.\nAlong the US-Mexican border, specifically dense areas like Tijuana, Mexican vendors sell food such as fruit melanged with Tajin spice to people crossing the border via carts. In recent years, these food carts have been threatened by tightened border security at the port of entry. Both the US and the Mexican governments have proposed a project that would widen the streets at the border, allowing for more people to pass through the border, although widening them would decimate neighboring mercados that rely on the business of travelers.\nBesides food, street vendors also sell various kinds of drinks (including , , and ) and treats (such as , , and ). Most tamale stands sell as a standard accompaniment.\nHistory.\nPre-Hispanic period.\nAround 7000 BCE, the indigenous peoples of Mexico and Central America hunted game and gathered plants, including wild chili peppers. Corn was not yet cultivated, so one main source of calories was roasted agave hearts. By 1200 BCE, corn was domesticated and a process called nixtamalization, or treatment with lye, was developed to soften corn for grinding and improve its nutritional value. This allowed the creation of tortillas and other kinds of flat breads. The indigenous peoples of Mesoamerica have numerous stories about the origin of corn, usually related to being a gift of one or more gods, such as Quetzalcoatl.\nThe other staple was beans, eaten with corn and some other plants as a complementary protein. Other protein sources included amaranth, domesticated turkey, insects such as grasshoppers, beetles and ant larvae, iguanas, and turtle eggs on the coastlines. Vegetables included squash and their seeds; chilacayote; jicama, a kind of sweet potato; and edible flowers, especially those of squash. The chili pepper was used as food, ritual and as medicine.\nWhen the Spanish arrived, the Aztecs had sophisticated agricultural techniques and an abundance of food, which was the base of their economy. It allowed them to expand an empire, bringing in tribute which consisted mostly of foods the Aztecs could not grow themselves. According to Bernardino de Sahag\u00fan, the Nahua peoples of central Mexico ate corn, beans, turkey, fish, small game, insects and a wide variety of fruits, vegetables, pulses, seeds, tubers, wild mushrooms, plants and herbs that they collected or cultivated.\nModern period.\nAfter the Conquest, the Spanish introduced a variety of foodstuffs and cooking techniques, like frying, to the New World. Regional cuisines remained varied, with native staples more prevalent in the rural southern areas and Spanish foods taking root in the more sparsely populated northern region. European style wheat bread was initially met unfavorably with Moctezuma's emissaries who reportedly described it as tasting of \"dried maize stalks\". On the Spanish side, Bernal D\u00edaz del Castillo complained about the \"maize cake\" rations on campaign.\nThe cuisine of Spain is a Mediterranean cuisine influenced by its Muslim Andalusian period, composed of a number of staples such as olive oil and rice. Spanish settlers introduced these staples to the region, although some continued to be imported, such as wine, brandy, nuts, olives, spices, and capers. They introduced domesticated animals, such as pigs, cows, chickens, goats, and sheep for meat and milk, raising the consumption of protein. Cheese became the most important dairy product.\nThe Spanish brought rice to Mexico, along with sugar cane, used extensively creation of many kinds of sweets, especially local fruits in syrup. A sugar-based candy craft called alfe\u00f1ique was imported and is now used for the Day of the Dead. Over time ingredients like olive oil, rice, onions, garlic, oregano, coriander, cinnamon, and cloves became incorporated with native ingredients and cooking techniques. One of the main avenues for the mixing of the two cuisines was in convents.\nDespite the influence of Spanish culture, Mexican cuisine has maintained its base of corn, beans and chili peppers. Natives continued to be reliant on maize; it was less expensive than the wheat favored by European settlers, it was easier to cultivate and produced higher yields. European control over the land grew stronger with the founding of wheat farms. In 18th century Mexico City, wheat was baked into leaved rolls called \"pan franc\u00e9s\" or \"pan espa\u00f1ol\", but only two bakers were allowed to bake this style of bread and they worked on consignment to the viceroy and the archbishop. Large ring loaves of choice flour known as \"pan floreado\" were available for wealthy \"Creoles\". Other styles of bread used lower-quality wheat and maize to produce \"pan com\u00fan\", \"pambazo\" and \"cemita\".\nPozole is mentioned in the 16th century Florentine Codex by Bernardino de Sahag\u00fan.\nIn the eighteenth century, an Italian Capuchin friar, Ilarione da Bergamo, included descriptions of food in his travelogue. He noted that tortillas were eaten not only by the poor, but by the upper class as well. He described lunch fare as pork products like chorizo and ham being eaten between tortillas, with a piquant red chili sauce. For drink, pulque, as well as corn-based atole, and for those who could afford it, chocolate-based drinks were consumed twice a day. According to de Bergamo's account neither coffee nor wine are consumed, and evening meals ended with a small portion of beans in a thick soup instead, \"served to set the stage for drinking water\".\nDuring the 19th century, Mexico experienced an influx of various immigrants, including French, Lebanese, German, Chinese and Italian, which have had some effect on the food. During the French intervention in Mexico, French food became popular with the upper classes. An influence on these new trends came from chef Tudor, who was brought to Mexico by the Emperor Maximilian of Habsburg. One lasting evidence of this is the variety of breads and sweet breads, such as bolillos, conchas and much more, which can be found in Mexican bakeries. The Germans brought beer brewing techniques and the Chinese added their cuisine to certain areas of the country. This led to Mexico characterizing its cuisine more by its relation to popular traditions rather than on particular cooking techniques.\nSince the 20th century, there has been an interchange of food influences between Mexico and the United States. Mexican cooking was of course still practiced in what is now the Southwest United States after the Mexican\u2013American War, but Diana Kennedy, in her book \"The Cuisines of Mexico\" (published in 1972), drew a sharp distinction between Mexican food and Tex-Mex.\nTex-Mex food was developed from Mexican and Anglo influences, and was traced to the late 19th century in Texas. It still continues to develop with flour tortillas becoming popular north of the border only in the latter 20th century. From north to south, much of the influence has been related to food industrialization, as well as the greater availability overall of food, especially after the Mexican Revolution. One other very visible sign of influence from the United States is the appearance of fast foods, such as hamburgers, hot dogs and pizza.\nIn the latter 20th century, international influence in Mexico has led to interest and development of haute cuisine. In Mexico, many professional chefs are trained in French or international cuisine, but the use of Mexican staples and flavors is still favored, including the simple foods of traditional markets. It is not unusual to see some quesadillas or small tacos among the other hors d'oeuvres at fancy dinner parties in Mexico.\nProfessional cookery in Mexico is growing and includes an emphasis on traditional methods and ingredients. In the cities, there is interest in publishing and preserving what is authentic Mexican food. This movement is traceable to 1982 with the Mexican Culinary Circle of Mexico City. It was created by a group of women chefs and other culinary experts as a reaction to the fear of traditions being lost with the increasing introduction of foreign techniques and foods. In 2010, Mexico's cuisine was recognized by UNESCO as an Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity.\nIn contemporary times, various world cuisines have become popular in Mexico, thus adopting a Mexican fusion. For example, sushi in Mexico is often made by using a variety of sauces based on mango and tamarind, and very often served with serrano-chili blended soy sauce, or complemented with vinegar, habanero peppers, and chipotle peppers.\nBeverages.\nCorn in Mexico is not only eaten, but also drunk as a beverage. Corn is the base of a hot drink called atole, which is then flavored with fruit, chocolate, rice or other flavors. Fermented corn is the base of a cold drink, which goes by different names and varieties, such as tejuino, pozol and others. Aguas frescas are flavored drinks usually made from fruit, water and sugar. Beverages also include hibiscus iced tea, one made from tamarind and one from rice called horchata. One variant of coffee is caf\u00e9 de olla, which is coffee brewed with cinnamon and raw sugar. Many of the most popular beverages can be found sold by street vendors and juice bars in Mexico.\nChocolate played an important part in the history of Mexican cuisine. The word \"chocolate\" originated from Mexico's Aztec cuisine, derived from the Nahuatl word \"xocolatl\". Chocolate was first drunk rather than eaten. It was also used for religious rituals. The Maya civilization grew cacao trees and used the cacao seeds it produced to make a frothy, bitter drink. The drink, called \"xocoatl\", was often flavored with vanilla, chile pepper, and \"achiote\". Tejate is another Mexican beverage made from cacao.\nAlcoholic beverages from Mexico include tequila, pulque, aguardiente, mezcal and charanda. wine, rum and beer are also produced. The most common alcoholic beverage consumed with food in Mexico is beer, followed by tequila. A classic margarita, a popular cocktail, is composed of tequila, cointreau and lime juice.\nRompope is believed to have been originally made in the convents of the city of Puebla, Mexico. The word \"rompope\" is a derivation of the word \"rompon\", which is used to describe the Spanish version of eggnog that came to Mexico.\nA popular soft drink from Mexico is Sangria Se\u00f1orial a sangria-flavored, non-alcoholic beverage. Sangria is a Spanish drink that was introduced by Spaniards, as was Horchata and Agua de Jamaica.\nRegional cuisines.\nChiapas.\nSimilar to other regions in Mexico, corn is a dietary staple and other indigenous foods remain strong in the cuisine as well. Along with a chile called simojovel, used nowhere else in the country, the cuisine is also distinguished by the use of herbs, such as chipil\u00edn and hierba santa. Like in Oaxaca, tamales are usually wrapped in banana leaves (or sometimes with the leaves of hoja santa), but often chipil\u00edn is incorporated into the dough. As in the Yucat\u00e1n Peninsula, boiled corn is drunk as a beverage called pozol, but here it is usually flavored with all-natural cacao. Another beverage (which can be served hot or cold) typical from this region is Tascalate, which is made of powdered maize, cocoa beans, achiote (annatto), chilies, pine nuts and cinnamon.\nThe favored meats are beef, pork and chicken (introduced by the Spanish), especially in the highlands, which favors the raising of livestock. The livestock industry has also prompted the making of cheese, mostly done on ranches and in small cooperatives, with the best known from Ocosingo, Ray\u00f3n and Pijijiapan. Meat and cheese dishes are frequently accompanied by vegetables, such as squash, chayote, and carrots.\nMexico City.\nMexico City cuisine has been influenced by the cuisines of the other regions of Mexico, as well as a number of foreign influences. This is because Mexico City has been a center for migration of people from all over Mexico since pre-Hispanic times. Most of the ingredients of this area's cooking are not grown \"in situ\", but transported from all over the country (for example, tropical fruits).\nStreet cuisine is very popular, with taco stands and lunch counters on every street. Popular foods in the city include barbacoa (a specialty of the central highlands), birria (from western Mexico), cabrito (from the north), carnitas (originally from Michoac\u00e1n), mole sauces (from Puebla and central Mexico), tacos with many different fillings, and large submarine-like sandwiches called tortas, usually served at specialized shops called \"torter\u00edas\". This is also the area where most of Mexico's haute cuisine can be found. Some restaurants specialize in pre-Hispanic food, including dishes with insects.\nNorthern Mexico.\nThe foods eaten in what is now the north of Mexico have differed from those in the south since the pre-Hispanic era. Here, the indigenous people were hunter-gatherers with limited agriculture and settlements because of the arid land.\nWhen the Europeans arrived, they found much of the land in this area suitable for raising cattle, goats and sheep. This led to the dominance of meat, especially beef, in the region, and some of the most popular dishes include machaca, arrachera and cabrito. The region's distinctive cooking technique is grilling, as ranch culture has promoted outdoor cooking done by men.\nThe ranch culture has also prompted cheese production and the north produces the widest varieties of cheese in Mexico. These include queso fresco (fresh farmer's cheese), ranchero (similar to Monterey Jack), cuajada (a mildly sweet, creamy curd of fresh milk), reques\u00f3n (similar to cottage cheese or ricotta), Chihuahua's creamy semi-soft queso menonita, and fifty-six varieties of asadero (smoked cheese).\nAnother important aspect of northern cuisine is the presence of wheat, especially in the use of flour tortillas. The area has at least forty different types of flour tortillas. The main reason for this is that much of the land supports wheat production, introduced by the Spanish. These large tortillas allowed for the creation of burritos in the border city of Ciudad Ju\u00e1rez, which eventually gained popularity in the Southwest United States.\nThe variety of foodstuffs in the north is not as varied as in the south of Mexico, because of the mostly desert climate. Much of the cuisine of this area is dependent on food preservation techniques, namely dehydration and canning. Dried foods include meat, chiles, squash, peas, corn, lentils, beans and dried fruit. A number of these are also canned. Preservation techniques change the flavor of foods; for example, many chiles are less hot after drying.\nIn Northeastern Mexico, during the Spanish colonial period, Nuevo Le\u00f3n was founded and settled by Spanish families of Jewish origin (Crypto-Jews). They contributed to the regional cuisine with dishes, such as \"pan de semita\" or \"Semitic bread\" (a type of bread made without leavening), and \"cabrito\" or baby goat, which is the typical food of Monterrey and the state of Nuevo Le\u00f3n, as well as some regions of Coahuila.\nThe north has seen waves of immigration by the Chinese, Mormons, and Mennonites, who have influenced the cuisines in areas, such as Chihuahua and Baja California. Most recently, Baja Med cuisine has emerged in Ensenada and elsewhere in Baja California, combining Mexican and Mediterranean flavors.\nOaxaca.\nThe cooking of Oaxaca remained more intact after the conquest, as the Spanish took the area with less fighting and less disruption of the economy and food production systems. However, it was the first area to experience the mixing of foods and cooking styles, while central Mexico was still recuperating. Despite its size, the state has a wide variety of ecosystems and a wide variety of native foods. Vegetables are grown in the central valley, seafood is abundant on the coast and the area bordering Veracruz grows tropical fruits.\nMuch of the state's cooking is influenced by that of the Mixtec and, to a lesser extent, the Zapotec. Later in the colonial period, Oaxaca lost its position as a major food supplier and the area's cooking returned to a more indigenous style, keeping only a small number of foodstuffs, such as chicken and pork. It also adapted mozzarella, brought by the Spanish, and modified it to what is now known as Oaxaca cheese.\nOne major feature of Oaxacan cuisine is its seven mole varieties, second only to mole poblano in popularity. The seven are \"negro\" (black), \"amarillo\" (yellow), \"coloradito\" (\"little red\"), \"mancha manteles\" (\"tablecloth stainer\"), \"chichilo\" (\"smoky stew\"), \"rojo\" (red), and \"verde\" (green).\nCorn is the staple food in the region. Tortillas are called blandas and are a part of every meal. Corn is also used to make empanadas, tamales and more. Black beans are favored, often served in soup or as a sauce for enfrijoladas. Oaxaca's regional chile peppers include pasilla oaxaque\u00f1a (red, hot and smoky), along with amarillos (yellow), , chilcostles and coste\u00f1os. These, along with herbs, such as hoja santa, give the food its unique taste.\nAnother important aspect of Oaxacan cuisine is chocolate, generally consumed as a beverage. It is frequently hand-ground and combined with almonds, cinnamon and other ingredients.\nVeracruz.\nThe cuisine of Veracruz is a mix of indigenous, Afro-Mexican and Spanish. The indigenous contribution is in the use of corn as a staple, as well as vanilla (native to the state) and herbs called acuyo and hoja santa. It is also supplemented by a wide variety of tropical fruits, such as papaya, mamey and zapote, along with the introduction of citrus fruit and pineapple by the Spanish. The Spanish also introduced European herbs, such as parsley, thyme, marjoram, bay laurel, cilantro and others, which characterize much of the state's cooking. They are found in the best-known dish of the region, huachinango a la veracruzana, a red snapper dish. Plantain was introduced by African slaves.\nThe African influence is from the importation of slaves through the Caribbean, who brought foods with them, which had been introduced earlier to Africa by the Portuguese. As it borders the Gulf coast, seafood figures prominently in most of the state. The state's role as a gateway to Mexico has meant that the dietary staple of corn is less evident than in other parts of Mexico, with rice as a heavy favorite. Corn dishes include garnachas (a kind of corn cake), which are readily available especially in the mountain areas, where indigenous influence is strongest.\nAnthropologist and restaurateur Raquel Torres Cerd\u00e1n has worked to preserve and record many of the foods of the indigenous peoples of the region.\nWestern Mexico.\nWest of Mexico City is the Pacific coast and the states of Michoac\u00e1n, Jalisco and Colima. The cuisine of Michoacan is based on the Purepecha culture which still dominates most of the state. The area has a large network of rivers and lakes providing fish. Its use of corn is perhaps the most varied. While atole is drunk in most parts of Mexico, it is made with more different flavors in Michoac\u00e1n, including blackberry, cascabel chili and more. Tamales come in different shapes, wrapped in corn husks. These include those folded into polyhedrons called corundas and can vary in name if the filling is different. In the Baj\u00edo area, tamales are often served with a meat stew called , which is flavored with cactus fruit.\nThe main Spanish contributions to Michoac\u00e1n cuisine are rice, pork and spices. One of the best-known dishes from the state is morisquesta, which is a sausage and rice dish, closely followed by carnitas, which is deep-fried (confit technique) pork. The latter can be found in many parts of Mexico, often claimed to be authentically Michoac\u00e1n. Other important ingredients in the cuisine include wheat (where bread symbolizes fertility) found in breads and pastries. Another is sugar, giving rise to a wide variety of desserts and sweets, such as fruit jellies and ice cream, mostly associated with the town of Tocumbo. The town of Cotija has a cheese named after it. The local alcoholic beverage is charanda, which is made with fermented sugar cane.\nThe cuisine of the states of Jalisco and Colima is noted for dishes such as birria, chilayo, menudo, and pork dishes. Jalisco's cuisine is known for tequila, with the liquor produced only in certain areas allowed to use the name. The cultural and gastronomic center of the area is Guadalajara, an area where both agriculture and cattle raising have thrived. The best-known dish from the area is birria, a stew of goat, beef, mutton, or pork, with chiles and spices.\nAn important street food is tortas ahogadas, where the torta (sandwich) is drowned in a chile sauce. Near Guadalajara is the town of Tonal\u00e1, known for its pozole, a hominy stew, reportedly said in the 16th century, to have been originally created with human flesh for ritual use. The area which makes tequila surrounds the city. A popular local drink is tejuino, made from fermented corn. Bionico is also a popular dessert in the Guadalajara area.\nOn the Pacific coast, seafood is common, generally cooked with European spices along with chile, and is often served with a spicy salsa. Favored fish varieties include marlin, swordfish, snapper, tuna, shrimp and octopus. Tropical fruits are also important. The cuisine of the Baja California Peninsula is especially heavy on seafood, with the widest variety. It also features a mild green chile pepper, as well as dates, especially in sweets.\nYucat\u00e1n.\nThe food of the Yucat\u00e1n Peninsula is distinct from the rest of the country. It is based primarily on Maya food with influences from the Caribbean, Central Mexican, European (especially French) and Middle Eastern cultures. As in other areas of Mexico, corn is the basic staple, as both a liquid and a solid food. One common way of consuming corn, especially by the poor, is a thin drink or gruel of white corn called by such names as pozol or keyem.\nOne of the main spices in the region is the annatto seed, called achiote in Spanish. It gives food a reddish color and a slightly peppery smell with a hint of nutmeg. Recados are seasoning pastes, based on achiote (recado rojo) or a mixture of habanero and chirmole both used on chicken and pork.\nRecado rojo is used for the area's best-known dish, cochinita pibil. Pibil refers to the cooking method (from the Mayan word \"p\u00edib\", meaning \"buried\") in which foods are wrapped, generally in banana leaves, and cooked in a pit oven. Various meats are cooked this way. Habaneros are another distinctive ingredient, but they are generally served as (or part of) condiments on the side rather than integrated into the dishes.\nA prominent feature of Yucat\u00e1n cooking is the use of bitter oranges, which gives Yucat\u00e1n food the tangy element that characterizes it. Bitter orange is used as a seasoning for broth, to marinate meat and its juice (watered down with sugar) is used as a refreshing beverage.\nHoney was used long before the arrival of the Spanish to sweeten foods and to make a ritual alcoholic drink called balch\u00e9. Today, a honey liquor called xtabentun is still made and consumed in the region. The coastal areas feature several seafood dishes, based on fish like the Mero, a variety of grunt and Esmedregal, which is fried and served with a spicy salsa based on the x'catic pepper and achiote paste. Other dishes include conch fillet (usually served raw, just marinated in lime juice), coconut flavored shrimp and lagoon snails.\nTraditionally, some dishes are served as entr\u00e9es, such as the brazo de reina (a type of tamale made from chaya) and papadzules (egg tacos seasoned in a pumpkin seed gravy).\nStreet food in the area usually consists of Cochinita Pibil Tacos, Lebanese-based kibbeh, shawarma tacos, snacks made from hardened corn dough called piedras, and fruit-flavored ices.\nLime soup made of chicken or some other meat such as pork or beef, lime juice and served with tortilla chips. Panucho made with a refried tortilla that is stuffed with refried black beans and topped with chopped cabbage, pulled chicken or turkey, tomato, pickled red onion, avocado, and pickled jalape\u00f1o pepper.\nDesserts.\nDessert culture in Mexico did not develop until after the introduction of Spanish customs to the area. There were foods which could be considered desserts by modern standards like chocolate, but they were consumed and used differently. With the introduction of Europeans and their food and culture to the region came sugar and with it, sweets. The range of desserts evolved and grew over time to include everything from churros to rice pudding, from cakes to fruit treats. Some of the desserts which historically are made in Mexico are fairly easy to make and can be produced in high quantity.\nChocolate.\nIn the era pre-dating European influence chocolate was drunk in a warm syrupy form mixed with honey to create a pleasant drinking experience. During this time chocolate was also treated as medicine. After the arrival of Europeans, chocolate was brought across the sea to Europe where it would be used in various forms including medicine and confections. In the modern era, chocolate is used as both a topping and a dip, as well as in candies. The traditional form of chocolate consumption lives on in the form of Mexican hot chocolate, the natural evolution of the warm syrup.\nFruits.\nThere no fruit related dessert recipes which are popular in Mexico, some using native fruits, such as plantains and others using foreign fruits like oranges. Recipes for these foods can not be found dating back to the early 19th century and incorporate both sugar and ice. Fruit dishes are naturally sweet and juicy which made them popular in the Mexican climate.\nOne such dessert is orange and lime ice, a treat similar to snow cones. It is made by freezing strained oranges and lime juice mixed with sugar.\nBaked goods.\nBaked dessert items in Mexico are mostly ideas imported from Europe over time. These items came from a variety of different nations before becoming staples of desserts in the region. Baked goods include cookies made with local fruits, churros which originated in the Iberian Peninsula, and macaroons which come from Italy. Churros can be made by mixing flour with boiling water, shaping and frying that mixture then coating it in cinnamon or sugar. Churros can be eaten hot or cold and can be molded into any number of different shapes.\nTres Leches Cake.\nThe most popular cake in all of Mexico is tres leches cake (Three Milk's Cake). It is moist due to its milky ingredients. To top things off, it can be topped off with whipped cream and other sorts of jams, cherries or strawberries. \nMexican food outside Mexico.\nMexican cuisine is offered in a few fine restaurants in Europe and the United States. Sometimes landrace corn from Mexico is imported and ground on the premises.\nUnited States.\nMexican food in the United States is based on the food of Native Americans and Hispanos in the Southwestern United States and Northern Mexico. Mexican foods that originate in the United States often come from the Southwestern region; breakfast burritos and red or green chile come from New Mexican cuisine, and chili con carne and chimichangas are examples of Tex-Mex cuisine. With the growing ethnic Mexican-American population in the United States, more authentic Mexican food is gradually appearing in the United States. Most large American cities host a Mexican diaspora due to proximity and immigration, and Mexican restaurants and food trucks are generally easy to find in the continental states. One reason is that Mexican immigrants use food as a means of combating homesickness, and for their descendants, it is a symbol of ethnicity. Alternatively, with more Americans experiencing Mexican food in Mexico, there is a growing demand for more authentic flavors. Korean tacos are a Korean-Mexican fusion dish popular in a number of urban areas in the United States and Canada. Korean tacos originated in Los Angeles. Sushi burrito is a Japanese-Mexican fusion food that became popular in urban areas across the United States, originating in California as part of the broader trend of innovative street food. The sushi burrito was created in 2008 by Peter Yen of the San Francisco fast casual restaurant Sushirrito. In 2013, Carlos Gayt\u00e1n became the first Mexican to obtain a Michelin star for his work at the Mexique restaurant in Chicago. In 2014, Daniela Soto-Innes helped to open Cosme in New York City, serving there as the \"chef de cuisine\". Houston chef Irma Galvan's restaurant was recognized and named an 'American classic' by the James Beard Foundation in 2008.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20169", "revid": "30371424", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20169", "title": "MIPS processor", "text": ""}
{"id": "20170", "revid": "50792403", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20170", "title": "MIPS architecture", "text": "Instruction set architecture\nMIPS (Microprocessor without Interlocked Pipelined Stages) is a family of reduced instruction set computer (RISC) instruction set architectures (ISA) developed by MIPS Computer Systems, now MIPS Technologies, based in the United States.\nThere are multiple versions of MIPS, including MIPS I, II, III, IV, and V, as well as five releases of MIPS32/64 (for 32- and 64-bit implementations, respectively). The early MIPS architectures were 32-bit; 64-bit versions were developed later. As of April 2017, the current version of MIPS is MIPS32/64 Release 6. MIPS32/64 primarily differs from MIPS I\u2013V by defining the privileged kernel mode System Control Coprocessor in addition to the user mode architecture.\nThe MIPS architecture has several optional extensions: MIPS-3D, a simple set of floating-point SIMD instructions dedicated to 3D computer graphics; MDMX (MaDMaX), a more extensive integer SIMD instruction set using 64-bit floating-point registers; MIPS16e, which adds compression to the instruction stream to reduce the memory programs require; and MIPS MT, which adds multithreading capability.\nComputer architecture courses in universities and technical schools often study the MIPS architecture. The architecture greatly influenced later RISC architectures such as Alpha. In March 2021, MIPS announced that the development of the MIPS architecture had ended as the company is making the transition to RISC-V.\nHistory.\nThe first version of the MIPS architecture was designed by MIPS Computer Systems for its R2000 microprocessor, the first MIPS implementation. Both MIPS and the R2000 were introduced together in 1985. When MIPS II was introduced, \"MIPS\" was renamed \"MIPS I\" to distinguish it from the new version.\nMIPS Computer Systems' R6000 microprocessor (1989) was the first MIPS II implementation. Designed for servers, the R6000 was fabricated and sold by Bipolar Integrated Technology, but was a commercial failure. During the mid-1990s, many new 32-bit MIPS processors for embedded systems were MIPS II implementations because the introduction of the 64-bit MIPS III architecture in 1991 left MIPS II as the newest 32-bit MIPS architecture until MIPS32 was introduced in 1999.\nMIPS Computer Systems' R4000 microprocessor (1991) was the first MIPS III implementation. It was designed for use in personal, workstation, and server computers. MIPS Computer Systems aggressively promoted the MIPS architecture and R4000, establishing the Advanced Computing Environment (ACE) consortium to advance its Advanced RISC Computing (ARC) standard, which aimed to establish MIPS as the dominant personal computing platform. ARC found little success in personal computers, but the R4000 (and the R4400 derivative) were widely used in workstation and server computers, especially by its largest user, Silicon Graphics. Other uses of the R4000 included high-end embedded systems and supercomputers. MIPS III was eventually implemented by a number of embedded microprocessors. Quantum Effect Design's R4600 (1993) and its derivatives were widely used in high-end embedded systems and low-end workstations and servers. MIPS Technologies' R4200 (1994), was designed for embedded systems, laptop, and personal computers. A derivative, the R4300i, fabricated by NEC Electronics, was used in the Nintendo 64 game console. The Nintendo 64, along with the PlayStation, were among the highest volume users of MIPS architecture processors in the mid-1990s.\nThe first MIPS IV implementation was the MIPS Technologies R8000 microprocessor chipset (1994). The design of the R8000 began at Silicon Graphics, Inc. and it was only used in high-end workstations and servers for scientific and technical applications where high performance on large floating-point workloads was important. Later implementations were the MIPS Technologies R10000 (1996) and the Quantum Effect Devices R5000 (1996) and RM7000 (1998). The R10000, fabricated and sold by NEC Electronics and Toshiba, and its derivatives were used by NEC, Pyramid Technology, Silicon Graphics, and Tandem Computers (among others) in workstations, servers, and supercomputers. The R5000 and R7000 found use in high-end embedded systems, personal computers, and low-end workstations and servers. A derivative of the R5000 from Toshiba, the R5900, was used in Sony Computer Entertainment's Emotion Engine, which powered its PlayStation 2 game console.\nAnnounced on October 21, 1996, at the Microprocessor Forum 1996 alongside the MIPS Digital Media Extensions (MDMX) extension, MIPS V was designed to improve the performance of 3D graphics transformations. In the mid-1990s, a major use of non-embedded MIPS microprocessors were graphics workstations from Silicon Graphics. MIPS V was completed by the integer-only MDMX extension to provide a complete system for improving the performance of 3D graphics applications. MIPS V implementations were never introduced. On May 12, 1997, Silicon Graphics announced the H1 (\"Beast\") and H2 (\"Capitan\") microprocessors. The former was to have been the first MIPS V implementation, and was due to be introduced in the first half of 1999. The H1 and H2 projects were later combined and eventually canceled in 1998. While there have not been any MIPS V implementations, MIPS64 Release 1 (1999) was based on MIPS V and retains all of its features as an optional Coprocessor 1 (FPU) feature called Paired-Single.\nWhen MIPS Technologies was spun-out of Silicon Graphics in 1998, it refocused on the embedded market. Through MIPS V, each successive version was a strict superset of the previous version, but this property was found to be a problem, and the architecture definition was changed to define a 32-bit and a 64-bit architecture: MIPS32 and MIPS64. Both were introduced in 1999. MIPS32 is based on MIPS II with some additional features from MIPS III, MIPS IV, and MIPS V; MIPS64 is based on MIPS V. NEC, Toshiba and SiByte (later acquired by Broadcom) each obtained licenses for MIPS64 as soon as it was announced. Philips, LSI Logic, IDT, Raza Microelectronics, Inc., Cavium, Loongson Technology and Ingenic Semiconductor have since joined them. MIPS32/MIPS64 Release 5 was announced on December 6, 2012. According to the Product Marketing Director at MIPS, Release 4 was skipped because the number four is perceived as unlucky in many Asian cultures.\nIn December 2018, Wave Computing, the new owner of the MIPS architecture, announced that MIPS ISA would be open-sourced in a program dubbed the MIPS Open initiative. The program was intended to open up access to the most recent versions of both the 32-bit and 64-bit designs making them available without any licensing or royalty fees as well as granting participants licenses to existing MIPS patents.\nIn March 2019, MIPS Revision 6 was made available under a royalty-free license, but later that year the program was shut down again.\nIn March 2021, Wave Computing announced that the development of the MIPS architecture has ceased. The company has joined the RISC-V foundation and future processor designs will be based on the RISC-V architecture. In spite of this, some licensees such as Loongson are continuing with new extensions of MIPS-compatible ISAs on their own.\nIn January 2024, Loongson won a case over rights to use MIPS architecture.\nDesign.\nMIPS is a modular architecture supporting up to four coprocessors (COP0/1/2/3). In MIPS terminology, COP0 is the System Control Coprocessor (an essential part of the processor that is implementation-defined in MIPS I\u2013V), COP1 is an optional floating-point unit (FPU), and COP2 and COP3 are optional implementation-defined coprocessors (MIPS III removed COP3 and reused its opcodes for other purposes). For example, in the PlayStation video game console, COP2 is the Geometry Transformation Engine (GTE), which accelerates the processing of geometry in 3D computer graphics.\nVersions.\nMIPS I.\nMIPS is a load/store architecture (also known as a \"register-register architecture\"); except for the load/store instructions used to access memory, all instructions operate on the registers.\nMIPS I has thirty-two 32-bit general-purpose registers (GPR). Register $0 is hardwired to zero and writes to it are discarded. Register $31 is the link register. For integer multiplication and division instructions, which run asynchronously from other instructions, a pair of 32-bit registers, \"HI\" and \"LO\", are provided. There is a small set of instructions for copying data between the general-purpose registers and the HI/LO registers. The program counter has 32 bits. The two low-order bits always contain zero since MIPS I instructions are 32 bits long and are aligned to their natural word boundaries.\nInstructions are divided into three types: R (register), I (immediate), and J (jump). Every instruction starts with a 6-bit opcode. In addition to the opcode, R-type instructions specify three registers, a shift amount field, and a function field; I-type instructions specify two registers and a 16-bit immediate value; J-type instructions follow the opcode with a 26-bit jump target.\nThe following are the three formats used for the core instruction set:\nMIPS I has instructions that load and store 8-bit bytes, 16-bit halfwords, and 32-bit words. Only one addressing mode is supported: base + displacement. Since MIPS I is a 32-bit architecture, loading quantities fewer than 32 bits requires the datum to be either sign-extended or zero-extended to 32 bits. The load instructions suffixed by \"unsigned\" perform zero extension; otherwise sign extension is performed. Load instructions source the base from the contents of a GPR (rs) and write the result to another GPR (rt). Store instructions source the base from the contents of a GPR (rs) and the store data from another GPR (rt). All load and store instructions compute the memory address by summing the base with the sign-extended 16-bit immediate. MIPS I requires all memory accesses to be aligned to their natural word boundaries, otherwise an exception is signaled. To support efficient unaligned memory accesses, there are load/store word instructions suffixed by \"left\" or \"right\". All load instructions are followed by a load delay slot. The instruction in the load delay slot cannot use the data loaded by the load instruction. The load delay slot can be filled with an instruction that is not dependent on the load; a NOP is substituted if such an instruction cannot be found.\nMIPS I has instructions to perform addition and subtraction. These instructions source their operands from two GPRs (rs and rt), and write the result to a third GPR (rd). Alternatively, addition can source one of the operands from a 16-bit immediate (which is sign-extended to 32 bits). The instructions for addition and subtraction have two variants: by default, an exception is signaled if the result overflows; instructions with the \"unsigned\" suffix do not signal an exception. The overflow check interprets the result as a 32-bit two's complement integer. MIPS I has instructions to perform bitwise logical AND, OR, XOR, and NOR. These instructions source their operands from two GPRs and write the result to a third GPR. The AND, OR, and XOR instructions can alternatively source one of the operands from a 16-bit immediate (which is zero-extended to 32 bits). The \"Set on \"relation\"\" instructions write one or zero to the destination register if the specified relation is true or false. These instructions source their operands from two GPRs or one GPR and a 16-bit immediate (which is sign-extended to 32 bits), and write the result to a third GPR. By default, the operands are interpreted as signed integers. The variants of these instructions that are suffixed with \"unsigned\" interpret the operands as unsigned integers (even those that source an operand from the sign-extended 16-bit immediate).\nThe Load Upper Immediate instruction copies the 16-bit immediate into the high-order 16 bits of a GPR. It is used in conjunction with the Or Immediate instruction to load a 32-bit immediate into a register.\nMIPS I has instructions to perform left and right logical shifts and right arithmetic shifts. The operand is obtained from a GPR (rt), and the result is written to another GPR (rd). The shift distance is obtained from either a GPR (rs) or a 5-bit \"shift amount\" (the \"sa\" field).\nMIPS I has instructions for signed and unsigned integer multiplication and division. These instructions source their operands from two GPRs and write their results to a pair of 32-bit registers called HI and LO, since they may execute separately from (and concurrently with) the other CPU instructions. For multiplication, the high- and low-order halves of the 64-bit product is written to HI and LO (respectively). For division, the quotient is written to LO and the remainder to HI. To access the results, a pair of instructions (Move from HI and Move from LO) is provided to copy the contents of HI or LO to a GPR. These instructions are interlocked: reads of HI and LO do not proceed past an unfinished arithmetic instruction that will write to HI and LO. Another pair of instructions (Move to HI or Move to LO) copies the contents of a GPR to HI and LO. These instructions are used to restore HI and LO to their original state after exception handling. Instructions that read HI or LO must be separated by two instructions that do not write to HI or LO.\nAll MIPS I control flow instructions are followed by a branch delay slot. Unless the branch delay slot is filled by an instruction performing useful work, a NOP is substituted. MIPS I branch instructions compare the contents of a GPR (rs) against zero or another GPR (rt) as signed integers and branch if the specified condition is true. Control is transferred to the address computed by shifting the 16-bit offset left by two bits, sign-extending the 18-bit result, and adding the 32-bit sign-extended result to the sum of the program counter (instruction address) and 810. Jumps have two versions: absolute and register-indirect. Absolute jumps (\"Jump\" and \"Jump and Link\") compute the address to which control is transferred by shifting the 26-bit instr_index left by two bits and concatenating the 28-bit result with the four high-order bits of the address of the instruction in the branch delay slot. Register-indirect jumps transfer control to the instruction at the address sourced from a GPR (rs). The address sourced from the GPR must be word-aligned, else an exception is signaled after the instruction in the branch delay slot is executed. Branch and jump instructions that link (except for \"Jump and Link Register\") save the return address to GPR 31. The \"Jump and Link Register\" instruction permits the return address to be saved to any writable GPR.\nMIPS I has two instructions for software to signal an exception: System Call and Breakpoint. System Call is used by user mode software to make kernel calls; and Breakpoint is used to transfer control to a debugger via the kernel's exception handler. Both instructions have a 20-bit Code field that can contain operating environment-specific information for the exception handler.\nMIPS has 32 floating-point registers. Two registers are paired for double precision numbers. Odd numbered registers cannot be used for arithmetic or branching, just as part of a double precision register pair, resulting in 16 usable registers for most instructions (moves/copies and loads/stores were not affected).\nSingle precision is denoted by the .s suffix, while double precision is denoted by the .d suffix.\nMIPS II.\nMIPS II removed the load delay slot and added several sets of instructions. For shared-memory multiprocessing, the \"Synchronize Shared Memory\", \"Load Linked Word\", and \"Store Conditional Word\" instructions were added. A set of Trap-on-Condition instructions were added. These instructions caused an exception if the evaluated condition is true. All existing branch instructions were given \"branch-likely\" versions that executed the instruction in the branch delay slot only if the branch is taken. These instructions improve performance in certain cases by allowing useful instructions to fill the branch delay slot. Doubleword load and store instructions for COP1\u20133 were added. Consistent with other memory access instructions, these loads and stores required the doubleword to be naturally aligned.\nThe instruction set for the floating point coprocessor also had several instructions added to it. An IEEE 754-compliant floating-point square root instruction was added. It supported both single- and double-precision operands. A set of instructions that converted single- and double-precision floating-point numbers to 32-bit words were added. These complemented the existing conversion instructions by allowing the IEEE rounding mode to be specified by the instruction instead of the Floating Point Control and Status Register.\nMIPS III.\nMIPS III is a backwards-compatible extension of MIPS II that added support for 64-bit memory addressing and integer operations. The 64-bit data type is called a doubleword, and MIPS III extended the general-purpose registers, HI/LO registers, and program counter to 64 bits to support it. New instructions were added to load and store doublewords, to perform integer addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, and shift operations on them, and to move doubleword between the GPRs and HI/LO registers. For shared-memory multiprocessing, the \"Load Linked Double Word\", and \"Store Conditional Double Word\" instructions were added. Existing instructions originally defined to operate on 32-bit words were redefined, where necessary, to sign-extend the 32-bit results to permit words and doublewords to be treated identically by most instructions. Among those instructions redefined was \"Load Word\". In MIPS III it sign-extends words to 64 bits. To complement \"Load Word\", a version that zero-extends was added.\nThe R instruction format's inability to specify the full shift distance for 64-bit shifts (its 5-bit shift amount field is too narrow to specify the shift distance for doublewords) required MIPS III to provide three 64-bit versions of each MIPS I shift instruction. The first version is a 64-bit version of the original shift instructions, used to specify constant shift distances of 0\u201331 bits. The second version is similar to the first, but adds 3210 the shift amount field's value so that constant shift distances of 32\u201363 bits can be specified. The third version obtains the shift distance from the six low-order bits of a GPR.\nMIPS III added a \"supervisor\" privilege level in between the existing kernel and user privilege levels. This feature only affected the implementation-defined System Control Processor (Coprocessor 0).\nMIPS III removed the Coprocessor 3 (COP3) support instructions, and reused its opcodes for the new doubleword instructions. The remaining coprocessors gained instructions to move doublewords between coprocessor registers and the GPRs. The floating general registers (FGRs) were extended to 64 bits and the requirement for instructions to use even-numbered register only was removed. This is incompatible with earlier versions of the architecture; a bit in the floating-point control/status register is used to operate the MIPS III floating-point unit (FPU) in a MIPS I- and II-compatible mode. The floating-point control registers were not extended for compatibility. The only new floating-point instructions added were those to copy doublewords between the CPU and FPU convert single- and double-precision floating-point numbers into doubleword integers and vice versa.\nMIPS IV.\nMIPS IV is the fourth version of the architecture. It is a superset of MIPS III and is compatible with all existing versions of MIPS.A-1 MIPS IV was designed to mainly improve floating-point (FP) performance. To improve access to operands, an indexed addressing mode (base + index, both sourced from GPRs) for FP loads and stores was added, as were prefetch instructions for performing memory prefetching and specifying cache hints (these supported both the base + offset and base + index addressing modes).\nMIPS IV added several features to improve instruction-level parallelism. To alleviate the bottleneck caused by a single condition bit, seven condition code bits were added to the floating-point control and status register, bringing the total to eight. FP comparison and branch instructions were redefined so they could specify which condition bit was written or read (respectively); and the delay slot in between an FP branch that read the condition bit written to by a prior FP comparison was removed. Support for partial predication was added in the form of conditional move instructions for both GPRs and FPRs; and an implementation could choose between having precise or imprecise exceptions for IEEE 754 traps.\nMIPS IV added several new FP arithmetic instructions for both single- and double-precision FPNs: fused-multiply add or subtract, reciprocal, and reciprocal square-root. The FP fused-multiply add or subtract instructions perform either one or two roundings (it is implementation-defined), to exceed or meet IEEE 754 accuracy requirements (respectively). The FP reciprocal and reciprocal square-root instructions do not comply with IEEE 754 accuracy requirements, and produce results that differ from the required accuracy by one or two units of last place (it is implementation defined). These instructions serve applications where instruction latency is more important than accuracy.\nMIPS V.\nMIPS V added a new data type, the Paired Single (PS), which consisted of two single-precision (32-bit) floating-point numbers stored in the existing 64-bit floating-point registers. Variants of existing floating-point instructions for arithmetic, compare and conditional move were added to operate on this data type in a SIMD fashion. New instructions were added for loading, rearranging and converting PS data. It was the first instruction set to exploit floating-point SIMD with existing resources.\nMIPS32/MIPS64.\nThe first release of MIPS32, based on MIPS II, added conditional moves, prefetch instructions, and other features from the R4000 and R5000 families of 64-bit processors. The first release of MIPS64 adds a MIPS32 mode to run 32-bit code. The MUL and MADD (multiply-add) instructions, previously available in some implementations, were added to the MIPS32 and MIPS64 specifications, as were cache control instructions. For the purpose of cache control, both codice_1 and codice_2 instructions were prepared.\nMIPS32/MIPS64 Release 6 in 2014 added the following:\nRemoved infrequently used instructions:\nReorganized the instruction encoding, freeing space for future expansions.\nmicroMIPS.\nThe microMIPS32/64 architectures are supersets of the MIPS32 and MIPS64 architectures (respectively) designed to replace the MIPS16e application-specific extension (ASE). A disadvantage of MIPS16e is that it requires a mode switch before any of its 16-bit instructions can be processed. microMIPS adds versions of the most-frequently used 32-bit instructions that are encoded as 16-bit instructions. This allows programs to intermix 16- and 32-bit instructions without having to switch modes. microMIPS was introduced alongside of MIPS32/64 Release 3, and each subsequent release of MIPS32/64 has a corresponding microMIPS32/64 version. A processor may implement microMIPS32/64 or both microMIPS32/64 and its corresponding MIPS32/64 subset. Starting with MIPS32/64 Release 6, support for MIPS16e ended, and microMIPS is the only form of code compression in MIPS.\nApplication-specific extensions.\nThe base MIPS32 and MIPS64 architectures can be supplemented with a number of optional architectural extensions, which are collectively referred to as \"application-specific extensions\" (ASEs). These ASEs provide features that improve the efficiency and performance of certain workloads, such as digital signal processing.\nMIPS MCU.\nEnhancements for microcontroller applications. The MCU ASE (application-specific extension) has been developed to extend the interrupt controller support, reduce the interrupt latency and enhance the I/O peripheral control function typically required in microcontroller system designs.\nMIPS16.\nMIPS16 is an Application-Specific Extension for MIPS I through to V designed by LSI Logic and MIPS Technologies, announced on October 21, 1996, alongside its first implementation, the LSI Logic TinyRISC processor. MIPS16 was subsequently licensed by NEC Electronics, Philips Semiconductors, and Toshiba (among others); and implemented as an extension to the MIPS I, II, an III architectures. MIPS16 decreases the size of application by up to 40% by using 16-bit instructions instead of 32-bit instructions and also improves power efficiency, the instruction cache hit rate, and is equivalent in performance to its base architecture. It is supported by hardware and software development tools from MIPS Technologies and other providers. MIPS16e is an improved version of MIPS16 first supported by MIPS32 and MIPS64 Release 1. MIPS16e2 is an improved version of MIPS16 that is supported by MIPS32 and MIPS64 (up to Release 5). Release 6 replaced it with microMIPS.\nMIPS Digital Signal Processing (DSP).\nThe DSP ASE is an optional extension to the MIPS32/MIPS64 Release\u00a02 and newer instruction sets which can be used to accelerate a large range of \"media\" computations\u2014particularly audio and video. The DSP module comprises a set of instructions and state in the integer pipeline and requires minimal additional logic to implement in MIPS processor cores. Revision 2 of the ASE was introduced in the second half of 2006. This revision adds extra instructions to the original ASE, but is otherwise backwards-compatible with it. Unlike the bulk of the MIPS architecture, it's a fairly irregular set of operations, many chosen for a particular relevance to some key algorithm. Its main novel features (vs original MIPS32):\nMIPS SIMD architecture (MSA).\nInstruction set extensions designed to accelerate multimedia.\nMIPS virtualization.\nMIPS Revision 6 added native virtualization supported by hardware.\nMIPS multi-threading.\nEach multi-threaded MIPS core can support up to two VPEs (Virtual Processing Elements) which share a single pipeline as well as other hardware resources. However, since each VPE includes a complete copy of the processor state as seen by the software system, each VPE appears as a complete standalone processor to an SMP Linux operating system. For more fine-grained thread processing applications, each VPE is capable of supporting up to nine TCs allocated across two VPEs. The TCs share a common execution unit but each has its own program counter and core register files so that each can handle a thread from the software. The MIPS MT architecture also allows the allocation of processor cycles to threads, and sets the relative thread priorities with an optional Quality of Service (QoS) manager block. This enables two prioritization mechanisms that determine the flow of information across the bus. The first mechanism allows the user to prioritize one thread over another. The second mechanism is used to allocate a specified ratio of the cycles to specific threads over time. The combined use of both mechanisms allows effective allocation of bandwidth to the set of threads, and better control of latencies. In real-time systems, system-level determinism is very critical, and the QoS block facilitates improvement of the predictability of a system. Hardware designers of advanced systems may replace the standard QoS block provided by MIPS Technologies with one that is specifically tuned for their application.\nSmartMIPS.\nSmartMIPS is an Application-Specific Extension (ASE) designed by Gemplus International and MIPS Technologies to improve performance and reduce memory consumption for smart card software. It is supported by MIPS32 only, since smart cards do not require the capabilities of MIPS64 processors. Few smart cards use SmartMIPS.\nMIPS Digital Media eXtension (MDMX).\nMultimedia application accelerations that were common in the 1990s on RISC and CISC systems. \nMIPS-3D.\nAdditional instructions for improving the performance of 3D graphics applications\nCalling conventions.\nMIPS has had several calling conventions, especially on the 32-bit platform.\nThe O32 ABI is the most commonly used ABI, owing to its status as the original System V ABI for MIPS. It is strictly stack-based, with only four registers ($a0-$a3) available to pass arguments. Space on the stack is reserved in case the callee needs to save its arguments, but the registers are not stored there by the caller. The return value is stored in register $v0; a second return value may be stored in $v1. The ABI took shape in 1990 and was last updated in 1994. This perceived slowness, along with an antiquated floating-point model with only 16 registers, has encouraged the proliferation of many other calling conventions. It is only defined for 32-bit MIPS, but GCC has created a 64-bit variation called O64.\nFor 64-bit, the N64 ABI by Silicon Graphics is most commonly used. The most important improvement is that eight registers are now available for argument passing; it also increases the number of floating-point registers to 32. There is also an ILP32 version called N32, which uses 32-bit pointers for smaller code, analogous to the x32 ABI. Both run under the 64-bit mode of the CPU. The N32 and N64 ABIs pass the first eight arguments to a function in the registers $a0-$a7; subsequent arguments are passed on the stack. The return value (or a pointer to it) is stored in $v0; a second return value may be stored in $v1. In both the N32 and N64 ABIs, all registers are considered to be 64-bits wide.\nA few attempts have been made to replace O32 with a 32-bit ABI that resembles N32 more than O32. A 1995 conference came up with MIPS EABI, for which the 32-bit version was quite similar. EABI inspired MIPS Technologies to propose a more radical \"NUBI\" ABI additionally reuse argument registers for the return value. MIPS EABI is supported by GCC but not LLVM, and neither supports NUBI.\nFor all of O32 and N32/N64, the return address is stored in $ra ($31). This is automatically set with the use of the JAL (jump and link) or JALR (jump and link register) instructions. The function prologue of a (non-leaf) MIPS subroutine pushes the return address (in $ra) to the stack.\nOn both O32 and N32/N64, the stack grows downwards, but the N32/N64 ABIs require 64-bit alignment for all stack entries. The frame pointer ($30) is optional and in practice rarely used except when the stack allocation in a function is determined at runtime, for example, by calling codice_3.\nFor N32 and N64, the return address is typically stored 8 bytes before the stack pointer, although this may be optional.\nFor the N32 and N64 ABIs, a function must preserve the $s0-$s7 registers, the global pointer ($gp or $28), the stack pointer ($sp or $29) and the frame pointer ($fp or $30). The O32 ABI is the same except the calling function is required to save the $gp register instead of the called function.\nFor multi-threaded code, the thread local storage pointer is typically stored in special hardware register $29 and is accessed by using the mfhw (move from hardware) instruction. At least one vendor is known to store this information in the $k0 register which is normally reserved for kernel use, but this is not standard.\nThe $k0 and $k1 registers ($26, $27) are reserved for kernel use and should not be used by applications since these registers can be changed at any time by the kernel due to interrupts, context switches or other events.\nRegisters that are preserved across a call are registers that (by convention) will not be changed by a system call or procedure (function) call. For example, $s-registers must be saved to the stack by a procedure that needs to use them, and $sp and $fp are always incremented by constants, and decremented back after the procedure is done with them (and the memory they point to). By contrast, $ra is changed automatically by any normal function call (ones that use jal), and $t-registers must be saved by the program before any procedure call (if the program needs the values inside them after the call).\nThe userspace calling convention of position-independent code on Linux additionally requires that when a function is called the $t9 register must contain the address of that function. This convention dates back to the System V ABI supplement for MIPS.\nUses.\nMIPS processors are used in embedded systems such as residential gateways and routers. Originally, MIPS was designed for general-purpose computing. During the 1980s and 1990s, MIPS processors for personal, workstation, and server computers were used by many companies such as Digital Equipment Corporation, MIPS Computer Systems, NEC, Pyramid Technology, SiCortex, Siemens Nixdorf, Silicon Graphics, and Tandem Computers.\nHistorically, video game consoles such as the Nintendo 64, Sony PlayStation, PlayStation 2, and PlayStation Portable used MIPS processors. MIPS processors also used to be popular in supercomputers during the 1990s, but all such systems have dropped off the TOP500 list. These uses were complemented by embedded applications at first, but during the 1990s, MIPS became a major presence in the embedded processor market, and by the 2000s, most MIPS processors were for these applications.\nIn the mid- to late-1990s, it was estimated that one in three RISC microprocessors produced was a MIPS processor.\nBy the late 2010s, MIPS machines were still commonly used in embedded markets, including automotive, wireless router, LTE modems (mainly via MediaTek), and microcontrollers (for example the Microchip Technology PIC32M). They have mostly faded out of the personal, server, and application space.\nSimulators.\nOpen Virtual Platforms (OVP) includes the freely available for non-commercial use simulator OVPsim, a library of models of processors, peripherals and platforms, and APIs which enable users to develop their own models. The models in the library are open source, written in C, and include the MIPS 4K, 24K, 34K, 74K, 1004K, 1074K, M14K, microAptiv, interAptiv, proAptiv 32-bit cores and the MIPS 64-bit 5K range of cores. These models are created and maintained by Imperas and in partnership with MIPS Technologies have been tested and assigned the MIPS-Verified mark. Sample MIPS-based platforms include both bare metal environments and platforms for booting unmodified Linux binary images. These platforms\u2013emulators are available as source or binaries and are fast, free for non-commercial usage, and are easy to use. OVPsim is developed and maintained by Imperas and is very fast (hundreds of million of instructions per second), and built to handle multicore homogeneous and heterogeneous architectures and systems.\nThere is a freely available MIPS32 simulator called SPIM (earlier versions simulated only the R2000/R3000) for use in education. EduMIPS64 is a GPL graphical cross-platform MIPS64 CPU simulator, written in Java/Swing. It supports a wide subset of the MIPS64 ISA and allows the user to graphically see what happens in the pipeline when an assembly program is run by the CPU.\nMARS is another GUI-based MIPS emulator designed for use in education, specifically for use with Hennessy's \"Computer Organization and Design\". It is no longer maintained.\nSaturn is a GUI-based MIPS IDE with an assembler called Titan. It started as a project by a student at the University of Toronto as a replacement for MARS, which is no longer maintained. Saturn is now used in courses at the University of Toronto, and is maintained by students and faculty.\nWebMIPS is a browser-based MIPS simulator with visual representation of a generic, pipelined processor. This simulator is quite useful for register tracking during step by step execution.\nQtMips provides a simple 5-stage pipeline visualization as well as cache principle visualization for basic computer architectures courses. It is available both as a web application and as a downloadable program for Windows, Linux, and macOS.\nMore advanced free emulators are available from the GXemul (formerly known as the mips64emul project) and QEMU projects. They emulate the various MIPS III and IV microprocessors in addition to entire computer systems which use them.\nCommercial simulators are available especially for the embedded use of MIPS processors, for example Wind River Simics (MIPS 4Kc and 5Kc, PMC RM9000, QED RM7000, Broadcom/Netlogic ec4400, Cavium Octeon I), Imperas (all MIPS32 and MIPS64 cores), VaST Systems (R3000, R4000), and CoWare (the MIPS4KE, MIPS24K, MIPS25Kf and MIPS34K).\nThe Creator simulator is portable and allows the user to learn various assembly languages of different processors. Creator has examples with an implementation of MIPS32 and RISC-V instructions.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20171", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20171", "title": "Murder", "text": "Unlawful killing of a human with malice\nMurder is the unlawful killing of another human without justification or valid excuse committed with the necessary intention as defined by the law in a specific jurisdiction. This state of mind may, depending upon the jurisdiction, distinguish murder from other forms of unlawful homicide, such as manslaughter. Manslaughter is killing committed in the absence of \"malice\", such as in the case of voluntary manslaughter brought about by reasonable provocation, or diminished capacity. \"Involuntary\" manslaughter, where it is recognized, is a killing that lacks all but the most attenuated guilty intent, recklessness.\nMost societies consider murder to be an extremely serious crime, and thus believe that a person convicted of murder should receive harsh punishments for the purposes of retribution, deterrence, rehabilitation, or incapacitation. In most countries, a person convicted of murder generally receives a long-term prison sentence, a life sentence, or capital punishment. Some countries, states, and territories, including the United Kingdom and other countries with English-derived common law, mandate life imprisonment for murder, whether it is subdivided into first-degree murder or otherwise.\nEtymology.\nThe modern English word \"murder\" descends from the Proto-Indo-European \"*m\u0155\u0325-trom\" which meant \"killing\", a noun derived from \"*mer-\" \"to die\".\nProto-Germanic, in fact, had two nouns derived from this word, later merging into the modern English noun: \"*mur\u00fer\u0105\" \"death, killing, murder\" (directly from Proto-Indo-European\"*m\u0155\u0325-trom\"), whence Old English \"mor\u00f0or\" \"secret or unlawful killing of a person, murder; mortal sin, crime; punishment, torment, misery\"; and \"*mur\u00ferij\u00f4\" \"murderer; homicide\" (from the verb \"*mur\u00ferijan\u0105\" \"to murder\"), giving Old English \"myr\u00fera\" \"homicide, murder; murderer\". There was a third word for \"murder\" in Proto-Germanic, continuing Proto-Indo-European \"*mr\u0325t\u00f3s\" \"dead\" (compare Latin \"mors\"), giving Proto-Germanic \"*mur\u00fe\u0105\" \"death, killing, murder\" and Old English \"mor\u00fe\" \"death, crime, murder\" (compare German \"Mord\").\nThe \"-d-\" first attested in Middle English \"mordre, mourdre, murder, murdre\" could have been influenced by Old French \"murdre\", itself derived from the Germanic noun via Frankish \"*mur\u00fera\" (compare Old High German \"murdreo, murdiro\"), though the same sound development can be seen with \"burden\" (from \"burthen\"). The alternative \"murther\" (attested up to the 19th century) springs directly from the Old English forms. Middle English \"mordre\" is a verb from Anglo-Saxon \"myr\u00f0rian\" from Proto-Germanic \"*mur\u00ferijan\u0105\", or, according to the \"Oxford English Dictionary\", from the noun.\nDefinition.\nThe eighteenth-century English jurist William Blackstone (citing Edward Coke), in his \"Commentaries on the Laws of England\" set out the common law definition of murder, which by this definition occurs\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;when a person, of sound memory and discretion, unlawfully kills any reasonable creature in being and under the king's peace, with malice aforethought, either express or implied. At common law, murder was normally punishable by death.\nThe elements of common law murder are:\nIn contrast with manslaughter, murder requires the mental element known as malice aforethought. Mitigating factors that weigh against a finding of intent to kill, such as \"loss of control\" or \"diminished responsibility\", may result in the reduction of a murder charge to voluntary manslaughter.\nThe four states of mind recognized as constituting \"malice\" are:\nUnder state of mind (i), intent to kill, the \"deadly weapon rule\" applies. Thus, if the defendant intentionally uses a deadly weapon or instrument against the victim, such use authorizes a permissive inference of intent to kill. Examples of deadly weapons and instruments include but are not limited to guns, knives, deadly toxins or chemicals or gases and even vehicles when intentionally used to harm one or more victims.\nUnder state of mind (iii), an \"abandoned and malignant heart\", the killing must result from the defendant's conduct involving a reckless indifference to human life and a conscious disregard of an unreasonable risk of death or serious bodily injury. In Australian jurisdictions, the unreasonable risk must amount to a foreseen probability of death (or grievous bodily harm in most states), as opposed to possibility.\nUnder state of mind (iv), the felony-murder doctrine, the felony committed must be an inherently dangerous felony, such as burglary, arson, rape, robbery or kidnapping. Importantly, the underlying felony \"cannot\" be a lesser included offense such as assault, otherwise all criminal homicides would be murder as all are felonies.\nIn Spanish criminal law, \"asesinato\" (literally 'assassination'): takes place when any of these requirements concur: Treachery (the use of means to avoid risk for the aggressor or to ensure that the crime goes unpunished), price or reward (financial gain) or viciousness (deliberately increasing the pain of the victim). After the last reform of the Spanish Criminal Code, in force since July 1, 2015, another circumstance that turns homicide (\"homicidio\") into assassination is the desire to facilitate the commission of another crime or to prevent it from being discovered.\nAs with most legal terms, the precise definition of murder varies between jurisdictions and is usually codified in some form of legislation. Even when the legal distinction between murder and manslaughter is clear, it is not unknown for a jury to find a murder defendant guilty of the lesser offense. The jury might sympathize with the defendant (e.g. in a crime of passion, or in the case of a bullied victim who kills their tormentor), and the jury may wish to protect the defendant from a sentence of life imprisonment or execution.\nDegrees.\nSome jurisdictions divide murder by degrees. The distinction between first- and second-degree murder exists, for example, in Canadian murder law and U.S. murder law. Some US states maintain the offense of capital murder.\nThe most common division is between first- and second-degree murder. Generally, second-degree murder is common law murder, and first-degree is an aggravated form. The aggravating factors of first-degree murder depend on the jurisdiction, but may include a specific intent to kill, premeditation, or deliberation. In some, murders committed by acts such as strangulation, poisoning, or lying in wait are also treated as first-degree murder. A few states in the U.S. further distinguish third-degree murder, but they differ significantly in which kinds of murders they classify as second-degree versus third-degree. For example, Minnesota and Pennsylvania define third-degree murder as depraved-heart murder (which in most U.S. jurisdictions is called second-degree), whereas Florida defines third-degree murder as felony murder (except when the underlying felony is specifically listed in the definition of first-degree murder).\nSome jurisdictions also distinguish premeditated murder. This is the crime of wrongfully and intentionally causing the death of another human being (also known as murder) after rationally considering the timing or method of doing so, in order to either increase the likelihood of success, or to evade detection or apprehension. State laws in the United States vary as to definitions of \"premeditation\". In some states, premeditation may be construed as taking place mere seconds before the murder. Premeditated murder is one of the most serious forms of homicide, and is punished more severely than manslaughter or other types of homicide, often with a life sentence without the possibility of parole, or in some countries, the death penalty. In the U.S., federal law (\u00a0https://) criminalizes premeditated murder, felony murder and second-degree murder committed under situations where federal jurisdiction applies. In Canada, the criminal code classifies murder as either first- or second-degree. The former type of murder is often called premeditated murder, although premeditation is not the only way murder can be classified as first-degree. In the Netherlands, the traditional strict distinction between premeditated intentional killing (classed as murder, \"moord\") and non-premeditated intentional killing (manslaughter, \"doodslag\") is maintained; when differentiating between murder and manslaughter, the only relevant factor is the existence or not of premeditation (rather than the existence or not of mitigating or aggravated factors). Manslaughter (non-premeditated intentional killing) with aggravating factors is punished more severely, but it is not classified as murder, because murder is an offense which always requires premeditation.\nCommon law.\nAccording to Blackstone, English common law identified murder as a \"public wrong\". According to common law, murder is considered to be \"malum in se\", that is, an act which is evil within itself. An act such as murder is wrong or evil by its very nature, and it is the very nature of the act which does not require any specific detailing or definition in the law to consider murder a crime.\nSome jurisdictions still take a common law view of murder. In such jurisdictions, what is considered to be murder is defined by precedent case law or previous decisions of the courts of law. However, although the common law is by nature flexible and adaptable, in the interests both of certainty and of securing convictions, most common law jurisdictions have codified their criminal law and now have statutory definitions of murder.\nExclusions.\nGeneral.\nAlthough laws vary by country, there are circumstances of exclusion that are common in many legal systems.\nVictim.\nAll jurisdictions require that the victim be a natural person; that is, a human being who was still alive before being murdered. In other words, under the law one cannot murder a corpse, a corporation, a non-human animal, or any other non-human organism such as a plant or bacterium.\nCalifornia's murder statute, penal code section 187, expressly mentioned a fetus as being capable of being killed, and was interpreted by the Supreme Court of California in 1994 as not requiring any proof of the viability of the fetus as a prerequisite to a murder conviction. This holding has two implications. Firstly, a defendant in California can be convicted of murder for killing a fetus which the mother herself could have terminated without committing a crime. And secondly, as stated by Justice Stanley Mosk in his dissent, because women carrying nonviable fetuses may not be visibly pregnant, it may be possible for a defendant to be convicted of intentionally murdering a person they did not know existed.\nMitigating circumstances.\nSome countries allow conditions that \"affect the balance of the mind\" to be regarded as mitigating circumstances. This means that a person may be found guilty of \"manslaughter\" on the basis of \"diminished responsibility\" rather than being found guilty of murder, if it can be proved that the killer was suffering from a condition that affected their judgment at the time. Depression, post-traumatic stress disorder and medication side-effects are examples of conditions that may be taken into account when assessing responsibility.\nInsanity.\nMental disorder may apply to a wide range of disorders including psychosis caused by schizophrenia and dementia, and excuse the person from the need to undergo the stress of a trial as to liability. Usually, sociopathy and other personality disorders are not legally considered insanity. In some jurisdictions, following the pre-trial hearing to determine the extent of the disorder, the defense of \"not guilty by reason of insanity\" may be used to get a not guilty verdict. This defense has two elements:\nUnder New York law, for example:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a7 40.15 Mental disease or defect. In any prosecution for an offense, it is an affirmative defence that when the defendant engaged in the proscribed conduct, he lacked criminal responsibility by reason of mental disease or defect. Such lack of criminal responsibility means that at the time of such conduct, as a result of mental disease or defect, he lacked substantial capacity to know or appreciate either: 1. The nature and consequences of such conduct; or 2. That such conduct was wrong.\nUnder the French Penal Code:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Article 122-1\nThose who successfully argue a defense based on a mental disorder are usually referred to mandatory clinical treatment until they are certified safe to be released back into the community, rather than prison.\nPostpartum depression.\nPostpartum depression (also known as post-natal depression) is recognized in some countries as a mitigating factor in cases of infanticide. According to Susan Friedman, \"Two dozen nations have infanticide laws that decrease the penalty for mothers who kill their children of up to one year of age. The United States does not have such a law, but mentally ill mothers may plead not guilty by reason of insanity.\" In the law of the Republic of Ireland, infanticide was made a separate crime from murder in 1949, applicable for the mother of a baby under one year old where \"the balance of her mind was disturbed by reason of her not having fully recovered from the effect of giving birth to the child or by reason of the effect of lactation consequent upon the birth of the child\". Since independence, death sentences for murder in such cases had always been commuted; the new act was intended \"to eliminate all the terrible ritual of the black cap and the solemn words of the judge pronouncing sentence of death in those cases ... where it is clear to the Court and to everybody, except perhaps the unfortunate accused, that the sentence will never be carried out.\" In Russia, murder of a newborn child by the mother has been a separate crime since 1996.\nUnintentional.\nFor a killing to be considered murder in nine out of fifty states in the US, there normally needs to be an element of intent. A defendant may argue that they took precautions not to kill, that the death could not have been anticipated, or was unavoidable. As a general rule, manslaughter constitutes reckless killing, but manslaughter also includes criminally negligent (i.e. grossly negligent) homicide. Unintentional killing that results from an involuntary action generally cannot constitute murder. After examining the evidence, a judge or jury (depending on the jurisdiction) would determine whether the killing was intentional or unintentional.\nDiminished capacity.\nIn jurisdictions using the Uniform Penal Code, such as California, diminished capacity may be a defense. For example, Dan White used this defense to obtain a manslaughter conviction, instead of murder, in the assassination of Mayor George Moscone and Supervisor Harvey Milk. Afterward, California amended its penal code to provide \"As a matter of public policy there shall be no defense of diminished capacity, diminished responsibility, or irresistible impulse in a criminal action...\"\nAggravating circumstances.\nMurder with specified aggravating circumstances is often punished more harshly. Depending on the jurisdiction, such circumstances may include:\nIn the United States and Canada, these murders are referred to as first-degree or aggravated murders. Under English criminal law, murder always carries a mandatory life sentence, but is not classified into degrees. Penalties for murder committed under aggravating circumstances are often higher under English law than the 15-year minimum non-parole period that otherwise serves as a starting point for a murder committed by an adult.\nFelony murder rule.\nA legal doctrine in some common law jurisdictions broadens the crime of murder: when an offender kills in the commission of a dangerous crime, (regardless of intent), he or she is guilty of murder. The felony murder rule is often justified by its supporters as a means of preventing dangerous felonies, but the case of Ryan Holle shows it can be used very widely.\nThe felony-murder reflects the versari in re illicita: the offender is objectively responsible for the event of the unintentional crime; in fact the figure of the civil law systems corresponding to felony murder is the preterintentional homicide (art. 222-7 French penal code, art. 584 Italian penal code, art. 227 German penal code etc.). Felony murder contrasts with the principle of guilt, for which in England it was, at least formally, abolished in 1957, in Canada it was quashed by the Supreme Court, while in the USA it continues to survive.\nYear-and-a-day rule.\nIn some common law jurisdictions, a defendant accused of murder is not guilty if the victim survives for longer than one year and one day after the attack. This reflects the likelihood that if the victim dies, other factors will have contributed to the cause of death, breaking the chain of causation; and also means that the responsible person does not have a charge of murder \"hanging over their head indefinitely\". Subject to any statute of limitations, the accused could still be charged with an offense reflecting the seriousness of the initial assault.\nWith advances in modern medicine, most countries have abandoned a fixed time period and test causation on the facts of the case. This is known as \"delayed death\" and cases where this was applied or was attempted to be applied go back to at least 1966.\nIn England and Wales, the \"year-and-a-day rule\" was abolished by the Law Reform (Year and a Day Rule) Act 1996. However, if death occurs three years or more after the original attack then prosecution can take place only with the attorney-general's approval.\nIn the United States, many jurisdictions have abolished the rule as well. Abolition of the rule has been accomplished by enactment of statutory criminal codes, which displaced the common-law definitions of crimes and corresponding defenses. In 2001 the Supreme Court of the United States held that retroactive application of a state supreme court decision abolishing the year-and-a-day rule did not violate the Ex Post Facto Clause of Article I of the United States Constitution.\nThe potential effect of fully abolishing the rule can be seen in the case of 74-year-old William Barnes, charged with the murder of a Philadelphia police officer Walter T. Barclay Jr., who he had shot nearly 41 years previously. Barnes had served 16 years in prison for attempting to murder Barkley, but when the policeman died on 19 August 2007, this was alleged to be from complications of the wounds suffered from the shooting \u2013 and Barnes was charged with his murder. He was acquitted on May 24, 2010.\nContributing factors.\nCertain personality disorders are associated with an increased homicide rate, most notably narcissistic, anti-social, and histrionic personality disorders and those associated with psychopathology.\nSeveral studies have shown that there is a correlation between murder rates and poverty. A 2000 study showed that regions of the state of S\u00e3o Paulo in Brazil with lower income also had higher rates of murder.\nHistorical attitudes.\nIn the past, certain types of homicide were lawful and justified. Georg Oesterdiekhoff wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Evans-Pritchard says about the Nuer from Sudan: \"Homicide is not forbidden, and Nuer do not think it wrong to kill a man in fair fight. On the contrary, a man who slays another in combat is admired for his courage and skill.\" (Evans-Pritchard 1956: 195) This statement is true for most African tribes, for pre-modern Europeans, for Indigenous Australians, and for Native Americans, according to ethnographic reports from all over the world. ... Homicides rise to incredible numbers among headhunter cultures such as the Papua. When a boy is born, the father has to kill a man. He needs a name for his child and can receive it only by a man, he himself has murdered. When a man wants to marry, he must kill a man. When a man dies, his family again has to kill a man.\nIn many such societies the redress was not via a legal system, but by blood revenge, although there might also be a form of payment that could be made instead\u2014such as the weregild which in early Germanic society could be paid to the victim's family in lieu of their right of revenge.\nOne of the oldest-known prohibitions against murder appears in the Sumerian Code of Ur-Nammu written sometime between 2100 and 2050 BC. The code states, \"If a man commits a murder, that man must be killed.\"\nIn the Abrahamic religions, the first ever murder was committed by Cain against his brother Abel out of jealousy. The prohibition against murder is one of the Ten Commandments given by God to Moses in Exodus and Deuteronomy, which are part of the scripture for both Jews and Christians. In Islam according to the Qur'an, one of the greatest sins is to kill a human being who has committed no fault.\nThe term \"assassin\" derives from Hashshashin, a militant Ismaili Shi'ite sect, active from the 8th to 14th centuries. This mystic secret society killed members of the Abbasid, Fatimid, Seljuq and Crusader elite for political and religious reasons. The Thuggee cult that plagued India was devoted to Kali, the goddess of death and destruction. According to some estimates the Thuggees murdered one million people between 1740 and 1840. The Aztecs believed that without regular offerings of blood the sun god Huitzilopochtli would withdraw his support for them and destroy the world as they knew it. According to Ross Hassig, author of \"Aztec Warfare\", \"between 10,000 and 80,400 persons\" were sacrificed in the 1487 re-consecration of the Great Pyramid of Tenochtitlan. Japanese samurai had the right to strike with their sword at anyone of a lower class who compromised their honour.\nSlavery.\nSouthern slave codes did make willful killing of a slave illegal in most cases. For example, the 1860 Mississippi case of \"Oliver v. State\" charged the defendant with murdering his own slave. In 1811, the wealthy white planter Arthur Hodge was hanged for murdering several of his slaves on his plantation in the Virgin Islands.\nHonor killings in Corsica.\nIn Corsica, vendetta was a social code that required Corsicans to kill anyone who wronged their family honor. Between 1821 and 1852, no fewer than 4,300 murders were perpetrated in Corsica.\nAbortion.\nOpponents of abortion consider abortion a form of murder, treating the foetus as a person. In some countries, a foetus is a legal person who can be murdered, and killing someone who is pregnant is considered a double homicide.\nIncidence.\nThe World Health Organization reported in October 2002 that a person is murdered every 60 seconds. An estimated 520,000 people were murdered in 2000 around the globe. Another study estimated the worldwide murder rate at 456,300 in 2010 with a 35% increase since 1990. Two-fifths of them were young people between the ages of 10 and 29 who were killed by other young people. Because murder is the least likely crime to go unreported, statistics of murder are seen as a bellwether of overall crime rates.\nHistorical variation.\nAccording to scholar Pieter Spierenburg homicide rates per 100,000 in Europe have fallen over the centuries, from 35 per 100,000 in medieval times, to 20 in 1500\u00a0AD, five in 1700, to below two per 100,000 in 1900.\nIn the United States, murder rates have been higher and have fluctuated. They fell below 2 per 100,000 by 1900, rose during the first half of the century, dropped in the years following World War II, and bottomed out at 4.0 in 1957 before rising again. The rate stayed in 9 to 10 range most of the period from 1972 to 1994, before falling to 5 in present times. The increase since 1957 would have been even greater if not for the significant improvements in medical techniques and emergency response times, which mean that more and more attempted homicide victims survive. According to one estimate, if the lethality levels of criminal assaults of 1964 still applied in 1993, the country would have seen the murder rate of around 26 per 100,000, almost triple the actually observed rate of 9.5 per 100,000.\nA similar, but less pronounced pattern has been seen in major European countries as well. The murder rate in the United Kingdom fell to 1 per 100,000 by the beginning of the 20th century and as low as 0.62 per 100,000 in 1960, and was at 1.28 per 100,000 as of 2009[ [update]]. The murder rate in France (excluding Corsica) bottomed out after World War II at less than 0.4 per 100,000, quadrupling to 1.6 per 100,000 since then.\nThe specific factors driving these dynamics in murder rates are complex and not universally agreed upon. Much of the raise in the U.S. murder rate during the first half of the 20th century is generally thought to be attributed to gang violence associated with Prohibition. Since most murders are committed by young males, the near simultaneous low in the murder rates of major developed countries circa 1960 can be attributed to low birth rates during the Great Depression and World War II. Causes of further moves are more controversial. Some of the more exotic factors claimed to affect murder rates include the availability of abortion and the likelihood of chronic exposure to lead during childhood (due to the use of leaded paint in houses and tetraethyllead as a gasoline additive in internal combustion engines).\nRates by country.\nMurder rates vary greatly among countries and societies around the world. In the Western world, murder rates in most countries have declined significantly during the 20th century and are now between 1 and 4 cases per 100,000 people per year. Latin America and the Caribbean, the region with the highest murder rate in the world, experienced more than 2.5 million murders between 2000 and 2017.\nMurder rates in jurisdictions such as Japan, Singapore, Hong Kong, Iceland, Switzerland, Italy, Spain and Germany are among the lowest in the world, around 0.3\u20131 cases per 100,000 people per year; the rate of the United States is among the highest of developed countries, around 4.5 in 2014, with rates in larger cities sometimes over 40 per 100,000. The top ten highest murder rates are in Honduras (91.6 per 100,000), El Salvador, Ivory Coast, Venezuela, Belize, Jamaica, U.S. Virgin Islands, Guatemala, Saint Kitts and Nevis and Zambia. (UNODC, 2011 \u2013 ).\nThe following absolute murder counts per-country are not comparable because they are not adjusted by each country's total population. Nonetheless, they are included here for reference, with 2010 used as the base year (they may or may not include justifiable homicide, depending on the jurisdiction). There were 52,260 murders in Brazil, consecutively elevating the record set in 2009. Over half a million people were shot to death in Brazil between 1979 and 2003. 33,335 murder cases were registered across India, approximately 17,000 murders in Colombia (the murder rate was 38 per 100,000 people, in 2008 murders went down to 15,000), approximately 16,000 murders in South Africa, approximately 15,000 murders in the United States, approximately 26,000 murders in Mexico, about 8,000 murders committed in Russia, approximately 13,000 murders in Venezuela, approximately 4,000 murders in El Salvador, approximately 1,400 murders in Jamaica, approximately 550 murders in Canada and approximately 470 murders in Trinidad and Tobago. Pakistan reported 12,580 murders.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, 666,160 people were killed between 1960 and 1996. Approximately 90% of murders in the US are committed by males. Between 1976 and 2005, 23.5% of all murder victims and 64.8% of victims murdered by intimate partners were female. For women in the US, homicide is the leading cause of death in the workplace.\nIn the US, murder is the leading cause of death for African American males aged 15 to 34. Between 1976 and 2008, African Americans were victims of 329,825 homicides. In 2006, the Federal Bureau of Investigation's Supplementary Homicide Report indicated that nearly half of the 14,990 murder victims that year were black (7421). In 2007, there were 3,221 black victims and 3,587 white victims of non-negligent homicides. While 2,905 of the black victims were killed by a black offender, 2,918 of the white victims were killed by white offenders. There were 566 white victims of black offenders and 245 black victims of white offenders. The \"white\" category in the Uniform Crime Reports (UCR) includes non-black Hispanics. \nMurder demographics are affected by the improvement of trauma care, which has resulted in reduced lethality of violent assaults \u2013 thus the murder rate may not necessarily indicate the overall level of social violence.\nWorkplace homicide, which tripled during the 1980s, is the fastest growing category of murder in America.\nDevelopment of murder rates over time in different countries is often used by both supporters and opponents of capital punishment and gun control. Using properly filtered data, it is possible to make the case for or against either of these issues. For example, one could look at murder rates in the United States from 1950 to 2000, and notice that those rates went up sharply shortly after a moratorium on death sentences was effectively imposed in the late 1960s. This fact has been used to argue that capital punishment serves as a deterrent and, as such, it is morally justified. Capital punishment opponents frequently counter that the United States has much higher murder rates than Canada and most European Union countries, although all those countries have abolished the death penalty. Overall, the global pattern is too complex, and on average, the influence of both these factors may not be significant and could be more social, economic, and cultural.\nDespite the immense improvements in forensics in the past few decades, the fraction of murders solved has decreased in the United States, from 90% in 1960 to 61% in 2007. Solved murder rates in major U.S. cities varied in 2007 from 36% in Boston, Massachusetts, to 76% in San Jose, California. Major factors affecting the arrest rate include witness cooperation and the number of people assigned to investigate the case.\nInvestigation.\nThe success rate of criminal investigations into murders (the clearance rate) tends to be relatively high for murder compared to other crimes, due to its seriousness. In the United States, the clearance rate was 62.6% in 2004.\nSee also.\nRelated topics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLaws by country.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20173", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20173", "title": "Mrs. Miggins", "text": ""}
{"id": "20174", "revid": "37017796", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20174", "title": "Mariner program", "text": "NASA space program from 1962 to 1973\nThe Mariner program was conducted by the American space agency NASA to explore other planets. Between 1962 and late 1973, NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) designed and built 10 robotic interplanetary probes named Mariner to explore the inner Solar System \u2013 visiting the planets Venus, Mars and Mercury for the first time, and returning to Venus and Mars for additional close observations.\nThe program included a number of interplanetary firsts, including the first successful planetary flyby, the planetary orbiter, and the first gravity assist maneuver. Of the 10 vehicles in the Mariner series, seven were successful, forming the starting point for many subsequent NASA/JPL space probe programs. The planned Mariner Jupiter-Saturn vehicles were adapted into the Voyager program, while the Viking program orbiters were enlarged versions of the Mariner 9 spacecraft. Later Mariner-based spacecraft include Galileo and Magellan, while the second-generation Mariner Mark II series evolved into the Cassini\u2013Huygens probe.\nThe total cost of the Mariner program was approximately $554 million.\nEarly concept.\nThe Mariner program began in 1960 with a series of JPL mission studies for small-scale, frequent exploration of the nearest planets. They were to take advantage of the soon-to-be-available Atlas launch vehicles as well as the developing capability of JPL's Deep Space Instrumentation Facility (later named the Deep Space Network), a global network of ground stations designed to communicate with spacecraft in deep space. The name of the Mariner program was decided in \"May 1960 \u2013 at the suggestion of Edgar M. Cortright\" to have the \"planetary mission probes ... patterned after nautical terms, to convey 'the impression of travel to great distances and remote lands.'\" That \"decision was the basis for naming Mariner, Ranger, Surveyor, and Viking probes.\"\nEach spacecraft was to carry solar panels that would be pointed toward the Sun and a dish antenna that would be pointed at Earth. Each would also carry a host of scientific instruments. Some of the instruments, such as cameras, would need to be pointed at the target body it was studying. Other instruments were non-directional and studied phenomena such as magnetic fields and charged particles. JPL engineers proposed to make the Mariners \"three-axis-stabilized,\" meaning that unlike other space probes they would not spin.\nEach of the Mariner projects was designed to have two spacecraft launched on separate rockets, in case of difficulties with the nearly untried launch vehicles. Mariner 1, Mariner 3, and Mariner 8 were in fact lost during launch, but their backups were successful. No Mariners were lost in later flight to their destination planets or before completing their scientific missions.\nBasic layout.\nAll Mariner spacecraft were based on a hexagonal or octagonal bus, which housed all of the electronics, and to which all components were attached, such as antennae, cameras, propulsion, and power sources. Mariner 2 was based on the Ranger Lunar probe. All of the Mariners launched after Mariner 2 had four solar panels for power, except for Mariner 10, which had two. Additionally, all except Mariner 1, Mariner 2 and Mariner 5 had TV cameras.\nThe first five Mariners were launched on Atlas-Agena rockets, while the last five used the Atlas-Centaur. All Mariner-based probes after Mariner 10 used the Titan IIIE, Titan IV uncrewed rockets or the Space Shuttle with a solid-fueled Inertial Upper Stage and multiple planetary flybys.\nMariners.\nThe Mariners were all relatively small robotic explorers, each launched on an Atlas rocket with either an Agena or Centaur upper-stage booster, and weighing less than half a ton (without onboard rocket propellant). Each of their missions was completed within a few months to a year or two, though one of them outlived its original mission and continued to send useful scientific data for three years.\nMariners 1 and 2.\nMariner 1 (P-37) and Mariner 2 (P-38) were two deep-space probes making up NASA's Mariner-R project. The primary goal of the project was to develop and launch two spacecraft sequentially to the near vicinity of Venus, receive communications from the spacecraft and to perform radiometric temperature measurements of the planet. A secondary objective was to make interplanetary magnetic field and/or particle measurements on the way to, and in the vicinity of, Venus. Mariner 1 (designated Mariner R-1) was launched on July 22, 1962, but was destroyed approximately 5 minutes after liftoff by the Air Force range safety officer when its malfunctioning Atlas-Agena rocket went off course. Mariner 2 (designated Mariner R-2) was launched on August 27, 1962, sending it on a 3\u00bd-month flight to Venus. The mission was a success, and Mariner 2 became the first spacecraft to have flown by another planet.\nOn the way it measured for the first time the solar wind, a constant stream of charged particles flowing outward from the Sun. It also measured interplanetary dust, which turned out to be more scarce than predicted. In addition, Mariner 2 detected high-energy charged particles coming from the Sun, including several brief solar flares, as well as cosmic rays from outside the Solar System. As it flew by Venus on December 14, 1962, Mariner 2 scanned the planet with infrared and microwave radiometers, revealing that Venus has cool clouds and an extremely hot surface (because the bright, opaque clouds hide the planet's surface, Mariner 2 was not outfitted with a camera).\nStatus:\nMariners 3 and 4.\nSisterships Mariner 3 and Mariner 4 were Mars flyby missions.\nMariner 3 was launched on November 5, 1964, but the shroud encasing the spacecraft atop its rocket failed to open properly and Mariner 3 did not get to Mars.\nMariner 4, launched on November 28, 1964, was the first successful flyby of the planet Mars and gave the first glimpse of Mars at close range. The spacecraft flew past Mars on July 14, 1965, collecting the first close-up photographs of another planet. The pictures, played back from a small tape recorder over a long period, showed lunar-type impact craters (just beginning to be photographed at close range from the Moon), some of them touched with frost in the chill Martian evening. The Mariner 4 spacecraft, expected to survive something more than the eight months to Mars encounter, actually lasted about three years in solar orbit, continuing long-term studies of the solar wind environment and making coordinated measurements with Mariner 5, a sister ship launched to Venus in 1967.\nStatus:\nMariner 5.\nThe Mariner 5 spacecraft was launched to Venus on June 14, 1967, and arrived in the vicinity of the planet in October 1967. It carried a complement of experiments to probe Venus' atmosphere with radio waves, scan its brightness in ultraviolet light, and sample the solar particles and magnetic field fluctuations above the planet.\nStatus:\nMariner 5 \u2013 Defunct and now in a heliocentric orbit.\nMariners 6 and 7.\nMariners 6 and 7 were identical teammates in a two-spacecraft mission to Mars. Mariner 6 was launched on February 24, 1969, followed by Mariner 7 on March 21, 1969. They flew over the equator and southern hemisphere of the planet Mars. They analyzed atmosphere and surface with remote sensors as well as recording and relaying hundreds of pictures. By chance, both flew over cratered regions and missed both the giant northern volcanoes and the equatorial grand canyon discovered later. Their approach pictures did, however, show the dark features long seen from Earth, but no canals.\nStatus: Both Mariner 6 and Mariner 7 are now defunct and are in a heliocentric orbit.\nMariners 8 and 9.\nMariner 8 and Mariner 9 were identical sister craft designed to map the Martian surface simultaneously, but Mariner 8 was lost in a launch vehicle failure. Mariner 9 was launched in May 1971 and became the first artificial satellite of Mars. Its launch mass was nearly doubled by the onboard rocket propellant needed to thrust it into orbit around Mars, but otherwise it closely resembled its predecessors. It entered Martian orbit in November 1971 and began photographing the surface and analyzing the atmosphere with its infrared and ultraviolet instruments.\nSince 1969, Mariner spacecraft operations such as science sequencing and pointing had been programmable, using simple flight computers with limited memory, and the spacecraft used a digital tape-recorder rather than film to store images and other science data. The spacecraft was thus able to wait until the storm abated, the dust settled and the surface was clearly visible before compiling its global mosaic of high-quality images of the surface of Mars.\nIt also provided the first closeup pictures of Mars's two small, irregular moons, Phobos and Deimos.\nStatus:\nMariner 10.\nThe Mariner 10 spacecraft launched on November 3, 1973, and was the first to use a gravity assist trajectory, accelerating as it entered the gravitational influence of Venus, then being flung by the planet's gravity onto a slightly different course to reach Mercury. It was also the first spacecraft to encounter two planets at close range, and for 33 years the only spacecraft to photograph Mercury in closeup.\nHere a fortuitous gravity assist enabled the spacecraft to return at six-month intervals for close mapping passes over the planet, covering half the globe (Mercury's slow rotation left the other half always in the dark when Mariner returned).\nStatus: Mariner 10 \u2013 Defunct and now in a heliocentric orbit.\nMariner Jupiter-Saturn.\nMariner Jupiter-Saturn was approved in 1972 after the cancellation of the Grand Tour program, which proposed visiting all the outer planets with multiple spacecraft. The Mariner Jupiter-Saturn program proposed two Mariner-derived probes that would perform a scaled back mission involving flybys of only the two gas giants, though designers at JPL built the craft with the intention that further encounters past Saturn would be an option. Trajectories were chosen to allow one probe to visit Jupiter and Saturn first, and perform a flyby of Saturn's moon Titan to gather information about the moon's substantial atmosphere. The other probe would arrive at Jupiter and Saturn later, and its trajectory would enable it to continue on to Uranus and Neptune assuming the first probe accomplished all its objectives, or be redirected to perform a Titan flyby if necessary. The program's name was changed to Voyager just before launch in 1977, and after \"Voyager 1\" successfully completed its Titan encounter, \"Voyager 2\" went on to visit the two ice giants.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAttribution:"}
{"id": "20175", "revid": "15305115", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20175", "title": "Mariner 4", "text": "First successful NASA mission to Mars (1964\u20131967)\nMariner 4 (Mariner C-3, together with Mariner 3 known as Mariner-Mars 1964) was the fourth in a series of spacecraft intended for planetary exploration in a flyby mode. It was designed to conduct closeup scientific observations of Mars and to transmit these observations to Earth. Launched on November 28, 1964, Mariner 4 performed the first successful flyby of the planet Mars, returning the first close-up pictures of the Martian surface. It captured the first images of another planet ever returned from deep space; their depiction of a cratered, dead planet largely changed the scientific community's view of life on Mars. Other mission objectives were to perform field and particle measurements in interplanetary space in the vicinity of Mars and to provide experience in and knowledge of the engineering capabilities for interplanetary flights of long duration. Initially expected to remain in space for eight months, Mariner 4's mission lasted about three years in solar orbit. On December 21, 1967, communications with Mariner 4 were terminated.\nSpacecraft and subsystems.\nThe Mariner 4 spacecraft consisted of an octagonal magnesium frame, across a diagonal and high. Four solar panels were attached to the top of the frame with an end-to-end span of , including solar pressure vanes which extended from the ends. A elliptical high-gain parabolic antenna was mounted at the top of the frame as well. An omnidirectional low-gain antenna was mounted on a tall mast next to the high-gain antenna. The overall height of the spacecraft was . The octagonal frame housed the electronic equipment, cabling, midcourse propulsion system, and attitude control gas supplies and regulators.\nThe scientific instruments included:\nThe electric power for the instruments and the radio transmitter of Mariner 4 was supplied by 28,224 solar cells contained in the four solar panels, which could provide 310\u00a0watts at the distance of Mars. A rechargeable 1200\u00a0W\u00b7h silver-zinc battery was also used for maneuvers and backup. Monopropellant hydrazine was used for propulsion, via a four-jet vane vector control motor, with thrust, installed on one of the sides of the octagonal structure. The space probe's attitude control was provided by 12 cold nitrogen gas jets mounted on the ends of the solar panels and three gyros. Solar pressure vanes, each with an area of , were attached to the tips of the solar panels. Positional information was provided by four Sun sensors, and a sensor for either the Earth, Mars, or the star Canopus, depending on the time in its spaceflight. Mariner 4 was the first space probe that needed a star for a navigational reference object, since earlier missions, which remained near either the Earth, the Moon, or the planet Venus, had sighted onto either the bright face of the home planet or the brightly lit target. During this flight, both the Earth and Mars would be too dim to lock onto. Another bright source at a wide angle away from the Sun was needed and Canopus filled this requirement. Subsequently, Canopus was used as a reference point in many following missions.\nThe telecommunications equipment on Mariner 4 consisted of dual S-band transmitters (with either a seven-watt triode cavity amplifier or a ten watt traveling-wave tube amplifier) and a single radio receiver which together could send and receive data via the low- and high-gain antennas at 8\u2153 or 33\u2153 bits per second. Data could also be stored onto a magnetic tape recorder with a capacity of 5.24 million bits for later transmission. All electronic operations were controlled by a command subsystem which could process any of 29 direct command words or three quantitative word commands for mid-course maneuvers. The central computer and sequencer operated stored time-sequence commands using a 38.4\u00a0kHz synchronization frequency as a time reference. Temperature control was achieved through the use of adjustable louvers mounted on six of the electronics assemblies, plus multilayer insulating blankets, polished aluminum shields, and surface treatments. Other measurements that could be made included:\nMariner 4 was also supposed to carry an ultraviolet photometer on the left side of the aft TV Camera scan platform. Late in testing, it was discovered that the inclusion of the UV photometer produced electrical problems that would have jeopardized the TV Camera. As a result, it was removed and replaced with a thermal/inertial mass simulator that was designed to emulate the UV photometer's geometry, mass, and other characteristics so that any unintentional problems caused by the removal of the UV photometer would be negated. This spare UV photometer was eventually flown on Mariner 5 in 1967.\nMission profile.\nLaunch.\nAfter Mariner 3 was a total loss due to failure of the payload shroud to jettison, JPL engineers suggested that there had been a malfunction caused during separation of the metal fairing exterior from the fiberglass inner lining due to pressure differences between the inner and outer part of the shroud and that this could have caused the spring-loaded separation mechanism to become tangled and fail to detach properly.\nTesting at JPL confirmed this failure mode and an effort was made to develop a new, all-metal fairing. The downside of this was that the new fairing would be significantly heavier and reduce the Atlas-Agena's lift capacity. Convair and Lockheed-Martin had to make several performance enhancements to the booster to wring more power out of it. Despite fears that the work could not be completed before the 1964 Mars window closed, the new shroud was ready by November.\nAfter launch from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station Launch Complex 12, the protective shroud covering Mariner 4 was jettisoned and the Agena-D/Mariner 4 combination separated from the Atlas-D booster at 14:27:23 UTC on November 28, 1964. The Agena's first burn took place from 14:28:14 to 14:30:38. The initial burn put the spacecraft into an Earth parking orbit and the second burn from 15:02:53 to 15:04:28 injected the craft into a Mars transfer orbit. Mariner 4 separated from the Agena at 15:07:09 and began cruise mode operations. The solar panels deployed and the scan platform was unlatched at 15:15:00. Sun acquisition occurred 16 minutes later.\nLock on Canopus.\nAfter Sun acquisition, the Canopus star tracker went searching for Canopus. The star tracker was set to respond to any object more than one-eighth as, and less than eight times as bright as Canopus. Including Canopus, there were seven such objects visible to the sensor. It took more than a day of \"star-hopping\" to find Canopus, as the sensor locked on to other stars instead: a stray light pattern from the near Earth, Alderamin, Regulus, Naos, and Gamma Velorum were acquired before Canopus.\nA consistent problem that plagued the spacecraft during the early portion of its mission was that roll error signal transients would occur frequently and on occasion would cause loss of the Canopus star lock. The first attempt at a midcourse maneuver was aborted by a loss of lock shortly after the gyros began spinup. Canopus lock was lost six times within a period of less than three weeks after launch and each time a sequence of radio commands would be required to reacquire the star. After a study of the problem, the investigators concluded that the behavior was due to small dust particles that were being released from the spacecraft by some means and were drifting through the star sensor field-of-view. Sunlight scattered from the particles then appeared as illumination equivalent to that from a bright star. This would cause a roll error transient as the object passed through the field-of-view while the sensor was locked onto Canopus. When the object was bright enough that it exceeded the high gate limits at eight times the Canopus intensity, the spacecraft would automatically disacquire Canopus and initiate a roll search for a new star. Finally, a radio command was sent on December 17, 1964, that removed the high gate limit. There was no further loss of Canopus lock, although roll transients occurred 38 more times before encounter with Mars.\nMidcourse maneuver.\nThe 7\u00bd month flight of Mariner 4 involved one midcourse maneuver on December 5, 1964. The maneuver was initially scheduled for December 4, but due to a loss of lock with Canopus, it was postponed. The maneuver was successfully completed on December 5; it consisted of a negative pitch turn of 39.16 degrees, a positive roll turn of 156.08 degrees, and a thrusting time of 20.07 seconds. The turns aimed the motor of the spacecraft back in the general direction of Earth, as the motor was initially pointed along the direction of flight. Both the pitch and roll changes were completed with better than 1% accuracy, the velocity change with about 2.5% accuracy. After the maneuver, Mariner 4 was on course for Mars as planned.\nData transmission rate reduced.\nOn January 5, 1965, 36 days after launch and from Earth, Mariner 4 reduced its rate of transmission of scientific data from 33 1/3 to 8 1/3 bits per second. This was the first autonomous action the spacecraft had taken since the midcourse maneuver.\nMars flyby.\nThe Mariner\u00a04 spacecraft flew by Mars on July 14 and 15, 1965. Its closest approach was from the Martian surface at 01:00:57 UT July 15, 1965 (8:00:57\u00a0p.m. EST July 14), its distance to Earth was , its speed was relative to Mars, relative to Earth.\nPlanetary science mode was turned on at 15:41:49 UTC on July 14. The camera sequence started at 00:18:36\u00a0UT on July 15 (7:18:49\u00a0p.m. EST on July 14) and 21 pictures using alternate red and green filters, plus 21 lines of a 22nd picture were taken. The images covered a discontinuous swath of Mars starting near 40\u00b0\u00a0N, 170\u00b0\u00a0E, down to about 35\u00b0\u00a0S, 200\u00b0\u00a0E, and then across to the terminator at 50\u00b0\u00a0S, 255\u00b0\u00a0E, representing about 1% of the planet's surface. The images taken during the flyby were stored in the on-board tape recorder. At 02:19:11\u00a0UTC, Mariner 4 passed behind Mars as seen from Earth and the radio signal ceased. The signal was reacquired at 03:13:04\u00a0UTC when the spacecraft reappeared. Cruise mode was then re-established. Transmission of the taped images to Earth began about 8.5\u00a0hours after signal reacquisition and continued until August 3. All images were transmitted twice to ensure no data was missing or corrupt. Each individual photograph took approximately six hours to be transmitted back to Earth.\nThe spacecraft performed all programmed activities successfully and returned useful data from launch until 22:05:07\u00a0UTC on October 1, 1965, when the long distance to Earth () and the imprecise antenna orientation led to a temporary loss of communication with the spacecraft until 1967.\nFirst image hand drawn.\nThe on-board tape recorder used on Mariner 4 was a spare, not originally intended for the Mariner 4 flight. Between the failure of Mariner 3, the fact that the Mariner 4 recorder was a spare, and some error readings suggesting an issue with the tape recorder, it was determined that the team would test the camera function definitively. This eventually led to the first digital image being painted. While waiting for the image data to be computer processed, the team used a pastel set from an art supply store to hand-color (paint-by-numbers style) a numerical printout of the raw pixels. The resulting image provided early verification that the camera was functioning. The hand-drawn image compared favorably with the final, computer-processed one.\nMicrometeoroid hits and end of communications.\nData acquisition resumed in late 1967. The cosmic dust detector registered 17 hits in a 15-minute span on September 15, part of an apparent micrometeoroid shower that temporarily changed the spacecraft attitude and probably slightly damaged its thermal shield. Later it was speculated that Mariner 4 passed through debris of comet D/1895 Q1 (Swift), and even made a flyby of that comet's possibly shattered nucleus at .\nOn December 7 the gas supply in the attitude control system was exhausted, and between December 10 and 11, a total of 83 micrometeoroid hits were recorded which caused perturbation of the spacecraft's attitude and degradation of the signal strength. On December 21, 1967, communications with Mariner 4 were terminated. The spacecraft is now derelict in an exterior heliocentric orbit.\nResults.\nThe total data returned by the mission was 5.2 million bits (about 634\u00a0kB). All instruments operated successfully with the exception of a part of the ionization chamber, namely the Geiger\u2013M\u00fcller tube, which failed in February 1965. In addition, the plasma probe had its performance degraded by a resistor failure on December 8, 1964, but experimenters were able to recalibrate the instrument and still interpret the data. The images returned showed a Moon-like cratered terrain, which scientists did not expect, although amateur astronomer Donald Cyr had predicted craters. Later missions showed that the craters were not typical for Mars, but only for the more ancient region imaged by Mariner 4. A surface atmospheric pressure of and daytime temperatures of were estimated. No magnetic field or Martian radiation belts or, again surprisingly, surface water was detected.\nBruce C. Murray used photographs from Mariner 4 to elucidate Mars's geologic history.\nImages of craters and measurements of a thin atmosphere\u2014much thinner than expected\u2014indicating a relatively inactive planet exposed to the harshness of space, generally dissipated hopes of finding intelligent life on Mars. Life on Mars had been the subject of speculation and science fiction for centuries. If there was life on Mars, after Mariner 4 most concluded it would probably be smaller, simpler forms. Others concluded that a search for life on Earth at kilometer resolution, using several thousand photographs, did not reveal a sign of life on the vast majority of these photographs; thus, based on the 22 photographs taken by Mariner 4, one could not conclude there was no intelligent life on Mars.\nThe solar wind was measured, and compared with simultaneous records from Mariner 5 which went to Venus.\nThe total cost of the Mariner 4 mission is estimated at $83.2\u00a0million (equivalent to $\u00a0million in 2024). Total research, development, launch, and support costs for the Mariner series of spacecraft (Mariners 1 through 10) was approximately $554\u00a0million (equivalent to $\u00a0billion in 2024).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20176", "revid": "40068029", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20176", "title": "Mariner 6", "text": ""}
{"id": "20177", "revid": "39958966", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20177", "title": "Mariner 7", "text": ""}
{"id": "20178", "revid": "244263", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20178", "title": "MOO (programming language)", "text": ""}
{"id": "20180", "revid": "46930939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20180", "title": "Musical ensemble", "text": "Instrumental and/or vocal music group\nA musical ensemble, also known as a music group, musical group, or a band is a group of people who perform instrumental and/or vocal music, with the ensemble typically known by a distinct name. Some music ensembles consist solely of instrumentalists, such as the jazz quartet or the orchestra. Other music ensembles consist solely of singers, such as choirs and doo-wop groups. In both popular music and classical music, there are ensembles in which both instrumentalists and singers perform, such as the rock band or the Baroque chamber group for basso continuo (harpsichord and cello) and one or more singers. In classical music, trios or quartets either blend the sounds of musical instrument families (such as piano, strings, and wind instruments) or group instruments from the same instrument family, such as string ensembles (e.g., string quartet) or wind ensembles (e.g., wind quintet). Some ensembles blend the sounds of a variety of instrument families, such as the orchestra, which uses a string section, brass instruments, woodwinds, and percussion instruments, or the concert band, which uses brass, woodwinds, and percussion. \nIn jazz ensembles or combos, the instruments typically include wind instruments (one or more saxophones, trumpets, etc.), one or two chordal \"comping\" instruments (electric guitar, acoustic guitar, piano, or Hammond organ), a bass instrument (bass guitar or double bass), and a drummer or percussionist. Jazz ensembles may be solely instrumental, or they may consist of a group of instruments accompanying one or more singers. In rock and pop ensembles, usually called rock bands or pop bands, there are usually guitars and keyboards (piano, electric piano, Hammond organ, synthesizer, etc.), one or more singers, and a rhythm section made up of a bass guitar and drum kit.\nMusic ensembles typically have a leader. In jazz bands, rock and pop groups, and similar ensembles, this is the band leader. In classical music, orchestras, concert bands, and choirs are led by a conductor. In orchestra, the concertmaster (principal first violin player) is the instrumentalist leader of the orchestra. In orchestras, the individual sections also have leaders, typically called the \"principal\" of the section (e.g., the leader of the viola section is called the \"principal viola\"). Conductors are also used in jazz big bands and in some very large rock or pop ensembles (e.g., a rock concert that includes a string section, a horn section, and a choir that accompanies a rock band's performance).\nClassical chamber music.\nIn Western classical music, smaller ensembles are called chamber music ensembles. The terms duo, trio, quartet, quintet, sextet, septet, octet, nonet, and decet describe groups of two up to ten musicians, respectively. A group of eleven musicians, such as found in \"The Carnival of the Animals\", is called an \"undecet\", and a group of twelve is called a \"duodecet\" (see Latin numerical prefixes). A soloist playing unaccompanied (e.g., a pianist playing a solo piano piece or a cellist playing a Bach suite for unaccompanied cello) is not an ensemble because it only contains one musician.\nFour parts.\nStrings.\nA string quartet consists of two violins, a viola, and a cello. There is a vast body of music written for string quartets, making it an important genre in classical music.\nWind.\nA woodwind quartet usually features a flute, an oboe, a clarinet, and a bassoon. A brass quartet features two trumpets, a trombone, and a tuba (or French horn (more commonly known as \"horn\")). A saxophone quartet consists of a soprano saxophone, an alto saxophone, a tenor saxophone, and a baritone saxophone.\nFive parts.\nThe string \"quintet\" is a common type of group. It is similar to the string quartet, but with an additional viola, cello, or more rarely, the addition of a double bass. Terms such as \"piano quintet\" or \"clarinet quintet\" frequently refer to a string quartet \"plus\" a fifth instrument. Mozart's Clarinet Quintet is similarly a piece written for an ensemble consisting of two violins, a viola, a cello, and a clarinet, the last being the exceptional addition to a \"normal\" string quartet.\nSome other quintets in classical music are the wind quintet, usually consisting of flute, oboe, clarinet, bassoon, and horn; the brass quintet, consisting of two trumpets, one horn, a trombone, and a tuba; and the reed quintet, consisting of an oboe, a soprano clarinet, a saxophone, a bass clarinet, and a bassoon.\nSix or more instruments.\nClassical chamber ensembles of six (sextet), seven (septet), or eight musicians (octet) are fairly common; the use of latinate terms for larger groups is rare, except for the nonet (nine musicians). In most cases, a larger classical group is referred to as an orchestra of some type or a concert band. A small orchestra with fifteen to thirty members (violins, violas, four cellos, two or three double basses, and several woodwind or brass instruments) is called a chamber orchestra. A sinfonietta usually denotes a somewhat smaller orchestra (though still not a chamber orchestra). Larger orchestras are called symphony orchestras (see below) or philharmonic orchestras.\nA pops orchestra is an orchestra that mainly performs light classical music (often in abbreviated, simplified arrangements) and orchestral arrangements and medleys of popular jazz, music theater, or pop music songs. A string orchestra has only string instruments, i.e., violins, violas, cellos, and double basses.\nA symphony orchestra is an ensemble usually comprising at least thirty musicians; the number of players is typically between fifty and ninety-five and may exceed one hundred. A symphony orchestra is divided into families of instruments. In the string family, there are sections of violins (I and II), violas, cellos (often eight), and basses (often from six to eight). The standard woodwind section consists of flutes (one doubling piccolo), oboes (one doubling English horn), soprano clarinets (one doubling bass clarinet), and bassoons (one doubling contrabassoon). The standard brass section consists of horns, trumpets, trombones, and tuba. The percussion section includes the timpani, bass drum, snare drum, and any other percussion instruments called for in a score (e.g., triangle, glockenspiel, chimes, cymbals, wood blocks, etc.). In Baroque music (1600\u20131750) and music from the early Classical period music (1750\u20131820), the percussion parts in orchestral works may only include timpani.\nA wind orchestra or concert band is a large classical ensemble generally made up of between 40 and 70 musicians from the woodwind, brass, and percussion families, along with the double bass. The concert band has a larger number and variety of wind instruments than the symphony orchestra but does not have a string section (although a single double bass is common in concert bands). The woodwind section of a concert band consists of piccolo, flutes, oboes (one doubling English horn), bassoons (one doubling contrabassoon), soprano clarinets (one doubling E\u266d clarinet, one doubling alto clarinet), bass clarinets (one doubling contrabass clarinet or contra-alto clarinet), alto saxophones (one doubling soprano saxophone), tenor saxophone, and baritone saxophone. The brass section consists of horns, trumpets or cornets, trombones, euphoniums, and tubas. The percussion section consists of the timpani, bass drum, snare drum, and any other percussion instruments called for in a score (e.g., triangle, glockenspiel, chimes, cymbals, wood blocks, etc.).\nLess well known is the large symphonic accordion orchestra. Typically, it includes between 50 and 100 musicians whose free-bass instruments are individually re-tuned in order to recreate the full range of orchestral sounds and timbers required for the performance of traditional Western classical music.\nWhen orchestras perform baroque music (from the 17th century and early 18th century), they may also use a harpsichord or pipe organ, to play the continuo part. When orchestras perform Romantic-era music (from the 19th century), they may also use harps or unusual instruments such as the wind machine or cannons. When orchestras perform music from the 20th century or the 21st century, occasionally instruments such as electric guitar, theremin, or even an electronic synthesizer may be used.\nVocal group.\nA vocal group is a performing ensemble of vocalists who sing and harmonize together. The first well-known vocals groups emerged in the 19th century, and the style had reached widespread popularity by the 1940s.\nVocal groups can come in several different forms, including:\nOther western musical ensembles.\nA group that plays popular music or military music is usually called a band; a drum and bugle corps is a type of the latter. These bands perform a wide range of music, ranging from arrangements of jazz orchestral, or popular music to military-style marches. Drum corps perform on brass and percussion instruments only. Drum and Bugle Corps incorporate costumes, hats, and pageantry in their performances.\nOther band types include:\nSee List of musical band types for more.\nRole of women.\nWomen have a high prominence in many popular music styles as singers. However, professional women instrumentalists are uncommon in popular music, especially in rock genres such as heavy metal. \"[P]laying in a band is largely a male homosocial activity, that is, learning to play in a band is largely a peer-based... experience, shaped by existing sex-segregated friendship networks.\" As well, rock music \"...is often defined as a form of male rebellion vis-\u00e0-vis female bedroom culture.\" In popular music, there has been a gendered \"distinction between public (male) and private (female) participation\" in music. \"[S]everal scholars have argued that men exclude women from bands or the bands' rehearsals, recordings, performances, and other social activities.\" \"Women are mainly regarded as passive and private consumers of allegedly slick, prefabricated \u2013 hence, inferior \u2013 pop music..., excluding them from participating as high-status rock musicians.\" One of the reasons that there are rarely mixed gender bands is that \"bands operate as tight-knit units in which homosocial solidarity \u2013 social bonds between people of the same sex... \u2013 plays a crucial role.\" In the 1960s pop music scene, \"[s]inging was sometimes an acceptable pastime for a girl, but playing an instrument...simply wasn't done.\"\n\"The rebellion of rock music was largely a male rebellion; the women\u2014often, in the 1950s and '60s, girls in their teens\u2014in rock usually sang songs as person\u00e6 utterly dependent on their macho boyfriends...\" Philip Auslander says that \"Although there were many women in rock by the late 1960s, most performed only as singers, a traditionally feminine position in popular music.\" Though some women played instruments in American all-female garage rock bands, none of these bands achieved more than regional success. So they \"did not provide viable templates for women's on-going participation in rock\". About the gender composition of heavy metal bands, it has been said that \"[h]eavy metal performers are almost exclusively male\" \"...[a]t least until the mid-1980s\" apart from \"...exceptions such as Girlschool\". However, \"...now [in the 2010s] maybe more than ever\u2013strong metal women have put up their dukes and got down to it,\" \"carv[ing] out a considerable place for [them]selves\".\nWhen Suzi Quatro emerged in 1973, \"no other prominent female musician worked in rock simultaneously as a singer, instrumentalist, songwriter, and bandleader.\" According to Auslander, she was \"kicking down the male door in rock and roll and proving that a female \"musician\"\u00a0... and this is a point I am extremely concerned about\u00a0... could play as well if not better than the boys\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20181", "revid": "38716918", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20181", "title": "Marienburg", "text": "Marienburg may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "20182", "revid": "20306027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20182", "title": "Military history of Afghanistan", "text": "The Military history of Afghanistan () began before 1709 when the Hotaki dynasty was established in Kandahar followed by the Durrani Empire. The Afghan military was re-organized with assistance from the British in 1880, when the country was ruled by Amir Abdur Rahman Khan. It was modernized during King Amanullah Khan's rule in the early 20th century, and then during King Zahir Shah's forty-year rule; the Soviet Union supplied almost all weapons, training and military needs between the 1950s and 1970s. From 1978 to 1992, the Soviet-backed Afghan Armed Forces engaged in heavy fighting with the multi-national mujahideen groups who were then backed by the United States, Pakistan and others. After President Najibullah's resignation in 1992 and the end of Soviet support, the Afghan military dissolved into portions controlled by different factions. This era was followed by the Taliban regime, whose leaders were trained and influenced by the Pakistan Armed Forces.\nAfter the removal of the Taliban regime in late 2001 and the formation of the Afghan Interim Administration, new military units were created. They were trained by NATO-member states, primarily by the United States. The Afghan Armed Forces operated independently but received some air support from the U.S. Air Force. As a major non-NATO ally, Afghanistan continued to receive billions of dollars in military assistance from the United States up until mid-2021.\nWith the Taliban takeover of Afghanistan in August 2021, the Islamic Republic Armed Forces were effectively dissolved, with the former insurgents becoming the country's new military. Remnants of the disbanded Afghan National Army regrouped to form the National Resistance Front of Afghanistan to wage guerrilla warfare against the Emirate.\nOrigins.\nAfghans have served in the militaries of the Ghaznavids (963\u20131187), Ghurids (1148\u20131215), Delhi Sultanate (1206\u20131527), Mughals (1526\u20131858) and the Persian army. The current Afghan military traces its origin to the early 18th century when the Hotaki dynasty rose to power in Kandahar and defeated the Persian Safavid Empire at the Battle of Gulnabad in 1722.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The sun had just appeared on the horizon when the armies began to observe each other with that curiosity so natural on these dreadful occasions. The Persian army just come out of the capital, being composed of whatever was most brilliant at court, seemed as if it had been formed rather to make a show than to fight. The riches and variety of their arms and vestments, the beauty of their horses, the gold and precious stones with which some of their harnesses were covered, and the richness of their tents contributed to render the Persian camp very pompous and magnificent.\"\n\"On the other side there was a much smaller body of soldiers, disfigured with fatigue and the scorching heat of the sun. Their clothes were so ragged and torn in so long a march that they were scarce sufficient to cover them from the weather, and, their horses being adorned with only leather and brass, there was nothing glittering about them but their spears and sabres...\"\u2014\u200a\nWhen Ahmad Shah Durrani formed the Durrani Empire in 1747, his Afghan army fought a number of wars in the Punjab region of Hindustan during the 18th to the 19th century. One of the famous battles was the 1761 Battle of Panipat in which the Afghans invaded and won a victory against the Maratha Empire. The Afghans then engaged multiple wars with the Sikh Empire. The Afghan\u2013Sikh Wars saw major territorial losses for the Afghans. During the First Anglo-Afghan War, British India invaded Afghanistan in 1838 but withdrew in 1842. During these three years a number of battles took place in different parts of Afghanistan.\nTraditionally, Afghan governments relied on three military institutions: the regular army, tribal levies, and community militias. The regular army was sustained by the state and commanded by government leaders. The tribal or regional levies - irregular forces - consisted of part-time soldiers provided by tribal or regional chieftains. The chiefs received tax breaks, land ownership, cash payments, or other privileges in return. The community militia included all available able-bodied members of the community, mobilized to fight, probably only in exceptional circumstances, for common causes under community leaders. Combining these three institutions created a formidable force whose components supplemented each other's strengths and minimized their weaknesses.\nAt the outbreak of the Second Anglo-Afghan War (1878\u201380) the regular army was about 50,000 strong and consisted of 62 infantry and 16 cavalry regiments, with 324 guns mostly organized in horse and mountain artillery batteries. Jalali writes that '..although Amir Shir Ali Khan (1863\u201378) is widely credited for founding the modern Afghan Army, it was only under Abdur Rahman that it became a viable and effective institution.' The Library of Congress Country Study for Afghanistan states:\nAbdur Rahman was the creator of the modern Afghan state. When he came to the throne [in 1880], the army was virtually nonexistent. With the assistance of a liberal financial loan from the British, plus their aid in the form of weapons, ammunition, and other military supplies, he began a 20-year task of creating a respectable regular force by instituting measures that formed the long-term basis of the military system. These included increasing the equalization of military obligation by setting up a system known as the hasht nafari (whereby one man in every eight between the ages of 20 and 40 took his turn at military service); constructing an arsenal in Kabul to reduce dependence on foreign sources for small arms and other ordnance; introducing supervised training courses; organizing troops into divisions, brigades, and regiments, including battalions of artillery; developing pay schedules; and introducing an elementary (and harsh) disciplinary system.\n20th century.\nSoviet aid.\nAfter the Third Anglo-Afghan War ended, the reforming Amanullah Khan did not see the need for a large army, instead deciding to rely on Afghanistan's historical martial qualities. This resulted in neglect, cutbacks, recruitment problems, and finally an army unable to quell the 1929 uprising that cost him his throne. However, under his reign, the Afghan Air Force was formed in 1924. The Afghan Armed Forces were expanded during King Zahir Shah's reign, reaching a strength of 70,000 in 1933. Adamec writes that the army was 60,000 strong in 1936, and included two corps in Kabul; three divisions in the Southern Province; one division Household troops (Guard Division); one artillery division; and two independent mixed divisions. Total divisions were 13 plus the artillery division. It is not clear how much the Army was involved in the Afghan tribal revolts of 1944\u20131947.\nFollowing the Second World War, Afghanistan briefly received continued military support from the British government under the Lancaster Plan from 1945 to 1947, until the partition of India transformed British priorities. Afghanistan declined to join the 1955 United States-sponsored Baghdad Pact; this rebuff did not stop the United States from continuing its low-level aid program, but it was reluctant to provide Afghanistan with military assistance, so Daoud turned to the Soviet Union and its allies, and in 1955 he received approximately US$25\u00a0million of military aid. \nDuring the 1950s and 1960s, Afghanistan purchased moderate quantities of Soviet weapons. It was mainly Sukhoi Su-7, Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-21 fighter jets, T-34 and Iosif Stalin tanks, SU-76 self-propelled guns, GAZ-69 4x4 light trucks of jeep class (in many versions), ZIL-157 military trucks, Katyusha multiple rocket launchers, and BTR-40 and BTR-152 armored personnel carriers. Also included were PPSh-41 and RPK machine guns. \nIn addition, the Soviet Union and its allies began construction of military airfields in Bagram, Mazar-e-Sharif, and Shindand. By the 1960s, Soviet assistance started to improve the structure, armament, training, and command and control arrangements for the military. The Afghan Armed Forces reached a strength of 98,000 (90,000 soldiers and 8,000 airmen) by this period.\nDuring this time in September 1960, irregulars &amp; regulars of the Royal Afghan Army invaded the Bajaur district of Pakistan which resulted in intense skirmishes with Pakistani forces &amp; local Pakistani tribesmen. However, the Afghan forces faced a defeat after they were flushed out of the area.\nAfter the exile of King Zahir Shah in 1973, President Daud Khan forged stronger ties with the Soviets by signing two highly controversial military aid packages for his nation in 1973 and 1975. Between 1973 and 1978, Afghanistan obtained more sophisticated Soviet weapons such as Mi-4 and Mi-8 helicopters, Sukhoi Su-22 and Il-28 jets. A great many T-55, T-62, and PT-76 tanks arrived and huge amounts of AKM assault rifles were ordered. Armored vehicles delivered in the 1970s also included ZIL-135s, BMP-1s, BRDM-1s, BTR-60s, UAZ-469, and GAZ-66 as well as large quantities of small arms and artillery. The Afghan Armed Forces and police continued to receive up-to-date Soviet weapons, as well as training by the KGB and Soviet Armed Forces, for another three years. Due to problems with local political parties in his country, President Daud Khan decided to distance himself from the Soviets in 1976. He made Afghanistan's ties closer to the Greater Middle East and the United States instead.\nBy the time Daoud visited the Soviet Union again in April 1977, the Soviets were aware of his purge of the left that began in 1975, his removal of Soviet advisers from some Afghan military units, and his diversification of Afghan military training (especially to nations like India and Egypt, where they could be trained with Soviet weapons but not by Soviets).\nIn April 1978 there was a coup, known as the Saur Revolution, orchestrated by members of the government loyal to the People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA). This led to a full-scale Soviet invasion in December 1979, led by the 40th Army and the Airborne Forces. In 1981 the total strength of the Afghan Armed Forces was around 85,000 troops according to The New York Times. The Afghan Army had around 35\u201340,000 soldiers, mostly conscripts; the Air Force had around 7,000 personnel; and the total of all military personnel was around 87,000 in 1984. Throughout the 1980s, the Afghan Armed Forces was heavily involved in fighting against the multi-national mujahiddin rebel groups who were largely backed by the United States and trained by the Pakistan Armed Forces. The rebel groups were fighting to force the Soviet Union to withdraw from Afghanistan as well as to remove the Soviet-backed government of President Mohammad Najibullah. Due to large number of defectors, the Afghan Armed Forces in 1985 were reduced to no more than about 47,000, the actual figure probably being lower. The Air Force had over 150 combat aircraft with about 7,000 officers who were supported by up to 5,000 Cuban Revolutionary Air and Air Defense Force and Czechoslovak Air Force advisers.\nUnder the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan (1978\u20131992), weapon deliveries by the Soviets were increased and included Mi-24 helicopters, MiG-23 fighter aircraft, ZSU-23-4 \"Shilka\" and ZSU-57-2 anti-aircraft self-propelled mounts, MT-LB armored personnel carriers, BM-27 \"Uragan\" and BM-21 \"Grad\" multiple-launch rocket systems and FROG-7 and Scud launchers. Some of the weapons that were not damaged during the decades of wars are still being used today.\nWeapons supplies were made available to the mujahideen rebel groups through numerous countries; the United States purchased all of Israel's captured Soviet weapons clandestinely, and then funnelled the weapons to the mujahideen rebels, while Egypt upgraded their own Army's weapons, and sent the older weapons to the mujahideen, Turkey sold its World War II stockpiles to the warlords, and the British and Swiss provided Blowpipe missiles and Oerlikon anti-aircraft guns respectively, after they were found to be poor models for their own forces. China provided the most relevant weapons, likely due to their own experience with guerrilla warfare, and kept meticulous record of all the shipments.\nFollowing the Soviet withdrawal in 1989 the mujahiddin rebel attacks continued and grew in intensity. For several years the Afghan Armed Forces had actually increased their effectiveness past levels ever achieved during the Soviet military presence. The eleven-year Siege of Khost ended with the city's fall in March 1991. But the government was dealt a major blow when Abdul Rashid Dostum, a leading general, switched allegiances to the mujahideen forces in 1992 and together they captured the city of Kabul. By 1992 the Army fragmented into regional militias under local warlords because of the fall of the Soviet Union which stopped supplying the Afghan Armed Forces and later in 1992 when the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan government lost power.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The fall of the Moscow-backed regime in 1992 disintegrated the state as well as the army. Bits and pieces of the fragmented military either disappeared or joined the warring factions that were locked in a drawn-out power struggle. The warring factions were composed of odd assortments of armed groups with varying levels of loyalties, political commitment, professional skills, and organizational integrity.\"\u2014\u200a\nAfter the fall of Najibullah's regime in 1992, the various Afghan political parties began to assemble their own more formal armed forces. By February 1992 Massoud's Jamiat-i-Islami had a central force reported at six battalions strong, plus additional second tier units, \"the bulk of the army, ..made up of regional battalions, subordinate to local commanders of the Supervisory Council.\" On 16 January 1993 \"Jane's Defence Weekly\" reported that \"a special assembly of 1335 delegates elected from across Afghanistan\" had both elected Professor Burhanuddin Rabbani as President of the Islamic State of Afghanistan for two years, and agreed to \"establish a regular army with soldiers mostly drawn from Mojahedin groups.\" Pakistan had offered training assistance. However, a Civil War started between the various warlords, including Ahmad Shah Massoud, Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, Abdul Rashid Dostum, Abdul Ali Mazari, Jalaluddin Haqqani, Ismail Khan, Atta Muhammad Nur, Abdul Rasul Sayyaf, Mohammad Nabi Mohammadi, Mohammad Yunus Khalis, Gul Agha Sherzai and many others. They received logistics support from foreign powers including Russia, Pakistan, India, Iran, China, France and others.\nFirst Taliban Government period.\nWhen the Taliban took power in 1996, the local warlords and their followers fled Kabul to the north of the country. With the backing and support of Pakistan, the Taliban solidified their own state military forces.Al-Qaeda was also training its fighters in the Taliban controlled territory, including their high-quality 055 Brigade. The Taliban forces possessed over 400 T-54/55 and T-62 tanks and more than 200 Armoured personnel carriers. The Afghan Air Force under the Taliban maintained five supersonic MIG-21MFs and 10 Sukhoi-22 fighter-bombers. In 1995, during the 1995 Airstan incident, a Taliban fighter plane captured a Russian transport. They also held six Mil Mi-8 helicopters, five Mi-35s, five L-39Cs, six Antonov An-12, 25 An-26, a dozen An-24/32, an IL-18, and a Yakovlev.\nU.S. war in Afghanistan (2002\u20132021).\nAfter the formation of the Karzai administration in late 2001, the Afghan armed forces was gradually reestablished by the United States and its allies. Over two decades, 2001\u20132021, the United States spent an estimated $83 billion on the Afghan military through the Afghanistan Security Forces Fund and an additional $36 billion to support the Afghan government.\nInitially, a new land force, the Afghan National Army (ANA), was created, along with an air arm, the Afghan National Army Air Corps, as part of the army. The army later included Commandos and Special Forces. The ANA Air Corps later split off to become an independent branch, the Afghan Air Force. Training was managed initially by the U.S. Office of Military Cooperation, followed by other U.S. organizations and then Combined Security Transition Command-Afghanistan, and was finally run by the Resolute Support Mission.\nThe President of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan was the Commander-in-Chief of the Afghan Armed Forces, who were administratively controlled through the Ministry of Defence. Before the Fall of Kabul, they had major bases and small outposts all across Afghanistan, including in the provinces of Badakhshan, Balkh, Helmand, Herat, Kabul, Kandahar, Nangarhar and Parwan, as well as in the cities of Kunduz, Ghazni, Gardez, Khost, Fayzabad, Farah and Zaranj.\nThe Afghan Air Force was relatively capable before and during the 1980s but by late 2001, the number of operational aircraft available was minimal. The United States and its allies quickly eliminated the remaining strength and ability of the Taliban to operate aircraft in the opening stages of their intervention. With the occupation of airbases by American forces it became clear how destitute the Air Force had become since the withdrawal of the Soviet Union. Most aircraft were only remnants rusting away for a decade or more. Many others were relocated to neighboring countries for storage purposes or sold cheaply. The AAF was reduced to a very small force while the country was torn by civil war. It was gradually strengthened by CSTC-A's NATO-led multinational Combined Air Power Transition Force.\nBy 2006, more than 60,000 former militiamen from around the country were disarmed. In 2007, it was reported that the DDR programmes had dismantled 274 paramilitary organizations, reintegrated over 62,000 militia members into civilian life, and recovered more than 84,000 weapons, including heavy weapons. But \"The New York Times\" also reported a rise in hoarded weapons and a growing Taliban threat, even in the north of the country.\nCommandos were established in 2007, later growing from a battalion to a brigade. The aim of Disbandment of Illegal Armed Groups programme was to ban all illegal armed groups in all provinces of the country. Approximately 2,000 such groups have been identified; most of them surrendered to the Afghan government or joined the new armed forces.\nThe NATO-trained Afghan National Army grew to a size of 31 Kandaks, or Battalions, at one point 28 of which were announced as combat ready. Seven regional corps headquarters were created. The National Military Academy of Afghanistan was built to provide future officers, modeled after the United States Military Academy. The Marshal Fahim National Defense University is located in Kabul province and consists of a headquarters building, classrooms, dining facility, library, and medical clinic. In addition to this, an $80\u00a0million central command center was built next to the Hamid Karzai International Airport. In 2012, Afghanistan became a major non-NATO ally of the United States.\nSizable numbers of Afghan officers are sent to be trained in India either at the Indian Military Academy in Dehradun, the National Defence Academy near Pune or the Officers Training Academy in Chennai. The Indian Military Academy which has been in existence since 1932, provides a 4-year degree to army officers, while the National Defence Academy is a tri-service college provides a 3-year degree after which officers undergo a 1-year specialization in their respective service colleges. The Officers Training Academy on the other hand provides a 49-week course to Graduate officer candidates. In 2014 the number of Afghan officers in training in India was nearly 1,100. A total of 1200 Afghan officers were trained up to 2013.\nThe total manpower of the Afghan Armed Forces was approximately 186,000 as of 2021. It was around 164,000 in May 2011.\nThe United States was also largely responsible for the growth of the Afghan Air Force, as part of the Combined Air Power Transition Force, from four aircraft at the end of 2001 to about 100 as of 2011. Types include Lockheed C-130 Hercules and Pilatus PC-12 transport aircraft, as well as Mi-17 troop-carrying helicopters and Mil Mi-35 attack helicopters. The aircrew are being trained by an American team. Eventually the air force had over 200 refurbished aircraft, which includes A-29 Super Tucano attack aircraft, Lockheed C-130 Hercules and Pilatus PC-12s military transport aircraft, as well as UH-60A Black Hawk, Mil Mi-17, and other types of helicopters. It also included trainers such as Aero L-39 Albatros and Cessna 182s. The manpower of the Afghan Air Force was around 7,000, which includes over 450 pilots. It also had a small number of female pilots.\nTaliban government since mid-2021.\nAs of 15 August 2021, what remained of the Ghani government's armed forces were left leaderless and dispersed due to the 2021 Taliban offensive and the Fall of Kabul to the Taliban. Some have since partly regrouped as the National Resistance Front of Afghanistan.\nAs Afghan forces accepted the circumstances of the Doha Agreement and the withdrawal of United States troops from Afghanistan, they understood that American close air support and other strategic assets would no longer be available to support them in combat situations against the Taliban, and they became more willing to surrender to the attacking Taliban forces.\nOther Afghans allied with the Afghan government looked for ways to maneuver themselves into better positions, having accepted the impending collapse of the government. The Taliban extended their control over the provinces through a series of negotiated surrenders. After Kunduz province was captured, a days long negotiation between the tribes and the Taliban resulted in a surrender of the government-controlled base to the Taliban. Similar negotiations in Herat saw a wave of resignations in the provincial government, and then the same in Helmand and Ghazni. Outgunned, Afghan special forces based in Kandahar fled. Police officers in Kandahar complained that they had not been paid for six months.\nIn early September 2021 the Taliban announced a new interim government. Among the appointees was Molvi Mullah Yaqoob, Defence Minister, son of ex-Taliban leader Mullah Omar; Mullah Mohammed Fazil Mazloom Akhund, deputy to the Defence Minister; and Qari Farseehuddin, a Tajik, listed as Army Chief.\nAs of \u00a02021[ [update]] the Islamic Emirate Army is subdivided into eight corps, mostly superseding the previous corps of the Afghan National Army. They are listed below. In November 2021 Mullah Yaqoob, Acting Minister of Defense, announced the new names and of the corps.\nBadri 313 Battalion, reported as operating in Kabul, is the only unit of the Taliban's armed forces that had the numerical designation 313.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20185", "revid": "44428614", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20185", "title": "Motorcycle sport", "text": "Competitive events involving motorcycles\nMotorcycle sport is a broad field that encompasses all sporting aspects of motorcycling. The disciplines are not all races or timed-speed events, as several disciplines test a competitor's various riding skills. \nDisciplines.\nMotorcycle racing.\nMotorcycle racing (also known as moto racing and motorbike racing) is a motorcycle sport involving racing motorcycles. Motorcycle racing can be divided into two categories, tarmac-based road disciplines and off-road.\nTrack racing.\nTrack racing is a motorcycle sport where teams or individuals race opponents around an oval track. There are differing variants, with each variant racing on a different surface type.\nRally.\nA road rally is a navigation event on public roads whereby competitors must visit a number of checkpoints in diverse geographical locations while still obeying road traffic laws (not to be confused with car rallies such as WRC).\nSpeedway.\nSpeedway is a motorcycle sport in which the motorcycles have one gear and no brakes.\nOther Motorcycle sports.\nLand speed.\nLand speed is where a single rider accelerates over a 1 to long straight track (usually on dry lake beds) and is timed for top speed through a trap at the end of the run. The rider must exceed the previous top speed record for that class or type of bike for their name to be placed on the record books. See\u2014http:// for an example.\nEnduro.\nEnduro, not to be confused with Enduro (mountain biking), is not exactly racing, because the main objective is to traverse a series of checkpoints, arriving exactly \"on time\" in accordance with your beginning time and the time it is supposed to take to arrive at each checkpoint. The courses are usually run over thick wooded terrain, sometimes with large obstacles such as logs, ditches, and sudden drops.\nFreestyle Motocross.\nA competition based upon points for acrobatic ability on an MX bike over jumps. This activity evolved from Motocross a continuing popular form of racing at both the Amateur and Professional levels.\nTrials.\nKnown in the US as Observed Trials, it is not racing, but a sport nevertheless. Trials is a test of skill on a motorcycle whereby the rider attempts to traverse an observed section without placing a foot on the ground (and traditionally, although not always, without ceasing forward motion). The winner is the rider with the least penalty points.\nTime and observation.\nTime and observation trials are trials with a time limit. The person who completes the route the quickest sets the \"standard time\". All other competitors must finish within a certain amount of time of the standard time to be counted as a finisher (they received penalty points for every minute after the quickest finisher). This is combined with the penalty points accrued from the observed sections to arrive at a winner, who is not always the quickest rider or the rider who lost the less marks on observation but the rider who balanced these competing demands the best. One of the most famous time and observation trials is the \"Scott\" trial held annually in North Yorkshire.\nIndoor trials.\nIndoor trials held in stadiums (not necessarily with a roof) which by their very nature use human-made artificial sections in contrast to outdoor trials which rely heavily on the natural terrain.\nLong distance trials.\nLong Distance Trials (often shortened to 'LDT') in the UK are events for road-registered motorcycles. A course of typically 80 to 120 miles is plotted by the organiser, taking in roads, lanes and Byways Open to All Traffic (known as BOATs). The event is not a race and riders are required to follow the course by using a RoadBook compiled by the organiser.\nMotorcycle Gymkhana.\nSimilar to car Autocross, Motorcycle Gymkhana is a motorcycle time trial sport round cones on a paved area. The winner is the competitor who completes the course in the shortest time. Time penalties are incurred by putting a foot down, hitting a cone, or going outside the designated area.\nMotoball (Motorcycle Polo).\nSimilar to football, but all players (except goalkeepers) are riding motorcycles, and the ball is much bigger. Motorcycle Polo first began as an officially organized sport in the mid-1930s. In France, there are organized motoball competitions, and the sport was included in the inaugural Goodwill Games.\nHill Climbs.\nIn the United States the completions are usually held on off-road courses, where one competitor at a time attempts to ride up a very steep hill, often 45 degrees or more. In some cases, few riders actually complete the course and results are judged on the distance that they manage to achieve. Of those that do complete the course, the rider to reach the top with the shortest elapsed time wins. The motorcycle of choice in the early decades was the Harley-Davidson 45 cubic inch model due to its high torque at low rpms, similar to farm engines. For years the national competitions was held at Mount Garfield near Muskegon, Michigan.\nIn other countries, notably the United Kingdom, completions mostly take place on tarmac courses and occasionally closed public roads, with the machines used for competition being similar to those used for other road disciplines.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20187", "revid": "48293413", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20187", "title": "Marina Tsvetaeva", "text": "Russian poet (1892\u20131941)\nMarina Ivanovna Tsvetaeva (Russian: , ; 8 October\u00a0[O.S. 26 September]\u00a01892\u00a0\u2013 31 August 1941) was a Russian poet. Her work is some of the best known in twentieth-century Russian literature. She lived through and wrote about the Russian Revolution of 1917 and the subsequent Moscow famine. \nMarina attempted to save her daughter Irina from starvation by placing her in a state orphanage in 1919, where Irina died of hunger. Tsvetaeva left Russia in 1922 and lived with her family in increasing poverty in Paris, Berlin and Prague before returning to Moscow in 1939. Her husband Sergei Efron and their daughter Ariadna (Alya) were arrested on espionage charges in 1941, when her husband was executed.\nTsvetaeva died by suicide in 1941. As a lyrical poet, her passion and daring linguistic experimentation mark her as a historical chronicler of her times and the depths of the human condition.\nEarly years.\nMarina Tsvetaeva was born in Moscow, the daughter of Ivan Vladimirovich Tsvetaev, a professor of Fine Art at the University of Moscow, who later founded the Alexander III Museum of Fine Arts (known from 1937 as the Pushkin Museum). Tsvetaeva's mother, Maria Alexandrovna Mein, Ivan's second wife, was a concert pianist, highly literate, with German and Polish ancestry. Growing up in considerable material comfort, Tsvetaeva would later come to identify herself with the Polish aristocracy.\nTsvetaeva's two half-siblings, Valeria and Andrei, were the children of Ivan's deceased first wife, Varvara Dmitrievna Ilovaiskaya, daughter of the historian Dmitry Ilovaisky. Tsvetaeva's only full sister, Anastasia, was born in 1894. The children quarrelled frequently and occasionally violently. There was considerable tension between Tsvetaeva's mother and Varvara's children, and Tsvetaeva's father maintained close contact with Varvara's family. Tsvetaeva's father was kind, but deeply wrapped up in his studies and distant from his family. He was also still deeply in love with his first wife; he would never get over her. Likewise, Tsvetaeva's mother Maria had never recovered from a love affair she'd had before her marriage. Maria disapproved of Marina's poetic inclination; Maria wanted her daughter to become a pianist, holding the opinion that Marina's poetry was poor.\nIn 1902, Maria contracted tuberculosis. A change in climate was recommended to help cure the disease, and so the family travelled abroad until shortly before her death in 1906, when Tsvetaeva was 14. They lived for a while by the sea at Nervi, near Genoa. There, away from the rigid constraints of a bourgeois Muscovite life, Tsvetaeva was able for the first time to run free, climb cliffs, and vent her imagination in childhood games. There were many Russian \"\u00e9migr\u00e9\" revolutionaries residing at that time in Nervi, who may have had some influence on the young Tsvetaeva.\nIn June 1904, Tsvetaeva was sent to school in Lausanne. Changes in the Tsvetaev residence led to several changes in school, and during the course of her travels she acquired the Italian, French, and German languages. She gave up the strict musical studies that her mother had imposed and turned to poetry. She wrote \"With a mother like her, I had only one choice: to become a poet\".\nIn 1908, aged 16, Tsvetaeva studied literary history at the Sorbonne. During this time, a major revolutionary change was occurring within Russian poetry: the flowering of the Russian symbolist movement, and this movement was to colour most of her later work. It was not the theory which was to attract her, but the poetry and the gravity which writers such as Andrei Bely and Alexander Blok were capable of generating. Her own first collection of poems, \"Vecherny Albom\" (\"Evening Album\"), self-published in 1910, promoted her considerable reputation as a poet. It was well received, although her early poetry was held to be insipid compared to her later work. It attracted the attention of the poet and critic Maximilian Voloshin, whom Tsvetaeva described after his death in \"A Living Word About a Living Man\". Voloshin came to see Tsvetaeva and soon became her friend and mentor.\nFamily and career.\nShe began spending time at Voloshin's home in the Black Sea resort of Koktebel (\"Blue Height\"), which was a well-known haven for writers, poets and artists. She became enamoured of the work of Alexander Blok and Anna Akhmatova, although she never met Blok and did not meet Akhmatova until the 1940s. Describing the Koktebel community, the \"\u00e9migr\u00e9\" Viktoria Schweitzer wrote: \"Here inspiration was born.\" At Koktebel, Tsvetaeva met Sergei Yakovlevich Efron, a cadet in the Officers' Academy. She was 19, he 18: they fell in love and were married in 1912, the same year as her father's project, the Alexander III Museum of Fine Arts, was ceremonially opened, an event attended by Tsar Nicholas II. Tsvetaeva's love for Efron was intense; however, this did not preclude her from having affairs, including one with Osip Mandelstam, which she celebrated in a collection of poems called \"Mileposts\". At around the same time, she became involved in an affair with the poet Sophia Parnok, who was 7 years older than Tsvetaeva, an affair that caused her husband great grief. The two women fell deeply in love, and the relationship profoundly affected both women's writings. She deals with the ambiguous and tempestuous nature of this relationship in a cycle of poems which at times she called \"The Girlfriend\", and at other times \"The Mistake\". Tsvetaeva and her husband spent summers in the Crimea until the revolution, and had two daughters: Ariadna, or Alya (born 1912) and Irina (born 1917).\nIn 1914, Efron volunteered for the front and by 1917 he was an officer stationed in Moscow with the 56th Reserve. \nTsvetaeva was a close witness of the Russian Revolution, which she rejected. On trains, she came into contact with ordinary Russian people and was shocked by the mood of anger and violence. She wrote in her journal: \"In the air of the compartment hung only three axe-like words: bourgeois, Junkers, leeches.\" After the 1917 Revolution, Efron joined the White Army, and Marina returned to Moscow hoping to be reunited with her husband. She was trapped in Moscow for five years, where there was a terrible famine.\nShe wrote six plays in verse and narrative poems. Between 1917 and 1922 she wrote the epic verse cycle \"Lebedinyi stan\" (\"The Encampment of the Swans\") about the civil war, glorifying those who fought against the communists. The cycle of poems in the style of a diary or journal begins on the day of Tsar Nicholas II's abdication in March 1917, and ends late in 1920, when the anti-communist White Army was finally defeated. The 'swans' of the title refers to the volunteers in the White Army, in which her husband was fighting as an officer. In 1922, she published a long pro-imperial verse fairy tale, \"Tsar-devitsa\" (\"Tsar-Maiden\").\nThe Moscow famine was to exact a toll on Tsvetaeva. With no immediate family to turn to, she had no way to support herself or her daughters. In 1919, she placed both her daughters in a state orphanage, mistakenly believing that they would be better fed there. Alya became ill, and Tsvetaeva removed her, but Irina died there of starvation in 1920. The child's death caused Tsvetaeva great grief and regret. In one letter, she wrote, \"God punished me.\"\nDuring these years, Tsvetaeva maintained a close and intense friendship with the actress Sofia Evgenievna Holliday, for whom she wrote a number of plays. Many years later, she would write the novella \"Povest o Sonechke\" about her relationship with Holliday.\nExile.\nBerlin and Prague.\nIn May 1922, Tsvetaeva and Ariadna left Soviet Russia and were reunited in Berlin with Efron, who she had thought had been killed by the Bolsheviks. There she published the collections \"Separation\", \"Poems to Blok\", and the poem \"The Tsar Maiden\". Much of her poetry was published in Moscow and Berlin, consolidating her reputation. In August 1922, the family moved to Prague. Living in unremitting poverty, unable to afford living accommodation in Prague itself, with Efron studying politics and sociology at the Charles University and living in hostels, Tsvetaeva and Ariadna found rooms in a village outside the city. She wrote: \"We are devoured by coal, gas, the milkman, the baker... the only meat we eat is horsemeat.\" When offered an opportunity to earn money by reading her poetry, she had to beg a simple dress from a friend to replace the one she had been living in.\nTsvetaeva began a passionate affair with Konstantyn Rodziewicz, a former military officer, a liaison which became widely known throughout \u00e9migr\u00e9 circles. Efron was devastated. Her break-up with Rodziewicz in 1923 was almost certainly the inspiration for her \"The Poem of the End\" and \"The Poem of the Mountain\". At about the same time, Tsvetaeva began correspondence with poet Rainer Maria Rilke and novelist Boris Pasternak. Tsvetaeva and Pasternak were not to meet for nearly twenty years, but maintained friendship until Tsvetaeva's return to Russia.\nIn summer 1924, Efron and Tsvetaeva left Prague for the suburbs, living for a while in J\u00edlovi\u0161t\u011b, before moving on to V\u0161enory, where Tsvetaeva completed \"The Poem of the End\", and was to conceive their son, Georgy, whom she was to later nickname 'Mur'. Tsvetaeva wanted to name him Boris (after Pasternak); Efron insisted on Georgy. He was to be a most difficult child but Tsvetaeva loved him obsessively. With Efron now rarely free from tuberculosis, their daughter Ariadna was relegated to the role of mother's helper and confidante, and consequently felt robbed of much of her childhood. In Berlin, before settling in Paris, Tsvetaeva wrote some of her greatest verse, including \"Remeslo\" (\"Craft\", 1923) and \"Posle Rossii\" (\"After Russia\", 1928). Reflecting a life in poverty and exiled, the work holds great nostalgia for Russia and its folk history, while experimenting with verse forms.\nParis.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;\nI Know the Truth\nI know the truth\u2014give up all other truths!\nNo need for people anywhere on earth to struggle.\nLook\u2014it is evening, look, it is nearly night:\n\"what\" do you speak of, poets, lovers, generals?\nThe wind is level now, the earth is wet with dew,\nthe storm of stars in the sky will turn to quiet.\nAnd soon all of us will sleep under the earth, we\nwho never let each other sleep above it. &lt;/poem&gt;\n \"I know the truth\" Tsvetaeva (1915). Trans. by Elaine Feinstein\nIn 1925, the family settled in Paris, where they would live for the next 14 years. At about this time Tsvetaeva had a relapse of the tuberculosis she had previously contracted in 1902. She received a small stipend from the Czechoslovak government, which gave financial support to artists and writers who had lived in Czechoslovakia. In addition, she tried to make whatever she could from readings and sales of her work. She turned more and more to writing prose because she found it made more money than poetry. Tsvetaeva did not feel at all at home in Paris's predominantly ex-bourgeois circle of Russian \u00e9migr\u00e9 writers. Although she had written passionately pro-'White' poems during the Revolution, her fellow \u00e9migr\u00e9s thought that she was insufficiently anti-Soviet, and that her criticism of the Soviet r\u00e9gime was altogether too nebulous. She was particularly criticised for writing an admiring letter to the Soviet poet Vladimir Mayakovsky. In the wake of this letter, the \u00e9migr\u00e9 paper \"Posledniye Novosti\", to which Tsvetaeva had been a frequent contributor, refused point-blank to publish any more of her work. She found solace in her correspondence with other writers, including Boris Pasternak, Rainer Maria Rilke, the Czech poet Anna Teskov\u00e1, the critics D. S. Mirsky and Aleksandr Bakhrakh, and the Georgian \u00e9migr\u00e9 princess Salomea Andronikova, who became her main source of financial support. Her poetry and critical prose of the time, including her autobiographical prose works of 1934\u20137, is of lasting literary importance. But she felt \"consumed by the daily round\", resenting the domesticity that left her no time for solitude or writing. Moreover her \u00e9migr\u00e9 milieu regarded Tsvetaeva as a crude sort who ignored social graces. Describing her misery, she wrote to Teskov\u00e1: \"In Paris, with rare personal exceptions, everyone hates me, they write all sorts of nasty things, leave me out in all sorts of nasty ways, and so on\". To Pasternak she complained \"They don't like poetry and what am I apart from that, not poetry but that from which it is made. [I am] an inhospitable hostess. A young woman in an old dress.\" She began to look back at even the Prague times with nostalgia and resent her exiled state more deeply.\nMeanwhile, Tsvetaeva's husband Efron was developing Soviet sympathies and was homesick for Russia. Eventually, he began working for the NKVD, the forerunner of the KGB. Their daughter Alya shared his views, and increasingly turned against her mother. In 1937, she returned to the Soviet Union. Later that year, Efron too had to return to the USSR. The French police had implicated him in the murder of the former Soviet defector Ignace Reiss in September 1937, on a country lane near Lausanne, Switzerland. After Efron's escape, the police interrogated Tsvetaeva, but she seemed confused by their questions and ended up reading them some French translations of her poetry. The police concluded that she was deranged and knew nothing of the murder. Later it was learned that Efron possibly had also taken part in the assassination of Trotsky's son in 1936. Tsvetaeva does not seem to have known that her husband was a spy, nor the extent to which he was compromised. However, she was held responsible for his actions and was ostracised in Paris because of the implication that he was involved with the NKVD. World War II had made Europe as unsafe and hostile as the USSR. In 1939, Tsvetaeva became lonely and alarmed by the rise of fascism, which she attacked in \"Stikhi k Chekhii\" (\"Verses to Czechia\" 1938\u201339).\nLast years: Return to the Soviet Union.\nIn 1939, she and her son returned to Moscow, unaware of the reception she would receive. In Stalin's USSR, anyone who had lived abroad was suspect, as was anyone who had been among the intelligentsia before the Revolution. Tsvetaeva's sister had been arrested before Tsvetaeva's return; although Anastasia survived the Stalin years, the sisters never saw each other again. Tsvetaeva found that all doors had closed to her. She got bits of work translating poetry, but otherwise the established Soviet writers refused to help her, and chose to ignore her plight; Nikolai Aseev, whom she had hoped would assist, shied away, fearful for his life and position.\nEfron and Alya were arrested on espionage charges in 1941; Efron was sentenced to death. Alya's fianc\u00e9 was actually an NKVD agent who had been assigned to spy on the family. Efron was shot in September 1941; Alya served over eight years in prison. Both were exonerated after Stalin's death. In 1941, Tsvetaeva and her son were evacuated to Yelabuga (Elabuga), while most families of the Union of Soviet Writers were evacuated to Chistopol. Tsvetaeva had no means of support in Yelabuga, and on 24 August 1941 she left for Chistopol desperately seeking a job. On 26 August, Marina Tsvetaeva and poet Valentin Parnakh applied to the Soviet of Literature Fund asking for a job at the LitFund's canteen. Parnakh was accepted as a doorman, while Tsvetaeva's application for a permission to live in Chistopol was turned down and she had to return to Yelabuga on 28 August.\nOn 31 August 1941, Tsvetaeva hanged herself in Yelabuga. She left a note for her son Georgy (\"Mur\"): \"Forgive me, but to go on would be worse. I am gravely ill, this is not me anymore. I love you passionately. Do understand that I could not live anymore. Tell Papa and Alya, if you ever see them, that I loved them to the last moment and explain to them that I found myself in a trap.\"\nAccording to the book \"The Death of a Poet: The Last Days of Marina Tsvetaeva\", the local NKVD department tried to force Tsvetaeva to start working as their informant, which left her no choice other than to die by suicide.\nTsvetaeva was buried in Yelabuga cemetery on 2 September 1941, but the exact location of her grave remains unknown.\nHer son Georgy volunteered for the Eastern Front of World War II and died in battle in 1944. Her daughter Ariadna spent 16 years in Soviet prison camps and exile and was released in 1955. Ariadna wrote a memoir of her family; an English-language edition was published in 2009. She died in 1975.\nIn the town of Yelabuga, the Tsvetaeva house is now a museum; there is a monument to her. The apartment in Moscow where she lived from 1914 to 1922 is now a museum as well. Much of her poetry was republished in the Soviet Union after 1961, and her passionate, articulate and precise work, with its daring linguistic experimentation, brought her increasing recognition as a major Russian poet.\nA minor planet, 3511 Tsvetaeva, discovered in 1982 by Soviet astronomer Lyudmila Karachkina, is named after her.\nIn 1989, in Gdynia, Poland, a special-purpose ship was built for the Russian Academy of Sciences and named Marina Tsvetaeva in her honor. From 2007, the ship served as a tourist vessel to the polar regions for Aurora Expeditions. In 2011, she was renamed and is currently operated by Oceanwide Expeditions as a tourist vessel in the polar regions.\nWork.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;\nAmidst the dust of bookshops, wide dispersed\nAnd never purchased there by anyone,\nYet similar to precious wines, my verse \nCan wait \u2013 its time will come.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\n Tsvetaeva (1913). Trans. Vladimir Nabokov, 1972\nTsvetaeva's poetry was admired by poets such as Valery Bryusov, Maximilian Voloshin, Osip Mandelstam, Boris Pasternak, Rainer Maria Rilke, and Anna Akhmatova. Later, that recognition was also expressed by the poet Joseph Brodsky, pre-eminent among Tsvetaeva's champions. Tsvetaeva was primarily a lyrical poet, and her lyrical voice remains clearly audible in her narrative poetry. Brodsky said of her work: \"Represented on a graph, Tsvetaeva's work would exhibit a curve \u2013 or rather, a straight line \u2013 rising at almost a right angle because of her constant effort to raise the pitch a note higher, an idea higher (or, more precisely, an octave and a faith higher.) She always carried everything she has to say to its conceivable and expressible end. In both her poetry and her prose, nothing remains hanging or leaves a feeling of ambivalence. Tsvetaeva is the unique case in which the paramount spiritual experience of an epoch (for us, the sense of ambivalence, of contradictoriness in the nature of human existence) served not as the object of expression but as its means, by which it was transformed into the material of art.\" Critic Annie Finch describes the engaging, heart-felt nature of the work. \"Tsvetaeva is such a warm poet, so unbridled in her passion, so completely vulnerable in her love poetry, whether to her female lover Sofie Parnak, to Boris Pasternak. [...] Tsvetaeva throws her poetic brilliance on the altar of her heart\u2019s experience with the faith of a true romantic, a priestess of lived emotion. And she stayed true to that faith to the tragic end of her life.\nTsvetaeva's lyric poems fill ten collections; the uncollected lyrics would add at least another volume. Her first two collections indicate their subject matter in their titles: \"Evening Album\" (Vecherniy albom, 1910) and \"The Magic Lantern\" (Volshebnyi fonar, 1912). The poems are vignettes of a tranquil childhood and youth in a professorial, middle-class home in Moscow, and display considerable grasp of the formal elements of style. The full range of Tsvetaeva's talent developed quickly, and was undoubtedly influenced by the contacts she had made at Koktebel, and was made evident in two new collections: \"Mileposts\" (Versty, 1921) and \"Mileposts: Book One\" (Versty, Vypusk I, 1922).\nThree elements of Tsvetaeva's mature style emerge in the \"Mileposts\" collections. First, Tsvetaeva dates her poems and publishes them chronologically. The poems in \"Mileposts: Book One\", for example, were written in 1916 and resolve themselves as a versified journal. Secondly, there are cycles of poems which fall into a regular chronological sequence among the single poems, evidence that certain themes demanded further expression and development. One cycle announces the theme of \"Mileposts: Book One\" as a whole: the \"Poems of Moscow.\" Two other cycles are dedicated to poets, the \"Poems to Akhmatova\" and the \"Poems to Blok\", which again reappear in a separate volume, Poems to Blok (\"Stikhi k Bloku\", 1922). Thirdly, the \"Mileposts\" collections demonstrate the dramatic quality of Tsvetaeva's work, and her ability to assume the guise of multiple \"dramatis personae\" within them.\nThe collection \"Separation\" (Razluka, 1922) was to contain Tsvetaeva's first long verse narrative, \"On a Red Steed\" (\"Na krasnom kone\"). The poem is a prologue to three more verse-narratives written between 1920 and 1922. All four narrative poems draw on folkloric plots. Tsvetaeva acknowledges her sources in the titles of the very long works, \"The Maiden Tsar: A Fairy-tale Poem\" (\"Tsar-devitsa: Poema-skazka\", 1922) and \"The Swain\", subtitled \"A Fairytale\" (\"Molodets: skazka\", 1924). The fourth folklore-style poem is \"Byways\" (\"Pereulochki\", published in 1923 in the collection \"Remeslo\"), and it is the first poem which may be deemed incomprehensible in that it is fundamentally a soundscape of language. The collection \"Psyche\" (\"Psikheya\", 1923) contains one of Tsvetaeva's best-known cycles \"Insomnia\" (Bessonnitsa) and the poem The Swans' Encampment (Lebedinyi stan, Stikhi 1917\u20131921, published in 1957) which celebrates the White Army.\nEmigrant.\nSubsequently, as an \u00e9migr\u00e9, Tsvetaeva's last two collections of lyrics were published by \u00e9migr\u00e9 presses, \"Craft\" (\"Remeslo\", 1923) in Berlin and \"After Russia\" (\"Posle Rossii\", 1928) in Paris. There then followed the twenty-three lyrical \"Berlin\" poems, the pantheistic \"Trees\" (\"Derev'ya\"), \"Wires\" (\"Provoda\") and \"Pairs\" (\"Dvoe\"), and the tragic \"Poets\" (\"Poety\"). \"After Russia\" contains the poem \"In Praise of the Rich\", in which Tsvetaeva's oppositional tone is merged with her proclivity for ruthless satire.\nSatire.\nSatire is a secondary element after lyricism in Tsvetaeva's poetry. Several satirical poems, moreover, are among Tsvetaeva's best-known works: \"The Train of Life\" (\"Poezd zhizni\") and \"The Floorcleaners' Song\" (\"Poloterskaya\"), both included in After Russia, and The Ratcatcher (Krysolov, 1925\u20131926), a long, folkloric narrative. The target of Tsvetaeva's satire is everything petty and petty bourgeois. Unleashed against such dull creature comforts is the vengeful, unearthly energy of workers both manual and creative. In her notebook, Tsvetaeva writes of \"The Floorcleaners' Song\": \"Overall movement: the floorcleaners ferret out a house's hidden things, they scrub a fire into the door... What do they flush out? Coziness, warmth, tidiness, order... Smells: incense, piety. Bygones. Yesterday... The growing force of their threat is far stronger than the climax.\" \"The Ratcatcher\" poem, which Tsvetaeva describes as a \"lyrical satire\", is loosely based on the legend of the Pied Piper of Hamelin. The Ratcatcher, which is also known as The Pied Piper, is considered by some to be the finest of Tsvetaeva's work. It was also partially an act of \"homage\" to Heinrich Heine's poem \"Die Wanderratten\". The Ratcatcher appeared initially, in serial format, in the \u00e9migr\u00e9 journal \"Volya Rossii\" in 1925\u20131926 whilst still being written. It was not to appear in the Soviet Union until after the death of Joseph Stalin in 1956. Its hero is the Pied Piper of Hamelin who saves a town from hordes of rats and then leads the town's children away too, in retribution for the citizens' ingratitude. As in the other folkloric narratives, The Ratcatcher's story line emerges indirectly through numerous speaking voices which shift from invective, to extended lyrical flights, to pathos.\nTsvetaeva's last ten years of exile, from 1928 when \"After Russia\" appeared until her return in 1939 to the Soviet Union, were principally a \"prose decade\", though this would almost certainly be by dint of economic necessity rather than one of choice.\nTranslators.\nTranslators of Tsvetaeva's work into English include Elaine Feinstein and David McDuff. Nina Kossman translated many of Tsvetaeva's long (narrative) poems, as well as her lyrical poems; they are collected in three books, \"Poem of the End\" (bilingual edition published by Ardis in 1998, by Overlook in 2004, and by Shearsman Books in 2021), \"In the Inmost Hour of the Soul\" (Humana Press, 1989), and \"Other Shepherds\" (Poets &amp; Traitors Press, 2020). Robin Kemball translated the cycle \"The Demesne of the Swans\", published as a separate (bilingual) book by Ardis in 1980. J. Marin King translated a great deal of Tsvetaeva's prose into English, compiled in a book called \"A Captive Spirit\". Tsvetaeva scholar Angela Livingstone has translated a number of Tsvetaeva's essays on art and writing, compiled in a book called \"Art in the Light of Conscience\". Livingstone's translation of Tsvetaeva's \"The Ratcatcher\" was published as a separate book. Mary Jane White has translated the early cycle \"Miles\" in a book called \"Starry Sky to Starry Sky\", as well as Tsvetaeva's elegy for Rilke, \"New Year's\", (Adastra Press 16 Reservation Road, Easthampton, MA 01027 USA) and \"Poem of the End\" (The Hudson Review, Winter 2009; and in the anthology Poets Translate Poets, Syracuse U. Press 2013) and \"Poem of the Hill\", (New England Review, Summer 2008) and Tsvetaeva's 1914\u20131915 cycle of love poems to Sophia Parnok. In 2002, Yale University Press published Jamey Gambrell's translation of post-revolutionary prose, entitled \"Earthly Signs: Moscow Diaries, 1917\u20131922\", with notes on poetic and linguistic aspects of Tsvetaeva's prose, and endnotes for the text itself.\nMusic and songs.\nIn 1973, Soviet composer Dmitri Shostakovich set six of Tsvetaeva's poems in his \"Six Poems by Marina Tsvetayeva\". Later the Russian-Tatar composer Sofia Gubaidulina wrote an \"Hommage \u00e0 Marina Tsvetayeva\" featuring her poems. Her poem \"Mne Nravitsya...\" (\"I like that...\"), was performed by Alla Pugacheva in the film \"The Irony of Fate\". In 2003, the opera \"Marina: A Captive Spirit\", based on Tsvetaeva's life and work, premiered from American Opera Projects in New York with music by Deborah Drattell and libretto by poet Annie Finch. The production was directed by Anne Bogart and the part of Tsvetaeva was sung by Lauren Flanigan. The poetry by Tsvetaeva was set to music and frequently performed as songs by Elena Frolova, Larisa Novoseltseva, Zlata Razdolina and other Russian bards. In 2019, American composer Mark Abel wrote \"Four Poems of Marina Tsvetaeva\", the first classical song cycle of the poet in an English translation. Soprano Hila Plitmann recorded the piece for Abel\u2019s album \"The Cave of Wondrous Voice\".\nTribute.\nOn 8 October 2015, Google Doodle commemorated her 123rd birthday.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20188", "revid": "47198717", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20188", "title": "Matilda of Tuscany", "text": "Canossian dynasty countess of Tuscany (c.1046\u20131115)\nMatilda of Tuscany (; or ; c.\u20091046 \u2013 24 July 1115), or Matilda of Canossa ( ), also referred to as (\"the Great Countess\"), was a member of the House of Canossa (also known as the Attonids) in the second half of the eleventh century. Matilda was one of the most important governing figures of the Italian Middle Ages. She reigned in a time of constant battles, political intrigues, and excommunications by the Church.\nShe ruled as a feudal margravine and, as a relative of the imperial Salian dynasty, she brokered a settlement in the so-called Investiture Controversy. In this extensive conflict with the emerging reform Papacy over the relationship between spiritual (\"sacerdotium\") and secular (\"regnum\") power, Pope Gregory VII dismissed and excommunicated the Holy Roman Emperor Henry IV (then King of the Romans) in 1076. At the same time, Matilda came into possession of a substantial territory that included present-day Lombardy, Emilia, Romagna, and Tuscany. She made the Canossa Castle, in the Apennines south west of Reggio Emilia, the centre of her domains.\nAfter his famous penitential walk in front of Canossa Castle in January 1077, Henry IV was accepted back into the Church by the Pope. However, the understanding between the Emperor and the Pope was short-lived. In the conflicts with Henry IV that arose a little later, from 1080, Matilda put all her military and material resources into the service of the Papacy. Her court became a refuge for many displaced persons during the turmoil of the investiture dispute and enjoyed a cultural boom. Even after the death of Pope Gregory VII in 1085, Matilda remained a vital pillar of the Reform Church. Between 1081 and 1098, grueling disputes with Henry IV meant Canossan rule was in crisis. The historical record is sparse for this time. A turning point resulted from Matilda forming a coalition with the southern German dukes, who opposed Henry IV.\nIn 1097, Henry IV retreated past the Alps to the northern portion of the Holy Roman Empire, and a power vacuum developed in Italy. The struggle between and changed the social and rulership structure of the Italian cities permanently, giving them space for emancipation from foreign rule and communal development. From autumn 1098, Matilda regained many of her lost domains. Until the end, she tried to bring the cities under her control. After 1098, she increasingly used the opportunities offered to her to consolidate her rule again. Since she was childless, in her final years, Matilda developed her legacy by focusing her donation activity on Polirone Abbey.\nThe account of Donizo reports that between 6 and 11 May 1111, Matilda was crowned Imperial Vicar and Vice-Queen of Italy by Henry V at Bianello Castle (Quattro Castella, Reggio Emilia). With her death, the House of Canossa became extinct in 1115. Well into the thirteenth century, popes and emperors fought over what was called the Terre Matildiche (\"Matildine domains\") as their rich inheritance.\nThe rule of Matilda and her influence became identified as a cultural epoch in Italy that found expression in the flowering of numerous artistic, musical, and literary designs and miracle stories and legends. Her legacy reached its apogee during the Counter-Reformation and the Baroque Period. Pope Urban VIII had Matilda's body transferred to Rome in 1630, where she was the first woman to be buried in Saint Peter's Basilica.\nOrigins of the House of Canossa.\nAlthough these names were only created by later generations, Matilda came from the noble House of Canossa, also named the Attonids. The oldest proven ancestor of the House of Canossa was the nobleman Sigifred, who lived in the county of Lucca during the first third of the tenth century. He probably increased his sphere of influence in the area around Parma and in the foothills of the Apennines. His son, Adalbert-Atto, was able to bring several castles in the foothills of the Apennines under his control in the politically fragmented region. Adalbert-Atto married Hildegard, of the Supponid Frankish noble family who had been very influential in northern Italy.\nAdalbert-Atto built the Canossa Castle in the southwest of the mountains of Reggio Emilia. After the unexpectred death of King Lothair II of Italy in 950, Adalbert-Atto provided refuge in Canossa Castle to Lothair's widow, Queen Adelaide, after Berengar of Ivrea attempted to take power in Italy and imprisoned her for a short time. King Otto I of East Francia then intervened in Italy and married Adelaide in 951. This resulted in a close bond between the House of Canossa and the Ottonian dynasty. Adalbert-Atto appeared in documents from the reign of Otto I as an advocate and he was able to establish contacts with the Papacy for the first time in the wake of the Ottonians. Otto I also awarded the counties of Reggio and Modena to Adalbert-Atto. In 977 at the latest, the county of Mantua was added to the domains awarded to Adalbert-Atto.\nAdalbert-Atto's son, Tedald, continued the close ties to the Ottonian rulers from 988. Tedald was the grandfather of Matilda. In 996 he is listed as \"dux et marchio\" (Duke and Margrave) in a document. This title was adopted by all subsequent rulers of the House of Canossa, an inheritance preventing disputes among the three sons of Tedald.\nThe rise of the family reached its apogee under Matilda's father, Boniface. The three successive Canossa rulers (Adalbert-Atto, Tedald, and Boniface) instituted monasteries for their expansion of rule. The founded monasteries (Brescello, Polirone, Santa Maria di Felonica) were established in places of transport and strategic importance for the administrative consolidation of their large estates. Three family saints (Genesius, Apollonius, and Simeon) were used to stabilize the House of Canossa's power structure and the family sought to exert influence on convents that had been in existence for a long time (Abbey of Nonantola). Transfer of monasteries to local bishops and the promotion of spiritual institutions also enlarged their network of alliances. An appearance as the guardian of order consolidated their position along the \"Via Aemilia\". Historian Arnaldo Tincani was able to prove the considerable number of 120 farms in the Canossa estate near the Po river.\nParents, birth, and early years.\nMatilda's parents, Boniface and Beatrice of Lorraine first met on the occasion of the wedding of Conrad II's son Henry with Gunhilda of Denmark in 1036 at the city of Nijmegen shortly after Boniface had become a widower early that year. Beatrice was the niece and foster daughter of Empress Gisela of Swabia. A marriage covenant was arranged and one year later, in June 1037, Boniface and Beatrice celebrated their marriage in high style, keeping court at Marengo for three months afterward. According to the marital agreements, Beatrice brought important assets in Lorraine: the Ch\u00e2teau of Briey, the Lordships of Stenay, Mouzay, Juvigny, Longlier, and Orval that constituted the northern part of her paternal family's ancestral lands. Beatrice and her sister, Sophia, were the daughters of Duke Frederick II of Upper Lorraine and Matilda of Swabia. After the deaths of their parents she and her sister had been raised in the imperial court by their maternal aunt, Empress Gisela. For Boniface, the marriage to Beatrice, a close relative of the emperor, brought him not only prestige, but also the prospect to have an heir. His first wife had been Richilda, a daughter of Giselbert II, Count Palatine of Bergamo and their only child was a daughter who was born and died in 1014. Boniface and Beatrice had three children, Beatrice (named after her mother), Frederick (named after his maternal grandfather), and Matilda (named after her maternal grandmother). Matilda, probably born around 1046, was the youngest child.\nMatilda's birthplace and exact date of birth are unknown. Italian scholars have been arguing about her place of birth for centuries. According to Francesco Maria Fiorentini, a doctor and scholar of the seventeenth century, she was born in Lucca, an assumption reinforced by a miniature in the early twelfth-century \"Vita Mathildis\" by the monk Donizo (or, in Italian, Donizone), where Matilda is referred to as 'Resplendent Matilda' (\"Mathildis Lucens\"): since the Latin word \"lucens\" is similar to \"lucensis\" (of/from Lucca), this also may be a reference to Matilda's birthplace and he interpreted it as such. For Benedictine scholar Camillo Affarosi, Canossa was her place of birth. Lino Lionello Ghirardini and Paolo Golinelli both advocated Mantua as her birthplace. A recent publication by Mich\u00e8le Kahn Spike also favors Mantua, as it was the center for Boniface's court at the time. In addition, Ferrara or the small Tuscan town of San Miniato have been discussed as the possible birthplace. According to author Elke Goez, sources cannot prove that there was a permanent household location for Boniface of Canossa in either Mantua or any other place.\nScholars generally believe that Matilda must have spent her early years around her mother, who was renowned for her learning. She was literate in Latin, as well as reputed to speak German and French. The extent of Matilda's education in military matters is debated. It has been asserted that she was taught strategy, tactics, riding, and wielding weapons, but some scholarship challenges these claims. Her father, Boniface of Canossa was a feared and hated prince for some small vassals throughout his life. On 7 May 1052, he was ambushed while hunting in the forest of San Martino dall'Argine near Mantua and killed. Following the death of their father, Matilda's brother, Frederick, inherited the family lands and titles under the regency of their mother, who not only managed to hold the family patrimony together, but also made important contacts with leading figures in the Church renewal movement. Beatrice developed into an increasingly important pillar of the reform of the Papacy. Matilda's older sister, Beatrice, died the next year (before 17 December 1053), making Matilda heiress presumptive to Frederick's personal holdings. Beatrice was Regent of Tuscany from 1052 until her death in 1076, during the minority of and in co-regency with Matilda.\nIn mid-1054, determined to safeguard the interests of her children as well as her own, Beatrice of Lorraine married Godfrey the Bearded, a distant kinsman who had been stripped of the Duchy of Upper Lorraine after openly rebelling against Emperor Henry III. Emperor Henry III was enraged by his cousin Beatrice's unauthorised union with his most vigorous adversary and took the opportunity to have her arrested, along with Matilda, when he marched south to attend a synod in Florence on Pentecost in 1055. \nHer brother Frederick's rather suspicious death soon thereafter, made Matilda the last member of the House of Canossa. Mother and daughter were taken to Germany, but Godfrey the Bearded successfully avoided capture. Unable to defeat him, Henry III sought a rapprochement. The Emperor's early death in October 1056, which brought to throne the underage Henry IV, seems to have accelerated the negotiations and the restoration of the previous balance of power.\nGodfrey the Bearded was reconciled with the imperial family and recognized as Margrave of Tuscany in December, while Beatrice and Matilda were released. By the time she and her mother returned to Italy, in the company of Pope Victor II, Matilda was formally acknowledged as sole heiress to the greatest territorial lordship in the southern part of the Empire. In June 1057 the Pope held a synod in Florence; he was present during the infamous capture of Beatrice and Matilda, and, with the deliberated choice of location of the synod also made it clear that the House of Canossa had returned to Italy, strengthened at the side of the Pope and had been completely rehabilitated; with Henry IV being a minor, the reform Papacy sought the protection of the powerful House of Canossa. According to Donizo, the Panegyric biographer of Matilda and her ancestors, she was familiar with both French and German due to her origins and living conditions.\nMatilda's mother and stepfather thus became heavily involved in the series of disputed papal elections during their regency, supporting the Gregorian Reforms. Godfrey the Bearded's brother, Frederick, became Pope Stephen IX, while both of the following two popes, Nicholas II and Alexander II, had been Tuscan bishops. Matilda made her first journey to Rome with her family in the entourage of Nicholas II in 1059. Godfrey and Beatrice actively assisted them in dealing with antipopes, while the role of adolescent Matilda remains unclear. A contemporary account of her stepfather's 1067 expedition against Prince Richard I of Capua on behalf of the papacy mentions Matilda's participation in the campaign, describing it as the \"first service that the most excellent daughter of Boniface offered to the blessed prince of the apostles\".\nFirst marriage: Godfrey the Hunchback.\nPossibly taking advantage of the minority of Henry IV, Beatrice and Godfrey the Bearded wanted to consolidate the connection between the Houses of Lorraine and of Canossa in the long term by marrying their two children. Around 1055, Matilda and her stepbrother Godfrey the Hunchback (son of Godfrey the Bearded from his first marriage) were betrothed. In May 1069, as Godfrey the Bearded lay dying in Verdun, Beatrice and Matilda hastened to reach Lorraine, anxious to ensure a smooth transition of power. Matilda was present at her stepfather's deathbed, and on that occasion she is for the first time clearly mentioned as the wife of her stepbrother. After the death of Godfrey the Bearded on 30 December, the newlyweds stayed in Lorraine. Beatrice returned to Italy alone. Matilda became pregnant in 1070; Godfrey the Hunchback seems to have informed the Salian imperial court about this event: in a charter from Henry IV dated 9 May 1071, Godfrey or his heirs are mentioned. Matilda gave birth to a daughter, named Beatrice after her maternal grandmother, but the child died a few weeks after the birth, before 29 August 1071. In 1071, Beatrice had donated property to the Abbey of Frassinoro for the salvation of her granddaughter's soul and she granted twelve farms \"for the health and life of my beloved daughter Matilda\" (\"pro incolomitate et anima Matilde dilecte filie mee\").\nMatilda and Godfrey the Hunchback's marriage proved a failure after a short time. The death of their only child and Godfrey's physical deformity may have helped fuel deep animosity between the spouses. By the end of 1071, Matilda had left her husband and returned to Italy, where her stay in Mantua on 19 January 1072 can be proven. From there she and her mother issued a deed of donation for the Monastery of Sant'Andrea. Godfrey the Hunchback fiercely protested the separation and demanded that Matilda come back to him, which she repeatedly refused. In early 1072, he descended into Italy and visited several places in Tuscany, determined not only to enforce the marriage, but to lay claim to these areas as Matilda's husband. During this time, Matilda stayed in Lucca and there is no evidence that the couple met. Additionally, Godfrey the Hunchback is named as her husband only in a single document dated 18 August 1073 signed in Mantua for a donation for the Monastery of San Paolo in Parma. In his efforts to restore his marital bond, Godfrey the Hunchback sought the help of both Matilda's mother and her ally, the newly elected Pope Gregory VII. He promised military aid to the latter. However, Matilda's resolution was unshakable, and in the summer of 1073 Godfrey the Hunchback returned to Lorraine alone, losing all hope for a reconciliation by 1074. Matilda wanted to enter in a monastery as a nun. During 1073\u20131074 she tried in vain to obtain the dissolution of her marriage with the pope; however, Gregory VII needed Godfrey the Hunchback as an ally and was therefore not interested in granting a divorce. At the same time the pope hoped for Matilda's help with his crusade plans.\nRather than supporting the pope as promised in exchange for preserving his marriage, Godfrey the Hunchback turned his attention to imperial affairs. Meanwhile, the conflict later known as the Investiture Controversy was brewing between Gregory VII and Henry IV, with both men claiming the right to appoint bishops and abbots within the empire. Matilda and Godfrey the Hunchback soon found themselves on opposing sides of the dispute, leading to a further deterioration of their difficult relationship. German chroniclers, writing of the synod held at Worms in January 1076, even suggested that Godfrey the Hunchback inspired an allegation by Henry IV of a licentious affair between Gregory VII and Matilda.\nMatilda and Godfrey the Hunchback continued to live separately until her husband was assassinated in Vlaardingen (near Rotterdam) on 26 February 1076. Having been accused the previous month of adultery with the pope, Matilda was suspected of ordering her estranged husband's death. However, she couldn't have known about the proceedings at the Synod of Worms at the time since the news took three months to reach the pope. It is more likely that Godfrey the Hunchback was killed at the instigation of an enemy nearer to him. Matilda made no spiritual donations for Godfrey the Hunchback.\nCo-rulership with her mother Beatrice.\nMatilda's bold decision to repudiate her husband came at a cost, but ensured her independence. Beatrice started preparing Matilda for rule as head of the House of Canossa by holding court jointly with her and, eventually, encouraging her to issue charters under her own authority as countess (\"comitissa\") and duchess (\"ducatrix\"). Both mother and daughter tried to be present throughout their territory. In what is now Emilia-Romagna their position was much more stable than in the southern Apennines, where they couldn't get their followers behind them despite rich donations. They therefore tried to act as guardians of justice and public order. Matilda's participation is mentioned in seven of the sixteen \"placita\" held by Beatrice. Supported by judges, Matilda had already held \"placitum\" placita alone. On 7 June 1072 Matilda and her mother presided over the court in favor of the Abbey of San Salvatore in Monte Amiata. On 8 February 1073, Matilda went to Lucca without her mother and presided over the court alone, where she made a donation in favor of the local Monastery of San Salvatore e Santa Giustina. At the instigation of the abbess Eritha, the monastery possessions in Lucca and Villanova near Serchio were secured by the King's ban (\"K\u00f6nigsbann\"). For the next six months Matilda's residence is not known, while her mother took part in the enthronement ceremony for Pope Gregory VII.\nMatilda was introduced by her mother to numerous personalities in church reform, especially Pope Gregory VII. She had already met the future pope, then Archdeacon Hildebrand, in the 1060s. During 9\u201317 March 1074, she met him for the first time after his election as pope. He developed a special relationship of trust with Matilda and Beatrice, in the period that followed. However, Beatrice died on 18 April 1076. On 27 August 1077 Matilda donated her town of Scanello and other estates to the extent of 600 \"mansus\" near the court to Bishop Landulf and the chapter of Pisa Cathedral as a soul device (\"Seelger\u00e4t\") for her and her parents.\nThe deaths of both her husband and mother within two months considerably augmented Matilda's power. She now was the undisputed heir of all lands allotted to both her parents. Her inheritance could have been threatened had Godfrey the Hunchback survived her mother, but she now enjoyed the privileged status of a widow. It seemed unlikely, however, that Emperor Henry IV would formally invest her with the margraviate.\nPersonal rule.\nMatilda's role during the Investiture Controversy.\nState of Matilda's domains after her accession to power.\nAfter the death of her mother, Matilda took over her immense paternal inheritance. This was contrary to the provisions of the Salic and Lombard law currently in force in the Kingdom of Italy, according to which Emperor Henry IV would have been the legal heir. In view of the minority of Henry IV and close cooperation with the reform papacy, a lending under imperial law was of secondary importance for the House of Canossa.\nBetween 1076 and 1080, Matilda travelled to Lorraine to lay claim to her husband's estate in Verdun, which he had willed (along with the rest of his patrimony) to his nephew Godfrey of Bouillon, the son of his sister Ida. Godfrey of Bouillon also disputed Matilda's rights to Stenay and Mosay, which her mother had received as dowry. The quarrel between aunt and nephew over the episcopal county of Verdun was eventually settled by Theoderic, Bishop of Verdun, who enjoyed the right to nominate the counts. He easily found in favor of Matilda, as such a verdict happened to please both Pope Gregory VII and King Henry IV. Matilda then proceeded to invest Verdun to her husband's pro-reform cousin, Albert III of Namur. The deep animosity between Matilda and her nephew is thought to have prevented her from travelling to Jerusalem during the First Crusade that he led in the late 1090s.\nEfforts to achieve a balance between king and pope.\nMatilda was a second cousin of Henry IV through their respective grandmothers, sisters Matilda of Swabia and Empress Gisela. Because of her family ties to the Salian dynasty, she was suitable for a mediator role between the Emperor and the Holy See. Matilda's mother died at the time when the conflict between King Henry IV and Pope Gregory VII was escalating. Matilda and Beatrice were among the closest confidants of Gregory VII. From the beginning, he took both into his confidence and let them know about his plans against the Roman-German king.\nThe disagreement between Pope Gregory VII and King Henry IV culminated in the aftermath of the synod of Worms on 24 January 1076; together with the Archbishops Siegfried of Mainz and Udo of Trier and 24 bishops, the king formulated drastic accusations against Gregory VII. The allegations included Gregory VII's election (which was described as illegitimate), the government of the Church through a \"women's senate\", and that \"he shared a table with a strange woman and housed her, more familiar than necessary.\" The contempt expressed was so immense that Matilda was not even called by name. The pope responded on 15 February 1076 with the excommunication of the king, releasing all his subjects from the oath of allegiance to him and providing the perfect reason for rebellion against his rule. These measures had a tremendous effect on contemporaries, as the words of the chronicler Bonizo of Sutri show: \"When the news of the banishment of the king reached the ears of the people, our whole world trembled\".\nInsubordinate southern German princes gathered in Trebur, awaiting the pope. Matilda's first military endeavor, as well as the first major task altogether as ruler, turned out to be protecting the pope during his perilous journey north. Gregory VII could rely on nobody else. As the sole heiress to the House of Canossa patrimony, Matilda controlled all the Apennine passes and nearly all the rest that connected central Italy to the north. The Lombard bishops, who were also excommunicated for taking part in the synod and whose sees bordered Matilda's domain, were keen to capture the pope. Gregory VII was aware of the danger, and recorded that all his advisors except Matilda counselled him against travelling to Trebur.\nHenry IV had other plans, however. He decided to descend into Italy and intercept Gregory VII, who was thus delayed. The German princes held a separate council and informed the king that he had to submit to the pope within a year or be replaced. Henry IV's predecessors had dealt easily with troublesome pontiffs \u2014 they had simply deposed them, and the excommunicated Lombard bishops rejoiced at this prospect. When Matilda heard about Henry IV's approach, she urged Gregory VII to take refuge in the Canossa Castle, her family's eponymous stronghold. The pope took her advice.\nIt soon became clear that the intention behind Henry's walk to Canossa was to show penance. By 25 January 1077, the king stood barefoot in the snow before the gates of Matilda's castle, accompanied by his wife Bertha of Savoy, their infant son Conrad, and Bertha's mother, the powerful Margravine Adelaide of Susa (Matilda's second cousin; Adelaide's grandmother was Prangarda, sister of Tedald of Canossa, Matilda's paternal grandfather). Since Matilda's castle became the setting for the reconciliation between the emperor and the pope, she must have been very closely involved in the negotiations. The king remained there, in a penitent's robe, barefoot, and without a sign of authority, despite the winter cold, until 28 January, when Matilda convinced the pope to see him. Matilda and Adelaide brokered a deal between the men.\nHenry IV was taken back into the Church, with both Matilda and Adelaide acting as sponsors and formally swearing to the agreement. For Matilda, the days in Canossa were a challenge. All those arriving had to be accommodated and looked after appropriately. She had to take care of the procurement and storage of food and fodder, and the supplies in the middle of winter. After the ban was dissolved, Henry IV stayed in the Po Valley for several months and demonstratively devoted himself to his rulership. Pope Gregory VII stayed in Matilda's castles for the next few months. Henry IV and Matilda never met again in person after the Canossa days. From 1077 to 1080 Matilda followed the usual activities of her rule. In addition to a few donations for the dioceses of Lucca and Mantua, court documents were in dominance.\nDisputes with Henry IV.\nIn 1079, Matilda gave the pope all her domains (the so-called \"Terre Matildiche\"), in open defiance of claims by Henry IV as both the overlord of some of those domains and as one of her close relatives. One year later, the fortunes of papacy and empire turned again: at the Roman synod of Lent in early March 1080 Henry IV was again excommunicated by Gregory VII. The pope combined the anathem with a warning: if the king didn't submit to the papal authority by 1 August he should be dethroned. However, unlike previously, the German bishops and princes stood behind Henry IV. In Brixen on 25 June 1080, seven German, one Burgundian, and 20 Italian bishops decided to depose Gregory VII and nominated Archbishop Guibert of Ravenna as pope, who took the name of Clement III. The break between the empire and the papacy also escalated the troubled relationship between Henry IV and Matilda. In September 1080, the Margravine stood on behalf of Bishop Gratianus of Ferrara to court. Marquis Azzo d'Este, Counts Ugo and Ubert, Albert (son of Count Boso), Paganus di Corsina, Fulcus de Rovereto, Gerardo di Corviago, Petrus de Ermengarda, and Ugo Armatus all met there. Matilda swore there to maintain the upcoming fight against Henry IV. On 15 October 1080 at Volta Mantovana, the imperial troops defeated the army of Matilda and Gregory VII in battle. Some Tuscan nobles took advantage of the uncertainty and positioned themselves against Matilda; few places remained faithful to her. In a donation of 9 December 1080 to the Modenese monastery of San Prospero, only a few local followers are named.\nMatilda, however, did not surrender. While Gregory VII was forced into exile, by retaining control over all the western passes in the Apennines, she could force Henry IV to approach Rome via Ravenna; even with this route open, the emperor would find it hard to besiege Rome with a hostile territory at his back. In December 1080 the citizens of Lucca, then the capital of Tuscany, had revolted and driven out her ally, Bishop Anselm. She is believed to have commissioned the renowned Ponte della Maddalena where the Via Francigena crosses the river Serchio at Borgo a Mozzano just north of Lucca.\nHenry IV crossed the Alps in the spring of 1081. He gave up his previous reluctance toward his cousin Matilda and honored the city of Lucca for their transfer to the royal side. On 23 June 1081, the king issued the citizens of Lucca a comprehensive privilege in the army camp outside Rome. By granting special urban rights, the king intended to weaken Matilda's rule. In July 1081 at a synod in Lucca, Henry IV\u2014on account of her 1079 donation to the Church\u2014imposed Imperial ban upon Matilda and all her domains were forfeit, although this was not enough to eliminate her as a source of trouble, for she retained substantial allodial holdings. The consequences for Matilda, however, were relatively minor in Italy, but she suffered losses in her far-away Lorraine possessions. On 1 June 1085, Henry IV gave Matilda's domains Stenay and Mosay to Bishop Dietrich of Verdun.\nMatilda remained Pope Gregory VII's chief intermediary for communication with northern Europe even as he lost control of Rome and was holed up in the Castel Sant'Angelo. After Henry IV obtained possession of the pope's seal, Matilda wrote to supporters in Germany only to trust papal messages that came through her.\nA guerrilla war developed that Matilda waged from her castles in the Apennines. In 1082 she was apparently insolvent. Therefore, she could no longer bind her vassals to her with generous gifts or fiefs. But even in dire straits, she did not let up in her zeal for the reform papacy. Although also a supporter of church reform, her mother had distanced herself from Gregory VII's revolutionary goals where these endangered the foundations of her rule structures. In this setting, mother and daughter differed significantly from one another. Matilda had the church treasure of the Apollonius monastery built near Canossa Castle melted down; precious metal vessels and other treasures from Nonantola Abbey also were melted down. She even sold her Allod city of Donceel to the Abbey of Saint-Jacques in Li\u00e8ge. All the proceeds were made available to the pope. The royal side of the dispute then accused her of plundering churches and monasteries. Pisa and Lucca sided with Henry IV. As a result, Matilda lost two of her most important pillars of power in Tuscany. She had to stand by and watch as anti-Gregorian bishops were installed in several places.\nHenry IV's control of Rome enabled him to enthrone Antipope Clement III, who, in turn, crowned him emperor. After this, Henry IV returned to Germany, leaving it to his allies to attempt Matilda's dispossession. These attempts foundered after Matilda (with help of the city of Bologna) defeated them at Sorbara near Modena on 2 July 1084. In the battle, Matilda was able to capture Bishop Bernardo of Parma and make him a hostage. By 1085 Archbishop Tedaldo of Milan and the Bishops Gandolfo of Reggio Emilia and Bernardo of Parma, all members of the pro-imperial party, were dead. Matilda took this opportunity and filled the Bishoprics sees in Modena, Reggio, and Pistoia with church reformers again.\nGregory VII died on 25 May 1085, and Matilda's forces, with those of Prince Jordan I of Capua (her off and on again enemy), took to the field in support of a new pope, Victor III. In 1087, Matilda led an expedition to Rome in an attempt to install Victor III, but the strength of the imperial counterattack soon convinced the pope to withdraw from the city.\nOn his third expedition to Italy, Henry IV besieged Mantua and attacked Matilda's sphere of influence. In April 1091 he was able to take the city after an eleven-month siege. In the following months, the emperor achieved further successes against the vassals of the Margravine. In the summer of 1091, he managed to get the entire north area of the Po with the Counties of Mantua, Brescia, and Verona under his control. In 1092 Henry IV was able to conquer most of the counties of Modena and Reggio. The Monastery of San Benedetto in Polirone suffered severe damages in the course of the military conflict so that on 5 October 1092 Matilda gave the monastery the churches of San Prospero, San Donino in Monte Uille, and San Gregorio in Antognano to compensate. Matilda had a meeting with her few remaining faithful allies in the late summer of 1092 at Carpineti. The majority of them were in favor of peace. Only the hermit Johannes from Marola strongly advocated a continuation of the fight against the emperor. Thereupon Matilda implored her followers not to give up the fight. The imperial army began to siege Canossa in the autumn of 1092, but withdrew after a sudden failure of the siege; after this defeat, Henry IV's influence in Italy was never recovered.\nIn the 1090s Henry IV got increasingly on the defensive. A coalition of the southern German princes had prevented him from returning to the empire over the Alpine passes. For several years the emperor remained inactive in the area around Verona. In the spring of 1093, Conrad, his eldest son and heir to the throne, fell from him. With the support of Matilda along with the Patarene-minded cities of northern Italy (Cremona, Lodi, Milan, and Piacenza), the prince rebelled against his father. Sources close to the emperor saw Matilda's influence on Conrad as the reason for the rebellion of the son against his father, but contemporary sources don't reveal any closer contact between the two before the rebellion. A little later, Conrad was taken prisoner by his father but with Matilda's help, he was freed. With the support of the Margravine, Conrad was crowned King of Italy by Archbishop Anselm III of Milan before 4 December 1093. Together with the pope, Matilda organized the marriage of King Conrad with Maximilla, daughter of Count Roger I of Sicily. This was intended to win the support of the Normans of southern Italy against Henry IV. Conrad's initiatives to expand his rule in northern Italy probably led to tensions with Matilda, and for this, he didn't find any more support for his rule. After 22 October 1097, his political activity was virtually ended, his death in the summer of 1101 from a fever being the only mention.\nIn 1094 Henry IV's second wife, the Rurikid princess Eupraxia of Kiev (renamed Adelaide after her marriage), escaped from her imprisonment at the monastery of San Zeno and spread serious allegations against him. Henry IV then had her arrested in Verona. With the help of Matilda, Adelaide was able to escape again and find refuge with her. At the beginning of March 1095 Pope Urban II called the Council of Piacenza under the protection of Matilda. There Adelaide appeared and made a public confession about Henry IV \"because of the unheard-of atrocities of fornication which she had endured with her husband\": she accused Henry IV of forcing her to participate in orgies, and, according to some later accounts, of attempting a black mass on her naked body. Thanks to these scandals and division within the Imperial family, the prestige and power of Henry IV was increasingly weakened. After the synod, Matilda no longer had any contact with Adelaide.\nSecond marriage: Welf V of Bavaria.\nIn 1088 Matilda was facing a new attempt at invasion by Henry IV, and decided to pre-empt it by means of a political marriage. In 1089 Matilda (in her early forties) married Welf V, heir to the Duchy of Bavaria and who was probably fifteen to seventeen years old, but none of the contemporary sources goes into the great age difference. The marriage was probably concluded at the instigation of Pope Urban II in order to politically isolate Henry IV. According to historian Elke Goez, the union of northern and southern Alpine opponents of the Salian dynasty initially had no military significance, because Welf V didn't appear in northern Italy with troops. In Matilda's documents, no Swabian names are listed in the subsequent period, so that Welf V could have moved to Italy alone or with a small entourage. According to the Rosenberg Annals, he even came across the Alps disguised as a pilgrim. Matilda's motive for this marriage, despite the large age difference and the political alliance\u2014her new husband was a member of the Welf dynasty, who were important supporters of the papacy from the eleventh to the fifteenth centuries in their conflict with the German emperors (see Guelphs and Ghibellines)\u2014, may also have been the hope for offspring: late pregnancy was quite possible, as the example of Constance of Sicily shows.\nCosmas of Prague (writing in the early twelfth century), included a letter in his \"Chronica Boemorum\" and claimed that Matilda had sent it to her future husband, but now the letter is thought to be spurious:\n\"Not for feminine lightness or recklessness, but for the good of all my kingdom, I send you this letter: agreeing to it, you take with it myself and the rule over the whole of Lombardy. I'll give you so many cities, so many castles and noble palaces, so much gold and silver, that you will have a famous name, if you endear yourself to me; do not reproof me for boldness because I first address you with the proposal. It's reason for both male and female to desire a legitimate union, and it makes no difference whether the man or the woman broaches the first line of love, sofar as an indissoluble marriage is sought. Goodbye\".\nMatilda sent an army of thousands to the border of Lombardy to escort her bridegroom, welcomed him with honors, and after the marriage (mid-1089), she organized 120 days of wedding festivities, with such splendor that those of any other medieval rulers pale in comparison. Cosmas also reports that for two nights after the wedding, Welf V, fearing witchcraft, refused to share the marital bed. The third day, Matilda appeared naked on a table especially prepared on sawhorses, and told him that \"everything is in front of you and there is no hidden malice\". But the Duke was dumbfounded; Matilda, furious, slapped him and spat in his face, taunting him: \"Get out of here, monster, you don't deserve our kingdom, you vile thing, viler than a worm or a rotten seaweed, don't let me see you again, or you'll die a miserable death\"...\nDespite the reportedly bad beginning of their marriage, Welf V is documented at least three times as Matilda's consort. By the spring of 1095 the couple were separated: in April 1095 Welf V had signed Matilda's donation charter for Piadena, but a next diploma dated 21 May 1095 was already issued by Matilda alone. Welf V's name no longer appears in any of the Mathildic documents. As a father-in-law, Welf IV tried to reconcile the couple; he was primarily concerned with the possible inheritance of the childless Matilda. The couple was never divorced, nor was the marriage declared invalid.\nFinal defeat of Henry IV and new room for maneuvers for Matilda.\nWith the \"de facto\" end of Matilda's marriage, Henry IV regained his capacity to act. Welf IV switched to the imperial side. The emperor locked in Verona was finally able to return to the north of the Alps in 1097. After that he never returned to Italy, and it would be 13 years before his son and namesake set foot on Italian soil for the first time. With the assistance of the French armies heading off to the First Crusade, Matilda was finally able to restore Pope Urban II to Rome. She ordered or led successful expeditions against Ferrara (1101), Parma (1104), Prato (1107), and Mantua (1114).\nIn eleventh century Italy, the rise of the cities began, in interaction with the overarching conflict. They soon succeeded in establishing their own territories. In Lucca, Pavia, and Pisa, consuls appeared as early as the 1080s, which are considered to be signs of the legal independence of the \"communities\". Pisa sought its advantage in changing alliances with the Salian dynasty and the House of Canossa. Lucca remained completely closed to the Margravine from 1081. It was not until Allucione de Luca's marriage to the daughter of the royal judge Flaipert that she gained new opportunities to influence. Flaipert had already been one of the most important advisors of the House of Canossa since the times of Matilda's mother. Allucione was a vassal of Count Guidi, with whom Matilda worked closely. Mantua had to make considerable concessions in June 1090; the inhabitants of the city and the suburbs were freed from all \"unjustified\" oppression and all rights and property in Sacca, Sustante and Corte Carpaneta were confirmed.\nAfter 1096 the balance of power slowly began to change again in favor of the Margravine. Matilda resumed her donations to ecclesiastical and social institutions in Lombardy, Emilia, and Tuscany. In the summer of 1099 and 1100 her route first led to Lucca and Pisa. There it can be detected again in the summer of 1105, 1107, and 1111. In early summer of 1099 she gave the Monastery of San Ponziano a piece of land for the establishment of a hospital. With this donation, Matilda resumed her relations with Lucca.\nAfter 1090 Matilda accentuated the consensual rule. After the profound crises, she was no longer able to make political decisions on her own. She held meetings with spiritual and secular nobles in Tuscany and also in her home countries of Emilia. She had to take into account the ideas of her loyal friends and come to an agreement with them. In her role as the most important guarantor of the law, she increasingly lost importance in relation to the bishops. They repeatedly asked the Margravine to put an end to grievances. As a result, the bishops expanded their position within the episcopal cities and in the surrounding area. After 1100 Matilda had to repeatedly protect churches from her own subjects. The accommodation requirements had also been reduced.\nCourt culture and rulership.\nThe court had developed since the twelfth century to a central institution of royal and princely power. The most important tasks were the visualization of the rule through festivals, art, and literature. The term \"court\" can be understood as \"presence with the ruler\". In contrast to the Brunswick court of the Guelphs, Matilda's court offices cannot be verified. Scholars such as Anselm of Lucca, Heribert of Reggio, and Johannes of Mantua were around the Margravine. Matilda encouraged some of them to write their works: for example, Bishop Anselm of Lucca wrote a psalter at her request and Johannes of Mantua a commentary on the Song of Songs and a reflection on the life of Virgin Mary. Works were dedicated or presented to Matilda, such as the \"Liber de anulo et baculo\" of Rangerius of Lucca, the \"Orationes sive meditationes\" of Anselm of Canterbury, the \"Vita Mathildis\" of Donizo, the miracle reports of Ubald of Mantua and the \"Liber ad amicum\" of Bonizo of Sutri. Matilda contributed to the distribution of the books intended for her by making copies. More works were dedicated only to Henry IV among their direct contemporaries. As a result, the Margravine court temporarily became the most important non-royal spiritual center of the Salian period. It also served as a contact point for displaced Gregorians in the church political disputes. Historian Paolo Golinelli interpreted the repeated admission of high-ranking refugees and their care as an act of charity. As the last political expellee, she granted asylum for a long time to Archbishop Conrad I of Salzburg, the pioneer of the canon reform. This brought her into close contact with this reform movement.\nMatilda regularly sought the advice of learned lawyers when making court decisions. A large number of legal advisors are named in their documents. There are 42 \"causidici\", 29 \"iudices sacri palatii\", 44 \"iudices\", 8 \"legis doctore\"s, and 42 \"advocati\". According to historian Elke Goez, Matilda's court can be described as \"a focal point for the use of learned jurists in the case law by lay princes\". Matilda encouraged these scholars and drew them to her court. According to Goez, the administration of justice was not a scholarly end in itself, but served to increase the efficiency of rulership. Goez sees a legitimation deficit as the most important trigger for the Margravine's intensive administration of justice, since Matilda was never formally invested by the king. In Tuscany in particular, an intensive administration of justice can be documented with almost 30 \"placitum\". Matilda's involvement in the founding of the Bolognese School of Law, which has been suspected again and again, is viewed by Elke Goez as unlikely. According to chronicler Burchard of Ursperg, the alleged founder of this school, Irnerius, produced an authentic text of the Roman legal sources on behalf of Margravine Matilda. According to historian Johannes Fried, this can at best affect the referring to the Vulgate version of the \"Digest\", and even that is considered unlikely. The role of this scholar in Matilda's environment is controversial. According to historian Wulf Eckart Voss, Irnerius had been a legal advisor since 1100. In an analysis of the documentary mentions, however, Gundula Grebner came to the conclusion that this scholar should not be classified in the circle of Matilda, but in that of Henry V.\nUntil well into the fourteenth century, medieval rule was exercised through itinerant court practice. There was neither a capital nor did the rulers of the House of Canossa have a preferred place of residence. Rule in the High Middle Ages was based on presence. Matilda's domains comprised most of what is now the dual region of Emilia-Romagna and part of Tuscany. She traveled in her domains in all seasons, and was never alone in this. There were always a number of advisors, clergy, and armed men in their vicinity that could not be precisely estimated. She maintained a special relationship of trust with Bishop Anselm of Lucca, who was her closest advisor until his death in May 1086. In the later years of her life, cardinal legates often stayed in her vicinity. They arranged for communication with the pope. The Margravine had a close relationship with the cardinal legates Bernard degli Uberti and Bonsignore of Reggio. In view of the rigors of travel domination, according to Elke Goez's judgment, she must have been athletic, persistent, and capable. The distant possessions brought a considerable administrative burden and were often threatened with takeover by rivals. Therefore, Matilda had to count on local confidants, in whose recruitment she was supported by Pope Gregory VII.\nIn a rulership without a permanent residence, the visualization of rulership and the representation of rank were of great importance. From Matilda's reign there are 139 documents (74 of which are original), four letters, and 115 lost documents (\"Deperdita\"). The largest proportion of the number of documents are donations to ecclesiastical recipients (45) and court documents (35). In terms of the spatial distribution of the documentary tradition, Northern Italy predominates (82). Tuscany and the neighboring regions (49) are less affected, while Lorraine has only five documents. There is thus a unique tradition for a princess of the High Middle Ages; a comparable number of documents only come back for the time being Henry the Lion five decades later. At least 18 of Matilda's documents were sealed. At the time, this was unusual for lay princes in imperial Italy. There were very few women who had their own seal: the Margravine had two seals of different pictorial types \u2014one shows a female bust with loose, falling hair, while the second seal from the year 1100 is an antique gem and not a portrait of Matilda and Godfrey the Hunchback or Welf V. Matilda's chancellery for issuing the diplomas on their own can be excluded with high probability. To consolidate her rule and as an expression of the understanding of rule, Matilda referred in her title to her powerful father; it was called \"filia quondam magni Bonifatii ducis\".\nThe castles in their domain and high church festivals also served to visualize the rule. Matilda celebrated Easter as the most important act of power representation in Pisa in 1074. Matilda's pictorial representations also belong in this context, some of which are controversial, however. The statue of the so-called Bonissima on the Palazzo Comunale, the cathedral square of Modena, was probably made in the 1130s at the earliest. The Margravine's mosaic in the church of Polirone was also made after her death. Matilda had her ancestors put in splendid coffins. However, she didn't succeed in bringing together all the remains of her ancestors to create a central point of reference for rule and memory: her grandfather remained buried in Brescello, while the remains of her father were kept in Mantua and those of her mother in Pisa. Their withdrawal would have meant a political retreat and the loss of Pisa and Mantua.\nBy using the written form, Matilda supplemented the presence of the immediate presence of power in all parts of her sphere of influence. In her great courts she used the script to increase the income from her lands. Scripture-based administration was still a very unusual means of realizing rule for lay princes in the eleventh century.\nIn the years from 1081 to 1098, however, the rule of the House of Canossa was in a crisis. The documentary and letter transmission is largely suspended for this period. A total of only 17 pieces have survived, not a single document from eight years. After this finding Matilda wasn't in Tuscany for almost twenty years. However, from autumn 1098 she was able to regain a large part of her lost territories. This increased interest in receiving certificates from her. Ninety-four documents have survived from the last 20 years. Matilda tried to consolidate her rule with the increased use of writing. After the death of her mother (18 April 1076), she often provided her documents with the phrase \"Matilda Dei gratia si quid est\" (\"Matilda, by God's grace, if she is something\"). The personal combination of symbol (cross) and text was unique in the personal execution of the certificates. By referring to the immediacy of God, she wanted to legitimize her contestable position. There is no consensus in research about the meaning of the qualifying suffix \"si quid est\". This formulation, which can be found in 38 original and 31 copiously handed down texts by the Margravine, ultimately remains as puzzling as it is singular in terms of tradition. One possible explanation for their use is that Matilda was never formally invested with the Margraviate of Tuscany by the king. Like her mother, Matilda carried out all kinds of legal transactions without mentioning her husbands and thus with full independence. Both princesses took over the official titles of their husbands, but refrained from masculinizing their titles.\nPatronage of churches and hospitals.\nAfter the discovery of contemporary diplomas, Elke Goez refuted the widespread notion that the Margravine had given churches and monasteries rich gifts at all times of her life. Very few donations were initially made. Already one year after the death of her mother, Matilda lost influence on the inner-city monasteries in Tuscany and thus an important pillar of her rule.\nThe issuing of deeds for monasteries concentrated on convents that were located in Matilda's immediate sphere of influence in northern and central Italy or Lorraine. The main exception to this was Montecassino. Among the most important of her numerous donations to monasteries and churches were those to Fonte Avellana, Farfa, Montecassino, Vallombrosa, Nonantola, and Polirone. In this way she secured the financing of the old church buildings. She often stipulated that the proceeds from the donated land should be used to build churches in the center of the episcopal cities. This money was an important contribution to the funds for the expansion and decoration of the churches of San Pietro in Mantua, Santa Maria Assunta e San Geminiano of Modena, Santa Maria Assunta of Parma, San Martino of Lucca, Santa Maria Assunta of Pisa, and Santa Maria Assunta of Volterra.\nMatilda supported the construction of Pisa Cathedral with several donations (in 1083, 1100, and 1103). Her name should be permanently associated with the cathedral building project. They released Nonantola from paying tithes to the Bishop of Modena; the funds thus freed up could be used for the monastery buildings. In Modena, with her participation, she secured the continued construction of the cathedral. Matilda acted as mediator in the dispute between cathedral canons and citizens about the remains of Saint Geminianus. The festive consecration could take place in 1106, with the \"Relatio fundationis cathedralis Mutinae\" recording these processes. Matilda is presented as a political authority: she is present with an army, gives support, recommends receiving the pope, and reappears for the ordination, during which she dedicates immeasurable gifts to the patron.\nNumerous examples show that Matilda made donations to bishops who were loyal to the Gregorian reforms. In May 1109 she gave land in the area of Ferrara to the Gregorian Bishop Landolfo of Ferrara in San Cesario sul Panaro and in June of the same year possessions in the vicinity of Ficarolo. The Bishop Wido of Ferrara, however, was hostile to Pope Gregory VII and had written \"De scismate Hildebrandi\" against him. The siege of Ferrara undertaken by Matilda in 1101 led to the expulsion of the schismatic bishop.\nOn the other hand, nothing is known of Matilda's sponsorship of nunneries. Their only relevant intervention concerned the Benedictine nuns of San Sisto of Piacenza, whom they chased out of the monastery for their immoral behavior and replaced with monks.\nMatilda founded and sponsored numerous hospitals to care for the poor and pilgrims. For the hospitals, she selected municipal institutions and important Apennine passes. The welfare institutions not only fulfilled charitable tasks, but were also important for the legitimation and consolidation of the margravial rule.\nSome churches traditionally said to have been founded by Matilda include: Sant'Andrea Apostolo of Vitriola in Montefiorino (Modena); Sant'Anselmo in Pieve di Coriano (Province of Mantua); San Giovanni Decollato in Pescarolo ed Uniti (Cremona); Santa Maria Assunta in Monteveglio (Bologna); San Martino in Barisano near Forl\u00ec; San Zeno in Cerea (Verona), and San Salvaro in Legnago (Verona).\nAdoption of Guido Guidi around 1099.\nIn the later years of her life, Matilda was increasingly faced with the question of who should take over the House of Canossa's inheritance. She could no longer have children of her own, and apparently for this reason she adopted Guido \"Guerra\", member of the Guidi family, who were one of her main supporters in Florence (although in a genealogically strictly way, the Margravine's feudal heirs were the House of Savoy, descendants of Prangarda of Canossa, Matilda's paternal great-aunt). On 12 November 1099, he was referred to in a diploma as Matilda's adopted son (\"adoptivus filius domine comitisse Matilde\"). With his consent, Matilda renewed and expanded a donation from her ancestors to the Brescello monastery. However, this is the only time that Guido had the title of adoptive son (\"adoptivus filius\") in a document that was considered to be authentic. At that time there were an unusually large number of vassals in Matilda's environment. In March 1100, the Margravine and Guido \"Guerra\" took part in a meeting of abbots of the Vallombrosians Order, which they both sponsored. On 19 November 1103 they gave the monastery of Vallombrosa possessions on both sides of the Vicano and half of the castle of Magnale with the town of Pagiano. After Matilda had bequeathed her property to the Apostolic See in 1102 (so-called second \"Matildine Donation\"), Guido withdrew from her. With the donation he lost hope of the inheritance. However, he signed three more documents with Matilda for the Abbey of Polirone.\nFrom these sources, Elke Goez, for example, concludes that Guido \"Guerra\" was adopted by Matilda. According to her, the Margravine must have consulted with her loyal followers beforehand and reached a consensus for this far-reaching political decision. Ultimately, pragmatic reasons were decisive: Matilda needed a political and economic administrator for Tuscany. The Guidi family estates in the north and east of Florence were also a useful addition to the House of Canossa possessions. Guido \"Guerra\" hoped that Matilda's adoption would not only give him the inheritance, but also an increase in rank. He also hoped for support in the dispute between the Guidi and the Cadolinger families for supremacy in Tuscany. The Cadolinger were named after one of their ancestors, Count Cadalo, who was attested from 952 to 986; they died out in 1113.\nPaolo Golinelli doubts this reconstruction of the events. He thinks that Guido \"Guerra\" held an important position among the Margravine's vassals, but was not adopted by her. This is supported by the fact that after 1108 he only appeared once as a witness in one of their documents, namely in a document dated 6 May 1115, which Matilda granted in favor of the Abbey of Polirone while she was on her deathbed at Bondeno di Roncore.\nMatildine Donation.\nOn 17 November 1102 Matilda donated her property to the Apostolic See at Canossa Castle in the presence of the Cardinal Legate Bernardo of San Crisogono. This is a renewal of the donation, as the first diploma was allegedly lost. Matilda had initially transferred all of her property to the Apostolic See in the Holy Cross Chapel of the Lateran before Pope Gregory VII. Most research has dated this first donation to the years between 1077 and 1080. Paolo Golinelli spoke out for the period between 1077 and 1081. Werner Goez placed the first donation in the years 1074 and 1075, when Matilda's presence in Rome can be proven. At the second donation, despite the importance of the event, very few witnesses were present. With Atto from Montebaranzone and Bonusvicinus from Canossa, the diploma was attested by two people of no recognizable rank who are not mentioned in any other certificate.\nThe Matildine Donation caused a sensation in the twelfth century and has also received a lot of attention in research. The entire tradition of the document comes from the curia. According to Paolo Golinelli, the donation of 1102 is a forgery from the 1130s; in reality, Matilda made Henry V her only heir in 1110/11. Even Johannes Laudage in his study of the contemporary sources, thought that the Matildine Donation was spurious. Elke and Werner Goez, on the other hand, viewed the second donation diploma from November 1102 as authentic in their document edition. Bernd Schneidm\u00fcller and Elke Goez believe that a diploma was issued about the renewed transfer of the \"Terre Matildiche\" out of curial fear of the Welfs. Welf IV died in November 1101. His eldest son and successor Welf V had rulership rights over the House of Canossa domains through his marriage to Matilda. Therefore, reference was made to an earlier award of the inheritance before Matilda's second marriage. Otherwise, given the spouse's considerable influence, their consent should have been obtained.\nWerner Goez explains with different ideas about the legal implications of the process that Matilda often had her own property even after 1102 without recognizing any consideration for Rome's rights. Goez observed that the donation is only mentioned in Matildine documents that were created under the influence of papal legates. Matilda didn't want a complete waiver of all other real estates and usable rights and perhaps did not notice how far the consequences of the formulation of the second Matildine Donation went.\nLast years and death.\nIn the last phase of her life, Matilda pursued the plan to strengthen the Abbey of Polirone. The Church of Gonzaga freed them in 1101 from the \"malos sacerdotes fornicarios et adulteros\" (\"wicked, unchaste, and adulterous priests\") and gave them to the monks of Polirone. The Gonzaga clergy were charged with violating the duty of celibacy. One of the main evils that the church reformers acted against. In the same year she gave the Abbey of Polirone a poor house that she had built in Mantua; she thus withdrew it from the monks of the monastery of Sant'Andrea in Mantua who had been accused of simony. The Abbey of Polirone received a total of twelve donations in the last five years of Matilda's life. So she transferred her property in Villola (16 kilometers southeast of Mantua) and the Insula Sancti Benedicti (island in the Po, today on the south bank in the area of San Benedetto Po) to this monastery. The Abbey thus rose to become the official monastery of the House of Canossa, with Matilda choosing it as her burial place. The monks used Matilda's generous donations to rebuild the entire Abbey and the main church. Matilda wanted to secure her memory not only through gifts, but also through written memories. Polirone was given a very valuable Gospel manuscript. The book, preserved today in New York, contains a liber vitae, a memorial book, in which all important donors and benefactors of the monastery are listed. This document also deals with Matilda's memorial. The Gospel manuscript was commissioned by the Margravine. It is not clear whether the codex originated in Polirone or was sent there as a gift from Matilda. It is the only larger surviving memorial from a Cluniac monastery in northern Italy. Paolo Golinelli emphasized that, through Matilda's favor, Polirone also became a base where reform forces gathered.\nHenry V had been in diplomatic contact with Matilda since 1109. He emphasized his blood relationship with the Margravine and demonstratively cultivated the connection. At his coronation as emperor in 1111, disputes over the investiture question broke out again. Henry V captured Pope Paschal II and some of the cardinals in St. Peter's Basilica and forced his imperial coronation. When Matilda found out about this, she asked for the release of two cardinals, Bernard of Parma and Bonsignore of Reggio, who were close to her. Henry V complied with her request and released both cardinals. Matilda did nothing to get the pope and the other cardinals free. On the way back from the Rome train, Henry V visited the Margravine during 6\u201311 May 1111 at Castle of Bianello in Quattro Castella, Reggio Emilia. Matilda then achieved the solution from the imperial ban imposed to her. According to the unique testimony of her biographer Donizo, Henry V transferred to Matilda the rule of Liguria and crowned her Imperial Vicar and Vice-Queen of Italy. At this meeting he also concluded a firm agreement (\"firmum foedus\") with her, which was mentioned only by Donizo and whose details are unknown. This agreement has been undisputedly interpreted in German historical studies since Wilhelm von Giesebrecht as an inheritance treaty, while Italian historians such as Luigi Simeoni and Werner Goez repeatedly questioned this. Elke Goez, on the other hand, assumed a mutual agreement with benefits from both sides: Matilda, whose health was weakened, probably waived her further support for Pope Paschal II with a view to a good understanding with the emperor. Paolo Golinelli thinks that Matilda recognized Henry V as the heir to her domains and only after this, the imperial ban against Matilda was lifted and she recovered the possessions in the northern Italian parts of the formerly powerful House of Canossa with the exception of Tuscany. Donizo imaginatively embellished this process with the title of Vice-Queen. Some researchers see in the agreement with Henry V a turning away from the ideals of the so-called Gregorian reform, but Enrico Spagnesi emphasizes that Matilda had by no means given up her church reform-minded policy.\nA short time after her meeting with Henry V, Matilda retired to Montebaranzone near Prignano sulla Secchia. In Mantua in the summer of 1114 the rumor that she had died sparked jubilation. The Mantuans strived for autonomy and demanded admission to the margravial Rivalta Castle located five kilometers west of Mantua. When the citizens found out that Matilda was still alive, they burned the castle down. Rivalta Castle symbolized the hated power of the Margravine. Donizo, in turn, used this incident as an instrument to illustrate the chaotic conditions that the sheer rumor of Matilda's death could trigger. The Margravine guaranteed peace and security for the population, and was able to recapture Mantua. In April 1115, the aging Margravine gave the Church of San Michele in Mantua the rights and income of the Pacengo court. This documented legal transaction proves their intention to win over an important spiritual community in Mantua.\nMatilda often visited the town of Bondeno di Roncore (today Bondanazzo), in the district of Reggiolo, Reggio Emilia, just in the middle of the Po valley, where she owned a small castle, which she often visited between 1106 and 1115. During a stay there, she fell seriously ill, so that she could finally no longer leave the castle. In the last months of her life, the sick Margravine was no longer able to travel strenuously. According to Vito Fumagalli, she stayed in the Polirone area not only because of her illness: the House of Canossa had largely been ousted from its previous position of power at the beginning of the twelfth century. In her final hours the Bishop of Reggio, Cardinal Bonsignore, stayed at her deathbed and gave her the sacraments of death. On the night of 24 July 1115, Matilda died of sudden cardiac arrest at the age of 69. After her death in 1116 Henry V succeeded in taking possession of the \"Terre Matildiche\" without any apparent resistance from the curia. The once loyal subjects of the Margravine accepted the emperor as their new master without resistance; for example, powerful vassals such as Arduin de Palude, Sasso of Bibianello, Count Albert of Sabbioneta, Ariald of Melegnano, Opizo of Gonzaga and many others came to the emperor and accepted him as their overlord.\nMatilda was at first buried in the Abbey of San Benedetto in Polirone, located in the town of San Benedetto Po; then, in 1633, at the behest of Pope Urban VIII, her body was moved to Rome and placed in Castel Sant'Angelo. Finally, in 1645 her remains were definitely deposited in the Vatican, where they now lie in St. Peter's Basilica. She is one of only six women who have the honor of being buried in the Basilica, the others being Queen Christina of Sweden, Maria Clementina Sobieska (wife of James Francis Edward Stuart), St. Petronilla, Queen Charlotte of Cyprus, and Agnesina Colonna Caetani. A memorial tomb for Matilda, commissioned by Pope Urban VIII and designed by Gianlorenzo Bernini with the statues being created by sculptor Andrea Bolgi, marks her burial place in St. Peter's and is often called the \"Honor and Glory of Italy\".\nLegacy.\nHigh and Late Middle Ages.\nBetween 1111 and 1115 Donizo wrote the chronicle \"De principibus Canusinis\" in Latin hexameters, in which he tells the story of the House of Canossa, especially Matilda. Since the first edition by Sebastian Tengnagel, it has been called \"Vita Mathildis\". This work is the main source to the Margravine's life. The \"Vita Mathildis\" consists of two parts. The first part is dedicated to the early members of the House of Canossa, the second deals exclusively with Matilda. Donizo was a monk in the monastery of Sant'Apollonio; with the \"Vita Mathildis\" he wanted to secure eternal memory of the Margravine. Donizo has most likely coordinated his \"Vita\" with Matilda in terms of content, including the book illumination, down to the smallest detail. Shortly before the work was handed over, Matilda died. Text and images on the family history of the House of Canossa served to glorify Matilda, were important for the public staging of the family and were intended to guarantee eternal memory. Positive events were highlighted, negative events were skipped. The \"Vita Mathildis\" stands at the beginning of a new literary genre. With the early Guelph tradition, it establishes medieval family history. The house and reform monasteries, sponsored by Guelph and Canossa women, attempted to organize the memories of the community of relatives and thereby \"to express awareness of the present and an orientation towards the present\" in the memory of one's own past. Eugenio Riversi considers the memory of the family epoch, especially the commemoration of the anniversaries of the dead, to be one of the characteristic elements in Donizo's work.\nBonizo of Sutri gave Matilda his \"Liber ad amicum\". In it he compared her to her glorification with biblical women. After an assassination attempt on him in 1090, however, his attitude changed, as he didn't feel sufficiently supported by the Margravine. In his \"Liber de vita christiana\" he took the view that domination by women was harmful; as examples he named Cleopatra and the Merovingian Queen Fredegund. Rangerius of Lucca also distanced himself from Matilda when she didn't position herself against Henry V in 1111. Out of bitterness, he didn't dedicate his \"Liber de anulo et baculo\" to Matilda, but to John of Gaeta, later Pope Gelasius II.\nViolent criticism of Matilda is related to the Investiture Controversy and relates to specific events. Thus the \"Vita Heinrici IV. imperatoris\" blames her for the rebellion of Conrad against his father Henry IV. The Milanese chronicler Landulfus Senior made a polemical statement in the eleventh century: he accused Matilda of having ordered the murder of her first husband. She is also said to have incited Pope Gregory VII to excommunicate the king. Landulf's polemics were directed against Matilda's Patarian partisans for the archbishop's chair in Milan.\nMatilda's tomb was converted into a mausoleum before the middle of the twelfth century. For Paolo Golinelli, this early design of the grave is the beginning of the Margravine's myth. In the course of the twelfth century, two opposing developments occurred: Matilda's person was mystified, at the same time historical memory of the House of Canossa declined. In the thirteenth century, Matilda's guilty feelings about the murder of her first husband became a popular topic. The \"Gesta episcoporum Halberstadensium\" took it up: Matilda confessed to Pope Gregory VII her participation in the murder of her husband, whereupon the pontiff released her from the crime. Through this act of leniency, Matilda felt obliged to donate her property to the Holy See. In the fourteenth century there was a lack of clarity about the historical facts about Matilda. Only the name of the Margravine, her reputation as a virtuous woman, her many donations to churches and hospitals, and the transfer of her goods to the Holy See were present. Knowledge of the conflicts between Henry IV and Gregory VII was forgotten. Because of their connection to the Guidi family that gave her little attention in the Florentine chronicles as the Guidi were mortal enemies of Florence. In the \"Nuova Cronica\" wrote by Giovanni Villani in 1306, Matilda was a decent and pious person. She is described there as product of a secret marriage between a Byzantine princess with an Italian knight. She also didn't consummate the marriage with Welf V; instead, she decided to live her life chaste and with pious works.\nEarly modern times.\nIn the fifteenth century, Matilda's marriage to Welf V disappeared from chronicles and narrative literature. Numerous families in Italy tried rather to claim Matilda as their ancestor and to derive their power from her. Giovanni Battista Panetti wanted to prove the Margravine's belonging to the House of Este in his \"Historia comitissae Mathildis\". He claimed that Matilda was married to Albert Azzo II d'Este, the grandfather of Welf V. In his epic \"Orlando Furioso\", poet Ludovico Ariosto also mentioned Matilda's alleged relationship with the House of Este; Giovanni Battista Giraldi also assumed a marriage between Matilda and Albert Azzo II and mentioned Ariosto as reference. Many more generations followed this tradition, and only the Este archivist Ludovico Antonio Muratori was the one able to dismiss the alleged relationship of Matilda and the House of Este in the eighteenth century. Nevertheless, he did not draw a more realistic picture of the Margravine; for him she was an Amazon queen. In Mantua, Matilda was also linked by marriage with the House of Gonzaga. Giulio Dal Pozzo underpinned the claims of the Malaspina family of descent from Matilda in his work \"Meraviglie Heroiche del Sesso Donnesco Memorabili nella Duchessa Matilda Marchesana Malaspina, Contessa di Canossa\", written in 1678.\nDante's \"Divine Comedy\" made a significant contribution to Matilda's myth: she has been posited by some critics as the origin of the mysterious \"Matelda\" who appears to Dante gathering flowers in the earthly paradise in Dante's \"Purgatorio\"; whether Dante is referring to the Margravine, Mechthild of Magdeburg or Mechthild of Hackeborn is still a matter of dispute. In the fifteenth century, Matilda was stylized by Giovanni Sabadino degli Arienti and Jacopo Filippo Foresti as a warrior for God and the Church.\nMatilda reached the climax of the positive assessment in the time of the Counter-Reformation and in the Baroque; she should serve as a symbol of the triumph of the church over all adversaries for everyone to see. In the dispute between Catholics and Protestants in the sixteenth century, two opposing judgments were received. From a Catholic perspective, Matilda was glorified for supporting the pope; for the Protestants, she was responsible for the humiliation of Henry IV in Canossa and was denigrated as a \"pope whore\", as in the biography of Henry IV by Johann Stumpf.\nIn the historiography of the eighteenth century (Ludovico Antonio Muratori, Girolamo Tiraboschi) Matilda was the symbol of the new Italian nobility, who wanted to create a pan-Italian identity. Contemporary representations (Saverio Dalla Rosa) presented her as the Pope's protector.\nIn addition to the upscale literature, numerous regional legends and miracle stories in particular contributed to Matilda's subsequent stylization. She was transfigured relatively early from the benefactress of numerous churches and monasteries to the sole monastery and church donor of the entire Apennine landscape. Around 100 churches are attributed to Matilda, this developed from the twelfth century. Numerous miracles are also associated with the Margravine. She is said to have asked the pope to bless the Branciana fountain; according to a legend, women can get pregnant after a single drink from the well. According to another legend, Matilda should prefer to stay at the Savignano Castle; there one should see the princess galloping in the sky on full moon nights on a white horse. According to a legend from Montebaranzone, she brought justice to a poor widow and her twelve-year-old son. Numerous legends also surround about Matilda's marriages: she is said to have had up to seven husbands and, as a young girl, fell in love with Henry IV.\nModern times.\nIn the nineteenth century, which was enthusiastic about the Middle Ages, the Margravine's myth was renewed. The remains of Canossa Castle were rediscovered and Matilda's whereabouts became popular travel destinations. In addition, Dante's praise for \"Matelda\" came back into the spotlight. One of the first German pilgrims to Canossa was the poet August von Platen-Hallerm\u00fcnde. In 1839, Heinrich Heine published the poem \"Auf dem Schlo\u00dfhof zu Canossa steht der deutsche Kaiser Heinrich\" (\"The German Emperor Henry stands in the courtyard of Canossa\"), in which it says: \"Peep out of the window above / Two figures, and the moonlight / Gregory's bald head flickers / And the breasts of Mathildis\".\nIn the era of the \"Risorgimento\", the struggle for national unification was in the foreground in Italy. Matilda was instrumentalized for daily political events. Silvio Pellico stood up for the political unity of Italy, and he designed a play called \"Mathilde\". Antonio Bresciani Borsa wrote a historical novel \"La contessa Matilde di Canossa e Isabella di Groniga\" (1858). The work was very successful in its time and saw Italian editions in 1858, 1867, 1876, and 1891. French (1850 and 1862), German (1868), and English (1875) translations were also published.\nThe Matilda's myth lives on in Italy to the present day. The Matildines were a Catholic women's association founded in Reggio Emilia in 1918, similar to the \"Azzione Cattolica\". The organization wanted to bring together young people from the province who wanted to work with the church hierarchy to spread the Christian faith. The Matildines revered the Margravine as a pious, strong, and steadfast daughter of St. Peter. After the World War II, numerous biographies and novels were written in Italy on Matilda and Canossa. Maria Bellonci published the story \"Trafitto a Canossa\" (\"Tormented in Canossa\"), Laura Mancinelli the novel \"Il principe scalzo\". Local historical publications honor her as the founder of churches and castles in the regions of Reggio Emilia, Mantua, Modena, Parma, Lucca and Casentino.\nQuattro Castella is named after the four Canusinian castles on the four hills at the foot of the Apennines. Bianello is the only castle that is still in use. A large number of communities on the northern and southern Apennines traces their origins and their heyday back to Matilda's epoch. Numerous citizen initiatives in Italy organize removals under the motto \"Matilda and her time\". Emilian circles applied for Matilda's beatification in 1988 without success. The place Quattro Castella had its name changed to Canossa out of reverence for Matilda. Since 1955 the \"Corteo Storico Matildico\" in Bianello Castle has been a reminiscent display of Matilda's meeting with Henry V and reported coronation as vicar and vice-queen; the event has taken place every year since then, usually on the last Sunday of May. The organizer is the municipality of Quattro Castella, which has owned the castle since 2000. The ruins on the hills of Quattro Castella have been the subject of a petition for UNESCO World Heritage.\nResearch history.\nMatilda receives much attention in Italian history. Matildine Congresses were held in 1963, 1970, and 1977. On the occasion of the 900th anniversary of the Walk of Canossa, the Istituto Superiore di Studi Matildici was founded in Italy in 1977 and inaugurated in May 1979. The institute is dedicated to the research of all notable citizens of Canossa and publishes a magazine entitled \"Annali Canossani\".\nIn Italy, Ovidio Capitani was one of the best experts on Canossa history in the twentieth century. According to his judgment in 1978, Matilda's policy was \"tutto legato al passato\", completely tied to the past, i.e. outdated and inflexible in the face of a changing time. Vito Fumagalli presented several national historical studies on the Margraves of Canossa; he saw the causes of the Canossa's power in rich and centralized allodial goods, in a strategic network of fortifications, and in the support of the Salian rulers. In 1998, a year after his death, Fumagalli's biography of Matilda was published.\nOf the Italian medievalists, Paolo Golinelli has dealt most intensively with Matilda in the past three decades. In 1991 he published a biography of Matilda, which appeared in 1998 in a German translation. On the occasion of the 900th return of Matilda's meeting with her allies in Carpineti, a financially supported congress was held in October 1992 by the province of Reggio Emilia. The rule of the House of Canossa and the various problems of rule in northern Italy of the tenth and eleventh centuries were dealt with. The contributions to this conference were edited by Paolo Golinelli. An international congress in Reggio Emilia in September 1997 was devoted to her afterlife in cultural and literary terms. The aim of the conference was to find out why Matilda attracted such interest in posterity. Thematically, arts and crafts, tourism, and folklore have been dealt with until recently. Most of the contributions were devoted to the genealogical attempts of the northern Italian nobility to link Matilda in the early modern period. Golinelli published the anthology in 1999. As an important result of this conference it turned out that goods and family relationships have been ascribed to her that have not been historically proven.\nIn German history, Alfred Overmann's dissertation formed the starting point for studying the history of the margravine. Since 1893 Overmann placed his investigation about Matilda in several \"Regest\" publications. The work was reprinted in 1965 and published in 1980 in an Italian translation. In the last few decades Werner and Elke Goez in particular have dealt with Matilda. From 1986 the couple worked together on the scientific edition of their documents. More than 90 archives and libraries in six countries were visited. The edition was created in 1998 in the series \"Diplomata\", which the \"Monumenta Germaniae Historica\" published. In addition to numerous individual studies on Matilda, Elke Goez published a biography of Matilda's mother Beatrice (1995) and emerged as the author of a history of Italy in the Middle Ages (2010). In 2012 she presented a biography of Matilda.\nThe 900th year of Henry IV's death in 2006 brought Matilda into the spotlight in the exhibitions in Paderborn (2006) and Mantua (2008). The 900th anniversary of her death in 2015 was the occasion for various initiatives in Italy and sessions at the International Medieval Congress at Leeds. The 21st \"Congresso Internazionale di Studi Langobardi\" took place in October of the same year. This resulted in two conference volumes. In Williamsburg, Virginia from February to April 2015, an exhibition took place at the Muscarelle Museum of Art, the first in the United States on Matilda.\nPopular culture.\nIn the arts, the story of Matilda and Henry IV is the main plot device in Luigi Pirandello's play \"Enrico IV\", and the Margravine is the main historical character in Kathleen McGowan's novel \"The Book of Love\" (Simon &amp; Schuster, 2009).\nMatilda is a featured figure on Judy Chicago's installation piece The Dinner Party, being represented as one of the 999 names on the Heritage Floor, along some other contemporaries like her second cousin Adelaide of Susa.\nIn the grand strategy role-playing video game \"Crusader Kings III\", Matilda is a playable character and is featured in the Rags to Riches start in 1066.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20189", "revid": "50274877", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20189", "title": "Mesopotamia", "text": "Historical region of West Asia\nMesopotamia is a historical region of West Asia situated within the Tigris\u2013Euphrates river system, in the northern part of the Fertile Crescent. It corresponds roughly to the territory of modern Iraq and forms the eastern geographic boundary of the modern Middle East. Just beyond it lies southwestern Iran, where the region transitions into the Persian plateau, marking the shift from the Arab world to Iran. In the broader sense, the historical region of Mesopotamia also includes parts of present-day Iran (southwest), Turkey (southeast), Syria (northeast), and Kuwait.\nMesopotamia is the site of the earliest developments of the Neolithic Revolution from around 10,000 BC. It has been identified as having \"inspired some of the most important developments in human history, including the invention of the wheel, the planting of the first cereal crops, the development of cursive script, mathematics, astronomy, and agriculture\". It is recognised as the cradle of some of the world's earliest civilizations.\nThe Sumerians and Akkadians, each originating from different areas, dominated Mesopotamia from the beginning of recorded history (c.\u20093100 BC) to the fall of Babylon in 539 BC. The rise of empires, beginning with Sargon of Akkad around 2350 BC, characterized the subsequent 2,000 years of Mesopotamian history, marked by the succession of kingdoms and empires such as the Akkadian Empire. The early second millennium BC saw the polarization of Mesopotamian society into Assyria in the north and Babylonia in the south. From 900 to 612 BC, the Neo-Assyrian Empire asserted control over much of the ancient Near East. Subsequently, the Babylonians, who had long been overshadowed by Assyria, seized power, dominating the region for a century as the final independent Mesopotamian realm until the modern era. In 539 BC, Mesopotamia was conquered by the Achaemenid Empire under Cyrus the Great. The area was next conquered by Alexander the Great in 332 BC. After his death, it was fought over by the various Diadochi (successors of Alexander), of whom the Seleucids emerged victorious.\nAround 150 BC, Mesopotamia was under the control of the Parthian Empire. It became a battleground between the Romans and Parthians, with western parts of the region coming under ephemeral Roman control. In 226 AD, the eastern regions of Mesopotamia fell to the Sassanid Persians under Ardashir I. The division of the region between the Roman Empire and the Sassanid Empire lasted until the 7th century Muslim conquest of the Sasanian Empire and the Muslim conquest of the Levant from the Byzantines. A number of primarily neo-Assyrian and Christian native Mesopotamian states existed between the 1st century BC and 3rd century AD, including Adiabene, Osroene, and Hatra.\nEtymology.\nThe regional toponym \"Mesopotamia\" (, '[land] between rivers'; or ; ; \"(land) between the (two) rivers\") comes from the ancient Greek root words (, 'middle') and (, 'river') and translates to '(land) between rivers'. It is used throughout the Greek Septuagint (c.\u2009250 BC) to translate the Hebrew and Aramaic equivalent \"Naharaim\". An even earlier Greek usage of the name \"Mesopotamia\" is evident from \"The Anabasis of Alexander\", which was written in the late 2nd century AD but specifically refers to sources from the time of Alexander the Great. In the \"Anabasis\", Mesopotamia was used to designate the land east of the Euphrates in north Syria.\nThe Akkadian term corresponded to a similar geographical concept. Later, the term \"Mesopotamia\" was more generally applied to all the lands between the Euphrates and the Tigris, thereby incorporating not only parts of Syria but also almost all of Iraq and southeastern Turkey. The neighbouring steppes to the west of the Euphrates and the western part of the Zagros Mountains are also often included under the wider term \"Mesopotamia\".\nA further distinction is usually made between \"Northern\" or \"Upper Mesopotamia\" and \"Southern\" or \"Lower Mesopotamia\". Upper Mesopotamia, also known as the \"Jazira\", is the area between the Euphrates and the Tigris from their sources down to Baghdad. Lower Mesopotamia is the area from Baghdad to the Persian Gulf and includes Kuwait and parts of western Iran.\nIn modern academic usage, the term \"Mesopotamia\" often also has a chronological connotation. It is usually used to designate the area until the Muslim conquests, with names like \"Syria\", \"Jazira\", and \"Iraq\" being used to describe the region after that date. It has been argued that these later euphemisms are Eurocentric terms attributed to the region in the midst of various 19th-century Western encroachments.\nGeography.\nMesopotamia encompasses the land between the Euphrates and Tigris rivers, both of which have their headwaters in the neighboring Armenian highlands. Both rivers are fed by numerous tributaries, and the entire river system drains a vast mountainous region. Overland routes in Mesopotamia usually follow the Euphrates because the banks of the Tigris are frequently steep and difficult. The climate of the region is semi-arid with a vast desert expanse in the north which gives way to a region of marshes, lagoons, mudflats, and reed banks in the south. In the extreme south, the Euphrates and the Tigris unite and empty into the Persian Gulf.\nThe arid environment ranges from the northern areas of rain-fed agriculture to the south where irrigation of agriculture is essential. This irrigation is aided by a high water table and by melting snows from the high peaks of the northern Zagros Mountains and from the Armenian Highlands, the source of the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers that give the region its name. The usefulness of irrigation depends upon the ability to mobilize sufficient labor for the construction and maintenance of canals, and this, from the earliest period, has assisted the development of urban settlements and centralized systems of political authority.\nAgriculture throughout the region has been supplemented by nomadic pastoralism, where tent-dwelling nomads herded sheep and goats (and later camels) from the river pastures in the dry summer months, out into seasonal grazing lands on the desert fringe in the wet winter season. The area is generally lacking in building stone, precious metals, and timber, and so historically has relied upon long-distance trade of agricultural products to secure these items from outlying areas. In the marshlands to the south of the area, a complex water-borne fishing culture has existed since prehistoric times and has added to the cultural mix.\nPeriodic breakdowns in the cultural system have occurred for a number of reasons. The demands for labor has from time to time led to population increases that push the limits of the ecological carrying capacity, and should a period of climatic instability ensue, collapsing central government and declining populations can occur. Alternatively, military vulnerability to invasion from marginal hill tribes or nomadic pastoralists has led to periods of trade collapse and neglect of irrigation systems. Equally, centripetal tendencies amongst city-states have meant that central authority over the whole region, when imposed, has tended to be ephemeral, and localism has fragmented power into tribal or smaller regional units. These trends have continued to the present day in Iraq.\nHistory.\nThe prehistory of the Ancient Near East begins in the Lower Paleolithic period. Therein, writing emerged with a pictographic script, Proto-cuneiform, in the Uruk IV period (c.\u2009late 4th millennium BC). The documented record of actual historical events\u2014and the ancient history of lower Mesopotamia\u2014commenced in the early-third millennium BC with cuneiform records of early dynastic kings. This entire history ends with either the arrival of the Achaemenid Empire in the late 6th century BC or with the Muslim conquest and the establishment of the Caliphate in the late 7th century AD, from which point the region came to be known as Iraq. In the long span of this period, Mesopotamia housed some of the world's most ancient highly developed, and socially complex states.\nThe region was home to one of the four riverine civilizations where writing was invented, along with the Nile valley in Ancient Egypt, the Indus Valley civilization in the Indian subcontinent, and the Yellow River in Ancient China. Mesopotamia housed historically important cities such as Uruk, Nippur, Nineveh, Assur and Babylon, as well as major territorial states such as the city of Eridu, the Akkadian kingdoms, the Third Dynasty of Ur, and the various Assyrian empires. Some of the important historical Mesopotamian leaders were Ur-Nammu (king of Ur), Sargon of Akkad (who established the Akkadian Empire), Hammurabi (who established the Old Babylonian state), Ashur-uballit I and Tiglath-Pileser I (who established the Assyrian Empire).\nScientists analysed DNA from the 8,000-year-old remains of early farmers found at an ancient graveyard in Germany. They compared the genetic signatures to those of modern populations and found similarities with the DNA of people living in today's Turkey and Iraq.\nLanguage and writing.\nThe earliest language written in Mesopotamia was Sumerian, an agglutinative language isolate. Along with Sumerian, Semitic languages were also spoken in early Mesopotamia. Subartuan, a language of the Zagros possibly related to the Hurro-Urartuan language family, is attested in personal names, rivers and mountains and in various crafts. Akkadian came to be the dominant language during the Akkadian Empire and the Assyrian empires, but Sumerian was retained for administrative, religious, literary and scientific purposes.\nDifferent varieties of Akkadian were used until the end of the Neo-Babylonian period. Old Aramaic, which had already become common in Mesopotamia, then became the official provincial administration language of first the Neo-Assyrian Empire, and then the Achaemenid Empire: the official lect is called Imperial Aramaic. Akkadian fell into disuse, but both it and Sumerian were still used in temples for some centuries. The last Akkadian texts date from the late 1st century AD.\nEarly in Mesopotamia's history, around the mid-4th millennium BC, cuneiform was invented for the Sumerian language. Cuneiform literally means \"wedge-shaped\", due to the triangular tip of the stylus used for impressing signs on wet clay. The standardized form of each cuneiform sign appears to have been developed from pictograms. The earliest texts, 7 archaic tablets, come from the \u00c9, a temple dedicated to the goddess Inanna at Uruk, from a building labeled as Temple C by its excavators.\nThe early logographic system of cuneiform script took many years to master. Thus, only a limited number of individuals were hired as scribes to be trained in its use. It was not until the widespread use of a syllabic script was adopted under Sargon's rule that significant portions of the Mesopotamian population became literate. Massive archives of texts were recovered from the archaeological contexts of Old Babylonian scribal schools, through which literacy was disseminated.\nAkkadian gradually replaced Sumerian as the spoken language of Mesopotamia somewhere around the turn of the 3rd and the 2nd millennium BC. The exact dating is a matter of debate. Sumerian continued to be used as a sacred, ceremonial, literary, and scientific language in Mesopotamia until the 1st century AD.\nLiterature.\nLibraries were extant in towns and temples during the Babylonian Empire. An old Sumerian proverb averred that \"he who would excel in the school of the scribes must rise with the dawn.\" Women as well as men learned to read and write, and for the Semitic Babylonians, this involved knowledge of the extinct Sumerian language, and a complicated and extensive syllabary.\nA considerable amount of Babylonian literature was translated from Sumerian originals, and the language of religion and law long continued to be the old agglutinative language of Sumer. Vocabularies, grammars, and interlinear translations were compiled for the use of students, as well as commentaries on the older texts and explanations of obscure words and phrases. The characters of the syllabary were all arranged and named, and elaborate lists were drawn up.\nMany Babylonian literary works are still studied today. One of the most famous of these was the Epic of Gilgamesh, in twelve books, translated from the original Sumerian by a certain S\u00een-l\u0113qi-unninni, and arranged upon an astronomical principle. Each division contains the story of a single adventure in the career of Gilgamesh. The whole story is a composite product, although it is probable that some of the stories are artificially attached to the central figure.\nScience and technology.\nMathematics.\nMesopotamian mathematics and science was based on a sexagesimal (base 60) numeral system. This is the source of the 60-minute hour, the 24-hour day, and the 360-degree circle. The Sumerian calendar was lunisolar, with three seven-day weeks of a lunar month. This form of mathematics was instrumental in early map-making. The Babylonians also had theorems on how to measure the area of shapes and solids. They measured the circumference of a circle as three times the diameter and the area as one-twelfth the square of the circumference, which would be correct if \u03c0 were fixed at 3.\nThe volume of a cylinder was taken as the product of the area of the base and the height; however, the volume of the frustum of a cone or a square pyramid was incorrectly taken as the product of the height and half the sum of the bases. Also, there was a recent discovery in which a tablet used \u03c0 as 25/8 (3.125 instead of 3.14159~). The Babylonians are also known for the Babylonian mile, which was a measure of distance equal to about seven modern miles (11\u00a0km). This measurement for distances eventually was converted to a time-mile used for measuring the travel of the Sun, therefore, representing time.\nAlgebra.\nThe roots of algebra can be traced to the ancient Babylonia who developed an advanced arithmetical system with which they were able to do calculations in an algorithmic fashion.\nThe Babylonian clay tablet YBC 7289 (c.\u20091800\u20131600 BC) gives an approximation of in four sexagesimal figures, 1 24 51 10, which is accurate to about six decimal digits, and is the closest possible three-place sexagesimal representation of :\n formula_1\nThe Babylonians were not interested in exact solutions, but rather approximations, and so they would commonly use linear interpolation to approximate intermediate values. One of the most famous tablets is the Plimpton 322 tablet, created around 1900\u20131600\u00a0BC, which gives a table of Pythagorean triples and represents some of the most advanced mathematics prior to Greek mathematics.\nAstronomy.\nFrom Sumerian times, temple priesthoods had attempted to associate current events with certain positions of the planets and stars. This continued to Assyrian times, when Limmu lists were created as a year by year association of events with planetary positions, which, when they have survived to the present day, allow accurate associations of relative with absolute dating for establishing the history of Mesopotamia.\nThe Babylonian astronomers were very adept at mathematics and could predict eclipses and solstices. Scholars thought that everything had some purpose in astronomy. Most of these related to religion and omens. Mesopotamian astronomers worked out a 12-month calendar based on the cycles of the moon. They divided the year into two seasons: summer and winter. The origins of astronomy as well as astrology date from this time.\nDuring the 8th and 7th centuries BC, Babylonian astronomers developed a new approach to astronomy. They began studying philosophy dealing with the ideal nature of the early universe and began employing an internal logic within their predictive planetary systems. This was an important contribution to astronomy and the philosophy of science and some scholars have thus referred to this new approach as the first scientific revolution. This new approach to astronomy was adopted and further developed in Greek and Hellenistic astronomy.\nIn Seleucid and Parthian times, the astronomical reports were thoroughly scientific. How much earlier their advanced knowledge and methods were developed is uncertain. The Babylonian development of methods for predicting the motions of the planets is considered to be a major episode in the history of astronomy.\nThe only Greek-Babylonian astronomer known to have supported a heliocentric model of planetary motion was Seleucus of Seleucia (b. 190 BC). Seleucus is known from the writings of Plutarch. He supported Aristarchus of Samos' heliocentric theory where the Earth rotated around its own axis which in turn revolved around the Sun. According to Plutarch, Seleucus even proved the heliocentric system, but it is not known what arguments he used, except that he correctly theorized on tides as a result of the Moon's attraction.\nBabylonian astronomy served as the basis for much of Greek, classical Indian, Sassanian, Byzantine, Syrian, medieval Islamic, Central Asian, and Western European astronomy.\nMedicine.\nThe oldest Babylonian texts on medicine date back to the Old Babylonian period in the first half of the 2nd millennium BC. The most extensive Babylonian medical text, however, is the \"Diagnostic Handbook\" written by the \"umm\u00e2n\u016b\", or chief scholar, Esagil-kin-apli of Borsippa, during the reign of the Babylonian king Adad-apla-iddina (1069\u20131046 BC).\nAlong with contemporary Egyptian medicine, the Babylonians introduced the concepts of diagnosis, prognosis, physical examination, enemas, and prescriptions. The \"Diagnostic Handbook\" introduced the methods of therapy and aetiology and the use of empiricism, logic, and rationality in diagnosis, prognosis and therapy. The text contains a list of medical symptoms and often detailed empirical observations along with logical rules used in combining observed symptoms on the body of a patient with its diagnosis and prognosis.\nThe symptoms and diseases of a patient were treated through therapeutic means such as bandages, creams and pills. If a patient could not be cured physically, the Babylonian physicians often relied on exorcism to cleanse the patient from any curses. Esagil-kin-apli's \"Diagnostic Handbook\" was based on a logical set of axioms and assumptions, including the modern view that through the examination and inspection of the symptoms of a patient, it is possible to determine the patient's disease, its aetiology, its future development, and the chances of the patient's recovery.\nEsagil-kin-apli discovered a variety of illnesses and diseases and described their symptoms in his \"Diagnostic Handbook\". These include the symptoms for many varieties of epilepsy and related ailments along with their diagnosis and prognosis. Some treatments used were likely based off the known characteristics of the ingredients used. The others were based on the symbolic qualities.\nTechnology.\nMesopotamian people invented many technologies including metal and copper-working, glass and lamp making, textile weaving, flood control, water storage, and irrigation. They were also one of the first Bronze Age societies in the world. They developed from copper, bronze, and gold on to iron. Palaces were decorated with hundreds of kilograms of these very expensive metals. Also, copper, bronze, and iron were used for armor as well as for different weapons such as swords, daggers, spears, and maces.\nAccording to a recent hypothesis, the Archimedes' screw may have been used by Sennacherib, King of Assyria, for the water systems at the Hanging Gardens of Babylon and Nineveh in the 7th century BC, although mainstream scholarship holds it to be a Greek invention of later times. Later, during the Parthian or Sasanian periods, the Baghdad Battery, which may have been the world's first battery, was created in Mesopotamia.\nReligion and philosophy.\nThe Ancient Mesopotamian religion was the first recorded. Mesopotamians believed that the world was a flat disc, surrounded by a huge, holed space, and above that, heaven. They believed that water was everywhere, the top, bottom and sides, and that the universe was born from this enormous sea. Mesopotamian religion was polytheistic. Although the beliefs described above were held in common among Mesopotamians, there were regional variations. The Sumerian word for universe is an-ki, which refers to the god An and the goddess Ki. Their son was Enlil, the air god. They believed that Enlil was the most powerful god. He was the chief god of the pantheon.\nPhilosophy.\nThe numerous civilizations of the area influenced the Abrahamic religions, especially the Hebrew Bible. Its cultural values and literary influence are especially evident in the Book of Genesis.\nGiorgio Buccellati believes that the origins of philosophy can be traced back to early Mesopotamian wisdom, which embodied certain philosophies of life, particularly ethics, in the forms of dialectic, dialogues, epic poetry, folklore, hymns, lyrics, prose works, and proverbs. Babylonian reason and rationality developed beyond empirical observation.\nBabylonian thought was also based on an open-systems ontology which is compatible with ergodic axioms. Logic was employed to some extent in Babylonian astronomy and medicine.\nBabylonian thought had a considerable influence on early Ancient Greek and Hellenistic philosophy. In particular, the Babylonian text \"Dialogue of Pessimism\" contains similarities to the agonistic thought of the Sophists, the Heraclitean doctrine of dialectic, and the dialogs of Plato, as well as a precursor to the Socratic method. The Ionian philosopher Thales was influenced by Babylonian cosmological ideas.\nCulture.\nFestivals.\nAncient Mesopotamians had ceremonies each month. The theme of the rituals and festivals for each month was determined by at least six important factors:\nMusic.\nSome songs were written for the gods but many were written to describe important events. Although music and songs amused kings, they were also enjoyed by ordinary people who liked to sing and dance in their homes or in the marketplaces.\nSongs were sung to children who passed them on to their children. Thus songs were passed on through many generations as an oral tradition until writing was more universal. These songs provided a means of passing on through the centuries highly important information about historical events.\nGames.\nHunting was popular among Assyrian kings. Boxing and wrestling feature frequently in art, and some form of polo was probably popular, with men sitting on the shoulders of other men rather than on horses.\nThey also played a board game similar to senet and backgammon, now known as the \"Royal Game of Ur\".\nFamily life.\nMesopotamia, as shown by successive law codes, those of Urukagina, Lipit Ishtar and Hammurabi, across its history became more and more a patriarchal society, one in which the men were far more powerful than the women. For example, during the earliest Sumerian period, the \"en\", or high priest of male gods was originally a woman, that of female goddesses. Thorkild Jacobsen, as well as others, have suggested that early Mesopotamian society was ruled by a \"council of elders\" in which men and women were equally represented, but that over time, as the status of women fell, that of men increased.\nAs for schooling, only royal offspring and sons of the rich and professionals, such as scribes, physicians, temple administrators, went to school. Most boys were taught their father's trade or were apprenticed out to learn a trade. Girls had to stay home with their mothers to learn housekeeping and cooking, and to look after the younger children. Some children would help with crushing grain or cleaning birds. Unusually for that time in history, women in Mesopotamia had rights. They could own property and, if they had good reason, get a divorce.\nBurials.\nHundreds of graves have been excavated in parts of Mesopotamia, revealing information about Mesopotamian burial habits. In the city of Ur, most people were buried in family graves under their houses, along with some possessions. A few have been found wrapped in mats and carpets. Deceased children were put in big \"jars\" which were placed in the family chapel. Other remains have been found buried in common city graveyards. 17 graves have been found with very precious objects in them. It is assumed that these were royal graves. Rich of various periods, have been discovered to have sought burial in Bahrein, identified with Sumerian Dilmun.\nEconomy.\nSumerian temples functioned as banks and developed the first large-scale system of loans and credit. The Babylonians developed the earliest system of commercial banking. It was comparable in some ways to modern post-Keynesian economics, but with a more \"anything goes\" approach.\nAgriculture.\nIrrigated agriculture spread southwards from the Zagros foothills with the Samara and Hadji Muhammed culture, from about 5,000 BC.\nIn the early period down to Ur III temples owned up to one third of the available land, declining over time as royal and other private holdings increased in frequency. The word \"Ensi\" was used to describe the official who organized the work of all facets of temple agriculture. Villeins are known to have worked most frequently within agriculture, especially in the grounds of temples or palaces.\nThe geography of southern Mesopotamia is such that agriculture is possible only with irrigation and with good drainage, a fact which had a profound effect on the evolution of early Mesopotamian civilization. The need for irrigation led the Sumerians, and later the Akkadians, to build their cities along the Tigris and Euphrates and the branches of these rivers. Major cities, such as Ur and Uruk, took root on tributaries of the Euphrates, while others, notably Lagash, were built on branches of the Tigris. The rivers provided the further benefits of fish, used both for food and fertilizer, reeds, and clay, for building materials. With irrigation, the food supply in Mesopotamia was comparable to that of the Canadian prairies.\nThe Tigris and Euphrates River valleys form the northeastern portion of the Fertile Crescent, which also included the Jordan River valley and that of the Nile. Although land nearer to the rivers was fertile and good for crops, portions of land farther from the water were dry and largely uninhabitable. Thus the development of irrigation became very important for settlers of Mesopotamia. Other Mesopotamian innovations include the control of water by dams and the use of aqueducts. Early settlers of fertile land in Mesopotamia used wooden plows to soften the soil before planting crops such as barley, onions, grapes, turnips, and apples.\nMesopotamian settlers were among the first people to make beer and wine. As a result of the skills needed to farm in the Mesopotamian region, farmers did not generally depend on slaves to do the work. Although the rivers sustained life, they also destroyed it by frequent floods that ravaged entire cities. The unpredictable Mesopotamian weather was often hard on farmers. Crops were often ruined, so backup sources of food such as cows and lambs were kept. Over time the southernmost parts of Sumerian Mesopotamia suffered from increased salinity of the soils, leading to a slow urban decline and a centring of power in Akkad, further north.\nTrade.\nMesopotamian trade with the Indus Valley civilisation flourished as early as the third millennium BC. Cylinder seals found throughout ANE is evidence of trade between Mesopotamian cities. Starting in the 4th millennium BC, Mesopotamian civilizations also traded with ancient Egypt (see Egypt\u2013Mesopotamia relations).\nFor much of history, Mesopotamia served as a trade nexus \u2013 east-west between Central Asia and the Mediterranean world\n(part of the Silk Road), as well as north\u2013south between the Eastern Europe and Baghdad (Volga trade route). Vasco da Gama's pioneering (1497\u20131499) of the sea route between India and Europe and the opening of the Suez Canal in 1869 impacted on this nexus.\nGenetics.\nGenetic studies on the modern day people of Iraq are limited and generally restricted to analysis of classical keys due to the country's modern political instability, although lately, there have been several published studies displaying a genealogical connection between all Iraqis and the neighboring countries, across religious, ethnic and linguistic barriers. Studies indicate that the different ethno-religious groups of Iraq (Mesopotamia) share significant similarities in genetics and that Mesopotamian Arabs, who make up the majority of Iraqis, are more genetically similar to Iraqi Kurds than other Arab populations in the Middle East and Arabia.\nNo significant differences in Y-DNA variation were observed among Iraqi Mesopotamian Arabs, Assyrians, or Kurds. Modern genetic studies indicate that Iraqi Mesopotamian Arabs are more related to Iraqi-Assyrians than Iraqi Kurds.\nDogan et. al (2017) states that contemporary Assyrian and Yazidis from northern Iraq might \"have stronger continuity with the original genetic stock of the Mesopotamian people, which possibly provided the basis for the ethnogenesis of various subsequent Near Eastern populations.\" Among northern Iraqi Assyrians, J and R subclades were observed at 36% and 41% respectively, where R1a, R1b, J1 and J2 sub-clades accounted for 11%, 30%, 12% and 24%. For Yazidis, R haplogroup subclades dominate, where R1a and R1b account for 9% and 21%, respectively. The high prevalence of R and J macrohaplogroups is attributed to pre-Last Glacial Maximum events in the Near East.\nMany historians and anthropologists provide strong circumstantial evidence to presuppose that Iraq's Marsh Arabs share very strong links to the ancient Sumerians.\nWhile other studies indicate that the Iraqi-Assyrian population was found to be significantly related to other Iraqis, especially Mesopotamian Arabs, likely due to the assimilation of indigenous Assyrians with other people groups who occupied and settled Mesopotamia after the fall of the Neo-Babylonian Empire.\nGovernment.\nThe geography of Mesopotamia had a profound impact on the political development of the region. Among the rivers and streams, the Sumerian people built the first cities, along with irrigation canals which were separated by vast stretches of open desert or swamp where nomadic tribes roamed. Communication among the isolated cities was difficult and, at times, dangerous. Thus, each Sumerian city became a city-state, independent of the others and protective of its independence.\nAt times, one city would try to conquer and unify the region, but such efforts were resisted and failed for centuries. As a result, the political history of Sumer is one of almost constant warfare. Eventually Sumer was unified by Eannatum. The unification was tenuous and failed to last, as the Akkadians conquered Sumer in 2331 BC only a generation later. The Akkadian Empire was the first successful empire to last beyond a generation and see a peaceful succession of kings. The empire was relatively short-lived, as the Babylonians conquered them within only a few generations.\nKings.\nThe Mesopotamians believed their kings and queens were descended from the city gods, but, unlike the ancient Egyptians, they never believed their kings were real gods. Most kings named themselves \"king of the universe\" or \"great king\". Another common name was \"shepherd\", as kings had to look after their people.\nPower.\nWhen Assyria grew into an empire, it was divided into smaller parts, called provinces. Each of these were named after their main cities, like Nineveh, Samaria, Damascus, and Arpad. They all had their own governor, who had to make sure everyone paid their taxes. Governors had to call up soldiers to war and supply workers when a temple was built. He was responsible for enforcing the laws. In this way, it was easier to keep control of a large empire.\nAlthough Babylon was quite a small state in Sumer, it grew tremendously throughout the time of Hammurabi's rule. He was known as \"the lawmaker\" and created the Code of Hammurabi. Soon Babylon became one of the main cities in Mesopotamia. It was later called Babylonia, which meant \"the gateway of the gods.\" It became one of history's greatest centers of learning.\nWarfare.\nWith the end of the Uruk phase, walled cities grew. Many isolated Ubaid villages were abandoned, indicating a rise in communal violence. An early king Lugalbanda was supposed to have built the white walls around the city. As city-states began to grow, their spheres of influence overlapped, creating arguments between other city-states, especially over land and canals. These arguments were recorded in tablets several hundreds of years before any major war\u2014the first recording of a war occurred around 3200 BC, but was not common until about 2500 BC.\nAn Early Dynastic II king (Ensi) of Uruk in Sumer, Gilgamesh (c. 2600 BC), was commended for military exploits against Humbaba guardian of the Cedar Mountain, and was later celebrated in many later poems and songs in which he was claimed to be two-thirds god and only one-third human. The later Stele of the Vultures at the end of the Early Dynastic III period (2600\u20132350 BC), commemorating the victory of Eannatum of Lagash over the neighbouring rival city of Umma, is the oldest monument in the world that celebrates a massacre.\nFrom this point forwards, warfare was incorporated into the Mesopotamian political system. At times, a neutral city acted as an arbitrator for two rival cities. This helped to form unions between cities, leading to regional states. When empires were created, they went to war more with foreign countries. King Sargon, for example, conquered all the cities of Sumer, some cities in Mari, and then went to war with cities in modern-day Syria. Many Assyrian and Babylonian palace walls were decorated with pictures of the successful fights and the enemy either desperately escaping or hiding amongst reeds.\nThe Neo-Babylonian kings used deportation as a means of control, like their predecessors, the Assyrians. For the Neo-Babylonian kings, war was a means to obtain tribute, plunder, sought after materials such as various metals and quality wood, and prisoners of war which could be put to work as slaves in the temples which they built. The Assyrians displaced populations throughout their vast empire. This practice under the Babylonian kings was more limited, only being used to establish new populations in Babylonia itself. Though royal inscriptions from the Neo-Babylonian period don't speak of acts of destruction and deportation in the same boastful way royal inscriptions from the Neo-Assyrian period do, this does not prove that the practice ceased, or that the Babylonians were less brutal than the Assyrians, since there is evidence that the city Ascalon was destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar II in 604 BC.\nLaws.\nCity-states of Mesopotamia created the first law codes, drawn from legal precedence and decisions made by kings. The codes of Urukagina and Lipit-Ishtar (the Code of Lipit-Ishtar) have been found. The most renowned of these was that of Hammurabi, as mentioned above, who was posthumously famous for his set of laws, the Code of Hammurabi, created c.\u20091780 BC, which is one of the earliest sets of laws found and one of the best preserved examples of this type of document from ancient Mesopotamia. He codified over 200 laws for Mesopotamia. Examination of the laws show a progressive weakening of the rights of women, and increasing severity in the treatment of slaves.\nArt.\nThe art of Mesopotamia rivalled that of Ancient Egypt as the most grand, sophisticated and elaborate in western Eurasia, from the 4th millennium BC until the Persian Achaemenid Empire conquered the region in the 6th century BC. The main emphasis was on very durable, forms of sculpture in stone and clay. Little painting has survived, but it seems that painting was mainly used for geometrical and plant-based decorative schemes. Most sculptures were also painted.\nThe Protoliterate period, dominated by Uruk, saw the production of sophisticated works like the Warka Vase and cylinder seals. The Guennol Lioness is an outstanding small limestone figure from Elam of about 3000\u20132800 BC, part man and part lion. A little later there are a number of figures of large-eyed priests and worshippers, mostly in alabaster and up to a foot high, who attended temple cult images of the deity, but very few of these have survived. Sculptures from the Sumerian and Akkadian period generally had large, staring eyes, and long beards on the men. Many masterpieces have been found at the Royal Cemetery at Ur (c. 2650 BC), including the two figures of a \"Ram in a Thicket\", the \"Copper Bull\" and a bull's head on one of the Lyres of Ur.\nFrom the many subsequent periods before the ascendency of the Neo-Assyrian Empire, Mesopotamian art survives in a number of forms: cylinder seals, relatively small figures in the round, and reliefs of various sizes, including cheap plaques of moulded pottery for the home, some religious and some apparently not. The Burney Relief is an unusual elaborate and relatively large (20 x 15\u00a0inches) terracotta plaque of a naked winged goddess with the feet of a bird of prey, and attendant owls and lions. It comes from the 18th or 19th century BC, and may also be moulded.\nStone stelae, votive offerings, or ones probably commemorating victories and showing feasts, are found from temples, which unlike more official ones lack inscriptions that would explain them. The fragmentary Stele of the Vultures is an early example of the inscribed type. The Assyrian Black Obelisk of Shalmaneser III a large and solid late one.\nThe conquest of the whole of Mesopotamia and much surrounding territory by the Assyrians created a larger and wealthier state than the region had known before, and very grandiose art in palaces and public places, no doubt partly intended to match the splendour of the art of the neighbouring Egyptian empire. The Assyrians developed a style of extremely large schemes of very finely detailed narrative low reliefs in stone for palaces, with scenes of war or hunting. The British Museum has an outstanding collection. They produced very little sculpture in the round, except for colossal guardian figures, often the human-headed lamassu, which are sculpted in high relief on two sides of a rectangular block, with the heads effectively in the round, and five legs, so that both views seem complete. Even before dominating the region, they continued the cylinder seal tradition, with designs which are often exceptionally energetic and refined.\nArchitecture.\nThe study of ancient Mesopotamian architecture is based on available archaeological evidence, pictorial representation of buildings, and texts on building practices. Scholarly literature usually concentrates on temples, palaces, city walls and gates, and other monumental buildings, but occasionally one finds works on residential architecture as well. Archaeological surface surveys also allowed for the study of urban form in early Mesopotamian cities.\nBrick is the dominant material, as the material was freely available locally, whereas building stone had to be brought a considerable distance to most cities. The ziggurat is the most distinctive form, and cities often had large gateways, of which the Ishtar Gate from Neo-Babylonian Babylon, decorated with beasts in polychrome brick, is the most famous, now largely in the Pergamon Museum in Berlin.\nThe most notable architectural remains from early Mesopotamia are the temple complexes at Uruk from the 4th millennium BC, temples and palaces from the Early Dynastic period sites in the Diyala River valley such as Khafajah and Tell Asmar, the Third Dynasty of Ur remains at Nippur (Sanctuary of Enlil) and Ur (Sanctuary of Nanna), Middle Bronze Age remains at Syrian-Turkish sites of Ebla, Mari, Alalakh, Aleppo and Kultepe, Late Bronze Age palaces at Hattusa, Ugarit, Ashur and Nuzi.\nIron Age palaces and temples are found at the Assyrian (Kalhu/Nimrud, Khorsabad, Nineveh), Babylonian (Babylon), Urartian (Tushpa/Van, Kalesi, Cavustepe, Ayanis, Armavir, Erebuni, Bastam) and Neo-Hittite sites (Karkamis, Tell Halaf, Karatepe). Houses are mostly known from Old Babylonian remains at Nippur and Ur. Among the textual sources on building construction and associated rituals, are Gudea's cylinders from the late 3rd millennium, as well as the Assyrian and Babylonian royal inscriptions from the Iron Age.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20190", "revid": "850609514", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20190", "title": "Mesopotamian", "text": ""}
{"id": "20191", "revid": "922089262", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20191", "title": "Megalithic", "text": ""}
{"id": "20192", "revid": "45718847", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20192", "title": "Miranda Richardson", "text": "English actress (born 1958)\nMiranda Jane Richardson (born 3 March 1958) is an English actress who has worked in film, television and theatre.\nAfter graduating from the Bristol Old Vic Theatre School, Richardson began her career in 1979 and made her West End debut in the 1981 play \"Moving\", before being nominated for the 1987 Olivier Award for Best Actress for \"A Lie of the Mind\".\nRichardson has been nominated for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress for \"Damage\" and the Academy Award for Best Actress for \"Tom &amp; Viv\". A seven-time BAFTA Award nominee, she won the BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Supporting Role for \"Damage\". She has also been nominated for seven Golden Globe Awards, winning twice for \"Enchanted April\" and the TV film \"Fatherland\".\nHer other films include \"Empire of the Sun\", \"The Crying Game\", \"Sleepy Hollow\", \"The Hours\", and \"Spider\". She also played a comedic version of Queen Elizabeth I in all six episodes of the sitcom \"Blackadder II\", and appeared in one episode each of \"Blackadder the Third\" and \"Blackadder Goes Forth\". \nRichardson also voiced Mrs Tweedy from Aardman's 2000 stop-motion film \"Chicken Run\" and reprised the role in its 2023 .\nEarly life.\nRichardson was born in Southport, Lancashire. She recalls \"a cinema about 50 yards from my house. So Saturday mornings were spent with The ABC Minors: the Saturday cinema club with the theme song set to the tune of Blaze Away by Abe Holzmann, a red ball bouncing over the lyrics so you could sing along. As I got older, I would go to the cinema by myself to watch matinees of westerns and historical Technicolor dramas.\"\nCareer.\nTheatre.\nRichardson enrolled at the Bristol Old Vic Theatre School, where she studied alongside Daniel Day-Lewis and Jenny Seagrove, having started out with juvenile performances in \"Cinderella\" and \"Lord Arthur Savile's Crime\" at the Southport Dramatic Club.\nRichardson joined the Manchester Library Theatre in 1979 as an assistant stage manager, followed by making a number of appearances in repertory theatre. Her London stage debut was in \"Moving\" at the Queen's Theatre in 1981. She found recognition in the West End for a series of stage performances, ultimately receiving an Olivier Award nomination for her performance in \"A Lie of the Mind\", and, in 1996, she appeared in the single-actor theatrical adaptation of \"\" at the Edinburgh Festival. She returned to the London stage in May 2009 to play the lead role in Wallace Shawn's new play, \"Grasses of a Thousand Colours\" at the Royal Court Theatre. Richardson has said that she prefers new works rather than the classics because of the history that goes with them.\nFilm and television.\nIn 1985, Richardson made her film debut as Ruth Ellis, the last woman to be hanged in the United Kingdom, in the biographical drama \"Dance with a Stranger\". Around the same time, Richardson played a comedic version of Queen Elizabeth I, aka Queenie, in the British television comedy \"Blackadder II\". Richardson returned in guest roles in one episode each in \"Blackadder the Third\" (1987) and \"Blackadder Goes Forth\" (1989). She returned to play Queenie in the Christmas special \"Blackadder's Christmas Carol\" (1988) and, later, played Field Nurse in a special edition for the millennium \"\".\nFollowing \"Dance with a Stranger\", Richardson turned down numerous parts in which her character was unstable or disreputable, including the Glenn Close role in \"Fatal Attraction\". In this period, she appeared in \"Empire of the Sun\" (1987) and was nominated for the BAFTA Television Award for Best Actress for her role as Penny in \"After Pilkington\" (1987). In an episode of the TV series \"The Storyteller\" (\"The Three Ravens\", 1988), she played a witch. \nRichardson starred as Charlie Maguire in \"Fatherland\" (1994), for which she was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress \u2013 Series, Miniseries or Television Film. Other television roles in this period include Pamela Flitton in \"A Dance to the Music of Time\" (1997), Miss Gilchrist in \"St. Ives\" (1998), Bettina the interior decorator in \"Absolutely Fabulous\" and Queen Elspeth, Snow White's stepmother, in \"\" (2001).\nRichardson has appeared in supporting roles in film, including Vanessa Bell in \"The Hours\" (2002), Lady Van Tassel in \"Sleepy Hollow\" (1999) and Patsy Carpenter in \"The Evening Star\" (1996). For her role in \"Sleepy Hollow\" she was nominated for the Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actress and won the Blockbuster Entertainment Award for Favorite Supporting Actress \u2013 Horror. She also won acclaim for her performances in \"The Crying Game\" (1992) and \"Enchanted April\" (1992), for which she won a Golden Globe. She received Academy Award nominations for her performances in \"Damage\" (1992) and \"Tom &amp; Viv\" (1994).\nHer film credits also include \"Kansas City\" (1996), \"The Apostle\" (1997) and \"Wah-Wah\" (2005). She voiced Mrs Tweedy, the main antagonist, in the stop-motion animated film, \"Chicken Run\" (2000). In 2002, she performed a triple role in the thriller \"Spider\". \nIn 2003, Richardson played Mary of Teck in the miniseries \"The Lost Prince\", for which she was nominated for both BAFTA Television Award for Best Actress and the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Miniseries or Motion Picture Made for Television. She also starred as Hermione Granger in a Comic Relief sketch called \"Harry Potter and the Secret Chamberpot of Azibaijan\". \nRichardson appeared as Queen Rosalind of Denmark in \"The Prince and Me\" and as the ballet mistress Madame Giry in the film version of the Andrew Lloyd Webber musical \"The Phantom of the Opera\" (2004). In 2005, she appeared in the role of Rita Skeeter, the toxic \"Daily Prophet\" journalist in \"Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire\". She later reprised the role of Rita Skeeter in a cameo in \"Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows: Part 1\" (2010).\nRichardson voiced Corky in \"The Adventures of Bottle Top Bill and His Best Friend Corky\" (2005), an Australian animated series for children. In 2006, she appeared in \"Gideon's Daughter\". In 2007 she played Mrs Claus in the film \"Fred Claus\" (2007) and appeared in the BBC sitcom, \"The Life and Times of Vivienne Vyle\" (2007).\nIn 2008, Richardson was cast in a leading role in the original AMC television pilot, \"Rubicon\". She plays Katherine Rhumor, a New York socialite who finds herself drawn into the central intrigue of a think tank after the death of her husband. The following year, she portrayed Princess Victoria of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld, Duchess of Kent in film \"The Young Victoria\" (2009)\".\"\nRichardson played Labour Party politician Barbara Castle in the British film \"Made in Dagenham\" (2010). She was nominated for a BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Supporting Role for this role. In 2012, she played roles in the BBC comedy television series \"Dead Boss,\" historical drama series \"World Without End,\" based on the 1989 Ken Follett novel \"The Pillars of the Earth\", and historical drama series \"Parade's End,\" based on Ford Madox Ford's eponymous novel cycle (1924\u20131928). In 2013, she played Lady Ashford in the film \"Belle\" (2013).\nIn 2012, Richardson was cast as Queen Ulla in Disney's live action film \"Maleficent\" (2014), where she was to play the titular character's aunt, but her role was cut from the film during post-production. In 2015, she played Sybil Birling in Helen Edmundson's BBC One adaptation of J. B. Priestley's \"An Inspector Calls\".\nIn 2015, she played Hilda Lorimer in the film \"Testament of Youth\" and was cast as Emily Brent in BBC One's three-part adaptation of Dame Agatha Christie's 1939 novel \"And Then There Were None\". In 2017, she portrayed Clementine Churchill in the biopic film \"Churchill\" and starred in the films \"Stronger\" and \"iBoy.\"\nIn 2019, Richardson voiced Pinky's Grandma in animated television series \"Pinky Malinky\" and played Lou Collins in seven episodes of television series \"Curfew\". In 2020, Richardson starred in the Australian comedy drama film \"Rams.\" \nRichardson reprised her role as the voice of Mrs Tweedy in the 2023 film, \"\".\nRichardson is due to appear in an upcoming biopic about conductor Sergiu Celibidache, \"The Yellow Tie\", and in the British film \"The Bitter End\".\nPersonal life.\nRichardson's hobbies include dog walking, gardening and falconry. In 2013, she began learning the cello.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20193", "revid": "2300502", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20193", "title": "Mecklenburg", "text": "Historical region of Germany\nMecklenburg (; ) is a historical region in northern Germany comprising the western and larger part of the federal-state Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania. The largest cities of the region are Rostock, Schwerin, Neubrandenburg, Wismar and G\u00fcstrow.\nThe name Mecklenburg derives from a castle named \"Mikilenburg\" (Old Saxon for \"big castle\", hence its translation into Neo-Latin and Greek as ), located between the cities of Schwerin and Wismar. In Slavic languages it was known as \"Veligrad\", which also means \"big castle\". It was the ancestral seat of the House of Mecklenburg; for a time the area was divided into Mecklenburg-Schwerin and Mecklenburg-Strelitz among the same dynasty.\nLinguistically Mecklenburgers retain and use many features of Low German vocabulary or phonology.\nThe adjective for the region is \"Mecklenburgian\" or \"Mecklenburgish\" (); inhabitants are called Mecklenburgians or Mecklenburgers ().\nGeography.\nMecklenburg is known for its mostly flat countryside. Much of the terrain is boggy, with ponds, marshes and fields as common features, with small forests interspersed. The terrain changes as one moves north towards the Baltic Sea.\nUnder the peat of Mecklenburg are sometimes found deposits of ancient lava flows. Traditionally, at least in the countryside, the stone from these flows is cut and used in the construction of homes, often in joint use with cement, brick and wood, forming a unique look to the exterior of country houses.\nMecklenburg has productive farming, but the land is most suitable for grazing for livestock.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nMecklenburg is the site of many prehistoric dolmen tombs. Its earliest organised inhabitants may have had Celtic origins. By no later than 100 BC the area had been populated by pre-Christian Germanic peoples.\nThe traditional symbol of Mecklenburg, the grinning steer's head (Low German: \"Ossenkopp\", lit.: 'oxen's head', with \"osse\" being a synonym for steer and bull in Middle Low German), with an attached hide, and a crown above, may have originated from this period. It represents what early peoples would have worn, i.e. a steers's head as a helmet, with the hide hanging down the back to protect the neck from the sun, and overall as a way to instill fear in the enemy.\nFrom the 7th through the 12th centuries, Mecklenburg was inhabited by Western Slavs who migrated there from what is now eastern Poland and north-western Ukraine. Among them were the Obotrites and other tribes that Frankish sources referred to as \"Wends\". The 11th-century founder of the Mecklenburger dynasty of Dukes and later Grand Dukes, which lasted until 1918, was Nyklot of the Obotrites.\nIn the late 12th century, Henry the Lion, Duke of the Saxons, reconquered the region, took oaths from its local lords, and Christianized its people, in a precursor to the Northern Crusades. From the 12th to 14th centuries, large numbers of Germans and Flemings settled the area (Ostsiedlung), importing German law and improved agricultural techniques. The Wends who survived all warfare and devastation of the centuries before, including invasions of and expeditions into Saxony, Denmark and Liutizic areas as well as internal conflicts, were assimilated in the centuries thereafter. However, elements of certain names and words used in Mecklenburg speak to the lingering Slavic influence. An example would be the city of Schwerin, which was originally called \"Zuarin\" in Slavic. Another example is the town of Bresegard, the 'gard' portion of the town name deriving from the Slavic word 'grad', meaning city or town.\nSince the 12th century, the territory remained stable and relatively independent of its neighbours; one of the few German territories for which this is true. During the Reformation, the Duke in Schwerin would convert to Protestantism and so would follow the Duchy of Mecklenburg in 1549.\nHistory, 1621\u20131933.\nLike many German territories, Mecklenburg was sometimes partitioned and re-partitioned among different members of the ruling dynasty. In 1621 it was divided into the two duchies of Mecklenburg-Schwerin and Mecklenburg-G\u00fcstrow. With the extinction of the G\u00fcstrow line in 1701, the G\u00fcstrow lands were redivided, part going to the Duke of Mecklenburg-Schwerin, and part going to the new line of Mecklenburg-Strelitz.\nIn 1815, the two Mecklenburgian duchies were raised to Grand Duchies, the Grand Duchy of Mecklenburg-Schwerin and the Grand Duchy of Mecklenburg-Strelitz, and subsequently existed separately as such in Germany under enlightened but absolute rule (constitutions being granted on the eve of World War I) until the revolution of 1918. Life in Mecklenburg could be quite harsh. Practices such as having to ask for permission from the Grand Duke to get married, or having to apply for permission to emigrate, would linger late into the history of Mecklenburg (i.e. 1918), long after such practices had been abandoned in other German areas. Even as late as the later half of the 19th century the Grand Duke personally owned half of the countryside. The last Duke abdicated in 1918, as monarchies fell throughout Europe. The Duke's ruling house reigned in Mecklenburg uninterrupted (except for two years) from its incorporation into the Holy Roman Empire until 1918. From 1918 to 1933, the duchies were free states in the Weimar Republic.\nHistory since 1934.\nAfter three centuries of partition, Mecklenburg was united on 1 January 1934 by the German government. During World War II the Wehrmacht assigned Mecklenburg and Pomerania to Wehrkreis II under the command of \"General der Infanterie\" Werner Kienitz, with the headquarters at Stettin. Mecklenburg was assigned to an Area headquartered at Schwerin, which was responsible for military units in Schwerin, Rostock, Parchim, and Neustrelitz.\nAfter World War II, the Soviet government occupying eastern Germany merged Mecklenburg with the smaller neighbouring region of Western Pomerania (German \"Vorpommern\") to form the state of Mecklenburg-Vorpommern. Mecklenburg contributed about two-thirds of the geographical size of the new state and the majority of its population. Also, the new state became temporary or permanent home for many refugees expelled from former German territories seized by the Soviet Union and Poland after the war. The Soviets changed the name from \"Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania\" to \"Mecklenburg\" in 1947.\nIn 1952, the East German government ended the independent existence of Mecklenburg, creating three districts (\"Bezirke\") out of its territory: Rostock, Schwerin and Neubrandenburg.\nDuring German reunification in 1990, the state of Mecklenburg-Vorpommern was revived, and is now one of the 16 states of the Federal Republic of Germany.\nCoat of arms of the duchies of Mecklenburg.\nThe House of Mecklenburg was founded by Niklot, prince of the Obotrites, Chizzini and Circipani on the Baltic Sea, who died in 1160. His Christian progeny was recognized as prince of the Holy Roman Empire 1170 and Duke of Mecklenburg 8 July 1348. On 27 February 1658 the ducal house divided in two branches: Mecklenburg-Schwerin and Mecklenburg-Strelitz.\nThe flag of both Mecklenburg duchies is traditionally made of the colours blue, yellow and red. The sequence however changed more than once in the past 300 years. In 1813 the duchies used yellow-red-blue. 23 December 1863 for Schwerin and 4 January 1864 for Strelitz blue-yellow-red was ordered. Mecklenburg-Schwerin however used white instead of yellow for flags on sea by law of 24 March 1855.\nSiebmachers Wappenbuch gives therefore (?) blue-white-red for Schwerin and blue-yellow-red for Strelitz.\nAccording to this source, the grand ducal house of Schwerin used a flag of 3.75 to 5.625 M with the middle arms on a white quadrant (1.75 M) in the middle.\nThe middle arms show the shield of Mecklenburg as arranged in the 17th century. The county of Schwerin in the middle and in the quartering Mecklenburg (bull's head with hide), Rostock (griffin), principality of Schwerin (griffin surmounting green rectangle), Ratzeburg (cross surmounted by crown), Stargard (arm with hand holding ring) and Wenden (bull's head). The shield is supported by a bull and a griffin and surmounted by a royal crown.\nThe dukes of Strelitz used according to Siebmachers the blue-yellow-red flag with just the (oval) shield of Mecklenburg in the yellow band.\nStr\u00f6hl in 1897 and Bulgaria show another arrangement: The grand-duke of Mecklenburg-Schwerin flows a flag (4:5) with the arms of the figures from the shield of arms.\nThe former Schwerin standard with the white quadrant is now ascribed to the grand dukes of Strelitz.\nStr\u00f6hl mentions a flag for the grand ducal house by law of 23 December 1863 with the middle arms in the yellow band. And he mentions a special sea flag, the same but with a white middle band. \n'Ber\u00fchmte Fahnen' shows furthermore a standard for grand duchess Alexandra of Mecklenburg-Schwerin, princess of Hannover (1882\u20131963), showing her shield and that of Mecklenburg joined by the order of the Wendic Crown in a white oval. On sea the yellow band in her flag was of course white. \nThe princes (dukes) of Mecklenburg-Schwerin had according to this source their own standard, showing the griffin of Rostock.\nEconomy.\nAgriculture.\nA flat landscape, Mecklenburg is known for its farmlands\u2014which produces quinoa, wheat, barley and maize\u2014and its animal husbandry, notably its cattle and the Mecklenburger breed of horse. Recently, given the upheavals and environmental disruptions created by globalisation, German farmers have become concerned about potentially invasive species such as the Greater rhea and the Asian hornet.\nTourism.\nMecklenburg has seen a huge increase in tourism since German reunification in 1990, particularly with its beaches and seaside resorts at the Baltic Sea (\"German Riviera\", Warnem\u00fcnde, Boltenhagen, Heiligendamm, K\u00fchlungsborn, Rerik and others), the Mecklenburg Lakeland (\"Mecklenburgische Seenplatte\") and the Mecklenburg Switzerland (\"Mecklenburgische Schweiz\") with their pristine nature, the old Hanseatic towns of Rostock, Greifswald, Stralsund and Wismar (the latter two being World Heritage) well known for their medieval Brick Gothic buildings, and the former royal residences of Schwerin, G\u00fcstrow, Ludwigslust and Neustrelitz.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "20196", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20196", "title": "March 10", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearMarch 10 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20197", "revid": "754658", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20197", "title": "March 12", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearMarch 12 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20199", "revid": "23755636", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20199", "title": "March 14", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearMarch 14 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20200", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20200", "title": "Management science", "text": "Study of problem-solving in human organizations\nManagement science (or managerial science) is a wide and interdisciplinary study of solving complex problems and making strategic decisions as it pertains to institutions, corporations, governments and other types of organizational entities. It is closely related to management, economics, business, engineering, management consulting, and other fields. It uses various scientific research-based principles, strategies, and analytical methods including mathematical modeling, statistics and numerical algorithms and aims to improve an organization's ability to enact rational and accurate management decisions by arriving at optimal or near optimal solutions to complex decision problems.\nManagement science looks to help businesses achieve goals using a number of scientific methods. The field was initially an outgrowth of applied mathematics, where early challenges were problems relating to the optimization of systems which could be modeled linearly, i.e., determining the optima (maximum value of profit, assembly line performance, crop yield, bandwidth, etc. or minimum of loss, risk, costs, etc.) of some objective function. Today, the discipline of management science may encompass a diverse range of managerial and organizational activity as it regards to a problem which is structured in mathematical or other quantitative form in order to derive managerially relevant insights and solutions.\nOverview.\nManagement science is concerned with a number of areas of study: \nManagement science research can be done on three levels:\nThe management scientist's mandate is to use rational, systematic and science-based techniques to inform and improve decisions of all kinds. The techniques of management science are not restricted to business applications but may be applied to military, medical, public administration, charitable groups, political groups or community groups. The norm for scholars in management science is to focus their work in a certain area or subfield of management like public administration, finance, calculus, information and so forth.\nHistory.\nAlthough management science as it exists now covers a myriad of topics having to do with coming up with solutions that increase the efficiency of a business, it was not even a field of study in the not too distant past. There are a number of businessmen and management specialists who can receive credit for the creation of the idea of management science. Most commonly, however, the founder of the field is considered to be Frederick Winslow Taylor in the early 20th century. Likewise, administration expert Luther Gulick and management expert Peter Drucker both had an impact on the development of management science in the 1930s and 1940s. Drucker is quoted as having said that, \"the purpose of the corporation is to be economically efficient.\" This thought process is foundational to management science. Even before the influence of these men, there was Louis Brandeis who became known as \"the people's lawyer\". In 1910, Brandeis was the creator of a new business approach which he coined as \"scientific management\", a term that is often falsely attributed to the aforementioned Frederick Winslow Taylor.\nThese men represent some of the earliest ideas of management science at its conception. After the idea was born, it was further explored around the time of World War II. It was at this time that management science became more than an idea and was put into practice. This sort of experimentation was essential to the development of the field as it is known today.\nThe origins of management science can be traced to operations research, which became influential during World War II when the Allied forces recruited scientists of various disciplines to assist with military operations. In these early applications, the scientists used simple mathematical models to make efficient use of limited technologies and resources. The application of these models to the corporate sector became known as management science.\nIn 1967 Stafford Beer characterized the field of management science as \"the business use of operations research\".\nTheory.\nSome of the fields that management science involves include: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nApplications.\nManagement science's applications are diverse allowing the use of it in many fields. Below are examples of the applications of management science. \nIn finance, management science is instrumental in portfolio optimization, risk management, and investment strategies. By employing mathematical models, analysts can assess market trends, optimize asset allocation, and mitigate financial risks, contributing to more informed and strategic decision-making.\nIn healthcare, management science plays a crucial role in optimizing resource allocation, patient scheduling, and facility management. Mathematical models aid healthcare professionals in streamlining operations, reducing waiting times, and improving overall efficiency in the delivery of care.\nLogistics and supply chain management benefit significantly from management science applications. Optimization algorithms assist in route planning, inventory management, and demand forecasting, enhancing the efficiency of the entire supply chain.\nIn manufacturing, management science supports process optimization, production planning, and quality control. Mathematical models help identify bottlenecks, reduce production costs, and enhance overall productivity.\nFurthermore, management science contributes to strategic decision-making in project management, marketing, and human resources. By leveraging quantitative techniques, organizations can make data-driven decisions, allocate resources effectively, and enhance overall performance across diverse functional areas.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
