{"id": "16291", "revid": "48969406", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16291", "title": "John Ambrose Fleming", "text": "British electrical engineer and physicist (1849\u20131945)\nSir John Ambrose Fleming (29 November 1849 \u2013 18 April 1945) was a British electrical engineer and physicist. He is known for inventing the vacuum tube, designing the radio transmitter\u2014with which the first transatlantic radio transmission was made\u2014and establishing the right-hand rule used in physics.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nJohn Ambrose Fleming was born on 29 November 1849 in Lancaster, England, the eldest of seven children of James Fleming DD, a Congregational minister at High Street Congregational Chapel, and Mary Ann White. \nHe was baptised on 11 February 1850.\nThrough his mother, Fleming was the nephew of Ellen Ranyard (n\u00e9e White), founder of The London Bible and Domestic Female Mission, and Edward White, a Free Church minister.\nSometime between 1853\u20131854, the Fleming family moved to North London. Initially tutored by his mother, Fleming enrolled at University College School in 1863, where he developed an interest in engineering. Unable to afford the fees to be apprenticed with a professional engineer, he decided to pursue a career in science teaching.\nEducation.\nIn 1867, Fleming enrolled at University College London, where he studied under Augustus De Morgan, Alexander Williamson, and George Carey Foster. However in 1868, he temporarily suspended his studies due to financial difficulties. He subsequently spent four months at a shipbuilders drawing office in Dublin before finding employment at a City stockbroker's office. He continued his studies on a part time basis, and graduated with a B.Sc. in 1870.\nFollowing graduation, Fleming took a position teaching science at the Rossall School upon the recommendation of Edward Frankland. In 1872, he enrolled at the Royal College of Science, where he studied chemistry under Frankland. There he first studied Alessandro Volta's battery, which became the subject of his first scientific paper. His paper was the first read at the inaugural meeting of the Physical Society of London in 1874. \nThe same year, Fleming returned to teaching, and was appointed Science Master at Cheltenham College. In 1877, he enrolled at St. John's College, Cambridge, to study the Natural Science Tripos. From January 1878 until May 1879, he was one of two students who attended the finial lectures of James Clerk Maxwell. In the summer of 1879, he obtained a D.Sc. from the University of London. In early 1880, he graduated with First Class Honours from St. John's College, where he became a Fellow in 1883.\nCareer.\nFleming served for one year at Cambridge University as a demonstrator of mechanical engineering, before being appointed the first Professor of Physics and Mathematics at University College Nottingham, but he left after less than a year. In 1882, he became an electrician at the Edison Electric Light Company, advising on lighting systems and the new Ferranti alternating current systems.\nIn 1885, Fleming became head of the newly established Department of Electrical Technology at University College London. Although this offered great opportunities, he recalls in his autobiography that the only equipment provided to him was a blackboard and piece of chalk. In 1897, the Pender Memorial Committee donated \u00a35,000 to the department, which was used to found the Pender Laboratory, along with the Pender Chair, which Fleming took up.\nIn 1926, Fleming retired from University College London. He remained active, becoming a committed advocate of the new technology of television which included serving as the second President of the Television Society. His contributions to electronic communications and radar were of vital importance in winning World War II.\nInventions.\nRadio transmitter.\nIn 1899, Guglielmo Marconi, the inventor of radiotelegraphy, decided to attempt transatlantic radio communication. This would require a scale-up in power from the small 200\u2013400 watt transmitters he had used up to then. Marconi contracted Fleming, an expert in power engineering, to design a radio transmitter. He designed the world's first large radio transmitter, a complicated spark transmitter powered by a 25 kW alternator driven by a combustion engine, built at Poldhu, Cornwall, which transmitted the first radio transmission across the Atlantic on 12 December 1901.\nAlthough Fleming was responsible for the design, the director of the Marconi Company had made him agree that: \"If we get across the Atlantic, the main credit will be and must forever be Mr. Marconi's\". Accordingly, the worldwide acclaim that greeted this landmark accomplishment went to Marconi, who only credited Fleming along with several other Marconi employees, saying he did some work on the \"power plant\". Marconi also forgot a promise to give him 500 shares of Marconi stock if the project was successful; he was bitter about this treatment. He honoured his agreement and did not speak about it throughout Marconi's life, but after his death in 1937 said Marconi had been \"very ungenerous\".\nFleming valve.\nIn 1904, while working for the Marconi Company to improve transatlantic radio reception, Fleming built the first vacuum tube, the two-electrode diode, which he called the \"oscillation valve\", for which he received a patent on 16 November. It became known as the Fleming valve. The Supreme Court of the United States later invalidated the patent because of an improper disclaimer and, additionally, maintained the technology in the patent was known art when filed.\nThis invention of the vacuum tube is often considered to have been the beginning of electronics. Fleming's diode was used in radio receivers and radar for many decades afterwards, until it was superseded by solid-state electronic technology more than 50 years later.\nPatent dispute.\nIn 1906, American inventor Lee De Forest added a control grid to the valve to create an amplifying vacuum tube RF detector called the Audion, leading Fleming to accuse him of infringing on his patents. De Forest's tube developed into the triode, the first electronic amplifier. The triode was vital in the creation of long-distance telephone and radio communications, radars, and early electronic digital computers (mechanical and electromechanical digital computers already existed using different technology). The court battle over these patents lasted for many years with victories at different stages for both sides.\nPersonal life.\nFleming was born with congenital hearing loss. He attended scientific meetings and debates with an assistant who would make notes. \nOn 11 June 1887, Fleming married Clara Ripley (1856/7\u20131917). On 27 July 1928, he married the popular young singer Olive May Franks (b. 1898/9) of Bristol.\nFleming was a noted photographer, painted watercolours, and enjoyed climbing the Alps.\nFleming retired to Sidmouth around 1926, where he died on 18 April 1945 at the age of 95.\nCreationism.\nFleming was a Christian creationist who argued against evolution. He was President of the Victoria Institute from 1927 to 1942.\nIn 1932, he and Douglas Dewar and Bernard Acworth helped establish the Evolution Protest Movement. Fleming bequeathed much of his estate to Christian charities, especially those for the poor. \nCommemorations.\nIn 1941, the London Power Company commemorated Fleming by naming a new 1,555 GRT coastal collier SS \"Ambrose Fleming\".\nIn 1971, the Greater London Council erected a blue plaque for Fleming at 9 Clifton Gardens in Maida Vale, London.\nCollections.\nIn 1945, Fleming's widow donated Fleming's library and papers to University College London. Fleming's library, which totals around 950 items, includes first editions of works by prominent scientists and engineers such as James Clerk Maxwell, Oliver Lodge, James Dewar and Shelford Bidwell. Fleming's archive spans 521 volumes and 12 boxes; it contains his laboratory notebooks, lecture notes, patent specifications, and correspondence.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16292", "revid": "2731577", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16292", "title": "John George, Elector of Brandenburg", "text": "Elector of Brandenburg from 1571 to 1598\nJohn George of Brandenburg (; 11 September 1525 \u2013 8 January 1598) was a prince-elector of the Margraviate of Brandenburg (1571\u20131598).\nEarly life.\nBorn as a member of the House of Hohenzollern, John George was the eldest son of Joachim II Hector, Elector of Brandenburg and Princess Magdalena of Saxony.\nBiography.\nFaced with large debts of 2.5 million guilder accumulated during the reign of his father, John George instituted a grain tax which drove part of the peasantry into dependence on a nobility that was exempt from taxation. He had Jews expelled from Brandenburg in 1573, stripped of their assets and prohibited from returning. Though a staunch Lutheran opposed to the rise of Calvinism, he permitted the admission of Calvinist refugees from the wars in the Spanish Netherlands and France. On 13 July 1574, he founded the Berlinisches Gymnasium zum Grauen Kloster, the first humanistic educational institution in Berlin. He was succeeded by his son Joachim Frederick.\nUpon the death of his kinsman Albert I, Duke of Prussia in 1568, the Duchy of Prussia was inherited by the latter's underage son Albert Frederick. John George's father was a co-inheritor of the Duchy of Prussia. In 1577 the Brandenburg electors became co-regent with Duke Albert Frederick of Prussia.\nFamily and children.\nJohn George was married three times.\nHis first wife was Princess Sophie of Legnica (ca. 1525 \u2013 6 February 1546), the daughter of Frederick II of Legnica, whom he married in 1545. They had one child together:\nSecondly, he married Margravine Sabina of Brandenburg-Ansbach (12 May 1529 \u2013 2 November 1575), daughter of George, Margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach, in 1548. They had the following children:\nThirdly, he married Princess Elisabeth of Anhalt-Zerbst (15 September\u00a0[O.S. 5 September]\u00a01563 \u2013 5 October 1607), the daughter of Joachim Ernest, Prince of Anhalt in 1577. They had the following children:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16294", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16294", "title": "Jahangir", "text": "Mughal emperor from 1605 to 1627\nNur al-Din Muhammad Salim ( ) (31 August 1569 \u2013 28 October 1627), known by his royal name Jahangir (, ), was the fourth emperor of the Mughal Empire, reigning from 1605 until his death in 1627.\nThe third and only surviving son of Emperor Akbar I (r.\u20091556\u00a0\u2013\u00a01605) and his consort Maryam uz-Zamani, Jahangir received comprehensive education, covering diverse subjects such as the Chagatai, Persian and Hindustani languages, military tactics, as well as social sciences. In 1594, at the age of 26, Jahangir successfully led an army to crush the revolt of the Bundela in Orchha and, upon the surrender of their leader Vir Singh Deo, transformed the State of Orchha into a vassal state. As such, the Jahangir Mahal was later constructed in Orchha by Deo in honor of Jahangir. Following Akbar's death, Jahangir succeeded him on 3 November 1605.\nJahangir's reign was marked by a combination of artistic achievement and political intrigue, set against the backdrop of the Mughal Empire's considerable expansion and consolidation. Jahangir's rule is distinguished by his commitment to justice and his interest in the arts, particularly painting and architecture, which flourished during his reign. Jahangir's reign was characterized by a complex relationship with his nobility and family, notably reflected in his marriage to Mehar-un-Nisa (later known as Empress Nur Jahan), who wielded significant political influence behind the throne. This period saw the empire's further entrenchment into the Indian subcontinent, including efforts to subdue the Rajput Kingdoms and extend Mughal authority into the Deccan. Jahangir's foreign policy included interactions with the Safavids of Persia and the Ottoman Empire, as well as with the English East India Company, marking the beginning of European influence in Indian politics and commerce.\nDespite his achievements, Jahangir's reign had challenges, including revolts led by his sons, which threatened the stability of his rule. His poor health, caused by a lifetime of opium and alcohol use, led to his death in 1627, precipitating a brief succession crisis before the throne passed to his son, Shah Jahan. Jahangir's legacy lives on through his contributions to Mughal art and architecture, his memoirs, and the policies he implemented, which continued to influence the empire after his demise.\nEarly life.\n Prince Nur al-Din Muhammad Salim was the third son born to Akbar and Mariam-uz-Zamani in the capital city of Fatehpur Sikri on 31 August 1569. He had two full elder twin brothers, Hassan Mirza and Hussain Mirza, born in 1564, both of whom died in infancy. Grief-struck, Akbar and Mariam-uz-Zamani, sought the blessings of Salim Chishti, a reputed khawaja (religious leader) who lived at Fatehpur Sikri. Akbar confided in Salim Chisti, who assured him that he would be soon delivered of three sons who would live up to a ripe old age. His parents, Akbar and Mariam Zamani, in hope of having a son born to them even made a pilgrimage to Ajmer Sharif Dargah, barefoot, to pray for a son.\nWhen Akbar was informed that his chief wife was expecting a child again, an order was passed for the establishment of a royal palace in Fatehpur Sikri (today known as Rang Mahal) near the lodgings of Salim Chishti, where the Empress could enjoy the repose in the vicinity of the saint. Mariam Zamani was shifted to the palace established there and during her pregnancy, Akbar himself used to travel to Sikri and used to spend half of his time in Sikri and another half in Agra.\nDuring the time of Mariam-uz-Zamani\u2019s pregnancy with Salim, says Jahangir in his memoirs, the baby stopped kicking in the womb abruptly. When the matter was reported to Akbar, who was engaged in hunt of cheetahs at that time, vowed that if the baby resumes kicking, he would never hunt cheetahs on Fridays throughout his life and Jahangir further notes, that Akbar kept his vow throughout his life. Jahangir, too, in reverence for his father's vow, never hunted cheetahs on Friday. On 31 August 1569, Mariam Zamani gave birth to Salim, and he was named after Hazrat Salim Chishti, in acknowledgement of his father's faith in the efficacy of the holy man's prayer. Akbar, overjoyed with the news of his heir-apparent, ordered a great feast and festivities which were held up to seven days and ordered the release of criminals with great offence. Throughout the empire, largesses were bestowed over common people, and he set himself ready to visit Sikri immediately. However, he was advised by his courtiers to delay his visit to Sikri on account of the astrological belief in Hindustan of a father not seeing the face of his long-awaited son immediately after his birth. He, therefore, delayed his visit and visited Sikri to meet his new born son and wife after forty-one days after his birth. Jahangir's foster mother was the daughter of Salim Chishti, and his foster brother was Qutubuddin Koka, the grandson of Chishti.\nJahangir began his education at the age of five. On this occasion, a big feast was thrown by the Emperor to ceremonially initiate his son into education. His first tutor was Qutubuddin Koka. Many other tutors were appointed to teach Persian, Arabic, Turkish, Hindi, Arithmetic, History, Geography, and Sciences. Abdur Rahim Khan-i-Khanan, one of the versatile geniuses, was an important tutor of him. His maternal uncle, Bhagwant Das the Kachhwaha ruler of Amer, was supposedly one of his tutors on the subject of warfare tactics. During this time, Jahangir grew up fluent in Persian and Hindustani, with a \"respectable\" knowledge of Persianised courtly Chaghatai (\"Turki\"), the Mughal ancestral language.\nIn 1594, Jahangir was dispatched by his father, Akbar, alongside Asaf Khan also known as Mirza Jafar Beg and Abu'l-Fazl ibn Mubarak to defeat the renegade Raja Vir Singh Deo Bundela and to capture the city of Orchha which was considered the centre of the revolt. Jahangir arrived with a force of 12,000 after many ferocious encounters and finally subdued the Bundela and ordered Vir Singh Deo to surrender. After tremendous casualties and the start of negotiations between the two, Vir Singh Deo handed over 5000 Bundela infantry and 1000 cavalry and submitted to the command of Jahangir along with taking up imperial services at the court later. The victorious Jahangir, at 26 years of age, ordered the completion of the Jahangir Mahal a famous Mughal citadel in Orchha to commemorate and honour his victory. From the very beginning of Jahangir's reign as emperor, he witnessed the internal rivalry of the Bundela chiefs for control. Jahangir appointed his favourite Vir Singh, as the ruler of Orchha by removing his elder brother Raja Ram Shah. This greatly hampered the interest of Ram Shah's house. Thus, Ram Shah along with his family members Bharat Shah, Indrajit, Rao Bhupal, Angad, Prema, and Devi (the wife of the deposed king) raised their arms in rebellion. However, Ram Shah was defeated by his brother Vir Singh with the help of imperial army under Abdullah Khan. Then the deposed Bundela chief escaped and continued to fight the Mughals for two years until he was finally arrested in 1607 and put in prison at Gwalior only later to be given the territory of Chanderi as his patrimony.\nFamily.\nThe ancestral lineage of Jahangir were traced from the House of Babur\nConsorts.\nJahangir\u2019s first wife was Manbhawati Bai, the daughter of Raja Bhagwant Das of Amber, who was serving as the governor of Punjab at the time. Their wedding took place on 13 February 1585 and included both Hindu and Muslim ceremonies. The marriage brought significant dowry to Emperor Akbar. She was admired for her beauty, loyalty, and deep affection for Jahangir, which earned her a special place in his heart. After giving birth to their first son, Khusrau, she was honored with the title \"Shah Begam\". She died on 5 May 1605.\nHis second wife was \"Jagat Gosain\", the daughter of Raja Udai Singh (also known as Mota Raja) of Jodhpur and Rani Manrang De of Gwalior. Their marriage took place on 11 January 1586 at Mota Raja's palace. Salim is believed to have fallen for Jagat Gosain during a social gathering attended with his mother. Despite initial hesitation from his parents, the match was approved by Hamida Banu. Her dowry was set at seventy-five lakh tankas. She was the mother of Emperor Shah Jahan. She died on 9 April 1619 and was given the posthumous title of \"Bilqis Makani\".\nHis third wife was a princess from Bikaner, the sixteen year old daughter of Raja Rai Singh. They were married on 28 May 1586 in Fatehpur Sikri, with a dowry of 250,000 rupees. Around the same time, he also married the daughter of Gakhar chief, Said Khan Gakhar and granddaughter of Sarang Khan Gakhar as his fourth wife. His fifth wife was \"Sahib Jamal\". She was the daughter of Khawaja Hassan and the cousin of Zain Khan Koka. The marriage took place in 1586. She died on 25 June 1599. Another wife was the daughter of Rawal Bhim Singh of Jaisalmer, whom Jahangir married in 1587. She was given the title \"Malika Jahan\". Another wife was the daughter of Darya Malbhas.\nAnother wife was the daughter of Mirza Sanjar, and the granddaughter of Khizr Khan Hazara. They married on 18 October 1589. Another wife was Karamsi Bai, daughter of Raja Keshav Das Rathor of Jhabua. Another wife was the daughter of Abdal Chak and sister of Abiya Chak of Kashmir. Another wife was the daughter of Ali Rai, the ruler of Little Tibet. The marriage took place on 1 January 1592. This marriage had a political motive\u2014Tibet's chief offered his daughter to Jahangir to prevent an invasion by Akbar. \nAnother wife was Nur-un-Nissa Begum. She was the daughter of Ibrahim Hussain Mirza and Gulrukh Begum, the daughter of Kamran Mirza. In spring of 1591, Gulrukh Begum petitioned a request of her daughter's marriage with Jahangir. Akbar agreeded to her request, and this led to their betrothal. The marriage took place on the eve of 26 February 1592 at the house of Hamida Banu Begum. Another wife was the daughter of Mubarak Khan, son of Hussain Chak of Kashmir. The marriage took place on 3 November 1592.\nAnother wife was the daughter of Raja Ali Khan, ruler of Khandesh. Her father had sent her to be married to Jahangir in 1593. The marriage took place on 10 September 1594. She died on 20 October 1596. Another wife was the daughter of Abdullah Khan Baluch. Another wife was \"Khas Mahal\", the daughter of Zain Khan Koka. The marriage took place on the eve of 18 June 1596 at the house of Hamida Banu Begum. Another wife was the daughter of Khawaja Dost Muhammad Kabuli known as Khawaja Jahan. In 1605, two of his concubines gave birth to two of his sons, Jahandar Mirza and Shahryar Mirza.\nAnother wife was Saliha Banu Begum. She was the daughter of Qaim Khan. The marriage took place in 1608. She died on 10 June 1620. On 8 June 1608, he married the daughter of Jagat Singh, the eldest son of Raja Man Singh of Amber. Jahangir personally arranged this marriage, gifting Jagat Singh 80,000 rupees and sending a rare European tapestry from the port of Cambay. The wedding took place at the residence of Mariam Zamani. As part of the dowry, Man Singh gave sixty elephants. On 11 January 1610, he married the daughter of Ram Chand Bundela. At some point, he also married the daughter of Mirza Muhammad Hakim son of Emperor Humayun.\nHis last wife was Mihr-un-Nissa Begum (better known by her subsequent title of Nur Jahan). The marriage took place on 25 May 1611. She was the widow of a high-ranking Persian nobleman Sher Afgan. Mihr-un-Nissa became his utmost favorite wife after their marriage and was the last of his chief consorts. She was witty, intelligent, and beautiful, which attracted Jahangir to her. Before being awarded the title of \"Nur Jahan\" ('Light of the World'), she was called \"Nur Mahal\" ('Light of the Palace'). After the death of Saliha Banu Begum in 1620, she was designated the title of \"Padshah Begum\" and held it until the death of Jahangir in 1627. Her abilities are said to range from fashion and jewellery designing, perfumery, hunting to building architectural monuments and more.\nReign.\nAccording to jesuit missionary Pierre de Jarric, the orthodox scholar Ahmad Sirhindi sent letters to his disciple, Shaikh Farid Bukhari, a Mir Bakshi official who had been appointed as representative of the muslim orthodox faction of Mughal court, to support Jahangir to succeed his father. The orthodox faction extracted promise from Jahangir that he would support the cause of orthodox faction's cause if he succeeded. Jahangir succeeded the throne on Thursday, 3 November 1605, eight days after his father's death. \nKhusrau rebellion.\nAfter Jahangir's ascent to the Mughal throne, growing tensions would cause Khusrau to rebel in April 1606. Soon after, Jahangir had to fend off his son Khusrau Mirza when he attempted to claim the throne based on Akbar's will. He left Agra with 350 horsemen on 6 April 1606 under the pretext of visiting Akbar's tomb in nearby Sikandra. Khusrau laid siege on Lahore, defended by Dilawar Khan. Jahangir relieved the siege and defeated Khusrau at the battle of Bhairowal. He was captured by Jahangir's army while crossing the Chenab river, attempting to flee toward Kabul. Khusrau was then defeated with the support of the Barha and Bukhari s\u0101da and confined in the fort of Agra.\nJahangir was found to be more militarily capable, and he crushed the rebellion in a week. Jahangir had all the young aristocrat supporters of Khusrau tortured, impaled and made him watch them in agony as a warning. After rebelled and defeated again for the second time, Khusrau was then blinded and imprisoned until 1619. In 1620, Khusrau was sent on a mission to Deccan with his brother, Shah Jahan.\nRule.\nFrom the time of his marriage with Mehr-un-Nissa, later known as Empress Nur Jahan, Jahangir left the reins of government in her hands and appointed her family and relatives to high positions. Nur Jahan had complete freedom of speech near Jahangir without any reprimand. On the contrary, she could nag and fight with him on the smallest issue. Thus, her unprecedented freedom of action to control the state caused the displeasure of both his courtiers and foreigners.\nIn 1608, Jahangir posted Islam Khan I to subdue the rebel Musa Khan, the Masnad-e-Ala of the Baro-Bhuyan confederacy in Bengal, who was able to imprison him. \nIn 1613, Jahangir issued a sanguinary order for the extirpation of the race of the Kolis who were notorious robbers and plunderers living in the most inaccessible parts of the province of Gujarat. A large number of the Koli chiefs were slaughtered and the rest hunted to their mountains and deserts. 169 heads of such Koli chiefs killed in battle by Nur-ul-llah Ibrahim, commander of 'Bollodo'. In the same year later, the Portuguese seized the Mughal ship \"Rahimi\", which had set out from Surat on its way with a large cargo of 100,000 rupees and Pilgrims, who were on their way to Mecca and Medina to attend the annual Hajj. The \"Rahimi\" was owned by Mariam-uz-Zamani, mother of Jahangir and Akbar's favourite consort. She was bestowed the title of 'Mallika-e-Hindustan' (Queen of Hindustan) by Akbar and was subsequently referred to as same during Jahangir's reign. The \"Rahimi\" was the largest Indian ship sailing in the Red Sea and was known to the Europeans as the \"great pilgrimage ship\". When the Portuguese officially refused to return the ship and the passengers, the outcry at the Mughal court was unusually severe. The outrage was compounded by the fact that the owner and the patron of the ship was none other than the revered mother of the current emperor. Jahangir himself was outraged and ordered the seizure of the Portuguese town Daman. He ordered the apprehension of all Portuguese within the Mughal Empire; he further confiscated churches that belonged to the Jesuits. This episode is considered to be an example of the struggle for wealth that would later ensue and lead to colonisation of the Indian sub-continent. Jahangir then gathered his forces under the command of Ali Kuli Khan and fought Raja Lakshmi Narayan Bhup of the Kingdom of Koch Bihar in the far eastern province of Bengal. Raja Lakshmi Narayan then accepted the Mughals as his suzerains and was given the title \"Nazir\", later establishing a garrison at Atharokotha. Jahangir was responsible for ending a century-long struggle with the Sisodia Rajput house of Mewar. The campaign against them was pushed so extensively that they were made to submit with great loss of life and property.\nIn 1614, The East India Company persuaded King James I to send a British ambassador to the Mughal court, Thomas Roe. Thomas Roe describes how petitioners could use the chain of justice to attract the emperor's attention if his decision was not to their satisfaction during Darshana. The Darshana tradition was adopted by the Mughal Emperors from Hindu religio-political rituals. As a royal envoy to the Agra court of Jahangir. Roe resided at Agra for three years, until 1619. At the Mughal court, Roe allegedly became a favourite of Jahangir and may have been his drinking partner; he arrived with gifts of \"many crates of red wine\" and explained to him what beer was and how it was made. The immediate result of the mission was to obtain permission and protection for an East India Company factory at Surat. While no major trading privileges were conceded by Jahangir, \"Roe's mission was the beginning of a Mughal-Company relationship that would develop into something approaching a partnership and see the \"EIC\" gradually drawn into the Mughal nexus\". While Roe's detailed journals are a valuable source of information on Jahangir's reign, the Emperor did not return the favour, with no mention of Roe in his voluminous diaries.\nIn 1615, Jahangir captured Kangra Fort, whose Katoch rulers came under Mughal vassalship during the reign of Akbar. Consequently, a siege was laid and the fort was taken in 1620, which \"resulted in the submission of the Raja of Chamba who was the greatest of all the rajas in the region.\" The district of Kishtwar, in the vast province of Kashmir, was also conquered the same year.\nIn October 1616, Jahangir sent Prince Khurram to fight against the combined forces of three rebel kingdoms of Ahmednagar, Bijapur and Golconda. Jahangir considered his third son, Khurram (regnal name Shah Jahan) as his favourite son.\nAfter intense lobbying by VOC factors during Jahangir's visit to Ahmedabad, Jahangir issued the first known Firman directed towards the VOC in Gujarat, contained in a letter from P. G. van Ravesteyn and A. W. Goeree to Jan Pieterszoon Coen, dated 12th March 1618. The firman granted few notable assurances to the factors, such as freedom to trade at any Mughal ports, autonomy to govern their affairs, application of normal customs duty (believed to be 2.5% during Jahangir's reign), freedom to trade with local merchants and profess their religion.\nIn 1621 of February, However, when Nur Jahan married her daughter, Mihr-un-nissa Begum, to Jahangir's youngest son, Shahryar Mirza, Khurram suspected that his stepmother was trying to maneuver Shahryar as the successor to Jahangir. Using the rugged terrain of Deccan to his advantage, Khurram launched a rebellion against Jahangir in 1622. This precipitated a political crisis in Jahangir's court. Khurram murdered his blind older brother, Khusrau Mirza, to smooth his path to the throne. Simultaneously, the Safavid emperor Abbas the Great attacked Kandahar in the winter of 1622. Since it was both a commercial center at the border of the Mughal Empire and the burial place of Babur, the founder of the Mughal Empire, Jahangir dispatched Prince Shahryar to repel the Safavids. However, due to Shahryar's inexperience and harsh Afghan winter, Kandahar fell to the Safavids.\nIn 1623, Emperor Jahangir sent his \"tehsildar\", Khan Alam, to Safavid Persia, accompanied by 800 sepoys, scribes and scholars, along with ten howdahs well decorated in gold and silver, to negotiate peace with Emperor Abbas after a brief conflict in the region around Kandahar. Khan Alam soon returned with valuable gifts and groups of masters of the hunt () from both Safavid Iran and the Khanates of Central Asia. On March, Jahangir ordered Mahabat Khan, one of Jahangir's most loyal high generals, to crush Khurram's rebellion in the Deccan. After a series of victories by Mahabat Khan over Khurram, the civil war finally ended in October 1625.\nIn 1626, Jahangir began to contemplate an alliance between the Ottoman Empire, the Mughals, and the Khanate of Bukhara of the Uzbeks against the Safavids, who had defeated the Mughals at Kandahar. He even wrote a letter to the Ottoman Sultan, Murad IV. Jahangir's ambition did not materialise due to his death in 1627.\nDeath.\nA lifelong user of opium and wine, Jahangir was frequently ill in the 1620s. Jahangir was trying to restore his health by visiting Kashmir and Kabul. He went from Kabul to Kashmir but decided to return to Lahore because of a severe cold.\nIn 1627 on 29 October, during the journey from Kashmir to Lahore, Jahangir died near Bhimber. To embalm and preserve his body, the entrails were removed; these were buried inside Baghsar Fort near Bhimber in Subah of Lahore. The body was then conveyed by palanquin to Lahore and was buried in Shahdara Bagh, a suburb of that city. His son, Shah Jahan, commissioned his tomb and is today a popular tourist attraction site. The tomb site was inscribed on the tentative list for UNESCO World Heritage Site status in 1993.\nJahangir's death launched a minor succession crisis. While Nur Jahan desired her son-in-law, Shahryar Mirza, to take the throne, her brother Abu'l-Hassan Asaf Khan was corresponding with his son-in-law, Prince Khurram to take over the throne. To counter Nur Jahan, Abu'l Hassan put Dawar Bakhsh as the puppet ruler and confined Nur Jahan in the Shahdara. Upon his arrival in Agra in February 1628, Prince Khurram executed both Shahryar and Dawar and took the regnal name Shah Jahan (Shihab-ud-Din Muhammad Khurram).\nPersonal life.\nJahangir was famous for his \"Chain of Justice\". In contemporary paintings, it has been shown as a golden chain with golden bells. In his memoir \"Tuzk-e-Jahangiri\", he wrote that he ordered the creation of this chain for his subjects to appeal to the emperor if they were denied justice at any level.\nJahangir also took interest in public health and medicine. After his accession, he passed twelve orders, of which at least two were related to this area. The fifth order forbade the manufacturing and sale of rice spirit and any kind of intoxicating drugs, and the tenth order was instrumental in laying the foundation of free hospitals and appointment of physicians in all the cities of his empire.\nReligious view.\nAccording to M. Athar Ali, Jahangir generally continued the religious policy of Akbar and had a major interest in pantheism. However, orthodox figures in the Mughal's court influenced him in his later years to become more puritan in stance and reversed some Akbar's religious policy.\nAt the start of his regime, many staunch Sunnis were hopeful, because he seemed less tolerant of other faiths than his father had been. At the time of his accession and the elimination of Abu'l Fazl, his father's chief minister and the architect of his eclectic religious stance, a powerful group of orthodox noblemen had gained increased power in the Mughal court. This included nobles especially like Shaykh Farid, Jahangir's trusted Mir Bakhshi, who held firmly the citadel of orthodoxy in Muslim India. Another influence for Jahangir changed his religious policies was due to the action of Ahmad Sirhindi, who routinely attend the court debates to counteract some religious beliefs and doctrines which prevalent in the court. In the process, it is recorded from these correspondence which compiled in 1617, that Farid Murtaza Khan took Ahmad Sirhindi advices regarding this matter. His efforts influenced Abul Fazl, protegee of emperor Akbar, to support Ahmad Sirhindi in effort to convince Jahangir to reverse the policies of Akbar of tolerating Hindus in Mughal court. Yohanan Friedmann has noted that according to many modern historians and thinkers, the puritanical though of Ahmad Sirhindi has inspired the religious orthodoxy of emperor Aurangzeb. This was noted by how Ahmad Sirhindi managed to influence the successor of emperor Akbar, starting from Jahangir, into reversing Akbar's policies such as lifting marriage age limits, mosque abolishments, and \"Hijra\" methodology revival which was abandoned by his father. It is noted by historians that this influence has been significantly recorded during the conquest of Kangra under Jahangir, that at the presence of Ahmad Sirhindi who observed the campaign, the Mughal forces had the Idols broken, a cow slaughtered, Khutbah sermon read, and other Islamic rituals performed. Further mark of Jahangir's departure from Akbar's secular policy were recorded Terry, a traveller, who came and observed India region between 1616 and 1619, where he found the mosques full of worshippers, the exaltation of Quran and hadith practical teaching, and the complete observance of Fasting during Ramadan and Eid al-Fitr celebrations.\nJahangir issued bans on cowslaugher and animal slaughter on certain days of the week in continuance of his father's policy. According to the \"Dabistan-i Mazahib\" he appointed Srikant of Kashmir to be qazi of the Hindus so that they would have their own judicial representative. He also continued his father's policy of patronizing Brahmins and temples. Notably he issued several grants to the Chaitanya sect for their temples in Vrindavan, but also made negative comments about their temples. He, like his father, disapproved of reincarnation and idol worship and ordered the boar image to be removed from Rana Shankar's temple at Pushkar.\nMost notorious was the execution of the Sikh Guru Arjan Dev on Jahangir's orders. His lands were confiscated and his sons imprisoned as Jahangir suspected him of helping Khusrau's rebellion. It is unclear whether Jahangir even understood what a Sikh was, referring to Guru Arjan as a Hindu, who had \"captured many of the simple-hearted of the Hindus and even of the ignorant and foolish followers of Islam, by his ways and manners... for three or four generations (of spiritual successors) they had kept this shop warm.\" The trigger for Guru Arjan's execution was his support for Jahangir's rebel son Khusrau Mirza, yet it is clear from Jahangir's own memoirs that he disliked Guru Arjan before then: \"many times it occurred to me to put a stop to this vain affair or bring him into the assembly of the people of Islam.\" Guru Arjan's successor Guru Hargobind was imprisoned for sometime but released soon. He developed friendly relations with Jahangir and accompanied him on his journey to Kashmir just before the latter's death.\nAccording to Jahangir's memoirs, he issued a firman banning Jain seorahs (monks) due to alleged scandalous behavior. However, the ban was quickly rescinded but Jahangir neglected to mention that in his memoirs. There is a wide variety of evidence that Jahangir had good relations with Jains and Jain sources themselves extol him. According to Ali, Jahangir wrote his memoirs with his intended audience of Persian-speaking Muslims in mind and sought to portray himself as an anti-idolatry sultan and thus \"modified\" facts. Jahangir's memoirs also omit the fact that three of his nephews at one point converted to Christianity with his permission, although they would later reverse their decision.\nHe issued 'Jahangiri coins' which had his own portrait. He even issued the zodiac series of gold and silver coins which had images of zodiac symbols alongside the radiating sun in the background, due to his faith in astrology. The sign of the zodiac was substituted for the month in which the coin was minted. All of this was considered haram by the ulema due to which his successor Shah Jahan ordered all those coins melted, accounting for their extreme rarity now. \nJahangir had a strong inclination toward pragmatism, reason and skepticism. He often remarked on unusual occurrences by stating, \"This is so strange, it is recorded here,\" or dismissing claims that defied logic with, \"It does not accord with reason, and my mind does not accept it.\" While he upheld religious tolerance, his patience did not extend to deceitful religious practices. He swiftly punished a self-proclaimed guru who displeased him, expelled a yogi while destroying his idol for performing a superstitious ritual with his visitors, and imprisoned a renowned Naqshbandi Muslim scholar for a while, who, in his view, held an inflated sense of self-importance and hoodwinked people by peddling mysticism. However, he was not without his own biases. He maintained a deep reverence for the tombs of saints and firmly believed in the power of holy men\u2019s prayers, particularly those he credited with enabling his birth. He held faith in astrology and ensured he gave alms to counteract the negative effects of unfavorable planetary alignments.\nAccording to Richard M Eaton, Emperor Jahangir issued many edicts admonishing his nobles not to convert the religion of anybody by force, but the issuance of such orders also suggests that such conversions must have occurred during his rule in some measure. He continued the Mughals tradition of being scrupulously secular in outlook. Stability, loyalty, and revenue were the main focus, not the religious change among their subjects.\nArt.\nJahangir was fascinated with art and architecture. In his autobiography, the Jahangirnama, Jahangir recorded events that occurred during his reign, descriptions of flora and fauna that he encountered, and other aspects of daily life, and commissioned court painters such as Ustad Mansur to paint detailed pieces that would accompany his vivid prose. For example, in 1619, he put pen to paper in awe of a royal falcon delivered to his court from the ruler of Iran: \"What can I write of the beauty of this bird's colour? It had black markings, and every feather on its wings, back, and sides was extremely beautiful,\" and then recorded his command that Ustad Mansur paint a portrait of it after it perished. \"Nadiri\" was a type of exclusive clothing designed by Jahangir, reserved for his personal use and esteemed courtiers. Jahangir bound and displayed much of the art that he commissioned in elaborate albums of hundreds of images, sometimes organized around a theme such as zoology.\nJahangir himself was far from modest in his autobiography when he stated his prowess at being able to determine the artist of any portrait by simply looking at a painting. As he said: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...my liking for painting and my practice in judging it have arrived at such point when any work is brought before me, either of deceased artists or of those of the present day, without the names being told me, I say on the spur of the moment that is the work of such and such a man. And if there is a picture containing many portraits and each face is the work of a different master, I can discover which face is the work of each of them. If any other person has put in the eye and eyebrow of a face, I can perceive whose work the original face is and who has painted the eye and eyebrow.\nJahangir took his connoisseurship of art very seriously. He also preserved paintings from Emperor Akbar's period. An excellent example of this is the painting done by Ustad Mansur of Musician Naubat Khan, son-in-law of legendary Tansen. In addition to their aesthetic qualities, paintings created under his reign were closely catalogued, dated and even signed, providing scholars with fairly accurate ideas as to when and in what context many of the pieces were created.\nIn the foreword to W. M. Thackston's translation of the Jahangirnama, Milo Cleveland Beach explains that Jahangir ruled during a time of considerably stable political control, and had the opportunity to order artists to create art to accompany his memoirs that were \"in response to the emperor's current enthusiasms\". He used his wealth and his luxury of free time to chronicle, in detail, the lush natural world that the Mughal Empire encompassed. At times, he would have artists travel with him for this purpose; when Jahangir was in Rahimabad, he had his painters on hand to capture the appearance of a specific tiger that he shot and killed because he found it to be particularly beautiful. \nHe had his artist Govardhan travel to Prayagraj(Allahabad) to paint sadhus. This resulted in the earliest set of images depicting sadhus in all yogic positions. \nThe Jesuits had brought with them various books, engravings, and paintings and, when they saw the delight Akbar held for them, sent for more and more of the same to be given to the Mughals. They felt the Mughals were on the \"verge of conversion\", a notion which proved to be very false. Instead, both Akbar and Jahangir studied this artwork very closely and replicated and adapted it, adopting much of the early iconographic features and later the pictorial realism for which Renaissance art was known. Jahangir was notable for his pride in the ability of his court painters. A classic example of this is described in Sir Thomas Roe's diaries, in which the Emperor had his painters copy a European miniature several times creating a total of five miniatures. Jahangir then challenged Roe to pick out the original from the copies, a feat Sir Thomas Roe could not do, to the delight of Jahangir.\nJahangir was also revolutionary in his adaptation of European styles. A collection at the British Museum in London contains seventy-four drawings of Indian portraits dating from the time of Jahangir, including a portrait of the emperor himself. These portraits are a unique example of art during Jahangir's reign because faces were not drawn in full, including the shoulders as well as the head as these drawings are.\nPolitics.\nJahangir is widely considered to have been a weak and incapable ruler. Orientalist Henry Beveridge (editor of the \"Tuzk-e-Jahangiri\") compares Jahangir to the Roman emperor Claudius, for both were \"weak men... in their wrong places as rulers... [and had] Jahangir been head of a Natural History Museum... [he] would have been [a] better and happier man.\" Further he notes, \"He made no addition to the imperial territories, but on the contrary, diminished them by losing Qandahar to the Persians. But possibly his peaceful temper, or his laziness, was an advantage, for it saved much bloodshed. His greatest fault as a king was his subservience to his wife, Nur-Jahan, and the consequent quarrel with his son, Shah Jahan, who was the ablest and best of his male children\". Sir William Hawkins, who visited Jahangir's court in 1609, said: \"In such short that what this man's father, called Ecber Padasha [Badshah Akbar], got of the Deccans, this king, Selim Sha [Jahangir] beginneth to lose.\" Italian writer and traveller, Niccolao Manucci, who worked under Jahangir's grandson, Dara Shikoh, began his discussion of Jahangir by saying: \"It is a truth tested by experience that sons dissipate what their fathers gained in the sweat of their brow.\"\nAccording to John F. Richards, Jahangir's frequent withdrawal to a private sphere of life was partly reflective of his indolence, brought on by his addiction to a considerable daily dosage of wine and opium. \nScience.\nJahangir had a keen interest in conducting his own \"scientific\" experiments, which reflected his deep fascination for the natural world. He found that the widely accepted belief about the aggressiveness of mountain sheep was not true. He investigated the effectiveness of bitumen for healing broken bones using a chicken as a specimen(bitumen proved ineffective). He compared the air quality of Ahmadabad and Mahmudabad by observing the rate of decay in sheep carcasses. Additionally, he actively engaged in animal husbandry and goat breeding, accurately estimated the gestation period of elephants, and studied the livers of lions and wolves to determine whether the location of their gall bladders, whether they were inside or outside the liver, correlated with courage.\nAppendix.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16295", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16295", "title": "Josiah Wedgwood", "text": "English potter and founder of the Wedgwood company (1730\u20131795)\nJosiah Wedgwood (12 July 1730 \u2013 3 January 1795) was an English potter, entrepreneur and abolitionist. Founding the Wedgwood company in 1759, he developed improved pottery bodies by systematic experimentation, and was the leader in the industrialisation of the manufacture of European pottery.\nThe renewed classical enthusiasms of the late 1760s and early 1770s were of major importance to his sales promotion. His expensive goods were in much demand from the upper classes, while he used emulation effects to market cheaper sets to the rest of society. Every new invention that Wedgwood produced \u2013 green glaze, creamware, black basalt, and jasperware \u2013 was quickly copied. Having once achieved efficiency in production, he obtained efficiencies in sales and distribution. His showrooms in London gave the public the chance to see his complete range of tableware.\nWedgwood's company never made porcelain during his lifetime, but specialised in fine earthenwares and stonewares that had many of the same qualities, but were considerably cheaper. He made great efforts to keep the designs of his wares in tune with current fashion. He was an early adopter of transfer printing which gave similar effects to hand-painting for a far lower cost. Meeting the demands of the consumer revolution that helped drive the Industrial Revolution in Britain, Wedgwood is credited as a pioneer of modern marketing. He pioneered direct mail, money-back guarantees, self-service, free delivery, buy one get one free, and illustrated catalogues.\nA prominent abolitionist fighting slavery, Wedgwood is remembered too for his \"Am I Not a Man and a Brother?\" anti-slavery medallion, which had been commissioned by Joseph Hooper, a founder of the Society for Effecting the Abolition of the Slave Trade. The medallion used the design from that society.\nWedgwood was a member of the Darwin\u2013Wedgwood family, and he was the grandfather of Charles and Emma Darwin.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nThere were several related Wedgwood families in the village of Burslem, which around 1650 was the main centre of Staffordshire Potteries. Each pot-works had one bottle kiln. Thomas Wedgwood set up the Churchyard Works, near St John's parish church. In 1679 the business went to his son of the same name, master potter and churchwarden who bought a family pew, whose son Thomas, born in 1685, married Mary Stringer around 1710. She was the daughter of Josiah Stringer, a dissenting minister whose church had been outlawed by the Corporation Act, but preached occasionally. The young Thomas and Mary moved to a small pot-works producing moulded ware, then after his father died in 1716 they moved back to the Churchyard Works. Their first son, Thomas, was born in 1716, Catherine was born in 1726, and Josiah was their thirteenth and last child.\nThe children were baptised in the parish church; Josiah was baptised on 12 July 1730, probably his date of birth. Though her husband continued to occupy the pew, Mary brought them up with the values taught by her father, who held that \"knowledge based on reason, experience, and experiment was preferable to dogma.\" Josiah went with the others to dame school then, around 1737 when able to walk to and from Newcastle-under-Lyme about distant, he went with them to the school there of Mr and Mrs Blunt, who were reputably Puritans.\nAfter his father died in June 1739, Josiah finished school then, at about the usual age, began an informal apprenticeship and learnt to \"throw\" pots on the potter's wheel. When nearly twelve, he suffered a severe bout of smallpox which affected his right knee, but recovered sufficiently to get a formal indenture on 11 November 1744, serving as an apprentice potter under his eldest brother Thomas, who had taken over the Churchyard Works. Josiah resumed potter's wheel work for a year or two until his knee pains returned, causing him to turn to moulded ware and small ornaments. His brother thought his ideas of improvements unnecessary, and turned down his proposed partnership, so in 1751 or 1752 Josiah worked as a partner and manager in a pot-works near Stoke.\nLate life.\nSeveral potters locally used practical chemistry to innovate, and Wedgwood very soon went into partnership with Thomas Whieldon, who made high value small items such as snuff boxes. After six months of research and preparation, Wedgwood developed an exceptionally brilliant green glaze, and there was immediate demand for products with this glaze. Like his partner, Wedgwood occasionally took samples to Birmingham wholesalers to get orders, making business contacts. Unfortunately a knee injury spread to general inflammation, forcing him to convalesce in his room for several months. He took this as an opportunity to extend his education, reading literature and science books. His studies were helped by repeated visits from Wiliam Willet, minister of Newcastle-under-Lyme Meeting House, who had married Wedgwood's sister Catherine in 1754; \"a man of extensive learning and general acquirements\". Josiah attended this English Presbyterian chapel, later known as Unitarian, and was a friend of Willet.\nAround 1759, Wedgwood expanded his Burslem business, renting Ivy House Works and cottage from his distant cousins John and Thomas. They were often visited by their brother Richard Wedgwood, a wealthy Congleton cheesemonger, along with his daughter Sarah. She had been well educated, as was Unitarian practice, soon \"Jos\" wrote to his \"loving Sally\".\nOn a business trip in 1762, Wedgwood had another knee accident. After attention from a surgeon, he was accommodated by Thomas Bentley, who would become his close business associate. While recuperating, he met the chemist Joseph Priestley, who became a close friend, and discussed his dissenting theological ideas. In May Wedgwood began a long correspondence with Bentley, writing from Burslem, and moved into larger premises, the Brick House Works and dwelling. During negotiations for the proposed Trent and Mersey Canal, Wedgwood met and befriended Erasmus Darwin (Robert's father), whose family long remembered as saying that Unitarianism was \"a feather-bed to catch a falling Christian\". After more problems with his knee, Wedgwood had his leg amputated on 28 May 1768.\nThe Etruria Works built at the canal opened in June 1769, in July the family moved there. For several months they stayed in Little Etruria, a house built for Bentley's use, then they moved into the just completed Etruria Hall.\nMarriage and children.\nWedgwood had wooed his distant cousin Sarah (1734\u20131815) since first meeting her, but her father Richard wanted to ensure his prospective son-in-law had sufficient means, and insisted on long negotiation by attorneys over the marriage settlement. Then, \"Jos\" and \"Sally\" were married on 25 January 1764 at Astbury parish church, near Congleton. They had eight children:\nAs a Unitarian, aware of legal constraints on nonconformists getting education, Wedgwood supported dissenting academies such as Warrington Academy, where he gave lectures on chemistry, and was made a professor of metallurgy. The older children first went to school in 1772; the boys to Hindley, while Sukey went to a dame school in Lancashire along with his niece, the daughter of Mrs. Willet. In 1774 he sent his son John to the Bolton boarding school run by the Unitarian minister Philip Holland, followed by young Josiah the next year, and Tom in 1779.\nCareer and work.\nPottery.\nWedgwood was keenly interested in the scientific advances of his day and it was this interest that underpinned his adoption of its approach and methods to revolutionise the quality of his pottery. His unique glazes began to distinguish his wares from anything else on the market.\nBy 1763, he was receiving orders from the highest-ranking people, including Queen Charlotte. Wedgwood convinced her to let him name the line of pottery she had purchased \"Queen's Ware\", and trumpeted the royal association in his paperwork and stationery. Anything Wedgwood made for the Queen was automatically exhibited before it was delivered. In 1764, he received his first order from abroad. Wedgwood marketed his Queen's Ware at affordable prices, everywhere in the world British trading ships sailed. In 1767 he wrote, \"The demand for this sd. Creamcolour, Alias, Queen Ware, Alias, Ivory, still increases \u2013 It is amazing how rapidly the use of it has spread all most [\"sic\"] over the whole Globe.\" \nHe first opened a warehouse at Charles Street, Mayfair in London as early as 1765 and it soon became an integral part of his sales organization. In two years, his trade had outgrown his rooms in Grosvenor Square. In 1767, Wedgwood and Bentley drew up an agreement to divide decorative wares between them, the domestic wares being sold on Wedgwood's behalf. A special display room was built to beguile the fashionable company. Wedgwood's in fact had become one of the most fashionable meeting places in London. His workers had to work day and night to satisfy the demand, and the crowds of visitors showed no sign of abating. The proliferating decoration, the exuberant colours, and the universal gilding of rococo were banished, the splendours of baroque became distasteful; the intricacies of \"chinoiserie\" lost their favour. The demand was for purity, simplicity and antiquity. To encourage this outward spread of fashion and to speed it on its way Wedgwood set up warehouses and showrooms at Bath, Liverpool and Dublin in addition to his showrooms at Etruria and in Westminster. Great care was taken in timing the openings, and new goods were held back to increase their effect.\nThe most important of Wedgwood's early achievements in vase production was the perfection of the black stoneware body, which he called \"basalt\". This body could imitate the colour and shapes of Etruscan or Greek vases which were being excavated in Italy. In 1769, \"vases was all the cry\" in London; he opened a new factory called Etruria, north of Stoke. Wedgwood became what he wished to be: \"Vase Maker General to the Universe\". Around 1771, he started to experiment with Jasperware, but he did not advertise this new product for a couple of years.\nSir George Strickland, 6th Baronet, was asked for advice on getting models from Rome. Gilding was to prove unpopular, and around 1772, Wedgwood reduced the amount of \"offensive gilding\" in response to suggestions from Sir William Hamilton. When English society found the uncompromisingly naked figure of the classics \"too warm\" for their taste, and the ardor of the Greek gods too readily apparent, Wedgwood was quick to cloak their pagan immodesty \u2013 gowns for the girls and fig leaves for the gods were usually sufficient. Just as he felt that his flowerpots would sell more if they were called \"Duchess of Devonshire flowerpots\", his creamware more if called Queensware, so he longed for Brown, James Wyatt, and the brothers Adam to lead the architect in the use of his chimneypieces and for George Stubbs to lead the way in the use of Wedgwood plaques.\nWedgwood hoped to monopolise the aristocratic market and thus win for his wares a special social \"cachet\" that would filter to all classes of society. Wedgwood fully realised the value of such a lead and made the most of it by giving his pottery the name of its patron: Queensware, Royal Pattern, Russian pattern, Bedford, Oxford and Chetwynd vases for instance. Whether they owned the original or merely possessed a Wedgwood copy mattered little to Wedgwood's customers. In 1773 they published the first \"Ornamental Catalogue\", an illustrated catalogue of shapes. A plaque, in Wedgwood's blue pottery style, marking the site of his London showrooms between 1774 and 1795 in Wedgwood Mews, is located at 12, Greek Street, London, W1.\nIn 1773, Empress Catherine the Great ordered the (Green) Frog Service from Wedgwood, consisting of 952 pieces and over a thousand original paintings, for the Kekerekeksinen Palace (\"palace on a frog swamp\" ), later known as Chesme Palace. Most of the painting was carried out in Wedgwood's decorating studio at Chelsea. Its display, Wedgwood thought, 'would bring an immence [\"sic\"] number of People of Fashion into our Rooms. For over a month the fashionable world thronged the rooms and blocked the streets with their carriages. (Catharine paid \u00a32,700. It can still be seen in the Hermitage Museum.) Strictly uneconomical in themselves, these productions offered huge advertising value. \nLater years.\nAs a leading industrialist, Wedgwood was a major backer of the Trent and Mersey Canal dug between the River Trent and River Mersey, during which time he became friends with Erasmus Darwin. Later that decade, his burgeoning business caused him to move from the smaller Ivy Works to the newly built Etruria Works, which would run for 180 years. The factory was named after the Etruria district of Italy, where black porcelain dating to Etruscan times was being excavated. Wedgwood found this porcelain inspiring, and his first major commercial success was its duplication with what he called \"Black Basalt\". He combined experiments in his art and in the technique of mass production with an interest in improved roads, canals, schools, and living conditions. At Etruria, he even built a village for his workers. The motto, \"Sic fortis Etruria crevit\" (\"Thus Etruria grew strong\"), was inscribed over the main entrance to the works.\nNot long after the new works opened, continuing trouble with his smallpox-afflicted knee made necessary the amputation of his right leg. In 1780, his long-time business partner Thomas Bentley died, and Wedgwood turned to Darwin for help in running the business. As a result of the close association that grew up between the Wedgwood and Darwin families, Josiah's eldest daughter would later marry Erasmus' son.\nTo clinch his position as leader of the new fashion, he sought out the famous Barberini vase as the final test of his technical skill. Wedgwood's obsession was to duplicate the Portland Vase, a blue-and-white glass vase dating to the first century BC. He worked on the project for three years, eventually producing what he considered a satisfactory copy in 1789.\nIn 1784, Wedgwood was exporting nearly 80% of his total produce. By 1790, he had sold his wares in every city in Europe. To give his customers a greater feeling of the rarity of his goods, he strictly limited the number of jaspers on display in his rooms at any given time, a sales technique detailed by Cambridge professor Neil McKendrick in \"Josiah Wedgwood: An Eighteenth-Century Entrepreneur in Salesmanship and Marketing Techniques\".\nHe was elected to the Royal Society in 1783 for the development of the pyrometric device (a type of pyrometer) working on the principle of clay contraction (see Wedgwood scale for details) to measure the high temperatures which are reached in kilns during the firing of ceramics.\nHe was an active member of the Lunar Society of Birmingham, often held at Erasmus Darwin House, and is remembered on the Moonstones in Birmingham.\nDeath.\nLeaving his company and his fortune to his children, Wedgwood died at home, probably of cancer of the jaw, in 1795. He was buried three days later in the parish church of Stoke-upon-Trent. Seven years later a marble memorial tablet commissioned by his sons was installed there.\nLegacy and influence.\nOne of the wealthiest entrepreneurs of the 18th century, Wedgwood created goods to meet the demands of the consumer revolution and growth in prosperity that helped drive the Industrial Revolution in Britain. He is credited as a pioneer of modern marketing, specifically direct mail, money-back guarantees, travelling salesmen, carrying pattern boxes for display, self-service, free delivery, buy one get one free, and illustrated catalogues. He is the subject of Brian Dolan's 2004 book, \"Wedgwood: The First Tycoon\", in which Dolan explains how he revolutionised the business model with innovations that have continued into the present.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"[Wedgwood] is someone who commercialised creativity. He made an industry of his talent.\"\n \u2014 Sir Howard Stringer, chairman of Sony Corporation, 2012.\nFor devising a number of sales methods, historian Judith Flanders in \"The New York Times\" called him \"among the greatest and most innovative retailers the world has ever seen\". He is also noted as an early adopter/founder of managerial accounting principles by Anthony Hopwood, professor of accounting and financial management at the London School of Economics, in \"The Archaeology of Accounting Systems\". The V&amp;A historian Tristram Hunt called Wedgwood a \"difficult, brilliant, creative entrepreneur whose personal drive and extraordinary gifts changed the way we work and live.\" The Adam Smith Institute states, \"Steve Jobs and Elon Musk are the spiritual heirs of Josiah Wedgwood, developing and promoting the new products and processes that will enrich our world with new opportunities\".\nHe was a friend, and commercial rival, of the potter John Turner the elder; their works have sometimes been misattributed. For the further comfort of his foreign buyers he employed French-, German-, Italian- and Dutch-speaking clerks and answered their letters in their native tongue.\nWedgwood belonged to the fifth generation of a family of potters whose traditional occupation continued through another five generations. Wedgwood's company is still a famous name in pottery (as part of the Fiskars group), and \"Wedgwood China\" is sometimes used as a term for his Jasperware, the coloured pottery with applied relief decoration (usually white). As early as 1774, Wedgwood began preserving samples of all the company's works for posterity, with the collection later put into the Wedgwood Museum. In 2009, the museum won a UK Art Fund Prize for Museums and Art Galleries (Museum of the Year) for its displays of Wedgwood pottery, skills, designs and artefacts. In 2011, the archive of the museum was inscribed in UNESCO's UK Memory of the World Register.\nAbolitionism.\nWedgwood was a prominent slavery abolitionist. His anti-slavery medallion, which had been commissioned by Joseph Hooper, a founder of the Society for Effecting the Abolition of the Slave Trade, brought public attention to abolitionism. The actual design of the cameo was probably done by either William Hackwood or Henry Webber who were modellers at his factory. \nWedgwood mass-produced cameos depicting the seal for the Society for Effecting the Abolition of the Slave Trade and had them widely distributed, which thereby became a popular and celebrated image. The Wedgwood anti-slavery medallion was, according to the BBC, \"the most famous image of a black person in all of 18th-century art\". Thomas Clarkson wrote: \"ladies wore them in bracelets, and others had them fitted up in an ornamental manner as pins for their hair. At length the taste for wearing them became general, and thus fashion, which usually confines itself to worthless things, was seen for once in the honourable office of promoting the cause of justice, humanity and freedom\".\nThe design on the medallion became popular and was used elsewhere: large-scale copies were painted to hang on walls and it was used on clay tobacco pipes.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16296", "revid": "35383775", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16296", "title": "Supreme Court of Judicature Act 1873", "text": "1873 UK law reorganising the English court system\nThe Supreme Court of Judicature Act 1873 (36 &amp; 37 Vict. c. 66) (sometimes known as the Judicature Act 1873) was an act of the Parliament of the United Kingdom in 1873. It reorganised the English court system to establish the High Court and the Court of Appeal, and also originally provided for the abolition of the judicial functions of the House of Lords with respect to England. It would have retained those functions in relation to Scotland and Ireland for the time being. However, the Gladstone Liberal government fell in 1874 before the act entered into force, and the succeeding Disraeli Conservative government suspended the entry into force of the act by means of the Supreme Court of Judicature (Commencement) Act 1874 (37 &amp; 38 Vict. c. 83) and the Supreme Court of Judicature Act 1875 (38 &amp; 39 Vict. c. 77).\nHistory.\nThe legislation for the act was drafted by the Judicature Commission which was chaired by Lord Chancellor Hatherley. Other members of the commission included judge George Bramwell, lawyers Sir John Hollams, Sir Robert Collier, and John Burgess Karslake, and parliament member George Ward Hunt.\nLiberal view.\nOne of the reasons that the Liberal government under Gladstone wanted to abolish the judicial aspect of the House of Lords was that it was concerned for the poor quality of judges at this court. Judges at the House of Lords secured their position by mere virtue of the fact that their fathers were hereditary peers and so individuals would automatically inherit seats in the upper house rather than securing their position through merit. Therefore, some of the best lawyers in the land were prohibited from sitting as judges in the upper house simply because of their parentage.\nConservative view.\nHowever, under the Conservative government, the 1874 and 1875 acts retained the judicial aspect of the House of Lords and ensured the quality of judicial appointments to the House of Lords by legislating under the Appellate Jurisdiction Act 1876 (39 &amp; 40 Vict. c. 59), for the mechanism of law lords. The reigning monarch could appoint any individual to be a peer and thus a judge in the House of Lords. These judicial life peers would hold seats only for the duration of their life; their seat would not pass through their inheritance to their son. Thus, Queen Victoria and subsequent monarchs were able to appoint leading lawyers to adjudicate in the House of Lords by making them life peers.\nProvisions.\nShort title, commencement and extent.\nSection 1 of the act provided that the act may be cited the \"Supreme Court of Judicature Act, 1873\".\nSection 2 of the act provided that the act would come into force on 2 November 1874. This act was repealed and replaced was repealed and replaced by section 2 of the Supreme Court of Judicature (Commencement) Act 1874 (37 &amp; 38 Vict. c. 83). Section 2 of the Supreme Court of Judicature Act 1875 (38 &amp; 39 Vict. c. 77) provided that the act would come into force on 1 November 1875, except any provision of that act declared to take effect before the commencement of the act and except sections 20, 21 and 25, which would come into force on 1 November 1876.\nThe preamble to the act provided that the act would extend to England and Wales.\nAppellate Jurisdiction Act 1876.\nLord Cairns, Disraeli's Lord Chancellor, sought to remove the House of Lords jurisdiction for Scottish and Irish appeals as well, which would have completely removed its judicial jurisdiction. However, the Lord Chancellor could not muster the necessary support in Parliament for the bill as originally proposed in 1874 or when it was reintroduced in 1875. Finally, when it became clear that the English legal profession was firmly opposed to the reform proposals, the Appellate Jurisdiction Act 1876 (39 &amp; 40 Vict. c. 59) removed the provisions for the abolition of the judicial functions of the House of Lords, although it retained the provisions that established the High Court and the Court of Appeal.\nSubsequent developments.\nThe whole act, except sections 25(2), 46, 64 and 66 of the act, was repealed by section 226(1) of, and the sixth schedule to the Supreme Court of Judicature (Consolidation) Act 1925 (15 &amp; 16 Geo. 5. c. 49).\nSection 25(2) of the act was repealed by section 34(4) of, and the schedule to, the Limitation Act 1939 (2 &amp; 3 Geo. 6. c. 21).\nSection 46 of the act ceased to have effect by section 34(1) of, and schedule 2 to, the Administration of Justice Act 1965.\nSection 64 of the act was repealed by section 5 of, and schedule 5 to, the Rules of the Supreme Court (Revision) 1962 (SI 1962/2145).\nSection 66 of the act, being the only repealed section of the act, was repealed by section 1(2) of, and schedule 2 of the Rules of the Supreme Court (Revision) 1965 (SI 1965/1776).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16299", "revid": "320236", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16299", "title": "Johann Sigmund", "text": ""}
{"id": "16300", "revid": "51042391", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16300", "title": "Julian (emperor)", "text": "Roman emperor from 361 to 363, Neoplatonic philosopher\nJulian (; ; 331 \u2013 26 June 363) was the Caesar of the West from 355 to 360 and Roman emperor from 361 to 363, as well as a notable philosopher and author in Greek. His rejection of Christianity, and his promotion of Neoplatonic Hellenism and persecution of Christians, caused him to be remembered as Julian the Apostate in the Christian tradition.\nA nephew of Constantine the Great, Julian was one of few in the imperial family to survive the purges and civil wars during the reign of Constantius II, his cousin. Julian became an orphan as a child after his father was executed in 337, and spent much of his life under Constantius's close supervision. However, the emperor allowed Julian freedom to pursue an education in the Greek-speaking east. In 355, Constantius II summoned Julian to court and appointed him to rule Gaul. Julian was successful in his rule, defeating and counterattacking Germanic raids across the Rhine and encouraging the provinces' return to prosperity. In 360, he was proclaimed emperor by his soldiers at Lutetia (Paris), sparking a civil war with Constantius. However, Constantius died before the two could face each other in battle, having named Julian as his successor to prevent further bloodshed.\nIn 363, Julian embarked on an ambitious campaign against the Sasanian Empire. The campaign was initially successful, securing a victory outside Ctesiphon in Mesopotamia. However, he did not attempt to besiege the capital. Julian instead moved into Persia's heartland, but he soon faced supply problems and was forced to retreat northwards while being ceaselessly harassed by Persian skirmishers. During the Battle of Samarra, Julian was mortally wounded. He was succeeded by Jovian, a senior officer in the imperial guard, who was obliged to cede territory, including Nisibis, in order to save the trapped Roman forces. Julian and Jovian were the last sole emperors to rule the whole Empire for their entire reign, after which it was permanently divided between a Western and Eastern court.\nJulian was the last non-Christian ruler of the Roman Empire, and he believed that it was necessary to restore the Empire's ancient Roman values and traditions in order to save it from dissolution. He purged the top-heavy state bureaucracy, and attempted to revive traditional Roman religious practices at the expense of Christianity. His efforts to build a Third Temple in Jerusalem were probably intended to harm Christianity rather than please Jews. Julian also forbade Christians from teaching and learning classical texts.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEarly life.\nJulian, whose full name was Flavius Claudius Julianus, was born at Constantinople, probably in 331, into the family of the reigning emperor, Constantine\u00a0I, and was the first attested individual to be born in that city after its refounding. His father was Julius Constantius, Constantine's younger half-brother, and his mother was a Bithynian noble named Basilina, daughter of a high-ranking bureaucrat, Julianus, who had served as praetorian prefect and head of government under the late emperor Licinius. Julian's mother died shortly after he was born, and he spent his childhood in Constantinople, forming a lasting attachment to the city. Julian was probably raised with Greek as his first language, and, being the nephew of Rome's first Christian emperor, he was brought up under the Christian faith.\nIn the turmoil after the death of Constantine in 337, in order to establish himself and his brothers, Julian's cousin Constantius II appears to have led a massacre of most of Julian's close relatives. Constantius II allegedly ordered the murders of many descendants from the second marriage of Constantius Chlorus and Theodora, leaving only Constantius and his brothers Constantine II and Constans I, and their cousins, Julian and Constantius Gallus (Julian's half-brother), as the surviving males related to Emperor Constantine. Constantius II, Constans I, and Constantine II were proclaimed joint emperors, each ruling a portion of Roman territory. Julian and Gallus were excluded from public life, were strictly guarded in their youth, and given a Christian education. They were likely saved by their youth. If Julian's later writings are to be believed, Constantius would later be tormented with guilt at the massacre of 337.\nInitially growing up in Bithynia, raised by his maternal grandmother, at the age of seven Julian was under the guardianship of Eusebius, the semi-Arian Christian Bishop of Nicomedia, and taught by Mardonius, a Gothic eunuch, about whom he later wrote warmly. After Eusebius died in 342, both Julian and Gallus were transferred to the imperial estate of Macellum in Cappadocia. Here Julian met the Christian bishop George of Cappadocia, who lent him books from the classical tradition. At the age of 18, the exile was lifted and he dwelt briefly in Constantinople and Nicomedia. He became a lector, a minor office in the Christian church, and his later writings show a detailed knowledge of the Bible, likely acquired in his early life.\nJulian's conversion from Christianity to paganism happened at around the age of 20. Looking back on his life in 362, Julian wrote that he had spent twenty years in the way of Christianity and twelve in the true way, i.e., the way of Helios. Julian began his study of Neoplatonism in Asia Minor in 351, at first under Aedesius, the philosopher, and then Aedesius' student Eusebius of Myndus. It was from Eusebius that Julian learned of the teachings of Maximus of Ephesus, whom Eusebius criticized for his more mystical form of Neoplatonic theurgy. Eusebius related his meeting with Maximus, in which the theurgist invited him into the temple of Hecate and, chanting a hymn, caused a statue of the goddess to smile and laugh, and her torches to ignite. Eusebius reportedly told Julian that he \"must not marvel at any of these things, even as I marvel not, but rather believe that the thing of the highest importance is that purification of the soul which is attained by reason.\" In spite of Eusebius' warnings regarding the \"impostures of witchcraft and magic that cheat the senses\" and \"the works of conjurers who are insane men led astray into the exercise of earthly and material powers\", Julian was intrigued, and sought out Maximus as his new mentor. According to the historian Eunapius, when Julian left Eusebius, he told his former teacher \"farewell, and devote yourself to your books. You have shown me the man I was in search of.\"\nConstantine II died in 340 when he attacked his brother Constans. Constans in turn fell in 350 in the war against the usurper Magnentius. This left Constantius II as the sole remaining emperor. In need of support, in 351 he made Julian's half-brother, Gallus, caesar of the East, while Constantius II himself turned his attention westward to Magnentius, whom he defeated decisively that year. In 354 Gallus, who had imposed a rule of terror over the territories under his command, was executed. Julian was summoned to Constantius' court in Mediolanum (Milan) in 354, and held for a year, under suspicion of treasonable intrigue, first with his brother and then with Claudius Silvanus; he was cleared, in part because Empress Eusebia intervened on his behalf, and he was permitted to study in Athens (Julian expresses his gratitude to the empress in his third oration). While there, Julian became acquainted with two men who later became both bishops and saints: Gregory of Nazianzus and Basil the Great. In the same period, Julian was also initiated into the Eleusinian Mysteries, which he would later try to restore.\nCaesar in Gaul.\nAfter dealing with the rebellions of Magnentius and Silvanus, Constantius felt he needed a permanent representative in Gaul. In 355, Julian was summoned to appear before the emperor in Mediolanum and on 6 November was made \"Caesar\" of the West, marrying Constantius' sister, Helena. Constantius, after his experience with Gallus, intended his representative to be more a figurehead than an active participant in events, so he packed Julian off to Gaul with a small retinue, assuming his prefects in Gaul would keep Julian in check. At first reluctant to trade his scholarly life for war and politics, Julian eventually took every opportunity to involve himself in the affairs of Gaul. In the following years he learned how to lead and then run an army, through a series of campaigns against the Germanic tribes that had settled on both sides of the Rhine.\nCampaigns against Germanic kingdoms.\nDuring his first campaign in 356, Julian led an army to the Rhine, where he engaged the inhabitants and recovered several towns that had fallen into Frankish hands, including Colonia Agrippina (Cologne). With success under his belt he withdrew for the winter to Gaul, distributing his forces to protect various towns, and choosing the small town of Senon near Verdun to await the spring. This turned out to be a tactical error, for he was left with insufficient forces to defend himself when a large contingent of Franks besieged the town and Julian was virtually held captive there for several months, until his general Marcellus deigned to lift the siege. Relations between Julian and Marcellus seem to have been poor. Constantius accepted Julian's report of events and Marcellus was replaced as \"magister equitum\" by Severus.\nThe following year saw a combined operation planned by Constantius to regain control of the Rhine from the Germanic peoples who had spilt across the river onto the west bank. From the south his \"magister peditum\" Barbatio was to come from Milan and amass forces at Augst (near the Rhine bend), then set off north with 25,000 soldiers; Julian with 13,000 troops would move east from Durocortorum (Rheims). However, while Julian was in transit, a group of Laeti attacked Lugdunum (Lyon) and Julian was delayed in order to deal with them. This left Barbatio unsupported and deep in Alamanni territory, so he felt obliged to withdraw, retracing his steps. Thus ended the coordinated operation against the Germanic peoples.\nWith Barbatio safely out of the picture, King Chnodomarius led a confederation of Alamanni forces against Julian and Severus at the Battle of Argentoratum. The Romans were heavily outnumbered and during the heat of battle a group of 600 horsemen on the right wing deserted, yet, taking full advantage of the limitations of the terrain, the Romans were overwhelmingly victorious. The enemy was routed and driven into the river. King Chnodomarius was captured and later sent to Constantius in Mediolanum. Ammianus, who was a participant in the battle, portrays Julian in charge of events on the battlefield and describes how the soldiers, because of this success, acclaimed Julian attempting to make him Augustus, an acclamation he rejected, rebuking them. He later rewarded them for their valor.\nRather than chase the routed enemy across the Rhine, Julian now proceeded to follow the Rhine north, the route he followed the previous year on his way back to Gaul. At Moguntiacum (Mainz), however, he crossed the Rhine in an expedition that penetrated deep into what is today Germany, and forced three local kingdoms to submit. This action showed the Alamanni that Rome was once again present and active in the area. On his way back to winter quarters in Paris he dealt with a band of Franks who had taken control of some abandoned forts along the river Meuse.\nIn 358, Julian gained victories over the Salian Franks on the Lower Rhine, settling them in Toxandria in the Roman Empire, north of today's city of Tongeren, and over the Chamavi, who were expelled back to Hamaland.\nTaxation and administration.\nAt the end of 357 Julian, with the prestige of his victory over the Alamanni to give him confidence, prevented a tax increase by the Gallic praetorian prefect Florentius and personally took charge of the province of \"Belgica Secunda\". This was Julian's first experience with civil administration, where his views were influenced by his liberal education in Greece. Properly it was a role that belonged to the praetorian prefect. However, Florentius and Julian often clashed over the administration of Gaul. Julian's first priority, as \"Caesar\" and nominal ranking commander in Gaul, was to drive out the barbarians who had breached the Rhine frontier. He sought to win over the support of the civil population, which was necessary for his operations in Gaul, and also to show his largely Germanic army the benefits of Imperial rule. Julian therefore felt it was necessary to rebuild stable and peaceful conditions in the devastated cities and countryside. For this reason, Julian clashed with Florentius over the latter's support of tax increases, as mentioned above, and Florentius's own corruption in the bureaucracy.\nConstantius attempted to maintain some modicum of control over his \"Caesar\", which explains his removal of Julian's close adviser Saturninius Secundus Salutius from Gaul. His departure stimulated the writing of Julian's oration, \"Consolation Upon the Departure of Salutius\".\nRebellion in Paris.\nIn the fourth year of Julian's stay in Gaul, the Sassanid emperor, Shapur II, invaded Mesopotamia and took the city of Amida after a 73-day siege. In February 360, Constantius II ordered more than half of Julian's Gallic troops to join his eastern army, the order by-passing Julian and going directly to the military commanders. Although Julian at first attempted to expedite the order, it provoked an insurrection by troops of the \"Petulantes\", who had no desire to leave Gaul. According to the historian Zosimus, the army officers were those responsible for distributing an anonymous tract expressing complaints against Constantius as well as fearing for Julian's ultimate fate. Notably absent at the time was the prefect Florentius, who was seldom far from Julian's side, though now he was kept busy organizing supplies in Vienne and away from any strife that the order could cause. Julian would later blame him for the arrival of the order from Constantius. Ammianus Marcellinus even suggested that the fear of Julian gaining more popularity than himself caused Constantius to send the order on the urging of Florentius.\nThe troops proclaimed Julian \"Augustus\" in Paris, and this in turn led to a very swift military effort to secure or win the allegiance of others. Although the full details are unclear, there is evidence to suggest that Julian may have at least partially stimulated the insurrection. If so, he went back to business as usual in Gaul, for, from June to August of that year, Julian led a successful campaign against the Attuarian Franks. In November, Julian began openly using the title \"Augustus,\" even issuing coins with the title, sometimes with Constantius, sometimes without. He celebrated his fifth year in Gaul with a big show of games.\nIn the spring of 361, Julian led his army into the territory of the Alamanni, where he captured their king, Vadomarius. Julian claimed that Vadomarius had been in league with Constantius, encouraging him to raid the borders of Raetia. Julian then divided his forces, sending one column to Raetia, one to northern Italy and the third he led down the Danube on boats. His forces claimed control of Illyricum and his general, Nevitta, secured the pass of Succi into Thrace. He was now well out of his comfort zone and on the road to civil war. (Julian would state in late November that he set off down this road \"because, having been declared a public enemy, I meant to frighten him [Constantius] merely, and that our quarrel should result in intercourse on more friendly terms...\")\nHowever, in June, forces loyal to Constantius captured the city of Aquileia on the north Adriatic coast, an event that threatened to cut Julian off from the rest of his forces, while Constantius's troops marched towards him from the east. Aquileia was subsequently besieged by 23,000 men loyal to Julian. All Julian could do was sit it out in Naissus, the city of Constantine's birth, waiting for news and writing letters to various cities in Greece justifying his actions (of which only the letter to the Athenians has survived in its entirety). Civil war was avoided only by the death on 3 November of Constantius, who, in his last will, is alleged by some sources to have recognized Julian as his rightful successor.\nReign.\nOn 11 December 361, Julian entered Constantinople as sole emperor and, despite his rejection of Christianity, his first political act was to preside over Constantius' Christian burial, escorting the body to the Church of the Apostles, where it was placed alongside that of Constantine. This act was a demonstration of his lawful right to the throne. He is also now thought to have been responsible for the building of Santa Costanza on a Christian site just outside Rome as a mausoleum for his wife Helena and sister-in-law Constantina.\nThe new Emperor rejected the style of administration of his immediate predecessors. He blamed Constantine for the state of the administration and for having abandoned the traditions of the past. He made no attempt to restore the tetrarchal system begun under Diocletian, nor did he seek to rule as an absolute autocrat. His own philosophic notions led him to idealize the reigns of Hadrian and Marcus Aurelius. In his first panegyric to Constantius, Julian described the ideal ruler as being essentially \"primus inter pares\" (\"first among equals\"), operating under the same laws as his subjects. While in Constantinople, therefore, it was not strange to see Julian frequently active in the Senate, participating in debates and making speeches, placing himself at the level of the other members of the Senate.\nHe viewed the royal court of his predecessors as inefficient, corrupt and expensive. Thousands of servants, eunuchs and superfluous officials were therefore summarily dismissed. He set up the Chalcedon tribunal to deal with the corruption of the previous administration under the supervision of \"magister militum\" Arbitio. Several high-ranking officials under Constantius, including the chamberlain Eusebius, were found guilty and executed. (Julian was conspicuously absent from the proceedings, perhaps signalling his displeasure at their necessity.) He continually sought to reduce what he saw as a burdensome and corrupt bureaucracy within the Imperial administration whether it involved civic officials, secret agents or the imperial postal service.\nAnother effect of Julian's political philosophy was that the authority of the cities was expanded at the expense of the imperial bureaucracy as Julian sought to reduce direct imperial involvement in urban affairs. For example, city land owned by the imperial government was returned to the cities, city council members were compelled to resume civic authority, often against their will, and the tribute in gold by the cities called the \"aurum coronarium\" was made voluntary rather than a compulsory tax. Additionally, arrears of land taxes were cancelled. This was a key reform reducing the power of corrupt imperial officials, as the unpaid taxes on land were often hard to calculate or higher than the value of the land itself. Forgiving back taxes both made Julian more popular and allowed him to increase collections of current taxes.\nWhile he ceded much of the authority of the imperial government to the cities, Julian also took more direct control himself. For example, new taxes and corv\u00e9es had to be approved by him directly rather than left to the judgement of the bureaucratic apparatus. Julian certainly had a clear idea of what he wanted Roman society to be, both in political as well as religious terms. The terrible and violent dislocation of the 3rd century meant that the Eastern Mediterranean had become the economic locus of the Empire. If the cities were treated as relatively autonomous local administrative areas, it would simplify the problems of imperial administration, which as far as Julian was concerned, should be focused on the administration of the law and defense of the empire's vast frontiers.\nIn replacing Constantius's political and civil appointees, Julian drew heavily from the intellectual and professional classes, or kept reliable holdovers, such as the rhetorician Themistius. His choice of consuls for the year 362 was more controversial. One was the very acceptable Claudius Mamertinus, previously the Praetorian prefect of Illyricum. The other, more surprising choice was Nevitta, Julian's trusted Frankish general. This latter appointment made overt the fact that an emperor's authority depended on the power of the army. Julian's choice of Nevitta appears to have been aimed at maintaining the support of the Western army which had acclaimed him.\nClash with the Antiochenes.\nAfter five months of dealings at the capital, Julian left Constantinople in May and moved to Antioch, arriving in mid-July and staying there for nine months before launching his fateful campaign against Persia in March 363. Antioch was a city favored by splendid temples along with a famous oracle of Apollo in nearby Daphne, which may have been one reason for his choosing to reside there. It had also been used in the past as a staging place for amassing troops, a purpose which Julian intended to follow.\nHis arrival on 18 July was well received by the Antiochenes, though it coincided with the celebration of the Adonia, a festival which marked the death of Adonis, so there was wailing and moaning in the streets\u2014not a good omen for an arrival.\nJulian soon discovered that wealthy merchants were causing food problems, apparently by hoarding food and selling it at high prices. He hoped that the curia would deal with the issue for the situation was headed for a famine. When the curia did nothing, he spoke to the city's leading citizens, trying to persuade them to take action. Thinking that they would do the job, he turned his attention to religious matters.\nHe tried to resurrect the ancient oracular spring of Castalia at the temple of Apollo at Delphi. After being advised that the bones of 3rd-century bishop Babylas were suppressing the god, he made a public-relations mistake in ordering the removal of the bones from the vicinity of the temple. The result was a massive Christian procession. Shortly after that, when the temple was destroyed by fire, Julian suspected the Christians and ordered stricter investigations than usual. He also shut up the chief Christian church of the city, before the investigations proved that the fire was the result of an accident.\nWhen the curia still took no substantial action in regards to the food shortage, Julian intervened, fixing the prices for grain and importing more from Egypt. Then landholders refused to sell theirs, claiming that the harvest was so bad that they had to be compensated with fair prices. Julian accused them of price gouging and forced them to sell. Various parts of Libanius' orations may suggest that both sides were justified to some extent; while Ammianus blames Julian for \"a mere thirst for popularity\".\nJulian's ascetic lifestyle was not popular either, since his subjects were accustomed to the idea of an all-powerful Emperor who placed himself well above them. Nor did he improve his dignity with his own participation in the ceremonial of bloody sacrifices.\nDavid Stone Potter said after nearly two millennia:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;They expected a man who was both removed from them by the awesome spectacle of imperial power, and would validate their interests and desires by sharing them from his Olympian height [...] He was supposed to be interested in what interested his people, and he was supposed to be dignified. He was not supposed to leap up and show his appreciation for a panegyric that it was delivered, as Julian had done on January 3, when Libanius was speaking, and ignore the chariot races.\nHe then tried to address public criticism and mocking of him by issuing a satire ostensibly on himself, called Misopogon or \"Beard Hater\". There he blames the people of Antioch for preferring that their ruler have his virtues in the face rather than in the soul.\nJulian's fellow pagans were of a divided mind about this habit of talking to his subjects on an equal footing: Ammianus Marcellinus saw in that only the foolish vanity of someone \"excessively anxious for empty distinction\", whose \"desire for popularity often led him to converse with unworthy persons\".\nOn leaving Antioch he appointed Alexander of Heliopolis as governor, a violent and cruel man whom the Antiochene Libanius, a friend of the emperor, admits on first thought was a \"dishonourable\" appointment. Julian himself described the man as \"undeserving\" of the position, but appropriate \"for the avaricious and rebellious people of Antioch\".\nPersian campaign.\nJulian's rise to \"Augustus\" was the result of military insurrection eased by Constantius's sudden death. This meant that, while he could count on the wholehearted support of the Western army which had aided his rise, the Eastern army was an unknown quantity originally loyal to the Emperor he had risen against; and though he had tried to woo it through the Chalcedon tribunal, to solidify his position in the eyes of the eastern army, he needed to lead its soldiers to victory. A campaign against the Sassanid Persians offered such an opportunity.\nAn audacious plan was formulated, the goal of which was to lay siege to the Sassanid capital city of Ctesiphon and definitively secure the eastern border. Yet the full motivation for this ambitious operation is, at best, unclear; there was no direct necessity for an invasion, as the Sassanids sent envoys in the hope of settling matters peacefully. Julian rejected this offer. Ammianus states that Julian longed for revenge on the Persians and that a certain desire for combat and glory also played a role in his decision to go to war.\nInto enemy territory.\nOn 5 March 363, despite a series of omens against the campaign, Julian departed from Antioch with about 65,000\u201383,000, or 80,000\u201390,000 men (the traditional number accepted by Gibbon is 95,000 effectives total), and headed north toward the Euphrates. En route he was met by embassies from various small powers offering assistance, none of which he accepted, though he did order the Armenian King Arsaces to muster an army and await instructions. He crossed the Euphrates near Hierapolis and moved eastward to Carrhae, giving the impression that his chosen route into Persian territory was down the Tigris. For this reason it seems he sent a force of 30,000 soldiers under Procopius and Sebastianus further eastward to devastate Media in conjunction with Armenian forces. This was where two earlier Roman campaigns had concentrated and where the main Persian forces were soon directed. Julian's strategy lay elsewhere, however. He had had a fleet built of over 1,000 ships at Samosata in order to supply his army for a march down the Euphrates and of 50 pontoon ships to facilitate river crossings. Procopius and the Armenians would march down the Tigris to meet Julian near Ctesiphon. Julian's ultimate aim seems to have been \"regime change\" by replacing king Shapur II with his brother Hormisdas.\nAfter feigning a march further eastward, Julian's army turned south to Circesium at the confluence of the Abora (Khabur) and the Euphrates arriving at the beginning of April. Passing Dura on 6 April, the army made good progress, bypassing towns after negotiations or besieging those which chose to oppose him. At the end of April the Romans captured the fortress of Pirisabora, which guarded the canal approach from the Euphrates to Ctesiphon on the Tigris. As the army marched toward the Persian capital, the Sassanids broke the dikes which crossed the land, turning it into marshland, slowing the progress of the Roman army.\nCtesiphon.\nBy mid-May, the army had reached the vicinity of the heavily fortified Persian capital, Ctesiphon, where Julian partially unloaded some of the fleet and had his troops ferried across the Tigris by night. \nThe Romans gained a tactical victory over the Persians before the gates of the city, driving them back into the city. However, the Persian capital was not taken. Concerned with the risk of becoming encircled and trapped within the city's walls, master-general Victor ordered his soldiers not to enter the open gates of the city in pursuit of the defeated Persians. Resultantly, the main Persian army was still at large and approaching, while the Romans lacked a clear strategic objective. In the council of war which followed, Julian's generals persuaded him not to mount a siege against the city, given the impregnability of its defenses and the fact that Shapur would soon arrive with a large force. Julian, not wanting to give up what he had gained and probably still hoping for the arrival of the column under Procopius and Sebastianus, set off east into the Persian interior, ordering the destruction of the fleet. This proved to be a hasty decision, for they were on the wrong side of the Tigris with no clear means of retreat and the Persians had begun to harass them from a distance, burning any food in the Romans' path. Julian had not brought adequate siege equipment, so there was nothing he could do when he found that the Persians had flooded the area behind him, forcing him to withdraw. A second council of war on 16 June 363 decided that the best course of action was to lead the army back to the safety of Roman borders, not through Mesopotamia, but northward to Corduene.\nDeath.\nDuring the withdrawal, Julian's forces suffered several attacks from Sassanid forces. In one such engagement on 26 June 363, the indecisive Battle of Samarra near Maranga in Mesopotamia, Julian was wounded when the Sassanid army raided his column. In the haste of pursuing the retreating enemy, Julian chose speed rather than caution, taking only his sword and leaving his coat of mail. He received a wound from a spear that reportedly pierced the lower lobe of his liver and intestines. The wound was not immediately deadly. Julian was treated by his personal physician, Oribasius of Pergamum, who seems to have made every attempt to treat the wound; this probably included the irrigation of the wound with a dark wine, and a procedure known as \"gastrorrhaphy\"\u2014\"i.e.,\" suturing of the damaged intestine. Despite these efforts, on the third day a major hemorrhage occurred and the emperor died during the night. Some Christian writers reported that his final words were \"Thou hast conquered, Galilean.\u201d As Julian wished, his body was buried outside Tarsus, though it was later moved to Constantinople.\nIn 364, Libanius stated that Julian was assassinated by a Christian who was one of his own soldiers; this charge is not corroborated by Ammianus Marcellinus or other contemporary historians. John Malalas reports that the supposed assassination was commanded by Basil of Caesarea. Fourteen years later, Libanius said that Julian was killed by a Saracen (Lakhmid) and this may have been confirmed by Julian's doctor Oribasius who, having examined the wound, said that it was from a spear used by a group of Lakhmid auxiliaries in Persian service. Later Christian historians propagated the tradition that Julian was killed by Saint Mercurius.\nLegacy.\nJulian was succeeded by the short-lived Emperor Jovian, who reestablished Christianity's privileged position throughout the Empire.\nLibanius says in his epitaph of the deceased emperor (18.304) that \"I have mentioned representations (of Julian); many cities have set him beside the images of the gods and honour him as they do the gods. Already a blessing has been besought of him in prayer, and it was not in vain. To such an extent has he literally ascended to the gods and received a share of their power from him themselves.\" However, no similar action was taken by the Roman central government, which would be more and more dominated by Christians in the ensuing decades.\nConsidered apocryphal is the report that his dying words were , or (\"You have won, Galilean\"), supposedly expressing his recognition that, with his death, Christianity would become the Empire's state religion. The phrase introduces the 1866 poem \"Hymn to Proserpine\", which was Algernon Charles Swinburne's elaboration of what a philosophic pagan might have felt at the triumph of Christianity. It also ends the Polish Romantic play \"The Undivine Comedy\" written in 1833 by Zygmunt Krasi\u0144ski.\nTomb.\nAs he had requested, Julian's body was buried in Tarsus. It lay in a tomb outside the city, across a road from that of Maximinus Daia.\nHowever, chronicler Zonaras says that at some \"later\" date his body was exhumed and reburied in or near the Church of the Holy Apostles in Constantinople, where Constantine and the rest of his family lay. His sarcophagus is listed as standing in a \"stoa\" there by Constantine VII. The church was demolished by the Ottomans after the fall of Constantinople in 1453. Today a sarcophagus of porphyry, believed by Jean Ebersolt to be Julian's, stands in the grounds of the Istanbul Archaeology Museum.\nReligious issues.\nBeliefs.\nJulian's personal religion was both pagan and philosophical; he viewed the traditional myths as allegories, in which the ancient gods were aspects of a philosophical divinity. The chief surviving sources are his works \"To King Helios\" and \"To the Mother of the Gods\", which were written as panegyrics, not theological treatises.\nAs the last pagan ruler of the Roman Empire, Julian's beliefs are of great interest for historians, but they are not in complete agreement. He learned theurgy from Maximus of Ephesus, a student of Iamblichus; his system bears some resemblance to the Neoplatonism of Plotinus; Polymnia Athanassiadi has brought new attention to his relations with Mithraism, although whether he was initiated into it remains debatable; and certain aspects of his thought (such as his reorganization of paganism under High Priests, and his fundamental monotheism) may show Christian influence. Some of these potential sources have not come down to us, and all of them influenced each other, which adds to the difficulties.\nAccording to one theory (that of Glen Bowersock in particular), Julian's paganism was highly eccentric and atypical because it was heavily influenced by an esoteric approach to Platonic philosophy sometimes identified as \"theurgy\" and also \"Neoplatonism\". Others (Rowland Smith, in particular) have argued that Julian's philosophical perspective was nothing unusual for a \"cultured\" pagan of his time, and, at any rate, that Julian's paganism was not limited to philosophy alone, and that he was deeply devoted to the same gods and goddesses as other pagans of his day.\nBecause of his Neoplatonist background, Julian accepted the creation of humanity as described in Plato's \"Timaeus\". Julian writes, \"when Zeus was setting all things in order there fell from him drops of sacred blood, and from them, as they say, arose the race of men.\" Further he writes, \"they who had the power to create one man and one woman only, were able to create many men and women at once...\" His view contrasts with the Christian belief that humanity is derived from the one pair, Adam and Eve. Elsewhere he argues against the single pair origin, indicating his disbelief, noting for example, \"how very different in their bodies are the Germans and Scythians from the Libyans and Ethiopians.\"\nThe Christian historian Socrates Scholasticus was of the opinion that Julian believed himself to be Alexander the Great \"in another body\" via transmigration of souls, \"in accordance with the teachings of Pythagoras and Plato\".\nThe diet of Julian is said to have been predominantly vegetable-based.\nRestoration of state paganism.\nAfter gaining the purple, Julian started a religious reformation of the empire, which was intended to restore the lost strength of the Roman state. He supported the restoration of Hellenistic polytheism as the state religion. His laws tended to target wealthy and educated Christians, and his aim was not to destroy Christianity but to drive the religion out of \"the governing classes of the empire\u2014much as Chinese Buddhism was driven back into the lower classes by a revived Confucian mandarinate in 13th century China.\"\nHe restored pagan temples which had been confiscated since Constantine's time, or simply appropriated by wealthy citizens; he repealed the stipends that Constantine had awarded to Christian bishops, and removed their other privileges, including a right to be consulted on appointments and to act as private courts. He also reversed some favors that had previously been given to Christians. For example, he reversed Constantine's declaration that Majuma, the port of Gaza, was a separate city. Majuma had a large Christian congregation while Gaza was still predominantly pagan.\nOn 4 February 362, Julian promulgated an edict to guarantee freedom of religion. This edict proclaimed that all the religions were equal before the law, and that the Roman Empire had to return to its original religious eclecticism, according to which the Roman state did not impose any religion on its provinces. The edict was seen as an act of favor toward the Jews, in order to upset the Christians.\nSince the persecution of Christians by past Roman Emperors had seemingly only strengthened Christianity, many of Julian's actions may have been designed to harass Christians and undermine their ability to organize resistance to the re-establishment of paganism in the empire. Julian's preference for a non-Christian and non-philosophical view of Iamblichus' theurgy seems to have convinced him that it was right to outlaw the Christian liturgy and demand the suppression of the Christian Holy Mysteries (Sacraments). \nIn his \"School Edict\", Julian required that all public teachers be approved by the Emperor; the state paid or supplemented much of their salaries. Ammianus Marcellinus explains this as intending to prevent Christian teachers from using pagan texts (such as the \"Iliad\", which was widely regarded as divinely inspired) that formed the core of classical education: \"If they want to learn literature, they have Luke and Mark: Let them go back to their churches and expound on them\", the edict says. This was an attempt to remove some of the influence of the Christian schools which at that time and later used ancient Greek literature in their teachings in their effort to present the Christian religion as being superior to paganism. The edict also dealt a severe financial blow to many Christian scholars, tutors, and teachers, as it deprived them of students.\nIn his \"Tolerance Edict\" of 362, Julian decreed the reopening of pagan temples, the restitution of confiscated temple properties, and the return from exile of \"heretical\" Christian bishops who had been censured or excommunicated by the Church. The latter was an instance of tolerance of different religious views, but it may also have been an attempt by Julian to foster schisms and divisions between his Christian rivals, since disputes over what constituted orthodox Catholic teaching could become quite fierce.\nPaganism's shift under Julian.\nJulian's popularity among the people and the army during his brief reign suggest that he might have brought paganism back to the fore of Roman public and private life. In fact, during his lifetime, neither pagan nor Christian ideology reigned supreme, and the greatest thinkers of the day argued about the merits and rationality of each religion. Most importantly for the pagan cause, though, Rome was still a predominantly pagan empire that had not wholly accepted Christianity.\nEven so, Julian's short reign did not stem the tide of Christianity. The emperor's ultimate failure can arguably be attributed to the many religious traditions and deities that paganism promulgated. Most pagans sought religious affiliations that were unique to their culture and people, and they had internal divisions that prevented them from creating any one 'pagan religion'. Indeed, the term pagan was simply a convenient appellation for Christians to lump together the believers of a system they opposed. In truth, there was no Roman religion, as modern observers would recognize it. Instead, paganism came from a system of observances that one historian has characterized as \"no more than a spongy mass of tolerance and tradition\".\nThis system of tradition had already shifted dramatically by the time Julian came to power; gone were the days of massive sacrifices honoring the gods. The communal festivals that involved sacrifice and feasting, which once united communities, now tore them apart\u2014Christian against pagan. Civic leaders did not even have the funds, much less the support, to hold religious festivals. Julian found the financial base that had supported these ventures (sacred temple funds) had been seized by his uncle Constantine to support the Christian Church. In all, Julian's short reign simply could not shift the feeling of inertia that had swept across the Empire. Christians had denounced sacrifice, stripped temples of their funds, and cut priests and magistrates off from the social prestige and financial benefits accompanying leading pagan positions in the past. Leading politicians and civic leaders had little motivation to rock the boat by reviving pagan festivals. Instead, they chose to adopt the middle ground by having ceremonies and mass entertainment that were religiously neutral.\nAfter witnessing the reign of two emperors bent on supporting the Church and stamping out paganism, it is understandable that pagans simply did not embrace Julian's idea of proclaiming their devotion to polytheism and their rejection of Christianity. Many chose to adopt a practical approach and not support Julian's public reforms actively for fear of a Christian revival. However, this apathetic attitude forced the emperor to shift central aspects of pagan worship. Julian's attempts to reinvigorate the people shifted the focus of paganism from a system of tradition to a religion with some of the same characteristics that he opposed in Christianity. For example, Julian attempted to introduce a tighter organization for the priesthood, with greater qualifications of character and service. Classical paganism simply did not accept this idea of priests as model citizens. Priests were elites with social prestige and financial power who organized festivals and helped pay for them. His attempts to create philanthropic institutions to rival the charitable activities of Christians were also unsuccessful, and Julian's attempt to impose moral strictness on the civic position of priesthood only made paganism more in tune with Christian morality, drawing it further from paganism's system of tradition.\nIndeed, this development of a pagan order created the foundations of a bridge of reconciliation over which paganism and Christianity could meet. Likewise, Julian's persecution of Christians, who by pagan standards were simply part of a different cult, was quite an un-pagan attitude that transformed paganism into a religion that accepted only one form of religious experience while excluding all others\u2014such as Christianity. In trying to compete with Christianity in this manner, Julian fundamentally changed the nature of pagan worship. That is, he made paganism a religion, whereas it once had been only a system of tradition.\nJuventinus and Maximus.\nMany of the Church fathers viewed the emperor with hostility, and told stories of his supposed wickedness after his death. A sermon by Saint John Chrysostom, entitled \"On Saints Juventinus and Maximinus,\" tells the story of two of Julian's soldiers at Antioch, who were overheard at a drinking party, criticizing the emperor's religious policies, and taken into custody. According to Chrysostom, the emperor had made a deliberate effort to avoid creating martyrs of those who disagreed with his reforms; but Juventinus and Maximinus admitted to being Christians, and refused to moderate their stance. Chrysostom asserts that the emperor forbade anyone from having contact with the men, but that nobody obeyed his orders; so he had the two men executed in the middle of the night. Chrysostom urges his audience to visit the tomb of these martyrs.\nCharity.\nThe fact that Christian charities were open to all, including pagans, put this aspect of Roman citizens' lives out of the control of Imperial authority and under that of the Church. Thus Julian envisioned the institution of a Roman philanthropic system, and cared for the behaviour and the morality of the pagan priests, in the hope that it would mitigate the reliance of pagans on Christian charity, saying: \"These impious Galileans not only feed their own poor, but ours also; welcoming them into their agapae, they attract them, as children are attracted, with cakes.\"\nAttempt to rebuild the Jewish Temple.\nIn 363, not long before Julian left Antioch to launch his campaign against Persia, in keeping with his religious tolerance, he allowed Jews to rebuild their temple. The point was that the rebuilding of the temple would invalidate Jesus' prophecy about its destruction in 70, which Christians had cited as proof of Jesus' truth. But fires broke out and stopped the project. A personal friend of his, Ammianus Marcellinus, wrote this about the effort:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Julian thought to rebuild at an extravagant expense the proud Temple once at Jerusalem, and committed this task to Alypius of Antioch. Alypius set vigorously to work, and was seconded by the governor of the province; when fearful balls of fire, breaking out near the foundations, continued their attacks, till the workmen, after repeated scorchings, could approach no more: and he gave up the attempt.\nThe failure to rebuild the Temple may be ascribed to the Galilee earthquake of 363. In the contemporary Orations of St. Gregory Nazianzen, the builders were described as \"being driven against one another, as though by a furious blast of wind, and sudden heaving of the earth\" driving some to seek refuge in a church where \"a flame issued forth... and stopped them.\" This, according to Gregory, is \"what all people nowadays report and believe.\" The 18th century writer Edward Gibbon considered this to be unreliable, positing instead sabotage or accident. Divine intervention is a common view among Christian historians, and it was seen as proof of Jesus' divinity.\nJulian's support of Jews caused Jews to call him \"Julian the Hellene\". However, it is believed by most historians that Julian's favor towards the Jews was more of an attempt to impede the growth of Christianity as opposed to any genuine affection towards Judaism.\nWorks.\nJulian wrote several works in Greek, some of which have survived to the modern day.\nThe religious works contain involved philosophical speculations, and the panegyrics to Constantius are formulaic and elaborate in style.\nThe \"Misopogon\" (or \"Beard Hater\") is a light-hearted account of Julian's clash with the inhabitants of Antioch after he was mocked for his beard and generally scruffy appearance for an emperor. \"The Caesars\" is a humorous tale of a contest between notable Roman emperors: Julius Caesar, Augustus, Trajan, Marcus Aurelius and Constantine, with the competition also including Alexander the Great. This was a satiric attack upon the recent Constantine, whose worth, both as a Christian and as the leader of the Roman Empire, Julian severely questions.\nOne of the most important of his lost works is his \"Against the Galileans\", intended to refute the Christian religion. The only parts of this work which survive are those excerpted by Cyril of Alexandria, who gives extracts from the three first books in his refutation of Julian, \"Contra Julianum\". These extracts do not give an adequate idea of the work: Cyril confesses that he had not ventured to copy several of the weightiest arguments.\nProblems regarding authenticity.\nJulian's works have been edited and translated several times since the Renaissance, most often separately; but many are translated in the Loeb Classical Library edition of 1913, edited by Wilmer Cave Wright. Wright mentions, however, that there are many problems surrounding Julian's vast collection of works, mainly the letters ascribed to Julian. The collections of letters existing today are the result of many smaller collections, which contained varying numbers of Julian's works in various combinations. For example, in Laurentianus 58.16, the largest collection of letters ascribed to Julian was found, containing 43 manuscripts. The origins of many letters in these collections are unclear.\n and Fran\u00e7ois Cumont compiled the different collections in 1922 and arrived at a total of 284 items. 157 of these were considered genuine, and 127 were regarded as spurious. This contrasts starkly with Wright's earlier mentioned collection, which contains only 73 items which are considered genuine, along with 10 apocryphal letters. Michael Trapp notes, however, that when comparing Bidez and Cumont's work with Wright's, Bidez and Cumont regard as many as sixteen of Wright's genuine letters as spurious. Which works can be ascribed to Julian is thus very much up to debate.\nThe problems surrounding a collection of Julian's works are exacerbated by the fact that Julian was a motivated writer, which means it is possible that many more letters could have circulated despite his short reign. Julian himself attests to the large number of letters he had to write in a letter that is itself likely to be genuine. Julian's religious agenda gave him even more work than the average emperor as he sought to instruct his newly styled pagan priests and dealt with discontented Christian leaders and communities. An example of him instructing his pagan priests is found in a fragment in the Vossianus MS., inserted in the Letter to Themistius.\nAdditionally, Julian's hostility towards the Christian faith inspired vicious counteractions by Christian authors, as in Gregory of Nazianzus' invectives against Julian. Christians no doubt suppressed some of Julian's works as well. This Christian influence is still visible in Wright's much smaller collection of Julian's letters. She comments that some letters are suddenly cut off when the contents become hostile towards Christians and believes this to be the result of Christian censorship. Notable examples appear in the \"Fragment of a letter to a Priest\" and the \"letter to High-Priest Theodorus.\""}
{"id": "16302", "revid": "47732363", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16302", "title": "John Cicero, Elector of Brandenburg", "text": "Elector of Brandenburg 1486 to 1499\nJohn II (; 2 August 1455 \u2013 9 January 1499) was Elector of Brandenburg from 1486 until his death, the fourth of the House of Hohenzollern. After his death he received the cognomen Cicero, after the Roman orator of the same name, but the elector's eloquence and interest in the arts is debatable.\nLife.\nJohn Cicero was the eldest son of Elector Albert III Achilles of Brandenburg with his first wife Margaret of Baden. As his father then ruled as Margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach (from 1457 also as Margrave of Brandenburg-Kulmbach), he was born at the Hohenzollern residence of Ansbach in Franconia, where he spent his childhood years until in 1466 he received the call to Brandenburg as presumed heir by his uncle Elector Frederick II. He joined him in the War of the Succession of Stettin with the Pomeranian dukes, until Frederick resigned in 1470 and was succeeded by John's father, who in 1473 appointed him regent of the Brandenburg lands. After the Pomeranian struggle he also had to deal with the inheritance conflict upon the 1476 death of the Piast duke Henry XI of G\u0142og\u00f3w, husband of his half-sister Barbara.\nOn 25 August 1476 in Berlin John married Margaret of Wettin, a daughter of Landgrave William III of Thuringia with Anne, Duchess of Luxembourg. Their children were:\nJohn succeeded his father as elector in 1486, while the Franconian possessions of the Hohenzollern dynasty passed to his younger brothers Frederick I and Siegmund. He decreed that the \"Stadtschloss\" in Berlin, erected at the behest of his uncle Frederick II, should serve as the permanent residence of the Brandenburg electors, the beginning of the city's history as a state capital. He also implemented an excise tax on beer in 1488, which sparked several disturbances, mainly in the towns of the Altmark region. \nIn 1490 John was able to purchase the former Lusatian territory around Zossen, acknowledged by the Bohemian king Vladislaus II, and maintained the succession claims of the Hohenzollern dynasty to the Pomeranian lands held by the House of Griffins. He died in 1499 from pleural effusion at Arneburg Castle and was succeeded by his eldest son Joachim I. John was the first of the Hohenzollern electors to be buried in Brandenburg, first at Lehnin Abbey, later transferred to Berlin Cathedral by order of his grandson Joachim II.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16305", "revid": "1295261614", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16305", "title": "Joachim Frederick, Elector of Brandenburg", "text": "Elector of Brandenburg from 1598 to 1608\nJoachim Frederick (27 January 1546 \u2013 18 July 1608), of the House of Hohenzollern, was Prince-elector of the Margraviate of Brandenburg from 1598 until his death.\nBiography.\nJoachim Frederick was born in C\u00f6lln to John George, Elector of Brandenburg, and Sophie of Legnica. He served as administrator of the Archbishopric of Magdeburg from 1566 to 1598, then succeeded his father as Elector of Brandenburg in 1598. Joachim Frederick was succeeded at his death by his son John Sigismund. Joachim Frederick's first marriage on 7 March 1570 was to Catherine of Brandenburg-K\u00fcstrin, daughter of John, Margrave of Brandenburg-K\u00fcstrin, and Catherine of Brunswick-Wolfenb\u00fcttel. \nJoachim Frederick and Catherine of Brandenburg-K\u00fcstrin had these children: \nJoachim Frederick's second marriage, on 23 October 1603, was to Eleanor of Prussia, born 21 August 1583, daughter of Albert Frederick and Marie Eleonore of Cleves. \nJoachim Frederick and Eleanor of Prussia had only one child: \nHe became regent of the Duchy of Prussia in 1605.\nHis titles also included \"duke (Dux) of Stettin, Pomerania, Cassubia, Vandalorum and Crossen\", according to the terms of the Treaty of Grimnitz, although the Pomeranian titles were only nominal.\nLegacy.\nJoachim-Friedrich Strasse in Berlin is named after him. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16306", "revid": "49438947", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16306", "title": "John Sigismund, Elector of Brandenburg", "text": "Elector of Brandenburg from 1608 to 1619\nJohn Sigismund (; 8 November 1572 \u2013 23 December 1619) was a Prince-elector of the Margraviate of Brandenburg from the House of Hohenzollern. He became the Duke of Prussia through his marriage to Duchess Anna, the eldest daughter of Duke Albert Frederick of Prussia who died without sons. Their marriage resulted in the potential creation of Brandenburg-Prussia, which became a reality after Poland's leader appointed John Sigismund in charge of Prussia in regency and, shortly thereafter, Albert Frederick died without an able, direct male heir.\nElector of Brandenburg and Duke of Prussia.\nJohn Sigismund was born in Halle an der Saale to Joachim III Frederick, Elector of Brandenburg, and his first wife Catherine of Brandenburg-K\u00fcstrin. He succeeded his father as Margrave of Brandenburg in 1608. In 1611, John Sigismund traveled from K\u00f6nigsberg to Warsaw, where on 16 November 1611 he gave feudal homage to Sigismund III Vasa, King of Poland (the Duchy of Prussia was a Polish fief at the time). He officially became Duke of Prussia in 1618, although he had served as regent on behalf of the mentally-disturbed Albert Frederick, Duke of Prussia, for several years prior. He suffered a stroke in 1616 from which he didn't recover and died in 1619.\nJohn Sigismund gave the Reichshof Castrop to his teacher and educator Carl Friedrich von Bordelius. Through his wife, he became a major claimant in the War of the Julich Succession. He received the territories of Cleves, Mark, and Ravensberg in the Treaty of Xanten in 1614.\nReligious policy.\nJohn Sigismund's most significant action was his conversion from Lutheranism to Calvinism, after he had earlier equalized the rights of Catholics and Protestants in the Duchy of Prussia under pressure from the King of Poland. He probably became Calvinist during a visit to Heidelberg in 1606, but it was not until 25 December 1613 that he publicly took communion according to the Calvinist rite. The vast majority of his subjects in Brandenburg, including his wife Anna of Prussia, remained deeply Lutheran, however. After the Elector and his Calvinist court officials drew up plans for mass conversion of the population to the new faith in February 1614, as provided for by the rule of \"Cuius regio, eius religio\" within the Holy Roman Empire, there were serious protests, with his wife backing the Lutherans. Resistance was so strong that in 1615, John Sigismund backed down and relinquished all attempts at forcible conversion. Instead, he allowed his subjects to be either Lutheran or Calvinist according to the dictates of their own consciences. Henceforward, Brandenburg-Prussia would be a bi-confessional state.\nFamily and children.\nOn 30 October 1594, John Sigismund married Anna of Prussia, daughter of Albert Frederick, Duke of Prussia (1553\u20131618). She was the elder sister of his stepmother. They were parents to eight children:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16307", "revid": "1601788", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16307", "title": "Jackson Pollock", "text": "American painter (1912\u20131956)\nPaul Jackson Pollock (; January 28, 1912\u00a0\u2013 August 11, 1956) was an American painter. A major figure in the abstract expressionist movement, he was widely noticed for his \"drip technique\" of pouring or splashing liquid household paint onto a horizontal surface, enabling him to view and paint his canvases from all angles. It was called all-over painting and action painting, because Pollock covered the entire canvas and used the force of his whole body to paint, often in a frenetic dancing style. This extreme form of abstraction divided critics: some praised the immediacy of the creation, while others derided the random effects.\nA reclusive and volatile personality, Pollock struggled with alcoholism for most of his life. In 1945, he married artist Lee Krasner, who became an important influence on his career and on his legacy. Pollock died in August 1956 at age 44 in an alcohol-related single-car collision when he was driving. Four months after his death, Pollock was given a memorial retrospective exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art (MoMA) in New York City. A larger, more comprehensive exhibition of his work was held there in 1967. In 1998 and 1999, Pollock's work was honored with large-scale retrospective exhibitions at MoMA and the Tate Gallery in London.\nEarly life (1912\u20131936).\nPaul Jackson Pollock was born in Cody, Wyoming, on January 28, 1912, the youngest of five brothers. His parents, Stella May (n\u00e9e McClure) and LeRoy Pollock, were born and grew up in Tingley, Iowa, and were educated at Tingley High School. Stella is interred at Tingley Cemetery, Ringgold County, Iowa. His father had been born with the surname McCoy, but took the surname of his adoptive parents. Stella and LeRoy Pollock were Presbyterian; they were of Irish and Scots-Irish descent, respectively. LeRoy was a farmer and later a land surveyor for the government, moving for different jobs. Stella, proud of her family's heritage as weavers, made and sold dresses as a teenager. In November 1912, Stella took her sons to San Diego; Jackson was just 10 months old and would never return to Cody. He subsequently grew up in Arizona and Chico, California.\nWhile living in the Vermont Square neighborhood of Los Angeles, Pollock enrolled at Manual Arts High School, from which he was expelled. Pollock had already been expelled in 1928 from another high school. During his early life, Pollock explored Native American culture while on surveying trips with his father. Pollock was also heavily influenced by Mexican muralists, particularly Jos\u00e9 Clemente Orozco, whose fresco \"Prometheus\" he would later call \"the greatest painting in North America\".\nIn 1930, following his older brother Charles, Pollock moved to New York City, where they both studied under Thomas Hart Benton at the Art Students League. Benton's rural American subject matter had little influence on Pollock's work, but his rhythmic use of paint and his fierce independence were more lasting. In the early 1930s, Pollock spent a summer touring the Western United States together with Glen Rounds, a fellow art student, and Benton, their teacher.\nCareer (1936\u20131954).\nPollock was introduced to the use of liquid paint in 1936 at an experimental workshop in New York City by the Mexican muralist David Alfaro Siqueiros. That summer, Pollock went to Dartmouth College to study Jos\u00e9 Clemente Orozco's 3,200 square foot mural, \"The Epic of American Civilization\". He later used paint pouring as one of several techniques on canvases of the early 1940s, such as \"Male and Female\" and \"Composition with Pouring I\". After moving to Springs, New York, Pollock began painting with his canvases laid out on the studio floor and he developed what was later called his \"drip\" technique.\nFrom 1938 to 1942, Pollock worked for the WPA Federal Art Project. During this time, he was trying to deal with his established alcoholism; from 1938 through 1941, Pollock underwent Jungian psychotherapy with Dr. Joseph L. Henderson and later with Dr. Violet Staub de Laszlo from 1941 to 1942. Henderson engaged him through his art, encouraging Pollock to make drawings. Jungian concepts and archetypes were expressed in his paintings. Some psychiatrists have hypothesized that Pollock might have had bipolar disorder.\nPollock signed a gallery contract with Peggy Guggenheim in July 1943. He received the commission to create the \"Mural\" (1943) for the entry to her new townhouse. At the suggestion of her friend and advisor Marcel Duchamp, Pollock painted the work on canvas, rather than the wall, so that it would be portable. After seeing the big mural, the art critic Clement Greenberg wrote: \"I took one look at it and I thought, 'Now that's great art,' and I knew Jackson was the greatest painter this country had produced.\" The catalog introducing his first exhibition described Pollock's talent as \"volcanic. It has fire. It is unpredictable. It is undisciplined. It spills out of itself in a mineral prodigality, not yet crystallized.\"\nDrip period.\nPollock's most famous paintings were made during the \"drip period\" between 1947 and 1950. However, when investigating the impact that other artists have had on him and his \"drip paintings\", the time that Pollock spent working and studying in the Experimental Workshop with David Alfaro Siqueiros in 1936 is rarely investigated or acknowledged. According to Robert Storr, \"there is no other experience in his professional life that is equal to the decade that he spent learning from and observing the modern Mexican muralists\u2026,\" especially when comparing this period of informal training to his formal education with Thomas Hart Benton, which, although critical to his beginnings, was short lived. Additionally, when specifically asked about how the \"drip\" came to be, Pollock disavowed his association with Siqueiros on multiple occasions and made contradictory statements. For example, in 1947, Pollock suggests that he painted his canvases on the floor because he witnessed the Navajo sand artist at the Natural History Museum in New York do it in 1941 (five years after he witnessed Siqueiros do it in 1936), and soon after, he suggested that he painted his canvases on the floor because \"the Orientals did it\".\nEventually, Pollock became famous from his \"drip\" paintings, and on August 8, 1949, in a four-page spread in \"Life\" magazine, he was asked, \"Is he the greatest living painter in the United States?\" Thanks to the mediation of Alfonso Ossorio, a close friend of Pollock, and the art historian Michel Tapi\u00e9, the young gallery owner Paul Facchetti, from March 7, 1952, managed to realize the first exhibition of Pollock's works from 1948 to 1951 in his Studio Paul Facchetti in Paris and in Europe. At the peak of his fame, Pollock abruptly abandoned the drip style. Pollock's drip paintings were influenced by the artist Janet Sobel; the art critic Clement Greenberg would later report that Pollock \"admitted\" to him that Sobel's work \"had made an impression on him.\"\nPollock's work after 1951 was darker in color, including a collection painted in black on unprimed canvases. These paintings have been referred to as his \"Black pourings\" and when he exhibited them at the Betty Parsons Gallery in New York, none of them sold. Parsons later sold one to a friend at half the price. These works show Pollock attempting to find a balance between abstraction and depictions of the figure.\nPollock later returned to using color and continued with figurative elements. During this period, he had moved to the Sidney Janis Gallery, a more commercial gallery; the demand for Pollock's work from collectors was great. In response to this pressure, along with personal frustration, his alcoholism deepened.\nRelationship with Lee Krasner.\nPollock and Lee Krasner met while they both exhibited at the McMillen Gallery in 1942. Krasner was unfamiliar yet intrigued with Pollock's work and went to his apartment, unannounced, to meet him following the gallery exhibition. In October 1945, Pollock and Krasner were married in a church with two witnesses present for the event. In November, they moved out of the city to the Springs area of East Hampton on the south shore of Long Island. With the help of a down-payment loan from Peggy Guggenheim, they bought a wood-frame house and barn at 830 Springs Fireplace Road. Pollock converted the barn into a studio. In that space, he perfected his \"drip\" technique of working with paint, with which he would become permanently identified. When the couple found themselves free from work, they enjoyed spending their time together cooking and baking, working on the house and garden, and entertaining friends.\nKrasner's influence on her husband's art was something critics began to reassess by the latter half of the 1960s due to the rise of feminism at the time. Her extensive knowledge and training in modern art and techniques helped her bring Pollock up to date with what contemporary art should be. Krasner is often considered to have tutored her husband in the tenets of modernistic painting. Pollock was then able to change his style to fit a more organized and cosmopolitan genre of modern art, and Krasner became the one judge he could trust. At the beginning of the two artists' marriage, Pollock would trust his peers' opinions on what did or did not work in his pieces. Krasner was also responsible for introducing Pollock to many collectors, critics, and artists, including Herbert Matter, who would help further his career as an emerging artist. Art dealer John Bernard Myers once said \"there would never have been a Jackson Pollock without a Lee Pollock\", whereas fellow painter Fritz Bultman referred to Pollock as Krasner's \"creation, her Frankenstein\", both men recognizing the immense influence Krasner had on Pollock's career.\nPollock's influence on his wife's artwork is often discussed by art historians. Many people thought Krasner began to reproduce and reinterpret her husband's chaotic paint splatters in her own work. There are several accounts where Krasner intended to use her own intuition as a way to move towards Pollock's \"I am nature\" technique in order to reproduce nature in her art.\nLater years and death (1955\u20131956).\nIn 1955, Pollock painted \"Scent\" and \"Search\", his last two paintings. He did not paint at all in 1956, but was making sculptures at Tony Smith's home: constructions of wire, gauze, and plaster. Shaped by sand-casting, they have heavily textured surfaces similar to what Pollock often created in his paintings.\nPollock and Krasner's relationship began to crumble by 1956, owing to Pollock's continuing alcoholism and infidelity involving another artist, Ruth Kligman. On August 11, 1956, at 10:15\u00a0p.m., Pollock died in a single-car crash in his Oldsmobile convertible while driving under the influence of alcohol. At the time, Krasner was visiting friends in Europe; she abruptly returned on hearing the news from a friend. One of the passengers, Edith Metzger, was also killed in the accident, which occurred less than a mile from Pollock's home. The other passenger, Ruth Kligman, survived. In December 1956, four months after his death, Pollock was given a memorial retrospective exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art (MoMA) in New York City. A larger, more comprehensive exhibition of his work was held there in 1967. In 1998 and 1999, his work was honored with large-scale retrospective exhibitions at MoMA and at The Tate in London.\nFor the rest of her life, Pollock's widow, Lee Krasner, managed his estate and ensured that Pollock's reputation remained strong despite changing art world trends. The couple are buried in Green River Cemetery in Springs with a large boulder marking his grave and a smaller one marking hers.\nArtistry.\nInfluence and technique.\nThe work of Thomas Hart Benton, Pablo Picasso and Joan Mir\u00f3 influenced Pollock. Pollock started using synthetic resin-based paints called alkyd enamels, which at that time was a novel medium. He described this use of household paints, instead of artist's paints, as \"a natural growth out of a need\". Pollock used hardened brushes, sticks, and even basting syringes as paint applicators. His technique of pouring and dripping paint is thought to be one of the origins of the term action painting. With this technique, Pollock was able to achieve his own signature style palimpsest paintings, with paints flowing from his chosen tool onto the canvas. By defying the convention of painting on an upright surface, Pollock added a new dimension by being able to view and apply paint to his canvases from all directions.\nIn 1936, Pollock participated in an experimental workshop run by the Mexican muralist David Alfaro Siqueiros. It was there that he first used liquid enamel paints, which he continued to incorporate in his paintings in the early to mid 1940s, long before encountering the work of the Ukrainian American artist Janet Sobel (born Jennie Lechovsky; 1894\u20131968). Peggy Guggenheim included Sobel's work in her \"The Art of This Century Gallery\" in 1945. Pollock and art critic Clement Greenberg saw Sobel's work there in 1946, and Greenberg later noted that Sobel was \"a direct influence on Jackson Pollock's drip painting technique\". In his essay \"American-Type Painting\", Greenberg noted those works were the first of all-over painting he had seen, and said, \"Pollock admitted that these pictures had made an impression on him\".\nWhile painting this way, Pollock moved away from figurative representation, and challenged the Western tradition of using easel and brush. He used the force of his whole body to paint, which was expressed on the large canvases. In 1956, \"Time\" magazine dubbed Pollock \"Jack the Dripper\" due to his painting style.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;My painting does not come from the easel. I prefer to tack the unstretched canvas to the hard wall or the floor. I need the resistance of a hard surface. On the floor I am more at ease. I feel nearer, more part of the painting, since this way I can walk around it, work from the four sides and literally be in the painting.\nI continue to get further away from the usual painter's tools such as easel, palette, brushes, etc. I prefer sticks, trowels, knives and dripping fluid paint or a heavy impasto with sand, broken glass or other foreign matter added.\nWhen I am in my painting, I'm not aware of what I'm doing. It is only after a sort of \"get acquainted\" period that I see what I have been about. I have no fear of making changes, destroying the image, etc., because the painting has a life of its own. I try to let it come through. It is only when I lose contact with the painting that the result is a mess. Otherwise there is pure harmony, an easy give and take, and the painting comes out well.\nPollock observed Native American sandpainting demonstrations in the 1940s. Referring to his style of painting on the floor, Pollock stated, \"I feel nearer, more a part of the painting, since this way I can walk round it, work from the four sides and literally be in the painting. This is akin to the methods of the Indian sand painters of the West.\" Other influences on his drip technique include the Mexican muralists and Surrealist automatism. Pollock denied reliance on \"the accident\"; he usually had an idea of how he wanted a particular work to appear. Pollock's technique combined the movement of his body, over which he had control, the viscous flow of paint, the force of gravity, and the absorption of paint into the canvas. It was a mixture of controllable and uncontrollable factors. Flinging, dripping, pouring, and spattering, Pollock would move energetically around the canvas, almost as if in a dance, and would not stop until he saw what he wanted to see.\nAustrian artist Wolfgang Paalen's article on totem art of the indigenous people of British Columbia, in which the concept of space in totemist art is considered from an artist's point of view, influenced Pollock as well; Pollock owned a signed and dedicated copy of the Amerindian Number of Paalen's magazine (DYN 4\u20135, 1943). He had also seen Paalen's surrealist paintings in an exhibition in 1940. Another strong influence must have been Paalen's surrealist \"fumage\" technique, which appealed to painters looking for new ways to depict what was called the \"unseen\" or the \"possible\". The technique was once demonstrated in Matta's workshop, about which Steven Naifeh reports, \"Once, when Matta was demonstrating the Surrealist technique [Paalen's] Fumage, Jackson [Pollock] turned to (Peter) Busa and said in a stage whisper: 'I can do that without the smoke.'\" Pollock's painter friend Fritz Bultman even stated, \"It was Wolfgang Paalen who started it all.\"\nIn 1950, Hans Namuth, a young photographer, wanted to take pictures\u2014both stills and moving\u2014of Pollock at work. Pollock promised to start a new painting especially for the photographic session, but when Namuth arrived, Pollock apologized and told him the painting was finished.\nNamuth said that when he entered the studio:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A dripping wet canvas covered the entire floor\u00a0... There was complete silence\u00a0... Pollock looked at the painting. Then, unexpectedly, he picked up can and paint brush and started to move around the canvas. It was as if he suddenly realized the painting was not finished. His movements, slow at first, gradually became faster and more dance like as he flung black, white, and rust colored paint onto the canvas. He completely forgot that Lee and I were there; he did not seem to hear the click of the camera shutter\u00a0... My photography session lasted as long as he kept painting, perhaps half an hour. In all that time, Pollock did not stop. How could one keep up this level of activity? Finally, he said \"This is it.\"\nPollock's finest paintings\u00a0... reveal that his all-over line does not give rise to positive or negative areas: we are not made to feel that one part of the canvas demands to be read as figure, whether abstract or representational, against another part of the canvas read as ground. There is not inside or outside to Pollock's line or the space through which it moves. ...\u00a0Pollock has managed to free line not only from its function of representing objects in the world, but also from its task of describing or bounding shapes or figures, whether abstract or representational, on the surface of the canvas.\nFrom naming to numbering.\nContinuing to evade the viewer's search for figurative elements in his paintings, Pollock abandoned titles and started numbering his works. Pollock said about this, \"[L]ook passively and try to receive what the painting has to offer and not bring a subject matter or preconceived idea of what they are to be looking for.\" Lee Krasner said, \"He used to give his pictures conventional titles\u00a0... but now he simply numbers them. Numbers are neutral. They make people look at a picture for what it is\u2014pure painting.\"\nCritical debate.\nPollock's work has been the subject of important critical debates. Critic Robert Coates once derided a number of Pollock's works as \"mere unorganized explosions of random energy, and therefore meaningless\". \"Reynold's News\", in a 1959 headline, said, \"This is not art\u2014it's a joke in bad taste.\" French abstract painter Jean H\u00e9lion, on the other hand, remarked on first seeing a Pollock, \"It filled out space going on and on because it did not have a start or end to it.\" Clement Greenberg supported Pollock's work on formalistic grounds. It fit well with Greenberg's view of art history as a progressive purification in form and elimination of historical content. He considered Pollock's work to be the best painting of its day and the culmination of the Western tradition via Cubism and C\u00e9zanne to Manet.\nIn a 1952 article in \"ARTnews\", Harold Rosenberg coined the term \"action painting\" and wrote that \"what was to go on the canvas was not a picture but an event. The big moment came when it was decided to paint 'just to paint'. The gesture on the canvas was a gesture of liberation from value\u2014political, aesthetic, moral.\" Many people assumed that he had modeled his \"action painter\" paradigm on Pollock.\nThe Congress for Cultural Freedom, an organization to promote American culture and values, backed by the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), sponsored exhibitions of Pollock's work. Some left-wing scholars, including Eva Cockcroft, have argued that the United States government and wealthy elite embraced Pollock and abstract expressionism to place the United States in the forefront of global art and devalue socialist realism. Cockcroft wrote that Pollock became a \"weapon of the Cold War\".\nPollock described his art as \"motion made visible memories, arrested in space\".\nLegacy.\nInfluence.\nPollock's staining into raw canvas was adapted by the Color Field painters Helen Frankenthaler and Morris Louis. Frank Stella made \"all-over composition\" a hallmark of his works of the 1960s. Joseph Glasco was introduced to Pollock by Alfonso Ossorio in 1949. Throughout his life, Glasco continued to reflect on Pollock's artistic influence, particularly in the early to mid-1970s when his style changed to all-over collage paintings with their emphasis on rhythm and process. The Happenings artist Allan Kaprow, sculptors Richard Serra and Eva Hesse, and many contemporary artists have retained Pollock's emphasis on the process of creation; they were influenced by his approach to the process, rather than the look of his work.\nIn 2004, \"One: Number 31, 1950\" was ranked the eighth-most influential piece of modern art in a poll of 500 artists, curators, critics, and dealers.\nIn pop culture and media.\nIn the early 1990s, three groups of movie makers were developing Pollock biographical projects, each based on a different source. The project that at first seemed most advanced was a joint venture between Barbra Streisand's Barwood Films and Robert De Niro's TriBeCa Productions (De Niro's parents were friends of Krasner and Pollock). The script, by Christopher Cleveland, was to be based on Jeffrey Potter's 1985 oral biography, \"To a Violent Grave\", a collection of reminiscences by Pollock's friends. Streisand was to play the role of Lee Krasner, and De Niro was to portray Pollock. A second was to be based on \"Love Affair\" (1974), a memoir by Ruth Kligman, who was Pollock's lover in the six months before his death. This was to be directed by Harold Becker, with Al Pacino playing Pollock.\nIn 2000, the biographical film \"Pollock\", based on the Pulitzer Prize-winning biography, \"\", directed by and starring Ed Harris, was released. Marcia Gay Harden won the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress for her portrayal of Lee Krasner. The movie was the project of Harris, who was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actor. Harris himself painted the works seen in the film. The Pollock-Krasner Foundation did not authorize or collaborate with any production.\nIn September 2009, the art historian Henry Adams claimed in \"Smithsonian\" magazine that Pollock had written his name in his famous painting \"Mural\" (1943). The painting is now insured for US$140 million. In 2011, the Republican Iowa State Representative Scott Raecker introduced a bill to force the sale of the artwork, held by the University of Iowa, to fund scholarships, but his bill created such controversy that it was quickly withdrawn.\nPollock's painting \"Free Form\" is shown throughout the 2016 movie \"The Accountant\". The movie's main character, played by Ben Affleck, gains the painting through his career. He gifts it to the character played by Anna Kendrick at the end of the film.\nOne of Jackson Pollock's works is featured heavily in the film Ex Machina. A pivotal scene in the film contains a monologue where antagonist Nathan Bateman describes the central challenge of artificial intelligence as engineering a cognitive state that is \"not deliberate, not random, but somewhere in between,\" which he likens to the cognitive state Pollock achieves while painting.\nArt market.\nIn 1973, \"Number 11, 1952\" (also known as \"Blue Poles\") was purchased by the Australian Gough Whitlam government for the National Gallery of Australia for US$2 million (A$1.3 million at the time of payment). This was the highest price ever paid for a modern painting and the painting is now one of the most popular exhibits. The artwork contains only a fleeting reference to the \"real world\" and \"Blue Poles\" has become the flagship of autonomous art. \"Blue Poles\" was a centerpiece of the Museum of Modern Art's 1998 retrospective in New York, the first time the painting had been shown in America since its purchase.\nIn November 2006, Pollock's \"No. 5, 1948\" became the world's most expensive painting, when it was sold privately to an undisclosed buyer for the sum of US$140 million. Another artist record was established in 2004, when \"No. 12\" (1949), a medium-sized drip painting that had been shown in the United States Pavilion at the 1950 Venice Biennale, fetched US$11.7 million at Christie's, New York. In 2012, \"Number 28, 1951\", one of the artist's combinations of drip and brushwork in shades of silvery gray with red, yellow, and shots of blue and white, also sold at Christie's, New York, for US$20.5 million\u2014US$23 million with fees\u2014within its estimated range of US$20 million to US$30 million.\nIn 2013, Pollock's \"Number 19\" (1948) was sold by Christie's for a reported US$58,363,750 during an auction that ultimately reached US$495 million total sales in one night, which Christie's reports as a record to date as the most expensive auction of contemporary art.\nIn February 2016, Bloomberg News reported that Kenneth C. Griffin had purchased Pollock's 1948 painting \"Number 17A\" for US$200 million, from David Geffen.\nIn 2023, an unknown Pollock painting was reportedly discovered in Bulgaria after international police agencies were able to track down a group of international art smugglers. The painting is reportedly worth up to 50 million euros.\nIn 2024, Kasmin announced exclusive global representation of Pollock. Kasmin has been representing Lee Krasner since 2016.\nAuthenticity issues.\nThe Pollock-Krasner Authentication Board was created by the Pollock-Krasner Foundation in 1990 to evaluate newly found works for an upcoming supplement to the 1978 catalogue. However, the Pollock-Krasner Foundation has declined to be involved in recent authentication cases.\nIn 2003, 24 Pollockesque paintings and drawings were found in a locker in Wainscott, New York. In 2005, the Pollock-Krasner Foundation requested a computer analysis (see fractal analysis section below) to be used for the first time in an authenticity dispute. Researchers at the University of Oregon used the technique to identify differences between the patterns in the six disputed paintings analyzed and those in 14 established Pollocks. \nIn 2007, a traveling museum exhibition of the paintings was mounted and was accompanied by a comprehensive book, \"Pollock Matters\", written by Ellen G. Landau, one of the four sitting scholars from the former Pollock Krasner Foundation authentication panel from the 1990s, and Claude Cernuschi, a scholar in Abstract Expressionism. In the book, Landau demonstrated the many connections between the family who owns the paintings and Jackson Pollock during his lifetime to place the paintings in what she believes to be their proper historic context. Pigment analysis of the paintings by researchers at Harvard University showed the presence in one painting of a synthetic pigment that was not patented until the 1980s, and materials in two others that were not available in Pollock's lifetime.Landau discussed the forensic findings of Harvard University and presented possible explanations for the forensic inconsistencies that were found in three of the 24 paintings. However, the scientist who invented one of the modern pigments dismissed the possibility that Pollock used this paint as being \"unlikely to the point of fantasy\".\nIn 2006, a documentary, \"Who the #$&amp;% Is Jackson Pollock?\", was made concerning Teri Horton, a truck driver who bought an abstract painting for five dollars at a thrift store in California in 1992. This work may be a lost Pollock painting, but its authenticity is debated. Thomas Hoving is shown in the documentary and states that the painting is on a primed canvas, which Pollock never used.\n\"Untitled 1950\", which the New York\u2013based Knoedler Gallery had sold in 2007 for $17 million to Pierre Lagrange, a London hedge-fund multimillionaire, was subject to an authenticity suit before the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York. Done in the painter's classic drip-and-splash style and signed \"J. Pollock\", the modest-sized painting () was found to contain yellow paint pigments not commercially available until about 1970. The suit was settled in a confidential agreement in 2012.\nFractal computer analysis.\nIn 1999, the physicist and artist Richard Taylor used computer analysis to show similarities between Pollock's painted patterns and fractals (patterns that recur on multiple size scales) found in natural scenery, reflecting Pollock's own words: \"I am nature\". His research team labelled Pollock's style fractal expressionism.\nIn 2005, the Pollock-Krasner Foundation requested a fractal analysis to be used in the authenticity dispute over the Pollockesque paintings found in the locker in Wainscott, New York in 2003 (see above). Fractal analysis has also been employed by the International Foundation for Art Research. Applied to imitation Pollocks sold by the Knoedler Gallery, the analysis identified significant visual differences when compared to established Pollocks.\nSubsequently, over 10 scientific groups have performed fractal analysis on over 50 of Pollock's works. A 2015 study that used fractal analysis as one of its techniques achieved a 93% success rate distinguishing real from fake Pollocks. A 2024 study used an artificial intelligence technique based on fractals to achieve a 99% success rate. Current research of Fractal Expressionism focuses on human response to viewing fractals. Cognitive neuroscientists have shown that Pollock's fractals induce the same stress-reduction in observers as computer-generated fractals and naturally occurring fractals.\nArchives.\nLee Krasner donated Pollock's papers to the Archives of American Art in 1983. They were later archived with her own papers. The Archives of American Art also houses the Charles Pollock papers, which include correspondence, photographs, and other files relating to his brother Jackson.\nA separate organization, the Pollock-Krasner Foundation, was established in 1985. The foundation functions as the official estate for both Pollock and his widow, but also under the terms of Krasner's will, serves \"to assist individual working artists of merit with financial need\". The U.S. copyright representative for the Pollock-Krasner Foundation is the Artists Rights Society.\nThe Pollock-Krasner House and Studio is owned and administered by the Stony Brook Foundation, a nonprofit affiliate of Stony Brook University. Regular tours of the house and studio occur from May through October.\nList of major works.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16308", "revid": "44141905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16308", "title": "Jet Li", "text": "Chinese-born martial artist and actor (born 1963)\n use both this parameter and |birth_date to display the person's date of birth, date of death, and age at death) --&gt;\nJet Li Lianjie (courtesy name Yangzhong; born 26 April 1963) is a martial artist, actor, and philanthropist. With a career spanning more than forty years, he is regarded as one of the most iconic Chinese film stars and one of the greatest martial artists in the history of cinema. His film career in Asia is credited with reviving Hong Kong kungfu films as well as Shaolin Temple.\nLi was trained as a wushu athlete at the Beijing Shichahai Sports School and went on to win multiple national championships with the Beijing Wushu Team between 1974 and 1979. After his retirement from the sport in 1979, he made his acting debut with the Hong Kong film \"Shaolin Temple\" (1982), a runaway success followed by two sequels in 1984 and 1986. Li established himself as a leading action star with the \"Once Upon a Time in China\" series (1991\u20131993), in which he portrayed Chinese folk hero Wong Fei-hung, followed by \"Born to Defence\" (1988), which is his directorial debut, \"Swordsman II\" (1992), \"Fong Sai-yuk\" (1993), \"Fist of Legend\" (1994), \"High Risk\" (1995), \"Black Mask\" (1996), and \"Hitman\" (1998).\nLi made his Hollywood debut as a villain in \"Lethal Weapon 4\" (1998), followed by his first Hollywood leading role in \"Romeo Must Die\" (2000). He went on to star in international productions such as Luc Besson-produced films \"Kiss of the Dragon\" (2001) and \"Unleashed\" (2005). He returned to Asia with \"Hero\" (2002), followed by \"Fearless\" (2006) and \"The Warlords\" (2007). In 2008, he starred in \"\" and \"The Forbidden Kingdom\", which marked his first collaboration with fellow kungfu star Jackie Chan. From 2010 to 2014, he appeared in the first three of the action film series \"The Expendables\".\nAs a philanthropist, Li founded One Foundation in 2007, which was registered in 2011 as the first private charitable fundraising organization in China. He also co-founded \"Taiji Zen\", an online health program providing instruction in meditation and tai chi. \nLi topped \"Forbes\"'s list of China's richest stars in 2004 and ranked 10th on the \"Forbes\" China Celebrity 100 list in 2004, 3rd in 2008, 6th in 2009, 24th in 2010, 8th in 2011, 22nd in 2012, and 41st in 2013. He was named by \"Time\" magazine as one of the 100 most influential people in 2010.\nEarly life and martial arts career.\nLi was born in Beijing, China, and was the youngest of two boys and two girls. His ancestral home is in Shenyang, China. When he was two years old, his father died and his family then lived in poverty.\nLi was eight when his talent for wushu was noticed as he practiced at a school summer course at the Beijing Sports and Exercise School (now known as Beijing Sport University). Renowned coaches Li Junfeng and Wu Bin made extra efforts to help the talented boy develop. Wu Bin even bought food for Li's family in order to boost Li's protein intake.\nAt the age of eleven, Li became a member of the 1974 China national wushu team which traveled to the United States during the time of the Ping-pong diplomacy. The group performed for American audiences in Hawaii, San Francisco, New York, and Washington, D.C., and additionally in Mexico City and Hong Kong. When the Chinese National Wushu Team went to perform for President Richard Nixon in the United States, he was asked by Nixon to be his personal bodyguard. Li replied, \"I don't want to protect any individual. When I grow up, I want to defend my one billion Chinese countrymen!\"\nIn November of the same year, the Beijing Wushu Team was founded and Li became a member. He became the national all-around champion four times from 1975 to 1979.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;My winning first place caused quite a sensation because I was so young. I was 12 years old, and the other two medalists were in their mid- to late twenties. During the awards ceremony, as I stood on the top step of the podium, I was still shorter than the 2nd and 3rd place medalists. It must have been quite a sight.\u2014\u200a\nLi is a master of several styles of wushu, especially changquan and fanziquan. He has also studied other arts including baguazhang, taijiquan, xingyiquan, zuiquan (drunken fist), yingzhaoquan (eagle claw), and tanglangquan (praying mantis fist). He also practiced weapons such as gunshu, daoshu, and jianshu as well as sanjiegun (three section staff).\nLi retired from competitive wushu when he was only 18 due to a knee injury, but became an assistant coach of the Beijing Wushu team for a few years. Li's martial arts prowess would eventually contribute to his domestic and international fame.\nActing career.\nAsia.\nThe fame gained by his sports winnings led to a career as a martial arts film star, beginning in mainland China and then continuing into Hong Kong. Li acquired his screen name in 1982 in the Philippines when a publicity company thought his real name was too hard to pronounce. They likened his career to an aircraft, which likewise \"takes-off\" as quickly, so they placed the name Jet Li on the movie posters. Soon everybody was calling him by this new name, which was also based on the nickname, \"Jet\", given to him as a young student, due to his speed and grace when training with the Beijing Wushu team.\nHe made his film debut with the 1982 film \"Shaolin Temple\". The film broke box office records in China, grossing CN\u00a5 (US$) at the Chinese box office, from an estimated 500 million ticket sales. The sequel \"Kids From Shaolin\" sold an estimated 490 million tickets, making it 1984's highest-grossing film in China.\nSome of his more famous Chinese films include:\nLi starred in the 1995 film \"High Risk\", where Li plays a Captain who becomes disillusioned after his wife is murdered by crime lords. Along the way, he pairs up with a wacky sell-out actor, Frankie (played by Jacky Cheung), and proceeds to engage in a series of violent battles in a high-rise building. The setting is similar to that of \"Die Hard\" and both their Chinese film titles. This movie is notable in that director Wong Jing had such a terrible experience working with Jackie Chan in Jing's previous film \"City Hunter\" that he chose to make Cheung's character a biting satire of Chan. Li would later publicly apologise to Chan for taking part in it.\nLi had two wuxia feature films released in 2011, \"The Sorcerer and the White Snake\" and \"Flying Swords of Dragon Gate\"; the latter was helmed by Tsui Hark.\nTo promote tai chi, in 2012, Li starred in a film titled \"Tai Chi\" and co-produced the movie with Chen Kuo-Fu. Li portrayed tai chi master Yang Luchan.\nInternational career.\nIn 1998, he made his international film debut in \"Lethal Weapon 4\" which also marked the first time he had ever played a villain in a film. He agreed to do \"Lethal Weapon 4\" after the producer Joel Silver promised to give him the leading role in his next film, \"Romeo Must Die\" (2000), alongside singer Aaliyah. The film became a box office hit. Though Li spoke very little English at the time of production, his performance as Chinese mafia hitman Wah Sing Ku was praised.\nLi turned down Chow Yun-fat's role in \"Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon\" (2000) because he promised his wife that he would not make any films during her pregnancy. He also turned down the role of Seraph in \"The Matrix\" trilogy, based on his belief that the role was not one which required his skills and that the films were iconic and stunning enough without adding his name to the cast list. Li was also cast as Kato in \"The Green Hornet\" when the film was still in development in 2000. In 2001, it was moved to another studio. When the film was moved on again and released in 2011, the role of Kato was portrayed by Jay Chou.\nIn 2001, he appeared in two more films: \"The One\", which was the first of his films with Jason Statham, and \"Kiss of the Dragon\" opposite Bridget Fonda which did moderately well at the box office. In July 2001, Li agreed to produce and star in an action film with Jackie Chan which was to be released in 2002 or 2003, but no further news of their collaboration surfaced until 2006. In 2002, the period martial arts epic film \"Hero\" was released in the Chinese market. This film was both a commercial and critical success and became the highest-grossing motion picture in Chinese film history at the time. In 2003 he reunited with producer Joel Silver for the action thriller film \"Cradle 2 the Grave\" where he starred alongside rapper DMX and fellow martial artist Mark Dacascos. In 2004, Li lent his likeness, voice and provided motion capture work for the video game \"\".\nLi was presented the Visionary Award by East West Players, the oldest Asian American theatre in the United States, in 2002 by contemporary John Woo. The award recognizes \"artists who have raised the visibility of the Asian Pacific American community through theater, film and television.\" He delivered his acceptance speech in his native language of Mandarin.\nLi took on a more serious role in the 2005 film, \"Unleashed\" (a.k.a. \"Danny the Dog\"), where he portrayed an adult with the mentality of a child who has been raised like an animal. Although his martial arts skills were used extensively, it was a somber film with more depth than had been previously seen in Li's films, and co-starred dramatic actors Bob Hoskins and Morgan Freeman.\nIn 2006, the martial arts film epic \"Fearless\", was released worldwide. Although he will continue to make martial arts films, \"Fearless\" is his last wushu martial arts film. In \"Fearless\", he played Huo Yuanjia, the real-life founder of Chin Woo Athletic Association, who reportedly defeated foreign boxers and Japanese martial artists in publicised events at a time when China's power was seen as eroding. Together with the film \"Fist of Legend\", Li has portrayed both Chen Jun, the student and avenger of Huo Yuanjia (a.k.a. Fok Yun Gap), as well as Huo Yuanjia himself. \"Fearless\" was released on 26 January 2006 in Hong Kong, followed by a 22 September 2006 release in the United States where it reached second place in its first weekend.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I stepped into the martial arts movie market when I was only 16. I think I have proved my ability in this field and it won't make sense for me to continue for another five or 10 years. Huo Yuanjia is a conclusion to my life as a martial arts star.\nLi has stated in an interview with the \"Shenzhen Daily\" newspaper that this will be his last martial arts epic, which is also stated in the film's television promotions. However, he plans to continue his film career in other genres. Specifically, he plans to continue acting in epic action and martial arts films dealing more with religious and philosophical issues.\nLi's 2007 Hollywood film, \"War\", was released in August of that year, and re-teamed him with actor Jason Statham, who previously starred with him in \"The One\", and action choreographer Corey Yuen. \"War\" raked in a disappointing US$ at the box office, becoming one of Li's lowest grossers in America; however, it was a hit on video, accumulating nearly US$ in rental revenue, more than doubling its box office take. With the exception of \"Romeo Must Die\" and the worldwide release of \"Hero\", most of Li's American/Western films have been only modest hits like \"Kiss of the Dragon\", \"The One\", \"Unleashed\", \"Cradle 2 the Grave\", and the worldwide release of \"Fearless\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He has a very good control of the strength of every fist and kick. In the past, he used too much strength, those that get hit would be in great pain. He's the archetype of power. [\u2026] Yes, he's still the best.\u2014\u200a\nLi was appointed by the Chinese Wushu Association as the \"Image Ambassador of Wushu\" (or IWUF ambassador) at the 2007 World Wushu Championships in Beijing. In late 2007, Li returned again to China to participate in the China/Hong Kong co-production of the period war film \"The Warlords\" with Andy Lau and Takeshi Kaneshiro. This film, with its focus on dramatics rather than martial arts, netted Li the Hong Kong Film Award for Best Actor.\nLi and fellow martial arts veteran Jackie Chan finally appeared together onscreen for the first time in \"The Forbidden Kingdom\", which began filming in May 2007 and was released to critical and commercial success on 18 April 2008. The film was based on the legend of the Monkey King from the Chinese folk novel \"Journey to the West\". Li also starred as the lead villain Emperor Han in the fantasy action film \"\" with actors Brendan Fraser, Isabella Leong and Michelle Yeoh.\nIn 2009, he launched his own fitness program, Wuji\u2014which consists of elements of martial arts, yoga and pilates\u2014and Adidas launched a special clothing line for it that bears the initials of \"JL\". After a one-year hiatus from filmmaking, Li returned to acting in 2010, portraying a mercenary in the film \"The Expendables\", teaming up with action stars Sylvester Stallone, Jason Statham, Dolph Lundgren, Mickey Rourke, Eric Roberts, Steve Austin, Terry Crews, and Randy Couture. It was the third time he had teamed up with Statham. In 2012, he reprised his role briefly in the sequel \"The Expendables 2\" and returned for the third film \"The Expendables 3\" in 2014. Li was initially stated to be appearing with Vin Diesel in \"\", but according to a Facebook post by Diesel, Li was replaced by Donnie Yen.\nLi plays the Emperor of China for the 2020 live action movie, \"Mulan\".\nPersonal life.\nIn 1987, Li married Huang Qiuyan, his Beijing Wushu Team fellow member and \"Kids From Shaolin\" co-star. They have two daughters, Si and Taimi. He met actress Nina Li Chi during the filming of \"Dragon Fight\" (1989) and divorced Huang in 1990. In 1999, Li married Nina at his villa in Arcadia, California, which he owned from 1998 to 2004. The couple have two daughters, Jane (born 2000) and Jada (born 2002).\nIn 1997, Li obtained US citizenship, which he renounced in April 2009. In July 2009, Amy Zhou Weiyan, then executive chairperson of the One Foundation, confirmed that Li had become a Singaporean citizen. In 2011, Li confirmed his Singaporean citizenship. \nIn 1998, Li converted to Tibetan Buddhism when he was promoting \"Lethal Weapon 4\" in Taiwan. His master is Lho Kunsang.\nIn 2013, Li revealed that he suffers from hyperthyroidism and had been dealing with the issue for the past three years. In 2016, Li stated that he was accepting fewer film offers due to his charity work rather than his illness, from which he had recovered.\nLi likes to play badminton and table tennis, ride his bicycle, read and meditate in his free time. He collects rare Tibetan beads.\nViews on life and martial arts.\nLi, as a Buddhist, believes that the difficulties of everyday life can be overcome with the help of religious philosophies. He thinks that fame is not something he can control; therefore, he does not care about it.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I never say to myself I'm the best fighter in the world. If someone learns martial arts solely to pick fights on the street, to lean on it as a keystone weapon in conflicts, to use it to bully and intimidate others \u2013 then that person, in my opinion, cannot be considered a true martial artist.\nAccording to Li, everything he has ever wanted to tell the world can be found in three of his films: the message of \"Hero\" is that the suffering of one person can never be as significant as the suffering of a nation; \"Unleashed\" shows that violence is never a solution; and \"Fearless\" tells that the biggest enemy of a person is himself. Li thinks that the greatest weapon is a smile and the largest power is love.\nAbout Wushu, he said that he believes the essence of martial arts is not power or speed but inner harmony, and considers it a sad development that today's Wushu championships place greater emphasis on form than on the essence of being a martial artist. He believes Wushu now lacks individuality and competitors move like machines, whereas according to his views Wushu should not be considered a race where the fastest athlete wins. He would like to see Wushu as a form of art, where artists have a distinctive style. Li blames the new competition rules that, according to him, place limitations on martial artists.\nLi believes that Wushu is not primarily for self-defense and instead of trying to play the hero people should think about peaceful resolutions of conflicts and call the police if necessary: \"A gun outdoes years of martial arts training in a split second. Like I've said many times before, it is important to differentiate between movies and reality. The hero in movies may be able to knock the gun off his opponent and save the day, but in real life \u2013 probably that is not the case.\" He has also stated that he has never had to use his martial arts skills in a real-life fight and he does not wish to, either.\nTaiji Zen.\nIn 2011, Li founded Taiji Zen, along with co-founder Executive chairman Jack Ma. Taiji Zen combined the martial art of tai chi (\"taijiquan\" in Chinese) with practices such as meditation. It packaged these into several different classes and online programs.\nPhilanthropy.\nLi has been a \"philanthropic ambassador\" of the Red Cross Society of China since January 2006. He contributed 500,000 yuan (US$) of box office revenues from his film \"Fearless\" to the Red Cross' psychological sunshine project, which promotes mental health.\nIn April 2007, touched by his life-shaking experience in the Maldives when he was close to dying during the 2004 tsunami, Li formed his own non-profit foundation called One Foundation. The One Foundation supports international disaster relief efforts in conjunction with the Red Cross as well as other efforts, including mental health awareness and suicide prevention. Since the starting of the foundation, Li has been involved with recovery efforts in seven disasters, including the 2008 Sichuan earthquake and Typhoon Morakot in Taiwan. In the 2013 Lushan earthquake in Ya'an, Sichuan, Li and other members of the entertainment sector were the first to appeal for donations of money, goods and materials to help the victims of the disaster. Wu Jing was a One Foundation volunteer and helped in the effort.\nLi discussed his commitment to philanthropy in an interview with the December 2009 issue of \"Alliance\" magazine, stating that \"grassroots non-government organizations can help the government in its blind spots. Government relief is not always detail-oriented. Grassroots NGOs can't be as big as a government effort, but they need to be flexible and independent.\"\nIn September 2010, he was appointed by the International Red Cross as the first Good Will Ambassador. He posted online, saying: \"Today I signed a deal with the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies \u2013 IFRC \u2013 to become the FIRST goodwill ambassador in the history of this humanitarian organization. I am very honored! At the same time, I will not pause to celebrate, but instead keep pushing forward and do my best to help the world! Thank you all once again for your support and belief in me!\"\nIt was also announced in September 2010, when Li was attending his wax unveiling ceremony in Hong Kong Madame Tussauds, that Li would be meeting Bill Gates and Warren Buffett to talk about charity work. \"Three days ago, I received an email from Gates, hoping I could make time because he and Buffett hoped I could go for a 30-minute chat before the dinner about the future we face as human beings, so I will go,\" Li said.\nFilmography.\nBy US box office statistics, the most successful Jet Li film as of August 2010 is \"Lethal Weapon 4\", which grossed over $130 million domestically, while the second is \"The Expendables\" with over $103 million. \"Hero\" is the third most successful foreign language film in the US, and one of the most critically acclaimed Li movies. \"Fearless\" is the seventh most successful foreign language film of all time in the US. From an aggregated critical point of view, the best acclaimed Li movie is \"Fist of Legend\" (Rotten Tomatoes: 100%) and the worst is \"The One\" (Rotten Tomatoes: 13%)."}
{"id": "16309", "revid": "36909700", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16309", "title": "Jianghu", "text": "Concept in Chinese wuxia fiction\nJianghu () is a Chinese term that generally refers to the social environment in which many Chinese \"wuxia\", \"xianxia\", and \"gong'an\" stories are set. The term is used flexibly, and can be used to describe a fictionalized version of imperial China (usually using loose influences from across the 221 BC \u2013 1912 AD period of time); a setting of feuding martial arts clans and the people of that community; a secret and possibly criminal underworld; a general sense of the \"mythic world\" where fantastical stories happen; or some combination thereof. A closely related term, \"wulin\" (\u6b66\u6797; w\u01d4l\u00edn; 'martial forest'), refers exclusively to the community of martial artists that inhabit a \"jianghu\" setting. The term \"wulin\" has been borrowed into Korean as \"murim\" (\ubb34\ub9bc) to refer to fiction set in Chinese-inspired martial arts worlds.\nEtymology.\nThe term originates from the Daoist classic \"Zhuangzi\", where it is used several times; most notably, in the chapter \"The Great and Most Honoured Master\" (\"da zongshi\"): When the springs are dried up, the fishes collect together on the land. Than that they should moisten one another there by the damp about them, and keep one another wet by their slime, it would be better for them to forget one another in the rivers and lakes. \uff08\u51fa\u6cc9\u6db8\uff0c\u9b5a\u76f8\u8207\u8655\u65bc\u9678\uff0c\u76f8\u5474\u4ee5\u6fd5\uff0c\u76f8\u6fe1\u4ee5\u6cab\uff0c\u4e0d\u5982\u76f8\u5fd8\u65bc\u6c5f\u6e56\u3002\uff09[...] \nHence it is said, \"Fishes forget one another in the rivers and lakes; men forget one another in the arts of the Dao. \uff08\u6545\u66f0\uff1a\u9b5a\u76f8\u5fd8\u4e4e\u6c5f\u6e56\uff0c\u4eba\u76f8\u5fd8\u4e4e\u9053\u8853\u3002\uff09 \nHistorical interpretations of \"jianghu\".\nThe image of the rivers and the lakes is associated with eremitism in Chinese historiography and literature. One prominent example is the story of Fan Li from the Spring and Autumn period, of whom it is said in \"Shiji,\" \"took a flat-bottomed boat and floated along the rivers and lakes\" (\u4e43\u4e58\u6241\u821f\u6d6e\u65bc\u6c5f\u6e56) to retreat from court life and live in seclusion. The term \"five lakes\" serves a similar function to \"jianghu\" in this particular context.\nThus, the term \"jianghu\" has been used in dynastic Chinese literature as a kind of literary euphemism or poetic trope to evoke distance (from other people or from politics), exile, dislocation, seclusion or hermitism. Famously, in Song dynasty poet Fan Zhongyan's \"Yueyang Lou Ji\", \"jianghu\" is set up in opposition to the courts and temples, meaning a world in its own right. Other examples of poetic and literary uses of \"jianghu\" include: Ouyang Xiu's literary essay on his boat, \"Huafang Zhai\" (\"Painted Pleasure-Boat Studio\"); Du Fu's poem, \"Tianmo huai Li Bai\" (\"Thinking of Li Bai at the End of the Sky\"), in which he reminisces about Li Bai, who had been banished after the An Lushan Rebellion; Bai Juyi's preface to his poem \"Pipa xing\" (\"Song of the Pipa\") where he describes himself as \"floating desolately among the rivers and lakes\"; Du Mu's poem \"Qian huai\" (\"Dwelling on exile\" or \"My Lament\"); among many others. In the Southern Song dynasty, there also emerged a group of poets who became retroactively known as the Jianghu shipai (\"Jianghu school of poetry\"), named after a title of a collection of their works by literary scholar and collector Chen Qi (\"Rivers and lakes collection\").\nOver the centuries, \"jianghu\" gained greater acceptance among the common people outside of the elite \"literati\" and gradually became a term for a sub-society parallel to, and sometimes orthogonal to, mainstream society. This sub-society initially included merchants, craftsmen, beggars and vagabonds, but over time it assimilated bandits, outlaws and gangs who lived \"outside the existing law\". During the Song and Yuan dynasties, bards and novelists began using the term \"jianghu\" in the process of creating literature covering a fictional society of adventurers and rebels who lived not by existing societal laws, but by their own moral principles or extralegal code of conduct. The core of these moral principles encompassed \"xia\" (), \"yi\" (), \"li\" (), \"zhong\" () and \"chou\" (). One of the most notable sources for helping develop the \"xiayi\" genre (prototypical version of the modern \"wuxia\" genre) and the concept of \"jianghu\" as it is understood in modern \"wuxia\" fiction is the 14th-century novel \"Water Margin\". In the novel, a band of noble outlaws, who mounted regular sorties in an attempt to right the wrongs of corrupt officials, have retreated to their hideout. These outlaws were called the \"Chivalrous men of the Green Forests\" () and they then proceed to have various adventures, mixing heroism with more roguish activities. Stories in this genre bloomed and enriched various interpretations of \"jianghu\". At the same time, the term \"jianghu\" also developed intricate interconnections with gang culture because of outlaws' mutually shared distaste towards governments.\nIn modern Chinese culture, \"jianghu\" is commonly accepted as an alternative universe coexisting with the actual historical one in which the context of the \"wuxia\" genre was set. Unlike the normal world, in the \"jianghu\", the \"youxia\" (wanderers or knights-errant) are free to act on their own initiative, including with violence, to punish evil and foes, and to reward goodness and allies. While the term literally means \"rivers and lakes\", it is broader than that: roads, inns, bandit lairs, deserted temples, and the wilderness are all classic places associated with the \"jianghu\", places far from government interference. Vigilantism is normal and accepted in a way that would be impermissible in a more realistic setting. Different wuxia novels have their own versions of the \"jianghu\" and its implications. Authors vary on whether they have one consistent setting or reinvent the \"jianghu\" in each work; Jin Yong's \"Condor Trilogy\" has one continuity, whereas Gu Long's \"jianghu\" would be distinct in every novel, for two examples.\nModern \"wuxia\" interpretations of the term \"jianghu\".\nThe inclusion of martial arts as a feature of \"jianghu\" was a recent development in the early 20th century. Novelists started creating a fantasy world of \"jianghu\" in which characters are martial artists and in which the characters' enforcement of righteousness is symbolised by conflicts between different martial artists or martial arts schools and the ultimate triumph of good over evil. Martial arts became a tool used by characters in a \"jianghu\" story to enforce their moral beliefs. On the other hand, there are characters who become corrupted by power derived from their formidable prowess in martial arts and end up abandoning their morality in their pursuit of power. Around this time, the term \"jianghu\" became closely related to a similar term, \"wulin\" (), which referred exclusively to a community of martial artists. This fantasy world of \"jianghu\" remains as the mainstream definition of \"jianghu\" in modern Chinese popular culture, particularly wuxia culture.\nIn more martial arts-centered stories, a common aspect of \"jianghu\" is that the courts of law are dysfunctional and that all disputes and differences (within the community) can only be resolved by members of the community, through the use of mediation, negotiation, or force, predicating the need for the code of \"xia\" and acts of chivalry. Law and order within the \"jianghu\" are maintained by the various orthodox and righteous schools and heroes. Sometimes these schools may gather to form an alliance against a common foe or organization.\nA leader, called the \"wulin mengzhu\" (), is elected from among the schools in order to lead them and ensure law and order within the \"jianghu\". The leader is usually someone with a high level of mastery in martial arts and a great reputation for righteousness who is often involved in some conspiracy and/or killed. In some stories, the leader may not be the greatest martial artist in the \"jianghu\"; in other stories, the position of the leader is hereditary. The leader is an arbiter who presides and adjudicates over all inequities and disputes. The leader is a \"de jure\" chief justice of the affairs of the \"jianghu\".\nRelationship with the government.\nMembers of the \"jianghu\" (referring to the criminal underworld, particularly that of organised crime) are also expected to keep their distance from any government offices or officials, without necessarily being antagonistic. It was acceptable for \"jianghu\" members who were respectable members of society (usually gentries owning properties or big businesses) to maintain respectful but formal and passive relationships with the officials, such as paying due taxes and attending local community events. Even then, they are expected to shield any fugitives from the law, or at the least not to turn over fugitives to the officials. Local officials who are savvier would know better than to expect co-operation from \"jianghu\" members and would refrain from seeking help except to apprehend the worst and most notorious criminals. If the crimes also violated some of the moral tenets of \"jianghu\", \"jianghu\" members may assist the government officials.\nAn interesting aspect is that while senior officials are kept at a distance, \"jianghu\" members may freely associate with low-ranking staff such as runners, jailers, or clerks of the magistrates. The \"jianghu\" members maintained order among their own in the community and prevented any major disturbance, thus saving a lot of work for their associates in the \"yamen\". In return, the runners turn a blind eye to certain \"jianghu\" activities that are officially disapproved, the jailers ensure incarcerated \"jianghu\" members are not mistreated, and the clerks pass on useful tips to the \"jianghu\" community. This reciprocal arrangement allowed their superiors to maintain order in their jurisdiction with the limited resources available and \"jianghu\" members greater freedom.\nAccording to Petrus Liu, [T]he martial arts novel['s] [...] discourse of \"jianghu\" (rivers and lakes) defines a public sphere unconnected to the sovereign power of the state, a sphere that is historically related to the idea of \"minjian\" \u6c11\u9593 (between the people) as opposed to the concept of \"tianxia\" \u5929\u4e0b (all under heaven) in Chinese philosophy. The martial arts novel presents the human subject as an ethical alterity, constituted by and dependent on its responsibilities to other human beings. It is through the recognition of this mutual interdependence, rather than the formal and positive laws of the state, that humanity manages to preserve itself despite rampant inequalities in privilege, rank, and status. As recounted by martial arts novels, the human subject is made and remade by forces that cannot be defined by positive laws of the state\u2014rage, love, gender, morality, life and death. The formation of this stateless subject is incompatible with the liberal conception of an autonomous rights-bearing citizen.According to Suzanne Brandtst\u00e4dter,\"Jianghu\", which literally translates as \"rivers and lakes\", is, [...] not a thing, an activity, or a kind of person. [...] it\u00a0rather encapsulates a particular relationality to the world that escapes order, structure, or representation. \"Jianghu\"\u00a0is\u00a0best\u00a0understood\u00a0as\u00a0any historical order's alterity, a reason why it can signify a particular attitude and agency, and also all kinds of rebellious and mysterious underworlds [...] Jianghu is lived and practiced ambivalence, always escaping political or legal efforts of categorization, regulation, and control. The nearest academic equivalent I found is Harney's and Moten's (2013) term \"undercommons\" [...] a metaphorical space where marginalized individuals and communities engage in forms of social, political, and intellectual resistance. Here, 'fugitive planning' allows alternative forms of knowledge, social relations, and solidarity to be developed outside the purview of mainstream structures (or indeed, infrastructures).\nUsage in modern times.\nThe term \"jianghu\" is linked to cultures other than those pertaining to martial arts in wuxia stories. It is also applied to anarchic societies. For instance, the triads and other Chinese secret societies use the term \"jianghu\" to describe their world of organised crime. Sometimes, the term \"jianghu\" may be replaced by the term \"underworld\" \"\u00e0 la\" \"criminal underworld\".\nIn modern terminology, \"jianghu\" may mean any circle of interest, ranging from the entertainment industry to sports to even politics and the business circle. Colloquially, retirement is also referred to as \"leaving the \"jianghu\"\" (). In \"wuxia\" stories, when reputable figures decide to retire from the \"jianghu\", they will do so in a ceremony known as \"washing hands in the golden basin\" (): they wash their hands in a golden basin filled with water, signifying that they will no longer be involved in the affairs of the \"jianghu\". When reclusive figures retired from the \"jianghu\" reappear, their return is described as \"re-entering the \"jianghu\"\" (). Another common expression to describe the disappointment, frustration and involuntariness one might have experienced during everyday work goes as \"[when] one is in the \"jianghu\", his body (i.e. action) is not up to himself (\u4eba\u5728\u6c5f\u6e56\uff0c\u8eab\u4e0d\u7531\u5df1)\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16310", "revid": "9012068", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16310", "title": "Jacopo Amigoni", "text": "Italian painter\nJacopo Amigoni (c. 1685 \u2013 September 1752), also named Giacomo Amiconi, was an Italian painter of the late-Baroque or Rococo period, who began his career in Venice, but traveled and was prolific throughout Europe, where his sumptuous portraits were much in demand.\nBiography.\nHe was born in Naples. Amigoni initially painted both mythological and religious scenes; but as the panoply of his patrons expanded northward, he began producing many parlour works depicting gods in sensuous languor or games. His style influenced Giuseppe Nogari. Among his pupils were Charles Joseph Flipart, Michelangelo Morlaiter, Pietro Antonio Novelli, Joseph Wagner, and Antonio Zucchi.\nStarting in 1717, he is documented as working in Bavaria in the Castle of Nymphenburg (1719); in the castle of Schleissheim (1725\u20131729); and in the Benedictine abbey of Ottobeuren. He returned to Venice in 1726. His \"Arraignment of Paris\" hangs in the Villa Pisani at Stra. From 1730 to 1739 he worked in England, including at Moor Park, Wolterton Hall, and in London at Powis House and the Theatre Royal, Covent Garden. From there, he helped convince Canaletto to travel to England by telling him of the ample patronage available.\nIn London or during a trip to Paris in 1736, he met the celebrated castrato Farinelli, whose portrait he painted twice in 1735 and again in 1752. Amigoni also encountered the painting of Fran\u00e7ois Lemoyne and Fran\u00e7ois Boucher.\nIn London he also became a flashpoint in the newspaper press. In 1734 James Ralph\u2019s \"The Weekly Register\" ran a five-week series on history painting that targeted Amigoni\u2019s recent work\u2014his frescoes for Lord Tankerville\u2019s house in St James\u2019s Square (\"Palamedes detecting Ulysses\u2019s madness\"; \"The Prophecy of Tiresias\"; \"Ulysses with Deidamia\"), the ceiling at the Theatre Royal, Covent Garden (\"The Muses presenting Shakespeare to Apollo\"), and scenes at Powis House\u2014faulting them for obscurity, over-ornament, and confused narratives. The \"Grub Street Journal\" replied point-by-point, at one stage pronouncing Amigoni\u2019s genius superior to that of all English painters.\nIn 1739 he returned to Italy, perhaps to Naples and surely to Montecassino, in whose Abbey existed two canvases (destroyed during World War II). He travelled to Venice to paint for Sigismund Streit, for the Casa Savoia and other buildings of the city.\nIn 1747 he left Italy for Madrid, encouraged by Farinelli, who held a court appointment there. He became court painter to Ferdinand VI of Spain and director of the Royal Academy of Saint Fernando. He painted a group portrait that included himself, Farinelli, Metastasio, Teresa Castellini, and an unidentified young man. The young man may have been the Austrian Archduke Joseph, the Habsburg heir to the throne. Amigoni died in Madrid.\nAmigoni was the father of the pastellist Caterina Amigoni Castellini, and the brother of the artist Carlotta Amigoni."}
{"id": "16312", "revid": "44120587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16312", "title": "Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Millet", "text": "French painter (1814\u20131875)\nJean-Fran\u00e7ois Millet (; 4 October 1814 \u2013 20 January 1875) was a French artist and one of the founders of the Barbizon school in rural France. Millet is noted for his paintings of peasant farmers and can be categorized as part of the Realism art movement. Toward the end of his career, he became increasingly interested in painting pure landscapes. He is known best for his oil paintings but is also noted for his pastels, Cont\u00e9 crayon drawings, and etchings.\nLife and work.\nYouth.\nMillet was the first child of Jean-Louis-Nicolas and Aim\u00e9e-Henriette-Ad\u00e9la\u00efde Henry Millet, members of the farming community in the village of Gruchy, in Gr\u00e9ville-Hague, Normandy, close to the coast. Under the guidance of two village priests\u2014one of them was vicar Jean Lebrisseux\u2014Millet acquired a knowledge of Latin and modern authors. But soon he had to help his father with the farm work, because Millet was the eldest of the sons. So all the farmer's work was familiar to him: to mow, make hay, bind the sheaves, thresh, winnow, spread manure, plough, sow, etc. All these motifs returned in his later art.\nIn 1833, his father sent him to Cherbourg to study with a portrait painter named Bon Du Mouchel. By 1835 he was studying with , a pupil of Baron Gros, in Cherbourg. A stipend provided by Langlois and others enabled Millet to move to Paris in 1837, where he studied at the with Paul Delaroche. In 1839, his scholarship was terminated, and his first submission to the Salon, \"Saint Anne Instructing the Virgin\", was rejected by the jury.\nParis.\nAfter his first painting, a portrait, was accepted at the Salon of 1840, Millet returned to Cherbourg to begin a career as a portrait painter. The following year he married Pauline-Virginie Ono, and they moved to Paris. After rejections at the Salon of 1843 and Pauline's death by consumption in April 1844, Millet returned again to Cherbourg. In 1845, Millet moved to Le Havre with Catherine Lemaire, whom he married in a civil ceremony in 1853; they had nine children and remained together for the rest of Millet's life. In Le Havre he painted portraits and small genre pieces for several months, before moving back to Paris.\nIt was in Paris in the middle 1840s that Millet befriended Constant Troyon, Narcisse Diaz, Charles Jacque, and Th\u00e9odore Rousseau, artists who, like Millet, became associated with the Barbizon school; Honor\u00e9 Daumier, whose figure draftsmanship influenced Millet's subsequent rendering of peasant subjects; and , a government bureaucrat who became a lifelong supporter and eventually the artist's biographer. In 1847, his first Salon success came with the exhibition of a painting \"Oedipus Taken down from the Tree\", and in 1848, his \"Winnower\" was bought by the government.\n\"The Captivity of the Jews in Babylon\", Millet's most ambitious work at the time, was unveiled at the Salon of 1848, but was scorned by art critics and the public alike. The painting eventually disappeared shortly thereafter, leading historians to believe that Millet destroyed it. In 1984, scientists at the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston x-rayed Millet's 1870 painting \"The Young Shepherdess\" looking for minor changes, and discovered that it was painted over \"Captivity\". It is now believed that Millet reused the canvas when materials were in short supply during the Franco-Prussian War.\nBarbizon.\nIn 1849, Millet painted \"Harvesters\", a commission for the state. In the Salon of that year, he exhibited \"Shepherdess Sitting at the Edge of the Forest\", a very small oil painting which marked a turning away from previous idealized pastoral subjects, in favor of a more realistic and personal approach. In June of that year, he settled in Barbizon with Catherine and their children.\nIn 1850, Millet entered into an arrangement with Sensier, who provided the artist with materials and money in return for drawings and paintings, while Millet simultaneously was free to continue selling work to other buyers as well. At that year's Salon, he exhibited \"Haymakers\" and \"The Sower\", his first major masterpiece and the earliest of the iconic trio of paintings that included \"The Gleaners\" and \"The Angelus\".\nFrom 1850 to 1853, Millet worked on \"Harvesters Resting (Ruth and Boaz)\", a painting he considered his most important, and on which he worked the longest. Conceived to rival his heroes Michelangelo and Poussin, it was also the painting that marked his transition from the depiction of symbolic imagery of peasant life to that of contemporary social conditions. It was the only painting he ever dated, and was the first work to garner him official recognition, a second-class medal at the Salon of 1853.\nIn the mid-1850s, Millet produced a small number of etchings of peasant subjects, such as \"Man with a Wheelbarrow\" (1855) and \"Woman Carding Wool\" (1855\u20131857).\n\"The Gleaners\".\nThis is one of the most well known of Millet's paintings, \"The Gleaners\" (1857). While Millet was walking the fields around Barbizon, one theme returned to his pencil and brush for seven years\u2014gleaning\u2014the centuries-old right of poor women and children to remove the bits of grain left in the fields following the harvest. He found the theme an eternal one, linked to stories from the Old Testament. In 1857, he submitted the painting \"The Gleaners\" to the Salon to an unenthusiastic, even hostile, public.\nA warm golden light suggests something sacred and eternal in this daily scene where the struggle to survive takes place. During his years of preparatory studies, Millet contemplated how best to convey the sense of repetition and fatigue in the peasants' daily lives. Lines traced over each woman's back lead to the ground and then back up in a repetitive motion identical to their unending, backbreaking labor. Along the horizon, the setting sun silhouettes the farm with its abundant stacks of grain, in contrast to the large shadowy figures in the foreground. The dark homespun dresses of the gleaners cut robust forms against the golden field, giving each woman a noble, monumental strength.\n\"The Angelus\".\nThe painting was commissioned by Thomas Gold Appleton, an American art collector based in Boston, Massachusetts. Appleton previously studied with Millet's friend, the Barbizon painter Constant Troyon. It was completed during the summer of 1857. Millet added a steeple and changed the initial title of the work, \"Prayer for the Potato Crop\" to \"The Angelus\" when the purchaser failed to take possession of it in 1859. Displayed to the public for the first time in 1865, the painting changed hands several times, increasing only modestly in value, since some considered the artist's political sympathies suspect. Upon Millet's death a decade later, a bidding war between the US and France ensued, ending some years later with a price tag of 800,000 gold francs.\nThe disparity between the apparent value of the painting and the poor estate of Millet's surviving family was a major impetus in the invention of the , intended to compensate artists or their heirs when works are resold.\nLater years.\nDespite mixed reviews of the paintings he exhibited at the Salon, Millet's reputation and success grew throughout the 1860s. At the beginning of the decade, he contracted to paint 25 works in return for a monthly stipend for the next three years and in 1865, another patron, Emile Gavet, began commissioning pastels for a collection that eventually included 90 works. In 1867, the hosted a major showing of his work, with the \"Gleaners\", \"Angelus\", and \"Potato Planters\" among the paintings exhibited. The following year, Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Hartmann commissioned \"Four Seasons\" for 25,000 francs, and Millet was named .\nIn 1870, Millet was elected to the Salon jury. Later that year, he and his family fled the Franco-Prussian War, moving to Cherbourg and Gr\u00e9ville, and did not return to Barbizon until late in 1871. His last years were marked by financial success and increased official recognition, but he was unable to fulfill government commissions due to failing health. On 3 January 1875, he married Catherine in a religious ceremony. Millet died on 20 January 1875.\nLegacy.\nMillet was an important source of inspiration for Vincent van Gogh, particularly during his early period. Millet and his work are mentioned many times in Vincent's letters to his brother Theo. Millet's late landscapes served as influential points of reference to Claude Monet's paintings of the coast of Normandy; his structural and symbolic content influenced Georges Seurat as well.\nMillet is the main protagonist of Mark Twain's play \"Is He Dead?\" (1898), in which he is depicted as a struggling young artist who fakes his death to score fame and fortune. Most of the details about Millet in the play are fictional.\nMillet's painting \"L'homme \u00e0 la houe\" inspired the famous poem \"The Man With the Hoe\" (1898) by Edwin Markham. His paintings also served as the inspiration for American poet David Middleton's collection \"The Habitual Peacefulness of Gruchy: Poems After Pictures by Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Millet\" (2005).\nThe \"Angelus\" was reproduced frequently in the 19th and 20th centuries. Salvador Dal\u00ed was fascinated by this work, and wrote an analysis of it, \"The Tragic Myth of The Angelus of Millet\". Rather than seeing it as a work of spiritual peace, Dal\u00ed believed it held messages of repressed sexual aggression. Dal\u00ed was also of the opinion that the two figures were praying over their buried child, rather than to the Angelus. Dal\u00ed was so insistent on this fact that eventually an X-ray was done of the canvas, confirming his suspicions: the painting contains a painted-over geometric shape strikingly similar to a coffin. However, it is unclear whether Millet changed his mind on the meaning of the painting, or even if the shape actually is a coffin.\nOn the 150th anniversary of Millet's death, the National Gallery, London exhibited \"Millet: Life on the Land\"; the exhibit organized by Sarah Herring is drawn from loans from around the United Kingdom. \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16313", "revid": "18872885", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16313", "title": "Jacques Callot", "text": "French engraver (c.1592\u20131635)\nJacques Callot (; c.\u20091592 \u2013 1635) was a baroque printmaker and draftsman from the Duchy of Lorraine. He is an important person in the development of the old master print. He made more than 1,400 etchings that chronicled the life of his period, featuring soldiers, clowns, drunkards, Romani, beggars, as well as court life. He also etched many religious and military images, and many prints featured extensive landscapes in their background.\nLife and training.\nCallot was born and died in Nancy, the capital of Lorraine, now in France. At the time, the Duchy of Lorraine was an independent state on the north-eastern border of France, southwestern border of Germany and overlapping the southern Netherlands. He came from an important family (his father was master of ceremonies at the court of the Duke), and he often describes himself as having noble status in the inscriptions to his prints. At the age of fifteen he was apprenticed to a goldsmith, but soon afterward travelled to Rome where he learned engraving from an expatriate Frenchman, Philippe Thomassin. He probably then studied etching with Antonio Tempesta in Florence, where he lived from 1612 to 1621. More than 2,000 preparatory drawings and studies for prints survive, but no paintings by him are known, and he probably never trained as a painter.\nDuring his period in Florence he became an independent master, and worked often for the Medici court. After the death of Cosimo II de' Medici during 1621, he returned to Nancy where he lived for the rest of his life, visiting Paris and the Netherlands later during the decade. He was commissioned by the courts of Lorraine, France and Spain, and by publishers, mostly in Paris. Although he remained in Nancy, his prints were distributed widely through Europe; Rembrandt was a keen collector of them.\nTechnical innovations: \u00e9choppe, new hard ground, stopping-out.\nHis technique was exceptional, and was helped by important technical advances he made. He developed the \u00e9choppe, a type of etching-needle with a slanting oval section at the end, which enabled etchers to create a swelling line, as engravers were able to do.\nHe also seems to have been responsible for an improved recipe for the etching ground that coated the plate and was removed to form the image, using lute-makers varnish rather than a wax-based formula. This enabled lines to be etched more deeply, prolonging the life of the plate in printing, and also greatly reducing the risk of \"foul-biting\", such that acid gets through the ground to the plate where it is not intended to, producing spots or blotches on the image. Previously the risk of foul-biting had always been present, preventing an engraver from investing too much time on a single plate that risked being ruined by foul-biting. Now etchers could do the very detailed work that was previously the monopoly of engravers, and Callot made good use of the new possibilities.\nHe also made more extensive and sophisticated use of multiple \"stoppings-out\" than previous etchers had done. This is the technique of letting the acid dissolve lightly over the whole plate, then stopping-out those parts of the work which the artist wishes to keep shallow by covering them with ground before bathing the plate in acid again. He achieved unprecedented subtlety in effects of distance and light and shade by careful control of this process. Most of his prints were relatively small \u2013 as much as about six inches or 15\u00a0cm on their longest dimension.\nOne of his devotees, the Parisian Abraham Bosse spread Callot's innovations all over Europe with the first published manual of etching, which was translated into Italian, Dutch, German and English.\n\"Miseries of War\".\nHis most famous prints are his two series of prints each on \"the Miseries and Misfortunes of War\". These are 18 prints published during 1633, and the earlier and incomplete \"Les Petites Mis\u00e8res\" \u2013 referring to their sizes, large and small (though even the large set are only about 8\u00a0x\u00a013\u00a0cm). These images show soldiers pillaging and burning their way through towns, country and convents, before being variously arrested and executed by their superiors, lynched by peasants, or surviving to live as crippled beggars. At the end the generals are rewarded by their monarch. During 1633, the year the larger set was published, Lorraine had been invaded by the French during the Thirty Years' War and Callot's artwork is still noted with Francisco Goya's \"Los Desastres de la Guerra\" (\"The Disasters of War\"), which was influenced by Callot \u2013 (Goya owned a series of the prints), as among the most powerful artistic statements of the inhumanity of war.\nGrotesque Dwarves.\nCallot's series of \"Grotesque Dwarves\" were to inspire Derby porcelain and other companies to create pottery figures known as \"Mansion House Dwarves\" or \"Grotesque Dwarves\". The former title comes from a father and son who were paid to wander around the Mansion House in London wearing oversized hats that contained advertisements.\nVarie Figure Gobbi \u2013 Series of 21 etchings, 1616\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16314", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16314", "title": "Ronald William Kirby", "text": ""}
{"id": "16315", "revid": "6433061", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16315", "title": "Joseph Campbell", "text": "American mythologist, writer, and lecturer (1904\u20131987)\nJoseph John Campbell (March 26, 1904\u00a0\u2013 October 30, 1987) was an American writer and the husband of Jean Erdman. He was a professor of literature at Sarah Lawrence College who worked in comparative mythology and comparative religion. His work covers many aspects of the human condition. Campbell's best-known work is his book \"The Hero with a Thousand Faces\" (1949), in which he discusses his theory of the journey of the archetypal hero shared by world mythologies, termed the monomyth.\nSince the publication of \"The Hero with a Thousand Faces\", Campbell's theories have been applied by a wide variety of modern writers and artists. His philosophy has been summarized by his own often repeated phrase: \"Follow your bliss.\" He gained recognition in Hollywood when George Lucas credited Campbell's work as influencing his \"Star Wars\" saga.\nLife.\nBackground.\nJoseph Campbell was born in White Plains, New York, on March 26, 1904, the elder son of hosiery importer and wholesaler Charles William Campbell, from Waltham, Massachusetts, and Josephine (n\u00e9e Lynch), from New York. Campbell was raised in an upper-middle-class Irish Catholic family; he related that his paternal grandfather Charles had been \"a peasant\" who came to Boston from County Mayo in Ireland, and became the gardener and caretaker at the Lyman Estate at Waltham, where his son Charles William Campbell grew up and became a successful salesman at a department store prior to establishing his hosiery business. During his childhood, he moved with his family to New Rochelle, New York. In 1919, a fire destroyed the family home in New Rochelle, killing his maternal grandmother and injuring his father, who tried to save her.\nIn 1921, Campbell graduated from the Canterbury School in New Milford, Connecticut. While at Dartmouth College he studied biology and mathematics, but decided that he preferred the humanities. He transferred to Columbia University, where he received a Bachelor of Arts degree in English literature in 1925 and a Master of Arts degree in medieval literature in 1927. At Dartmouth he had joined Delta Tau Delta. An accomplished athlete, he received awards in track and field events, and, for a time, was among the fastest half-mile runners in the world.\nIn 1924, Campbell traveled to Europe with his family. On the ship during his return trip he encountered the messiah elect of the Theosophical Society, Jiddu Krishnamurti; they discussed Indian philosophy, sparking in Campbell an interest in Hindu and Indian thought. In 1927, he received a fellowship from Columbia University to study in Europe. Campbell studied Old French, Proven\u00e7al, and Sanskrit at the University of Paris and the University of Munich. He learned to read and speak French and German.\nOn his return to Columbia University in 1929, Campbell expressed a desire to pursue the study of Sanskrit and modern art in addition to medieval literature. Lacking faculty approval, Campbell withdrew from graduate studies. Later in life he jested that it is a sign of incompetence to have a PhD in the liberal arts, the discipline covering his work.\nThe Great Depression.\nWith the arrival of the Great Depression, Campbell spent the next five years (1929\u20131934) living in a rented shack in Woodstock, New York. There, he contemplated the next course of his life while engaged in intensive and rigorous independent study. He later said that he \"would divide the day into four three-hour periods, of which I would be reading in three of the three-hour periods, and free one of them\u00a0... I would get nine hours of sheer reading done a day. And this went on for five years straight.\"\nCampbell traveled to California for a year (1931\u20131932), continuing his independent studies and becoming a close friend of the budding writer John Steinbeck and his wife Carol. Campbell had met Carol's sister, Idell, on a Honolulu cruise and she introduced him to the Steinbecks. Campbell had an affair with Carol. On the Monterey Peninsula, Campbell, like John Steinbeck, fell under the spell of the marine biologist Ed Ricketts (the model for \"Doc\" in Steinbeck's novel \"Cannery Row\" as well as central characters in several other novels). Campbell lived for a while next door to Ricketts, participated in professional and social activities at his neighbor's, and accompanied him, along with Xenia and Sasha Kashevaroff, on a 1932 journey to Juneau, Alaska on the \"Grampus\". Campbell began writing a novel centered on Ricketts as a hero but, unlike Steinbeck, did not complete his book.\nBruce Robison writes that &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Campbell would refer to those days as a time when everything in his life was taking shape.\u00a0... Campbell, the great chronicler of the \"hero's journey\" in mythology, recognized patterns that paralleled his own thinking in one of Ricketts's unpublished philosophical essays. Echoes of Carl Jung, Robinson Jeffers and James Joyce can be found in the work of Steinbeck and Ricketts as well as Campbell.\nCampbell continued his independent reading while teaching for a year in 1933 at the Canterbury School in Connecticut, during which time he also attempted to publish works of fiction. While teaching at the Canterbury School, Campbell sold his first short story \"Strictly Platonic\" to \"Liberty\" magazine.\nSarah Lawrence College.\nIn 1934, Campbell accepted a position as Professor of Literature at Sarah Lawrence College in Yonkers, New York. In 1938, he married one of his former students, the dancer-choreographer Jean Erdman. For most of their 49 years of marriage they shared a two-room apartment in Greenwich Village in New York City. In the 1980s they also purchased an apartment in Honolulu and divided their time between the two cities. They did not have any children.\nEarly in World War II, Campbell attended a lecture by the Indologist Heinrich Zimmer; the two men became good friends. After Zimmer's death, Campbell was given the task of editing and posthumously publishing Zimmer's papers, which he would do over the following decade.\nIn 1955\u20131956, as the last volume of Zimmer's posthumous treatise, \"The Art of Indian Asia, Its Mythology and Transformations,\" was finally about to be published, Campbell took a sabbatical from Sarah Lawrence College and traveled, for the first time, to Asia. He spent six months in southern Asia (mostly India) and another six in East Asia (mostly Japan). This year had a profound influence on his thinking about Asian religion and myth, and also on the necessity for teaching comparative mythology to a larger, non-academic audience.\nIn 1972, Campbell retired from Sarah Lawrence College, after having taught there for 38 years.\nLater life and death.\nCampbell attended a Grateful Dead concert in 1986, and marveled that \"Everyone has just lost themselves in everybody else here!\" With Grateful Dead, Campbell put on a conference called \"Ritual and Rapture from Dionysus to the Grateful Dead\".\nCampbell died at his home in Honolulu, Hawaii, on October 30, 1987, from complications of esophageal cancer. Before his death he had completed filming the series of interviews with Bill Moyers that aired the following spring as \"The Power of Myth\". He is buried in O'ahu Cemetery, Honolulu.\nInfluences.\nArt, literature, philosophy.\nCampbell often referred to the work of modern writers James Joyce and Thomas Mann in his lectures and writings, as well as to the art of Pablo Picasso. He was introduced to their work during his stay as a graduate student in Paris. Campbell eventually corresponded with Mann.\nThe works of Arthur Schopenhauer and Friedrich Nietzsche had a profound effect on Campbell's thinking; he quoted their writing frequently.\nThe \"follow your bliss\" philosophy attributed to Campbell following the original broadcast of \"The Power of Myth\" (see below) derives from the Hindu Upanishads; however, Campbell was possibly also influenced by the 1922 Sinclair Lewis novel \"Babbitt\". In \"The Power of Myth,\" Campbell quotes from the novel:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPsychology and anthropology.\nThe anthropologist Leo Frobenius and his disciple Adolf Ellegard Jensen were important to Campbell's view of cultural history. Campbell was also influenced by the psychological work of Abraham Maslow and Stanislav Grof.\nCampbell's ideas regarding myth and its relation to the human psyche are dependent in part on the pioneering work of Sigmund Freud, but in particular on the work of Jung, whose studies of human psychology greatly influenced Campbell. Campbell's conception of myth is closely related to the Jungian method of dream interpretation, which is heavily reliant on symbolic interpretation. Jung's insights into archetypes were heavily influenced by the \"Bardo Thodol\" (also known as \"The Tibetan Book of the Dead\"). In his book \"The Mythic Image\", Campbell quotes Jung's statement about the \"Bardo Thodol\", that it\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;belongs to that class of writings which not only are of interest to specialists in Mahayana Buddhism, but also, because of their deep humanity and still deeper insight into the secrets of the human psyche, make an especial appeal to the layman seeking to broaden his knowledge of life\u00a0... For years, ever since it was first published, the \"Bardo Thodol\" has been my constant companion, and to it I owe not only many stimulating ideas and discoveries, but also many fundamental insights.\nComparative mythology and theories.\nMonomyth.\nCampbell's concept of \"monomyth\" (one myth) refers to the theory that sees all mythic narratives as variations of a single great story. The theory is based on the observation that a common pattern exists beneath the narrative elements of most great myths, regardless of their origin or time of creation. Campbell often referred to the ideas of Adolf Bastian and his distinction between what he called \"folk\" and \"elementary\" ideas, the latter referring to the prime matter of monomyth while the former to the multitude of local forms the myth takes in order to remain an up-to-date carrier of sacred meanings. The central pattern most studied by Campbell is often referred to as \"the hero's journey\" and was first described in \"The Hero with a Thousand Faces\" (1949). An enthusiast of novelist James Joyce, Campbell borrowed the term \"monomyth\" from Joyce's \"Finnegans Wake\". Campbell also made heavy use of Carl Jung's theories on the structure of the human psyche, and he often used terms such as anima, animus and ego consciousness.\nAs a strong believer in the psychic unity of mankind and its poetic expression through mythology, Campbell made use of the concept to express the idea that the whole of the human race can be seen as engaged in the effort of making the world \"transparent to transcendence\" by showing that underneath the world of phenomena lies an eternal source which is constantly pouring its energies into this world of time, suffering, and ultimately death. To achieve this task one needs to speak about things that existed before and beyond words, a seemingly impossible task, the solution to which lies in the metaphors found in myths. These metaphors are statements that point beyond themselves into the transcendent. The Hero's Journey was the story of the man or woman who, through great suffering, reached an experience of the eternal source and returned with gifts powerful enough to set their society free.\nAs this story spread through space and evolved through time, it was broken down into various local forms (masks), depending on the social structures and environmental pressures that existed for the culture that interpreted it. The basic structure, however, has remained relatively unchanged and can be classified using the various stages of a hero's adventure through the story, stages such as \"the Call to Adventure, Receiving Supernatural Aid, Meeting with the Goddess/Atonement with the Father\" and \"Return\". These stages, as well as the symbols one encounters throughout the story, provide the necessary metaphors to express the spiritual truths the story is trying to convey. Metaphors for Campbell, in contrast with \"similes\" which make use of the word \"like\", pretend to a literal interpretation of what they are referring to, as in the sentence \"Jesus is the Son of God\" rather than \"the relationship of man to God is \"like\" that of a son to a father\".\nIn the 1987 documentary \"Joseph Campbell: A Hero's Journey\", he explains God in terms of a metaphor:\nGod is a metaphor for a mystery that absolutely transcends all human categories of thought, even the categories of being and non-being. Those are categories of thought. I mean it's as simple as that. So it depends on how much you want to think about it. Whether it's doing you any good. Whether it is putting you in touch with the mystery that's the ground of your own being. If it isn't, well, it's a lie. So half the people in the world are religious people who think that their metaphors are facts. Those are what we call theists. The other half are people who know that the metaphors are not facts. And so, they're lies. Those are the atheists.\nFunctions of myth.\nCampbell often described mythology as having a fourfold function within human society. These appear at the end of his work \"The Masks of God: Creative Mythology\", as well as various lectures.\n According to Campbell, the absolute mystery of life, what he called transcendent reality, cannot be captured directly in words or images. Symbols and mythic metaphors on the other hand point outside themselves and into that reality. They are what Campbell called \"being statements\" and their enactment through ritual can give to the participant a sense of that ultimate mystery as an experience. \"Mythological symbols touch and exhilarate centers of life beyond the reach of reason and coercion... The first function of mythology is to reconcile waking consciousness to the \"mysterium tremendum et fascinans\" of this universe \"as it is\".\"\n For pre-modern societies, myth also functioned as a \"proto-science\", offering explanations for the physical phenomena that surrounded and affected their lives, such as the change of seasons and the life cycles of animals and plants.\n Ancient societies had to conform to an existing social order if they were to survive at all. This is because they evolved under \"pressure\" from necessities much more intense than the ones encountered in our modern world. Mythology confirmed that order and enforced it by reflecting it into the stories themselves, often describing how the order arrived from divine intervention. Campbell often referred to these \"conformity\" myths as the \"Right Hand Path\" to reflect the brain's left hemisphere's abilities for logic, order and linearity. Together with these myths however, he observed the existence of the \"Left Hand Path\", mythic patterns like the \"Hero's Journey\" which are revolutionary in character in that they demand from the individual a surpassing of social norms and sometimes even of morality.\n As a person goes through life, many psychological challenges will be encountered. Myth may serve as a guide for successful passage through the stages of one's life.\nEvolution of myth.\nCampbell's view of mythology was by no means static and his books describe in detail how mythologies evolved through time, reflecting the realities in which each society had to adjust. Various stages of cultural development have different yet identifiable mythological systems. In brief these are:\n At this stage of evolution, religion was animistic, as all of nature was seen as being infused with a spirit or divine presence. At center stage was the main hunting animal of that culture, whether the buffalo for Native Americans or the eland for South African tribes, and a large part of religion focused on dealing with the psychological tension that came from the reality of the necessity to kill versus the divinity of the animal. This was done by presenting the animals as springing from an eternal archetypal source and coming to this world as \"willing victims\", with the understanding that their lives would be returned to the soil or to the Mother through a ritual of restoration. The act of slaughter then becomes a ritual where both parties, animal and mankind, are equal participants. In \"Mythos\" and \"The Power of Myth\", Campbell recounts the story he calls \"The Buffalo's Wife\" as told by the Blackfoot tribe of North America. The story tells of a time when the buffalos stopped coming to the hunting plains, leaving the tribe to starve. The chief's daughter promises to marry the buffalo chief in return for their reappearance, but is eventually spared and taught the buffalo dance by the animals themselves, through which the spirits of their dead will return to their eternal life source. Indeed, Campbell taught that throughout history mankind has held a belief that all life comes from and returns to another dimension which transcends temporality, but which can be reached through ritual.\n Beginning in the fertile grasslands of the Levant and the Fertile Crescent of Mesopotamia in the Bronze Age and moving to Europe, the practice of agriculture spread along with a new way of understanding mankind's relationship to the world. At this time the earth was seen as the Mother, and the myths focused around Her life-giving powers. The plant and cultivation cycle was mirrored in religious rituals which often included human sacrifice, symbolic or literal. The main figures of this system were a female Great Goddess, Mother Earth, and her ever-dying and ever-resurrected son/consort, a male God. At this time the focus was to participate in the repetitive rhythm the world moved in expressed as the four seasons, the birth and death of crops and the phases of the moon. At the center of this motion was the Mother Goddess from whom all life springs and to whom all life returns. This often gave Her a dual aspect as both mother and destroyer.\n As the first agricultural societies evolved into the high civilisations of Mesopotamia and Babylonia, the observation of the stars inspired them with the idea that life on earth must also follow a similar mathematically predetermined pattern in which individual beings are but mere participants in an eternal cosmic play. The king was symbolised by the Sun with the golden crown as its main metaphor, while his court were the orbiting planets. The Mother Goddess remained, but her powers were now fixed within the rigid framework of a clockwork universe.\n However, two barbarian incursions changed that. As the Indo-European (Aryan) people descended from the north and the Semites swept up from the Arabian desert, they carried with them a male dominated mythology with a warrior god whose symbol was the thunder. As they conquered, mainly due to the superior technology of iron smithing, their mythology blended with and subjugated the previous system of the Earth Goddess. Many mythologies of the ancient world, such as those of Greece, India, and Persia, are a result of that fusion with gods retaining some of their original traits and character but now belonging to a single system. Figures such as Zeus and Indra are thunder gods who now interact with Demeter and Dionysus, whose ritual sacrifice and rebirth, bearing testament to his pre-Indo-European roots, were still enacted in classical Greece. But for the most part, the focus heavily shifted toward the masculine, with Zeus ascending the throne of the gods and Dionysus demoted to a mere demi-god.\n This demotion was very profound in the case of the biblical imagery where the female elements were marginalized to an extreme. Campbell believed that Eve and the snake that tempted her were once fertility gods worshipped in their own right, with the tree of knowledge being the Tree of Life. He also found significance in the biblical story of Cain and Abel, with Cain being a farmer whose agrarian offering is not accepted by God, while herder Abel's animal sacrifice is. In the lecture series of Mythos, Campbell speaks of the Mysteries of Eleusis in Ancient Greece, where Demeter's journey in the underworld was enacted for young men and women of the time. There he observed that wheat was presented as the ultimate mystery with wine being a symbol of Dionysus, much like in the Christian mysteries where bread and wine are considered to incarnate the body and blood of Jesus. Both religions carry the same \"seeded earth\" cosmology in different forms while retaining an image of the ever-dying, ever-resurrected God.\n Campbell recognized that the poetic form of courtly love, carried through medieval Europe by the traveling troubadours, contained a complete mythology in its own right. In\" The Power of Myth\" as well as the \"Occidental Mythology\" volume of \"The Masks of God\", Campbell describes the emergence of a new kind of erotic experience as a \"person to person\" affair, in contrast with the purely physical definition given to Eros in the ancient world and the communal agape found in the Christian religion. An archetypal story of this kind is the legend of Tristan and Isolde which, apart from its mystical function, shows the transition from an arranged-marriage society as practiced in the Middle Ages and sanctified by the church, into the form of marriage by \"falling in love\" with another person that we recognize today. So what essentially started from a mythological theme has since become a social reality, mainly due to a change in perception brought about by a new mythology\u00a0\u2013 and represents a central foundational manifestation of Campbell's overriding interpretive message, \"Follow your bliss.\"\n Campbell believed that in the modern world the function served by formal, traditional mythological systems has been taken on by individual creators such as artists and philosophers. In the works of some of his favorites, such as Thomas Mann, Pablo Picasso and James Joyce, he saw mythological themes that could serve the same life-giving purpose that mythology had once played. Accordingly, Campbell believed the religions of the world to be the various culturally influenced \"masks\" of the same fundamental, transcendent truths. All religions can bring one to an elevated awareness above and beyond a dualistic conception of reality, or idea of \"pairs of opposites\" such as being and non-being, or right and wrong. Indeed, he quotes from the Rigveda in the preface to \"The Hero with a Thousand Faces\": \"Truth is one, the sages speak of it by many names.\"\nLegacy.\nJoseph Campbell Foundation.\nIn 1991, Campbell's widow, choreographer Jean Erdman, worked with Campbell's longtime friend and editor, Robert Walter, to create the Joseph Campbell Foundation.\nInitiatives undertaken by the JCF include: \"The Collected Works of Joseph Campbell\", a series of books and recordings that aims to pull together Campbell's myriad-minded work; the Erdman Campbell Award; the Mythological RoundTables, a network of local groups around the globe that explore the subjects of comparative mythology, psychology, religion and culture; and the collection of Campbell's library and papers housed at the OPUS Archives and Research Center.\nFilm and television.\nGeorge Lucas was the first filmmaker to credit Campbell's influence. Lucas stated, following the release of the first \"Star Wars\" film in 1977, that its story was shaped, in part, by ideas described in \"The Hero with a Thousand Faces\" and other works of Campbell's. The linkage between \"Star Wars\" and Campbell was further reinforced when later reprints of Campbell's book used the image of Luke Skywalker on the cover. Lucas discusses this influence at great length in the authorized biography of Joseph Campbell, \"A Fire in the Mind\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; I came to the conclusion after \"American Graffiti\" that what's valuable for me is to set standards, not to show people the world the way it is... around the period of this realization\u2026 it came to me that there really was no modern use of mythology... The Western was possibly the last generically American fairy tale, telling us about our values. And once the Western disappeared, nothing has ever taken its place. In literature we were going off into science fiction\u2026 so that's when I started doing more strenuous research on fairy tales, folklore, and mythology, and I started reading Joe's books. Before that I hadn't read any of Joe's books\u2026 It was very eerie because in reading \"The Hero with a Thousand Faces\" I began to realize that my first draft of \"Star Wars\" was following classic motifs\u2026 So I modified my next draft according to what I'd been learning about classical motifs and made it a little bit more consistent... I went on to read \"The Masks of God\" and many other books.\nIt was not until after the completion of the original \"Star Wars\" trilogy in 1983, however, that Lucas met Campbell or heard any of his lectures. In 1984, Campbell gave a lecture at the Palace of Fine Arts in San Francisco, with Lucas in the audience, who was introduced through their mutual friend Barbara McClintock. A few years later, Lucas invited Campbell to watch the entire \"Star Wars\" trilogy at Skywalker Ranch, which Campbell called \"real art\". This meeting led to the filming of the 1988 documentary \"The Power of Myth\" at Skywalker Ranch. In his interviews with Bill Moyers, Campbell discusses the way in which Lucas used \"The Hero's Journey\" in the \"Star Wars\" films (IV, V, and VI) to re-invent the mythology for the contemporary viewer. Moyers and Lucas filmed an interview 12 years later in 1999 called the \"Mythology of Star Wars with George Lucas &amp; Bill Moyers\" to further discuss the impact of Campbell's work on Lucas' films. In addition, the National Air and Space Museum of the Smithsonian Institution sponsored an exhibit during the late 1990s called \"Star Wars: The Magic of Myth\", which discussed the ways in which Campbell's work shaped the \"Star Wars\" films.\nMany filmmakers of the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries have acknowledged the influence of Campbell's work on their own craft. Christopher Vogler, a Hollywood screenwriter, created a seven-page company memo based on Campbell's work, \"A Practical Guide to The Hero With a Thousand Faces\", which led to the development of Disney's 1994 film \"The Lion King\". Among films that many viewers have recognized as closely following the pattern of the monomyth are \"The Matrix\" series, the Batman series and the \"Indiana Jones\" series. Dan Harmon, the creator of the TV show \"Community\" and co-creator of the TV show \"Rick and Morty\", often references Campbell as a major influence. According to him, he uses a \"story circle\" to formulate every story he writes, in a formulation of Campbell's work. A fictionalized version of Campbell himself appears in the seventh episode of the sixth season of \"Rick and Morty\", \"Full Meta Jackrick\".\nPopular literature.\nAfter the explosion of popularity brought on by the \"Star Wars\" films and \"The Power of Myth\", creative artists in many media recognized the potential to use Campbell's theories to try to unlock human responses to narrative patterns. Novelists, songwriters, and video game designers have studied Campbell's work in order to better understand mythology\u2014in particular, the monomyth\u2014and its impact.\nThe novelist Richard Adams acknowledges a debt to Campbell's work and specifically to the concept of the monomyth. In his best known work, \"Watership Down\", Adams uses extracts from \"The Hero with a Thousand Faces\" as chapter epigrams.\nDan Brown mentioned in a \"New York Times\" interview that Joseph Campbell's works, particularly \"The Power of Myth\" and \"The Hero with a Thousand Faces\", inspired him to create the character of Robert Langdon.\n\"Follow your bliss\".\nOne of Campbell's most identifiable, most quoted and arguably most misunderstood sayings was his maxim to \"follow your bliss\". He derived this idea from the Upanishads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; Now, I came to this idea of bliss because in Sanskrit, which is the great spiritual language of the world, there are three terms that represent the brink, the jumping-off place to the ocean of transcendence: Sat-Chit-Ananda. The word \"Sat\" means being. \"Chit\" means consciousness. \"Ananda\" means bliss or rapture. I thought, \"I don't know whether my consciousness is proper consciousness or not; I don't know whether what I know of my being is my proper being or not; but I do know where my rapture is. So let me hang on to rapture, and that will bring me both my consciousness and my being.\" I think it worked.\nHe saw this not merely as a mantra, but as a helpful guide to the individual along the hero journey that each of us walks through life:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If you follow your bliss, you put yourself on a kind of track that has been there all the while, waiting for you, and the life that you ought to be living is the one you are living. Wherever you are\u00a0\u2013 if you are following your bliss, you are enjoying that refreshment, that life within you, all the time.\nCampbell began sharing this idea with students during his lectures in the 1970s. By the time that \"The Power of Myth\" was aired in 1988, six months following Campbell's death, \"Follow your bliss\" was a philosophy that resonated deeply with the American public\u00a0\u2013 both religious and secular.\nDuring his later years, when some students took him to be encouraging hedonism, Campbell is reported to have grumbled, \"I should have said, 'Follow your \"blisters\".'\"\nAcademic reception and criticism.\nCampbell's approach to myth, a genre of folklore, has been the subject of criticism from folklorists, academics who specialize in folklore studies. American folklorist Barre Toelken says that few psychologists have taken the time to become familiar with the complexities of folklore, and that, historically, Jung-influenced psychologists and authors have tended to build complex theories around single versions of a tale that support a theory or a proposal. To illustrate his point, Toelken employs Clarissa Pinkola Est\u00e9s's (1992) \"Women Who Run with the Wolves\", citing its inaccurate representation of the folklore record, and Campbell's \"monomyth\" approach as another. Regarding Campbell, Toelken writes, \"Campbell could construct a monomyth of the hero only by citing those stories that fit his preconceived mold, and leaving out equally valid stories\u2026 which did not fit the pattern\". Toelken traces the influence of Campbell's monomyth theory into other then-contemporary popular works, such as Robert Bly's \"\" (1990), which he says suffers from similar source selection bias.\nSimilarly, American folklorist Alan Dundes was highly critical of both Campbell's approach to folklore, designating him as a \"non-expert\" and gives various examples of what he considers source bias in Campbell's theories, as well as media representation of Campbell as an expert on the subject of myth in popular culture. Dundes writes, \"Folklorists have had some success in publicising the results of our efforts in the past two centuries such that members of other disciplines have, after a minimum of reading, believe they are qualified to speak authoritatively of folkloristic matters. It seems that the world is full of self-proclaimed experts in folklore, and a few, such as Campbell, have been accepted as such by the general public (and public television, in the case of Campbell)\". According to Dundes, \"there is no single idea promulgated by amateurs that has done more harm to serious folklore study than the notion of archetype\".\nAccording to anthropologist Raymond Scupin, \"Joseph Campbell's theories have not been well received in anthropology because of his overgeneralizations, as well as other problems.\"\nCampbell's Sanskrit scholarship has been questioned. Jeffrey Moussaieff Masson, a former Sanskrit professor at the University of Toronto, said that he once met Campbell, and that the two \"hated each other at sight\", commenting that, \"When I met Campbell at a public gathering he was quoting Sanskrit verses. He had no clue as to what he was talking about; he had the most superficial knowledge of India but he could use it for his own aggrandizement. I remember thinking: this man is corrupt. I know that he was simply \"lying\" about his understanding\". According to Richard Buchen, librarian of the Joseph Campbell Collection at the Pacifica Graduate Institute, Campbell could not translate Sanskrit well, but worked closely with three scholars who did.\nEllwood observes that \"The Masks of God\" series \"impressed literate laity more than specialists\"; he quotes Stephen P. Dunn as remarking that in \"Occidental Mythology\" Campbell \"writes in a curiously archaic style\u00a0\u2013 full of rhetorical questions, exclamations of wonder and delight, and expostulations directed at the reader, or perhaps at the author's other self\u00a0\u2013 which is charming about a third of the time and rather annoying the rest.\" Ellwood says that \"Campbell was not really a social scientist, and those in the latter camp could tell\" and records a concern about Campbell's \"oversimplification of historical matters and tendency to make myth mean whatever he wanted it to mean\". The critic Camille Paglia, writing in \"Sexual Personae\" (1990), expressed disagreement with Campbell's \"negative critique of fifth-century Athens\" in \"Occidental Mythology\", arguing that Campbell missed the \"visionary and exalted\" androgyny in Greek statues of nude boys. Paglia has written that while Campbell is \"a seminal figure for many American feminists\", she loathes him for his \"mawkishness and bad research.\" Paglia has called Campbell \"mushy\" and a \"false teacher\", and described his work as a \"fanciful, showy mishmash\".\nCampbell has also been accused of antisemitism by some authors. In \"Tikkun\" magazine, Tamar Frankiel noted that Campbell called Judaism the \"Yahweh Cult\" and that he spoke of Judaism in almost exclusively negative terms. In a 1989 \"New York Review of Books\" article, Brendan Gill accused Campbell of both antisemitism and prejudice against blacks. Gill's article resulted in a series of letters to the editor, some supporting the charge of antisemitism and others defending him. However, according to Robert S. Ellwood, Gill relied on \"scraps of evidence, largely anecdotal\" to support his charges. In 1991, Masson also accused Campbell of \"hidden anti-Semitism\" and \"fascination with conservative, semifascistic views\". Robert A. Segal's \"Joseph Campbell on Jews and Judaism\" offers 70 references.\nWorks.\nEarly collaborations.\nThe first published work that bore Campbell's name was \"Where the Two Came to Their Father\" (1943), an account of a Navajo ceremony that was performed by singer (medicine man) Jeff King and recorded by artist and ethnologist Maud Oakes, recounting the story of two young heroes who go to the hogan of their father, the Sun, and return with the power to destroy the monsters that are plaguing their people. Campbell provided a commentary. He would use this tale through the rest of his career to illustrate both the universal symbols and structures of human myths and the particulars (\"folk ideas\") of Native American stories.\nAs noted above, James Joyce was an important influence on Campbell. Campbell's first important book (with Henry Morton Robinson), \"A Skeleton Key to Finnegans Wake\" (1944), is a critical analysis of Joyce's final text \"Finnegans Wake\". In addition, Campbell's seminal work, \"The Hero with a Thousand Faces\" (1949), discusses what Campbell called the \"monomyth\"\u00a0\u2013 the cycle of the journey of the hero\u00a0\u2013 a term that he borrowed directly from Joyce's \"Finnegans Wake\".\n\"The Hero with a Thousand Faces\".\nFrom his days in college through the 1940s, Joseph Campbell turned his hand to writing fiction. In many of his later stories (published in the posthumous collection \"Mythic Imagination\") he began to explore the mythological themes that he was discussing in his Sarah Lawrence classes. These ideas turned him eventually from fiction to non-fiction.\nOriginally titled \"How to Read a Myth\", and based on the introductory class on mythology that he had been teaching at Sarah Lawrence College, \"The Hero with a Thousand Faces\" was published in 1949 as Campbell's first foray as a solo author; it established his name outside of scholarly circles and remains, arguably, his most influential work to this day. The book argues that hero stories such as Krishna, Buddha, Apollonius of Tyana, and Jesus all share a similar mythological basis. Not only did it introduce the concept of the hero's journey to popular thinking, but it also began to popularize the very idea of comparative mythology itself\u00a0\u2013 the study of the human impulse to create stories and images that, though they are clothed in the motifs of a particular time and place, draw nonetheless on universal, eternal themes. Campbell asserted:\nWherever the poetry of myth is interpreted as biography, history, or science, it is killed. The living images become only remote facts of a distant time or sky. Furthermore, it is never difficult to demonstrate that as science and history, mythology is absurd. When a civilization begins to reinterpret its mythology in this way, the life goes out of it, temples become museums, and the link between the two perspectives becomes dissolved.\n\"The Masks of God\".\nPublished between 1959 and 1968, Campbell's four-volume work \"The Masks of God\" covers mythology from around the world, from ancient to modern. Where \"The Hero with a Thousand Faces\" focused on the commonality of mythology (the \"elementary ideas\"), the \" Masks of God\" books focus upon historical and cultural variations the monomyth takes on (the \"folk ideas\"). In other words, where \"The Hero with a Thousand Faces\" draws perhaps more from psychology, the \" Masks of God\" books draw more from anthropology and history. The four volumes of \"Masks of God\" are as follows: \"Primitive Mythology\", \"Oriental Mythology\", \"Occidental Mythology\", and \"Creative Mythology\".\n\"Historical Atlas of World Mythology\".\nAt the time of his death, Campbell was in the midst of working on a large-format, lavishly illustrated series titled \"Historical Atlas of World Mythology\". This series was to build on Campbell's idea, first presented in \"The Hero with a Thousand Faces\", that myth evolves over time through four stages:\nOnly the first volume was completed at the time of Campbell's death. Campbell's editor Robert Walter completed the publication of the first three of five parts of the second volume after Campbell's death. The works are now out of print. As of 2014[ [update]], Joseph Campbell Foundation is currently undertaking to create a new, ebook edition.\n\"The Power of Myth\".\nCampbell's widest popular recognition followed his collaboration with Bill Moyers on the PBS series \"The Power of Myth\", which was first broadcast in 1988, the year following Campbell's death. The series discusses mythological, religious, and psychological archetypes. A book, \"The Power of Myth\", containing expanded transcripts of their conversations, was released shortly after the original broadcast.\n\"Collected Works\".\nThe \"Collected Works of Joseph Campbell\" series is a project initiated by the Joseph Campbell Foundation to release new, authoritative editions of Campbell's published and unpublished writing, as well as audio and video recordings of his lectures. Working with New World Library and Acorn Media UK, as well as publishing audio recordings and ebooks under its own banner, as of 2014[ [update]] the project has produced over seventy-five titles. The series's executive editor is Robert Walter, and the managing editor is David Kudler.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nBooks\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nArticles\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16316", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16316", "title": "John Dowland", "text": "English composer and lutenist (1563\u20131626)\nJohn Dowland (c.\u20091563 \u2013 buried 20 February 1626) was an English Renaissance composer, lutenist, and singer. He is best known today for his melancholy songs such as \"Come, heavy sleep\", \"Come again\", \"Flow my tears\", \"I saw my Lady weepe\", \"Now o now I needs must part\", and \"In darkness let me dwell\". His instrumental music has undergone a major revival, and with the 20th century's early music revival, has been a continuing source of repertoire for lutenists and classical guitarists.\nCareer and compositions.\nVery little is known of Dowland's early life, but it is generally thought he was born in London; some sources even put his birth year as 1563. Irish historian W. H. Grattan Flood claimed that he was born in Dalkey, near Dublin, but no corroborating evidence has been found either for that or for Thomas Fuller's claim that he was born in Westminster. One piece of evidence points to Dublin as his place of origin: he dedicated the song \"From Silent Night\" to 'my loving countryman Mr. John Forster the younger, merchant of Dublin in Ireland'. The Forsters were a prominent Dublin family at the time, providing several Lord Mayors to the city.\nIn 1580 Dowland went to Paris, where he was in service to Sir Henry Cobham, the ambassador to the French court, and his successor Sir Edward Stafford. He became a Roman Catholic at this time. Around 1584, Dowland moved back to England and married. In 1588 he was admitted Mus. Bac. from Christ Church, Oxford. In 1594 a vacancy for a lutenist came up at the English court, but Dowland's application was unsuccessful. He claimed his religion led to his not being offered a post at Elizabeth I's Protestant court, but his conversion was not publicised, and being Catholic did not prevent some other important musicians (such as William Byrd) from a court career.\nFrom 1598 Dowland worked at the court of Christian IV of Denmark, though he continued to publish in London. King Christian was very interested in music and paid Dowland astronomical sums; his salary was 500 daler a year, making him one of the highest-paid servants of the Danish court. Though Dowland was highly regarded by King Christian, he was not the ideal servant, often overstaying his leave when he went to England on publishing business or for other reasons. Dowland was dismissed in 1606 and returned to England; in early 1612 he secured a post as one of James I's lutenists. There are few compositions dating from the moment of his royal appointment until his death in London in 1626. While the date of his death is not known, \"Dowland's last payment from the court was on 20 January 1626, and he was buried at St Ann's, Blackfriars, London, on 20 February 1626.\"\nTwo major influences on Dowland's music were popular consort songs and the dance music of the day. Most of Dowland's music is for his own instrument, the lute. It includes several books of solo lute works, lute songs (for one voice and lute), part-songs with lute accompaniment, and several pieces for viol consort with lute. The poet Richard Barnfield wrote that Dowland's \"heavenly touch upon the lute doth ravish human sense.\"\nOne of his better known works is the lute song \"Flow my tears\", the first verse of which runs:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;Flow my tears, fall from your springs,\nExil'd for ever let me mourn;\nWhere night's black bird her sad infamy sings,\nThere let me live forlorn.&lt;/poem&gt;\u2014\u200a\nHe later wrote what is probably his best known instrumental work, \"Lachrimae, or Seaven Teares, Figured in Seaven Passionate Pavans\", a set of seven pavanes for five viols and lute, each based on the theme derived from the lute song \"Flow my tears\". It became one of the best known collections of consort music in his time. His pavane \"Lachrymae antiquae\" was also popular in the 17th century, and was arranged and used as a theme for variations by many composers. He wrote a lute version of the popular ballad \"My Lord Willoughby's Welcome Home\".\nDowland's music often displays a melancholia rare in music at that time, and he pioneered it together with Johann Froberger. He wrote a consort piece with the punning title \"Semper Dowland, semper dolens\" (always Dowland, always doleful), which may be said to sum up much of his work.\nRichard Barnfield, Dowland's contemporary, refers to him in poem VIII of \"The Passionate Pilgrim\" (1598), a Shakespearean sonnet:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;If music and sweet poetry agree,\nAs they must needs, the sister and the brother,\nThen must the love be great 'twixt thee and me,\nBecause thou lovest the one, and I the other.\nDowland to thee is dear, whose heavenly touch\nUpon the lute doth ravish human sense;\nSpenser to me, whose deep conceit is such\nAs, passing all conceit, needs no defence.\nThou lovest to hear the sweet melodious sound\nThat Phoebus' lute, the queen of music, makes;\nAnd I in deep delight am chiefly drown'd\nWhen as himself to singing he betakes.\nOne god is god of both, as poets feign;\nOne knight loves both, and both in thee remain.&lt;/poem&gt;\u2014\u200a\nPublished works.\nUntil 2024, only one comprehensive monograph of Dowland's life and works, by Diana Poulton, was available in print. A more updated biography by K. Dawn Grapes was published in July 2024. The fullest catalog list of Dowland's works is that compiled by K. Dawn Grapes in \"John Dowland: A Research and Information Guide\" (Routledge, 2019). The numbering for the lute pieces follow the same system as Diana Poulton created in her \"The Collected Lute Music of John Dowland\". \"P\" numbers are therefore sometimes used to designate individual pieces. \nMany of Dowland's works survive only in manuscript form.\n\"Whole Book of Psalms\" (1592).\nPublished by Thomas Est in 1592, \"The Whole Booke of Psalmes\" contained works by 10 composers, including 6 pieces by Dowland.\n\"New Book of Tablature\" (1596).\nThe \"New Booke of Tabliture\" was published by William Barley in 1596. It contains seven solo lute pieces by Dowland.\n\"Lamentatio Henrici Noel\" (1596).\nPerhaps written for the professional choir of Westminster Abbey.\nOf uncertain attribution are:\n\"First Book of Songs\" (1597).\nDowland in London in 1597 published his \"First Booke of Songes or Ayres\", a set of 21 lute-songs and one of the most influential collections in the history of the lute. Brian Robins wrote that \"many of the songs were composed long before the publication date, [...] However, far from being immature, the songs of Book I reveal Dowland as a fully fledged master.\" It is set out in a way that allows performance by a soloist with lute accompaniment or by various other combinations of singers and instrumentalists. The lute-songs are listed below. After them, at the end of the collection, comes \"My Lord Chamberlaine, His Galliard\", a piece for two people to play on one lute.\n\"Second Book of Songs\" (1600).\nDowland published his \"Second Booke of Songs or Ayres\" in 1600. It has 22 lute songs. There is also an instrumental work, Dowland\u2019s adew for Master Oliver Cromwell. The songs are as follows:\n\"Third Book of Songs\" (1603).\nThe \"Third and Last Booke of Songs or Aires\" was published in 1603.\nThe 21 songs are:\n\"Lachrimae\" (1604).\nThe \"Lachrimae, or Seaven Teares\" was published in 1604. It contains the seven pavans of Lachrimae itself and 14 others, including the famous \"Semper Dowland semper Dolens\".\n\"Micrologus\" (1609).\nDowland published a translation of the \"Micrologus\" of Andreas Ornithoparcus in 1609, originally printed in Latin in Leipzig in 1517.\n\"Varietie of Lute-Lessons\" (1610).\nThis was published by Dowland's son Robert in 1610 and contains solo lute works by his father and others.\n\"A Musicall Banquet\" (1610).\nThis was likewise published by Dowland's son that year. It contains three songs by his father: \n\"A Pilgrimes Solace\" (1612).\nDowland's last work, \"A Pilgrimes Solace\", was published in 1612 and seems to have been conceived more as a collection of contrapuntal music than as solo works. Edmund Fellowes praised it as the last masterpiece in the English school of lutenist song before John Attey's \"First Booke of Ayres of Foure Parts, with Tableture for the Lute\" (1622). John Palmer also wrote, \"Although this book produced no hits, it is arguably Dowland's best set, evincing his absorption of the style of the Italian monodists.\"\nSuspicions of treason.\nDowland performed a number of espionage assignments for Sir Robert Cecil in France and Denmark; despite his high rate of pay, Dowland seems to have been only a court musician. However, we have in his own words the fact that he was for a time embroiled in treasonous Catholic intrigue in Italy, whither he had travelled in the hopes of meeting and studying with Luca Marenzio, a famed madrigal composer. Whatever his religion, however, he was still intensely loyal to the Queen, though he seems to have had something of a grudge against her for her remark that he, Dowland, \"was a man to serve any prince in the world, but [he] was an obstinate Papist.\" But in spite of this, and though the plotters offered him a large sum of money from the Pope, as well as safe passage for his wife and children to come to him from England, in the end he declined to have anything further to do with their plans and begged pardon from Sir Robert Cecil and from the Queen.\nPrivate life.\nJohn Dowland was married and had children, as referenced in his letter to Sir Robert Cecil. However, he had long periods of separation from his family, as his wife stayed in England while he worked on the Continent.\nHis son Robert Dowland (c. 1591 \u2013 1641) was also a musician, working for some time in the service of the first Earl of Devonshire, and taking over his father's position of lutenist at court when John died.\nDowland's melancholic https:// () and music have often been described as his attempts to develop an \"artistic persona\" in spite of actually being a cheerful person, but many of his own personal complaints, and the tone of bitterness in many of his comments, suggest that much of his music and his melancholy truly did come from his own personality and frustration.\nModern interpretations.\nOne of the first 20th-century musicians who successfully helped reclaim Dowland from the history books was the singer-songwriter Frederick Keel. Keel included fifteen Dowland pieces in his two sets of \"Elizabethan love songs\" published in 1909 and 1913, which achieved popularity in their day. These free arrangements for piano and low or high voice were intended to fit the tastes and musical practices associated with art songs of the time.\nIn 1935, Australian-born composer Percy Grainger, who also had a deep interest in music made before Bach, arranged Dowland's \"Now, O now I needs must part\" for piano. Some years later, in 1953, Grainger wrote a work titled \"Bell Piece (Ramble on John Dowland's 'Now, O now I needs must part')\", which was a version scored for voice and wind band, based on his previously mentioned transcription.\nIn 1951 the counter-tenor Alfred Deller recorded songs by Dowland, Thomas Campion, and Philip Rosseter with the label HMV (His Master's Voice) HMV C.4178 and another HMV C.4236 of Dowland's \"Flow my Tears\". In 1977, Harmonia Mundi also published two records of Deller singing Dowland's Lute songs (HM 244&amp;245-H244/246).\nDowland's song \"Come Heavy Sleepe, the Image of True Death\" was the inspiration for Benjamin Britten's \"Nocturnal after John Dowland\", written in 1963 for the guitarist Julian Bream. It consists of eight variations, all based on musical themes drawn from the song or its lute accompaniment, finally resolving into a guitar setting of the song itself.\nDowland's music became part of the repertoire of the early music revival with Bream and tenor Peter Pears, and later with Christopher Hogwood and David Munrow and the Early Music Consort in the late 1960s and later with the Academy of Ancient Music from the early 1970s.\nJan Akkerman, guitarist of the Dutch progressive rock band Focus, recorded \"Tabernakel\" in 1973 (though released in 1974), an album of John Dowland songs and some original material, performed on lute.\nThe complete works of John Dowland were recorded by the Consort of Musicke, and released on the L'Oiseau Lyre label, though they recorded some of the songs as vocal consort music; the \"Third Book of Songs\" and \"A Pilgrim's Solace\" have yet to be recorded in their entirety as collections of solo songs.\nThe 1999 ECM New Series recording \"In Darkness Let Me Dwell\" features new interpretations of Dowland songs performed by tenor John Potter, lutenist Stephen Stubbs, and baroque violinist Maya Homburger in collaboration with English jazz musicians John Surman and Barry Guy.\nNigel North recorded Dowland's complete works for solo lute on four CDs between 2004 and 2007, on Naxos records.\nPaul O'Dette recorded the complete lute works for Harmonia Mundi on five CDs issued from 1995 to 1997.\nJakob Lindberg recorded the complete lute works for BIS on four CDs, issued in 1995.\nJordi Savall and his Hesp\u00e8rion XX issued recordings of the \"Lachrimae or Seven Teares\" in 2000 and 2013.\nElvis Costello included a recording (with Fretwork and the Composers Ensemble) of Dowland's \"Can she excuse my wrongs\" as a bonus track on the 2006 re-release of his \"The Juliet Letters\".\nPatrick Doyle adapted Dowland's \"Weep You No More Sand Fountains\" featuring soprano Jane Eaglen for the end credits of the film Sense and Sensibility (1995), directed by Ang Lee. In the film, Marianne Dashwood, played by Kate Winslet, sings the song. \nIn October 2006, Sting, who says he has been fascinated by the music of John Dowland for 25 years, released an album featuring Dowland's songs titled \"Songs from the Labyrinth\", on Deutsche Grammophon, in collaboration with Edin Karamazov on lute and archlute. They described their treatment of Dowland's work in a \"Great Performances\" appearance. To give some idea of the tone and intrigues of life in late Elizabethan England, Sting also recites throughout the album portions of a 1593 letter written by Dowland to Sir Robert Cecil. The letter describes Dowland's travels to various points of Western Europe, then breaks into a detailed account of his activities in Italy, along with a heartfelt denial of the charges of treason whispered against him by unknown persons. Dowland most likely was suspected of this for travelling to the courts of various Catholic monarchs and accepting payment from them greater than what a musician of the time would normally have received for performing.\nScience fiction writer Philip K. Dick referred to Dowland in many of his works, including the novel \"Flow My Tears, the Policeman Said\" (1974), even using the pseudonym \"Jack Dowland\" once.\n\"The Collected Lute Music of John Dowland\", with lute tablature and keyboard notation, was transcribed and edited by Diana Poulton and Basil Lam, Faber Music Limited, London 1974.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16317", "revid": "1653549", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16317", "title": "John James Audubon", "text": "French-American ornithologist (1785\u20131851)\nJohn James Audubon (born Jean-Jacques Rabin, April 26, 1785 \u2013 January 27, 1851) was a French-American self-trained artist, naturalist, and ornithologist. His combined interests in art and ornithology turned into a plan to make a complete pictorial record of all the bird species of North America. He was notable for his extensive studies documenting all types of American birds and for his detailed illustrations, which depicted the birds in their natural habitats. His major work, a color-plate book titled \"The Birds of America\" (1827\u20131839), is considered one of the finest ornithological works ever completed. Audubon is also known for identifying 25 new species. He is the eponym of the National Audubon Society, and his name adorns a large number of towns, neighborhoods, and streets across the United States. Dozens of scientific names first published by Audubon are still in use by the scientific community. Audubon was accused during his life as well as posthumously of academic fraud, plagiarism, and scientific misconduct; and more recently criticized for involvement in slavery and his racist writings.\nEarly life.\nAudubon was born in Les Cayes in the French colony of Saint-Domingue (now Haiti) on his father's sugarcane plantation. He was the son of Lieutenant Jean Audubon, a French naval officer (and privateer) from the south of Brittany, and his mistress, Jeanne Rabine, a 27-year-old chambermaid from Les Touches, Brittany (now in the modern region Pays de la Loire). They named him Jean Rabin. Another 1887 biographer has stated that his mother was a lady from a Louisiana plantation. His mother died when he was a few months old, as she had suffered from tropical disease since arriving on the island. His father already had an unknown number of mixed-race children (among them a daughter named Marie-Madeleine), some by his mixed-race housekeeper, Catherine \"Sanitte\" Bouffard (described as a quadroon, meaning she was three-quarters European in ancestry). Following Jeanne Rabin's death, Audubon renewed his relationship with Sanitte Bouffard and had a daughter by her, named Muguet. Bouffard also took care of the infant boy Jean.\nThe senior Audubon had commanded ships. During the American Revolution, he was imprisoned by Britain. After his release, he helped the American cause. He had long worked to save money and secure his family's future with real estate. Due to repeated uprisings of slaves in the Caribbean, he sold part of his plantation in Saint-Domingue in 1789 and purchased a 284-acre farm called Mill Grove, 20 miles from Philadelphia, to diversify his investments. Increasing tension in Saint-Domingue between the colonists and slaves, who greatly outnumbered them, convinced the senior Audubon to return to France, where he became a member of the Republican Guard. In 1788 he arranged for Jean and in 1791 for Muguet to be transported to France.\nThe children were raised in Cou\u00ebron, near Nantes, France, by Audubon and his French wife, Anne Moynet Audubon, whom he had married years before his time in Saint-Domingue. In 1794 they formally adopted both the children to regularize their legal status in France. They renamed the boy Jean-Jacques Foug\u00e8re Audubon and the girl Rose.\nFrom his earliest days, the younger Audubon had an affinity for birds. \"I felt an intimacy with them...bordering on frenzy [that] must accompany my steps through life.\" His father encouraged his interest in nature:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He would point out the elegant movement of the birds, and the beauty and softness of their plumage. He called my attention to their show of pleasure or sense of danger, their perfect forms and splendid attire. He would speak of their departure and return with the seasons.\nIn France during the years of the French Revolution and its aftermath, Audubon grew up to be a handsome and gregarious man. He played flute and violin, and learned to ride, fence, and dance. Audubon enjoyed roaming in the woods, often returning with natural curiosities, including birds' eggs and nests, of which he made crude drawings. His father planned to make a seaman of his son. At twelve, Audubon went to military school and became a cabin boy. He quickly found out that he was susceptible to seasickness and not fond of mathematics or navigation. After failing the officer's qualification test, Audubon ended his incipient naval career. He returned to exploring fields again, focusing on birds.\nImmigration to the United States.\nIn 1803, his father obtained a false passport so that Jean-Jacques could go to the United States to avoid conscription in the Napoleonic Wars. 18-year-old Jean-Jacques boarded ship, anglicizing his name to John James Audubon. Jean Audubon and Claude Rozier arranged a business partnership for their sons John James Audubon and Jean Ferdinand Rozier to pursue lead mining in Pennsylvania at Audubon's Pennsylvania property of Mill Grove. The Audubon-Rozier partnership was based on Rozier's buying half of Jean Audubon's share of a plantation in Haiti, and lending money to the partnership as secured by half interest in the lead mining.\nAudubon caught yellow fever upon arrival in New York City. The ship's captain placed him in a boarding house run by Quaker women who nursed Audubon to recovery and taught him English. He traveled with the family's Quaker lawyer to the Audubon family farm at Mill Grove. The homestead is located on the Perkiomen Creek a few miles from Valley Forge.\nAudubon lived with the tenants in the two-story stone house, in an area that he considered a paradise. \"Hunting, fishing, drawing, and music occupied my every moment; cares I knew not, and cared naught about them.\" Studying his surroundings, Audubon quickly learned the ornithologist's rule, which he wrote down as, \"The nature of the place\u2014whether high or low, moist or dry, whether sloping north or south, or bearing tall trees or low shrubs\u2014generally gives hint as to its inhabitants.\"\nHis father hoped that the lead mines on the property could be commercially developed, as lead was an essential component of bullets. This could provide his son with a profitable occupation. At Mill Grove, Audubon met the owner of the nearby Fatland Ford estate, William Bakewell, and his daughter Lucy Bakewell.\nAudubon set about to study American birds, determined to illustrate his findings in a more realistic manner than most artists did then. He began drawing and painting birds, and recording their behavior. After an accidental fall into a creek, Audubon contracted a severe fever. He was nursed and recovered at Fatland Ford, with Lucy at his side.\nRisking conscription in France, Audubon returned in 1805 to see his father and ask permission to marry. He also needed to discuss family business plans. While there, he met the naturalist and physician Charles-Marie D'Orbigny, who improved Audubon's taxidermy skills and taught him scientific methods of research. Although his return ship was overtaken by an English privateer, Audubon and his hidden gold coins survived the encounter.\nAudubon resumed his bird studies and created his own nature museum, perhaps inspired by the great museum of natural history created by Charles Willson Peale in Philadelphia. Peale's bird exhibits were considered scientifically advanced. Audubon's room was brimming with birds' eggs, stuffed raccoons and opossums, fish, snakes, and other creatures. He had become proficient at specimen preparation and taxidermy.\nDeeming the mining venture too risky, with his father's approval Audubon sold part of the Mill Grove farm, including the house and mine, and retaining some land for investment.\nBanding experiment with eastern phoebes.\nIn volume 2 of \"Ornithological Biography\" (1834), Audubon told a story from his childhood, 30 years after the events reportedly took place, that has since garnered him the label of \"first bird bander in America\". The story has since been exposed as likely apocryphal. In the spring of 1804, according to the story, Audubon discovered a nest of the \"Pewee Flycatcher\", now known as the eastern phoebe (\"Sayornis phoebe\"), in a small grotto on the property of Mill Grove. To determine whether the other phoebes on the property were \"descended from the same stock\", Audubon (1834:126) said that he tied silver threads to the legs of five nestlings:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I took the whole family out, and blew off the exuviae of the feathers from the nest. I attached light threads to their legs: these they invariably removed, either with their bills, or with the assistance of their parents. I renewed them, however, until I found the little fellows habituated to them; and at last, when they were about to leave the nest, I fixed a light silver thread to the leg of each, loose enough not to hurt the part, but so fastened that no exertions of theirs could remove it. He also said that he had \"ample proof afterwards that the brood of young Pewees, raised in the cave, returned the following spring, and established themselves farther up on the creek, and among the outhouses in the neighbourhood \u2026 having caught several of these birds on the nest, [he] had the pleasure of finding that two of them had the little ring on the leg.\" However, multiple independent primary sources (including original, dated drawings of European species) demonstrate that Audubon was in France during the spring of 1805, not in Pennsylvania as he later claimed. Furthermore, Audubon's claim to have re-sighted 2 out of 5 of the banded phoebes as adults (i.e., a 40% rate of natal philopatry) has not been replicated by modern studies with much larger sample sizes (e.g., 1.6% rate among 549 nestlings banded; and 1.3% rate among 217 nestlings banded). These facts cast doubt on the truth of Audubon's story.\nMarriage and family.\nIn 1808, Audubon moved to Kentucky, which was rapidly being settled. Six months later, he married Lucy Bakewell at her family estate, Fatland Ford, Pennsylvania, and took her the next day to Kentucky. The two shared many common interests, and began to explore the natural world around them. Though their finances were tenuous, the Audubons started a family. They had two sons, Victor Gifford (1809\u20131860) and John Woodhouse Audubon (1812\u20131862), and two daughters who died while still young, Lucy at two years (1815\u20131817) and Rose at nine months (1819\u20131820). Both sons eventually helped publish their father's works. John W. Audubon became a naturalist, writer, and painter in his own right.\nStarting out in business.\nAudubon and Jean Ferdinand Rozier moved their merchant business partnership west at various stages, ending ultimately in Ste. Genevieve, Missouri, a former French colonial settlement west of the Mississippi River and south of St. Louis. Shipping goods ahead, Audubon and Rozier started a general store in Louisville, Kentucky on the Ohio River; the city had an increasingly important slave market and was the most important port between Pittsburgh and New Orleans. Soon he was drawing bird specimens again. He regularly burned his earlier efforts to force continuous improvement. He also took detailed field notes to document his drawings.\nDue to rising tensions with the British, President Jefferson ordered an embargo on British trade in 1808, hurting Audubon's trading business. In 1810, Audubon moved his business further west to the less competitive Henderson, Kentucky, area. He and his small family took over an abandoned log cabin. In the fields and forests, Audubon wore typical frontier clothes and moccasins, having \"a ball pouch, a buffalo horn filled with gunpowder, a butcher knife, and a tomahawk on his belt\".\nHe frequently turned to hunting and fishing to feed his family, as business was slow. On a prospecting trip down the Ohio River with a load of goods, Audubon joined up with Shawnee and Osage hunting parties, learning their methods, drawing specimens by the bonfire, and finally parting \"like brethren\". Audubon had great respect for Native Americans: \"Whenever I meet Indians, I feel the greatness of our Creator in all its splendor, for there I see the man naked from His hand and yet free from acquired sorrow.\" Audubon also admired the skill of Kentucky riflemen and the \"regulators\", citizen lawmen who created a kind of justice on the Kentucky frontier. In his travel notes, he claims to have encountered Daniel Boone.\nThe Audubon family owned several slaves while he was in Henderson, until they needed money at which point they were sold. Audubon was condemned contemporaneously by abolitionists. Audubon was dismissive of abolitionists in both the US and the United Kingdom.\nAudubon and Rozier mutually agreed to end their partnership at Ste. Genevieve on April 6, 1811. Audubon had decided to work at ornithology and art and wanted to return to Lucy and their son in Kentucky. Rozier agreed to pay Audubon US$3,000 (), with $1,000 in cash and the balance to be paid over time.\nThe terms of the dissolution of the partnership include those by Audubon:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I John Audubon, having this day mutual consent with Ferdinand Rozier, dissolved and forever closed the partnership and firm of Audubon and Rozier, and having Received from said Ferdinand Rozier payment and notes to the full amount of my part of the goods and debts of the late firm of Audubon and Rozier, I the said John Audubon one of the firm aforesaid do hereby release and forever quit claim to all and any interest which I have or may have in the stock on hand and debts due to the late firm of Audubon and Rozier assign, transfer and set over to said Ferdinand Rozier, all my rights, titles, claims and interest in the goods, merchandise and debts due to the late firm of Audubon and Rozier, and do hereby authorize and empower him for my part, to collect the same in any manner what ever either privately or by suit or suits in law or equity hereby declaring him sole and absolute proprietor and rightful owner of all goods, merchandise and debts of this firm aforesaid, as completely as they were the goods and property of the late firm Audubon and Rozier.\nIn witness thereof I have set my hand and seal this Sixth day of April 1811\nJohn Audubon\nEd D. DeVillamonte\nAudubon was working in Missouri and out riding when the 1811 New Madrid earthquake struck on December 16, 1811, followed by a moment magnitude 7.4 aftershock on the same day. Two additional earthquakes of similar magnitude followed in January and February 1812. When Audubon reached his house, he was relieved to find no major damage, but the area was shaken by aftershocks for months. The quake is estimated to have ranked from 8.4 to 8.8 on today's moment magnitude scale of severity, stronger than the San Francisco earthquake of 1906 which is estimated at 7.8. Audubon writes that while on horseback, he first believed the distant rumbling to be the sound of a tornado,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHe noted that as the earthquake retreated, \"the air was filled with an extremely disagreeable sulphurous odor.\"\nCitizenship and debt.\nDuring a visit to Philadelphia in 1812 following Congress' declaration of war against Great Britain, Audubon became an American citizen and had to give up his French citizenship. After his return to Kentucky, he found that rats had eaten his entire collection of more than 200 drawings. After weeks of depression, he took to the field again, determined to re-do his drawings to an even higher standard.\nThe War of 1812 upset Audubon's plans to move his business to New Orleans. He formed a partnership with Lucy's brother and built up their trade in Henderson. Between 1812 and the Panic of 1819, times were good. Audubon bought land and slaves, founded a flour mill, and enjoyed his growing family. After 1819, Audubon went bankrupt and was thrown into jail for debt. The little money he earned was from drawing portraits, particularly death-bed sketches, greatly esteemed by country folk before photography. He wrote, \"[M]y heart was sorely heavy, for scarcely had I enough to keep my dear ones alive; and yet through these dark days I was being led to the development of the talents I loved.\"\nEarly ornithological career.\nAudubon worked for a brief time as the first paid employee of the Western History Society, now known as The Museum of Natural History at The Cincinnati Museum Center. He then traveled south on the Mississippi with his gun, paintbox, and assistant Joseph Mason, who stayed with him from October 1820 to August 1822 and painted the plant life backgrounds of many of Audubon's bird studies. He was committed to find and paint all the birds of North America for eventual publication. His goal was to surpass the earlier ornithological work of poet-naturalist Alexander Wilson. Though he could not afford to buy Wilson's work, Audubon used it to guide him when he had access to a copy.\nIn 1818, Rafinesque visited Kentucky and the Ohio River valley to study fishes and was a guest of Audubon. In the middle of the night, Rafinesque noticed a bat in his room and thought it was a new species. He happened to grab Audubon's favourite violin in an effort to knock the bat down, resulting in the destruction of the violin. Audubon reportedly took revenge by showing drawings and describing some fictitious fishes and rodents to Rafinesque; Rafinesque gave scientific names to some of these fishes in his \"Ichthyologia Ohiensis\".\nOn October 12, 1820, Audubon traveled into Mississippi, Alabama, and Florida in search of ornithological specimens. He traveled with George Lehman, a professional Swiss landscape artist. The following summer, he moved upriver to the Oakley Plantation in Feliciana Parish, Louisiana, where he taught drawing to Eliza Pirrie, the young daughter of the owners. Though low-paying, the job was ideal, as it afforded him much time to roam and paint in the woods. (The plantation has been preserved as the Audubon State Historic Site, and is located at 11788 Highway 965, between Jackson and St. Francisville.)\nAudubon called his future work \"The Birds of America\". He attempted to paint one page each day. Painting with newly discovered technique, he decided his earlier works were inferior and re-did them. He hired hunters to gather specimens for him. Audubon realized the ambitious project would take him away from his family for months at a time.\nAudubon sometimes used his drawing talent to trade for goods or sell small works to raise cash. He made charcoal portraits on demand at $5 each and gave drawing lessons. In 1823, Audubon took lessons in oil painting technique from John Steen, a teacher of American landscape, and history painter Thomas Cole. Though he did not use oils much for his bird work, Audubon earned good money painting oil portraits for patrons along the Mississippi. (Audubon's account reveals that he learned oil painting in December 1822 from Jacob Stein, an itinerant portrait artist. After they had enjoyed all the portrait patronage to be expected in Natchez, Mississippi, during January\u2013March 1823, they resolved to travel together as perambulating portrait-artists.) During this period (1822\u20131823), Audubon also worked as an instructor at Jefferson College in Washington, Mississippi.\nLucy became the steady breadwinner for the couple and their two young sons. Trained as a teacher, she conducted classes for children in their home. Later she was hired as a local teacher in Louisiana. She boarded with their children at the home of a wealthy plantation owner, as was often the custom of the time.\nIn 1824, Audubon returned to Philadelphia to seek a publisher for his bird drawings. He took oil painting lessons from Thomas Sully and met Charles Bonaparte, who admired his work and recommended he go to Europe to have his bird drawings engraved. Audubon was nominated for membership at the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia by Charles Alexandre Lesueur, Reuben Haines, and Isaiah Lukens, on July 27, 1824. However, he failed to gather enough support, and his nomination was rejected by vote on August 31, 1824; around the same time accusations of scientific misconduct were levied by Alexander Lawson and others.\n\"The Birds of America\".\nWith his wife's support, in 1826 at age 41, Audubon took his growing collection of work to England. He sailed from New Orleans to Liverpool on the cotton-hauling ship \"Delos\", reaching England in the autumn of 1826 with his portfolio of over 300 drawings. With letters of introduction to prominent Englishmen, and paintings of imaginary species including the \"Bird of Washington\", Audubon gained their quick attention. \"I have been received here in a manner not to be expected during my highest enthusiastic hopes.\"\nThe British could not get enough of Audubon's images of backwoods America and its natural attractions. He met with great acceptance as he toured around England and Scotland, and was lionized as \"the American woodsman\". He raised enough money to begin publishing his \"The Birds of America\". This monumental work consists of 435 hand-colored, life-size prints of 497 bird species, made from engraved copper plates of various sizes depending on the size of the image. They were printed on sheets measuring about . The work illustrates slightly more than 700 North American bird species, of which some were based on specimens collected by fellow ornithologist John Kirk Townsend on his journey across America with Thomas Nuttall in 1834 as part of Nathaniel Jarvis Wyeth's second expedition across the Rocky Mountains to the Pacific Ocean.\nThe pages were organized for artistic effect and contrasting interest, as if the reader were taking a visual tour. (Some critics thought he should have organized the plates in Linnaean order as befitting a \"serious\" ornithological treatise.) The first and perhaps most famous plate was the wild turkey. Among the earliest plates printed was the \"Bird of Washington\", which generated favorable publicity for Audubon as his first discovery of a new species. However, no specimen of the species has ever been found, and research published in 2020 argues that this plate was a mixture of plagiarism and ornithological fraud.\nThe cost of printing the entire work was $115,640 (over $2,000,000 today), paid for from advance subscriptions, exhibitions, oil painting commissions, and animal skins, which Audubon hunted and sold. Audubon's great work was a remarkable accomplishment. It took more than 14 years of field observations and drawings, plus his single-handed management and promotion of the project to make it a success. A reviewer wrote,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;All anxieties and fears which overshadowed his work in its beginning had passed away. The prophecies of kind but overprudent friends, who did not understand his self-sustaining energy, had proved untrue; the malicious hope of his enemies, for even the gentle lover of nature has enemies, had been disappointed; he had secured a commanding place in the respect and gratitude of men.\nColorists applied each color in assembly-line fashion (over fifty were hired for the work). The original edition was engraved in aquatint by Robert Havell Jr., who took over the task after the first ten plates engraved by W. H. Lizars were deemed inadequate. Known as the Double Elephant folio for its double elephant paper size, it is often regarded as the greatest picture book ever produced and the finest aquatint work. By the 1830s the aquatint process had been largely superseded by lithography. A contemporary French critic wrote, \"A magic power transported us into the forests which for so many years this man of genius has trod. Learned and ignorant alike were astonished at the spectacle ... It is a real and palpable vision of the New World.\"\nAudubon sold oil-painted copies of the drawings to make extra money and publicize the book. A potential publisher had Audubon's portrait painted by John Syme, who clothed the naturalist in frontier clothes; the portrait was hung at the entrance of his exhibitions, promoting his rustic image. The painting is now held in the White House art collection, and is not frequently displayed. The New-York Historical Society holds all 435 of the preparatory watercolors for \"The Birds of America\". Lucy Audubon sold them to the society after her husband's death. All but 80 of the original copper plates were melted down when Lucy Audubon, desperate for money, sold them for scrap to the Phelps Dodge Corporation.\nKing George IV was among the avid fans of Audubon and subscribed to support publication of the book. Britain's Royal Society recognized Audubon's achievement by electing him as a fellow. He was the second American to be elected after statesman Benjamin Franklin. While in Edinburgh to seek subscribers for the book, Audubon gave a demonstration of his method of supporting birds with wire at professor Robert Jameson's Wernerian Natural History Association. Student Charles Darwin was in the audience. Audubon also visited the dissecting theatre of the anatomist Robert Knox. Audubon was also successful in France, gaining the King and several of the nobility as subscribers.\n\"The Birds of America\" became very popular during Europe's Romantic era. Audubon's dramatic portraits of birds appealed to people in this period's fascination with natural history.\nLater career.\nAudubon returned to America in 1829 to complete more drawings for his magnum opus. He also hunted animals and shipped the valued skins to British friends. He was reunited with his family. After settling business affairs, Lucy accompanied him back to England. Audubon found that during his absence, he had lost some subscribers due to the uneven quality of coloring of the plates. Others were in arrears in their payments. His engraver fixed the plates and Audubon reassured subscribers, but a few begged off. He responded, \"\"The Birds of America\" will then raise in value as much as they are now depreciated by certain fools and envious persons.\" He was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1830 and to the American Philosophical Society in 1831.\nHe followed \"The Birds of America\" with a sequel \"Ornithological Biographies\". This was a collection of life histories of each species written with Scottish ornithologist William MacGillivray. The two books were printed separately to avoid a British law requiring copies of all publications with text to be deposited in copyright libraries, a huge financial burden for the self-published Audubon. Both books were published between 1827 and 1839.\nDuring the 1830s, Audubon continued making expeditions in North America. During a trip to Key West, a companion wrote in a newspaper article, \"Mr. Audubon is the most enthusiastic and indefatigable man I ever knew ... Mr. Audubon was neither dispirited by heat, fatigue, or bad luck ... he rose every morning at 3\u00a0o'clock and went out ... until 1\u00a0o'clock.\" Then he would draw the rest of the day before returning to the field in the evening, a routine he kept up for weeks and months. In the posthumously published book \"The Life of John James Audubon The Naturalist\", edited by his widow and derived primarily from his notes, Audubon related visiting the northeastern Florida coastal sugar plantation of John Joachim Bulow for Christmas 1831/early January 1832. It was started by his father and at 4,675 acres, was the largest in East Florida. Bulow had a sugar mill built there under direction of a Scottish engineer, who accompanied Audubon on an excursion in the region. The mill was destroyed in 1836 in the Second Seminole War. The plantation site is preserved today as the Bulow Plantation Ruins Historic State Park.\nIn March 1832, Audubon booked passage at St. Augustine, Florida, aboard the schooner \"Agnes\", bound for Charleston, South Carolina. A gale forced the vessel to berth at the mouth of the Savannah River, where an officer of the United States Army Corps of Engineers on Cockspur Island where Fort Pulaski was under construction, transported Audubon upstream to Savannah, Georgia, on their barge. Just as he was about to board a Charleston-bound stage coach, he remembered William Gaston, a Savannah resident who had once befriended him. Audubon stayed at City Hotel, and the next day sought out and found the acquaintance, \"who showed but little enthusiasm for his \"Birds of America\"\" and who doubted that the book would sell a single copy in the city. A dejected Audubon continued to talk to the merchant and a mutual friend who, by chance, had appeared. The merchant, having further considered his position, said, \"I subscribe to your work\", gave him $200 for the first volume, and promised to act as his agent in finding additional subscriptions.\nIn 1833, Audubon sailed north from Maine, accompanied by his son John, and five other young colleagues, to explore the ornithology of Labrador. On the return voyage, their ship \"Ripley\" made a stop at St. George's, Newfoundland. There Audubon and his assistants documented 36 species of birds.\nAudubon painted some of his works while staying at the Key West house and gardens of Capt. John H. Geiger. This site was preserved as the Audubon House and Tropical Gardens.\nIn 1841, having finished the \"Ornithological Biographies\", Audubon returned to the United States with his family. He bought an estate on the Hudson River in northern Manhattan. (The roughly 20-acre estate came to be known as Audubon Park in the 1860s when Audubon's widow began selling off parcels of the estate for the development of free-standing single family homes.) Between 1840 and 1844, he published an octavo edition of \"The Birds of America\", with 65 additional plates. Printed in standard format to be more affordable than the oversize British edition, it earned $36,000 and was purchased by 1100 subscribers. Audubon spent much time on \"subscription-gathering trips\", drumming up sales of the octavo edition, as he hoped to leave his family a sizeable income.\nDeath.\nAudubon made some excursions out West where he hoped to record Western species he had missed, but his health began to fail. In 1848, he manifested signs of senility or possibly dementia from what is now called Alzheimer's disease, his \"noble mind in ruins\". He died at his family home in northern Manhattan on January 27, 1851. Audubon is buried in the graveyard at the Church of the Intercession in the Trinity Church Cemetery and Mausoleum at 155th Street and Broadway in Manhattan, near his home. An imposing monument in his honor was erected at the cemetery, which is now recognized as part of the Heritage Rose District of NYC.\nAudubon's final work dealt with mammals; he prepared \"The Viviparous Quadrupeds of North America\" (1845\u20131849) in collaboration with his good friend Rev. John Bachman of Charleston, South Carolina, who supplied much of the scientific text. His son, John Woodhouse Audubon, drew most of the plates. The work was completed by Audubon's sons, and the second volume was published posthumously in 1851.\nArt and methods.\nAudubon developed his own methods for drawing birds. First, he killed them using fine shot. He then used wires to prop them into a natural position, unlike the common method of many ornithologists, who prepared and stuffed the specimens into a rigid pose. When working on a major specimen like an eagle, he would spend up to four 15-hour days, preparing, studying, and drawing it. His paintings of birds are set true-to-life in their natural habitat. He often portrayed them as if caught in motion, especially feeding or hunting. This was in stark contrast to the stiff representations of birds by his contemporaries, such as Alexander Wilson. Audubon based his paintings on his extensive field observations. He worked primarily with watercolor early on. He added colored chalk or pastel to add softness to feathers, especially those of owls and herons. He employed multiple layers of watercoloring, and sometimes used gouache. All species were drawn life size which accounts for the contorted poses of the larger birds as Audubon strove to fit them within the page size. Smaller species were usually placed on branches with berries, fruit, and flowers. He used several birds in a drawing to present all views of anatomy and wings. Larger birds were often placed in their ground habitat or perching on stumps. At times, as with woodpeckers, he combined several species on one page to offer contrasting features. He frequently depicted the birds' nests and eggs, and occasionally natural predators, such as snakes. He usually illustrated male and female variations, and sometimes juveniles. In later drawings, Audubon used assistants to render the habitat for him. In addition to faithful renderings of anatomy, Audubon also employed carefully constructed composition, drama, and slightly exaggerated poses to achieve artistic as well as scientific effects.\nDispute over accuracy.\nThe success of \"Birds of America\" has been marred by numerous accusations of plagiarism, scientific fraud, and deliberate manipulation of the primary record. Research has uncovered that Audubon falsified (and fabricated) scientific data, published fraudulent data and images in scientific journals and commercial books, invented new species to impress potential subscribers and to \"prank\" rivals, and most likely stole the holotype specimen of Harris's hawk (\"Parabuteo unicinctus harrisi\") before pretending not to know its collector, who was one of his subscribers. He failed to credit work by Joseph Mason, prompting a series of articles in 1835 by critic John Neal questioning Audubon's honesty and trustworthiness. Audubon also repeatedly lied about the details of his autobiography, including the place and circumstances of his birth. His diaries, which might have cleared up some of these issues, were destroyed in 1895 by his granddaughter, Maria R. Audubon, who published a doctored version that realigned the \"primary\" record with some of his false narratives. Maria Audubon admitted to a biographer that she had \"copied from it all [she] ever meant to give to the public\" and then burned the original journals herself.\nThe litany of misconduct in Audubon's scientific career has drawn comparisons to others such as Richard Meinertzhagen. Similar to early biographies of Meinertzhagen, Audubon's scientific misconduct has been repeatedly ignored and/or played down by biographers, who defend \"Ornithological Biography\" as a \"valuable resource and a very good read\".\nLegacy.\nAudubon's influence on ornithology and natural history was far reaching. Nearly all later ornithological works were inspired by his artistry and high standards. Charles Darwin cited Audubon three times in \"On the Origin of Species\" and also in later works. Despite some errors in field observations, he made a significant contribution to the understanding of bird anatomy and behavior through his field notes. \"The Birds of America\" is still considered one of the greatest examples of book art. Audubon discovered 25 new species and 12 new subspecies.\nAudubon in popular culture.\nAudubon is the subject of the 1969 book-length poem, \"Audubon: A Vision\" by Robert Penn Warren. Stephen Vincent Ben\u00e9t, with his wife Rosemary Ben\u00e9t, included a poem about Audubon in the children's poetry book \"A Book of Americans\".\nAudubon's 1833 trip to Labrador is the subject of the novel \"Creation\" by Katherine Govier. Audubon and his wife, Lucy, are the chief characters in the \"June\" section of the Maureen Howard novel \"Big as Life: Three Tales for Spring\". In the novel \"Audubon's Watch\", John Gregory Brown explores a mysterious death that took place on a Louisiana plantation when Audubon worked there as a young man.\nGeorge Voskovec plays Audubon in the 1952 American film \"The Iron Mistress\", which stars Alan Ladd as James Bowie. The film imagines a friendship between the two men.\nIn 1985, The National Gallery of Art 20C History Project produced a documentary, \"John James Audubon: The Birds of America\", now widely available online.\nIn July 2007, PBS's \"American Masters\" series aired an episode titled \"John James Audubon: Drawn from Nature\", Supplemental material is available https://.\nAudubon appears in the short story \"Audubon In Atlantis\" by Harry Turtledove, published in the 2010 collection \"Atlantis and Other Places\". Audubon's drawings are also the important part of the plot of Gary D. Schmidt's children's novel \"Okay for Now\".\nThe choral oratorio \"Audubon\" by James Kallembach was premiered on November 9, 2018, in Boston, Massachusetts by Chorus pro Musica. The work depicts scenes of Audubon's life and descriptions of the birds he drew with text drawn from the 2004 biography by Richard Rhodes.\nSurviving bird specimens.\nSome of Audubon's bird specimens survive in the collections of the Natural History Museum, London, the Academy of Natural Sciences, Philadelphia, and there are 5 specimens in the collections of World Museum, National Museums Liverpool.\nWorks.\nPosthumous collections.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Botanist/styles.css\"/&gt;The standard author abbreviation Audubon is used to indicate this person as the author when citing a botanical name.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16318", "revid": "2747", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16318", "title": "Jan Bruegel", "text": ""}
{"id": "16319", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16319", "title": "John Masefield", "text": "English poet and writer (1878\u20131967)\nJohn Edward Masefield (; 1 June 1878 \u2013 12 May 1967) was an English poet and writer. He was Poet Laureate from 1930 until his death in 1967, during which time he lived at Burcot, Oxfordshire, near Abingdon-on-Thames. Among his best known works are the children's novels \"The Midnight Folk\" and \"The Box of Delights\", and the poems \"The Everlasting Mercy\" and \"Sea-Fever\". Shortly after his death his house (Burcote Brook) burned down and was later replaced by a Cheshire Home named after him.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nMasefield was born in Ledbury in Herefordshire to George Masefield, a solicitor, and his wife Caroline (n\u00e9e Parker). He was baptised in the Church at Preston Cross, just outside Ledbury. His mother died giving birth to his sister when Masefield was six, and he went to live with his aunt. His father died soon afterwards, following a mental breakdown.\nAfter a very happy education at the King's School in Warwick (now known as Warwick School where he even had a building named after him), where he was a boarder between 1888 and 1891, he left to board , both to train for a life at sea and to break his addiction to reading, of which his aunt thought little. He spent several years aboard this ship, and found that he could spend much of his time reading and writing. It was aboard the \"Conway\" that Masefield's love of story-telling grew. While he was on the ship, he listened to the stories told about sea lore, continued to read, and decided that he was to become a writer and story-teller himself. Masefield gives an account of life aboard the \"Conway\" in his book \"New Chum\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Poetically break lines/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nFrom \", in \"Salt-Water Ballads\" (1902)\nIn 1894 Masefield boarded the \"Gilcruix\", destined for Chile. This first voyage brought him the experience of sea sickness, but his record of his experiences while sailing through extreme weather shows his delight in seeing flying fish, porpoises and birds. He was awed by the beauty of nature, including a rare sighting of a nocturnal rainbow, on this voyage. On reaching Chile, he suffered from sunstroke and was hospitalised. He eventually returned home to England as a passenger aboard a steamship. His experiences on the voyage were used as material for his narrative poem \"Dauber\" (1913).\nIn 1895 Masefield returned to sea on a windjammer destined for New York City. However, the urge to become a writer and the hopelessness of life as a sailor overtook him, and in New York he jumped ship and travelled throughout the countryside. For several months he lived as a vagrant, drifting between odd jobs, before he returned to New York City and found work as a barkeeper's assistant. Some time around Christmas 1895, he read the December edition of \"Truth\", a New York periodical, which contained the poem \"The Piper of Arll\" by Duncan Campbell Scott. Ten years later, Masefield wrote to Scott to tell him what reading that poem had meant to him:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I had never (till that time) cared very much for poetry, but your poem impressed me deeply, and set me on fire. Since then poetry has been the one deep influence in my life, and to my love of poetry I owe all my friends, and the position I now hold.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Poetically break lines/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nFrom \", in \"Ballads\" (1903)\nFrom 1895 to 1897, Masefield was employed at the huge Alexander Smith carpet factory in Yonkers, New York, where long hours were expected and conditions were far from ideal. He purchased up to 20 books a week, and devoured both modern and classical literature. His interests at this time were diverse, and his reading included works by George du Maurier, Alexandre Dumas (p\u00e8re), Thomas Browne, William Hazlitt, Charles Dickens, Rudyard Kipling, and Robert Louis Stevenson. Chaucer also became very important to him during this time, as well as Keats and Shelley. In 1897, Masefield returned home to England as a passenger aboard a steamship.\nIn 1901, when Masefield was 23, he met his future wife, Constance de la Cherois Crommelin (6 February 1867\u00a0\u2013 18 February 1960, from Cushendun in County Antrim, Northern Ireland; she was a sister to Andrew Claude de la Cherois Crommelin), aged 35, and of Huguenot descent. They married on 23 June 1903 at St. Mary, Bryanston Square. Educated in classics and English Literature, and a mathematics teacher, Constance was a good match for him, despite the difference in their ages. The couple had two children: Judith, born Isabel Judith, 28 April 1904, in London, died in Sussex, 1 March 1988; and Lewis Crommelin, born in 1910, in London, killed in action in Africa, 29 May 1942.\nIn 1902 Masefield was put in charge of the fine arts section of the Arts and Industrial Exhibition in Wolverhampton. By then his poems were being published in periodicals and his first collection of verse, \"Salt-Water Ballads\", was published that year. It included the poem \"Sea-Fever\". Masefield then wrote two novels, \"Captain Margaret\" (1908) and \"Multitude and Solitude\" (1909). In 1911, after a long period of writing no poems, he composed \"The Everlasting Mercy\", the first of his narrative poems, and within the next year had produced two more, \"The Widow in the Bye Street\" and \"Dauber\". As a result, he became widely known to the public and was praised by the critics. In 1912 he was awarded the annual Edmond de Polignac Prize.\nFrom the First World War to appointment as Poet Laureate.\nWhen the First World War began in 1914 Masefield was old enough to be exempted from military service, but he joined the staff of a British hospital for French soldiers, the H\u00f4pital Temporaire d'Arc-en-Barrois in Haute-Marne, serving a six-week term during the spring of 1915. He later published an account of his experiences. At about this time Masefield moved his country retreat from Buckinghamshire to Lollingdon Farm in Cholsey, the setting that inspired a number of poems and sonnets under the title \"Lollingdon Downs\", and which his family used until 1917.\nAfter returning home, Masefield was invited to the United States on a three-month lecture tour. Although his primary purpose was to lecture on English literature, he also intended to collect information on the mood and views of Americans regarding the war in Europe. When he returned to England, he submitted a report to the British Foreign Office and suggested that he should be allowed to write a book about the failure of the Allied effort in the Dardanelles that might be used in the United States to counter German propaganda there. The resulting work, \"Gallipoli\", was a success. Masefield then met the head of British Military Intelligence in France and was asked to write an account of the Battle of the Somme. Although Masefield had grand ideas for his book, he was denied access to official records and what was intended to be the preface was published as \"The Old Front Line\", a description of the geography of the Somme area.\nIn 1918 Masefield returned to America on his second lecture tour, spending much of his time speaking and lecturing to American soldiers waiting to be sent to Europe. These speaking engagements were very successful. On one occasion a battalion of black soldiers danced and sang for him after his lecture. During this tour he matured as a public speaker and realised his ability to touch the emotions of his audience with his style of speaking, learning to speak publicly from his own heart rather than from dry scripted speeches. Towards the end of his visit both Yale and Harvard Universities conferred honorary doctorates of letters on him.\nMasefield entered the 1920s as an accomplished and respected writer. His family was able to settle on Boar's Hill, a somewhat rural setting not far from Oxford, where Masefield took up beekeeping, goat-herding and poultry-keeping. He continued to meet with success: the first edition of his \"Collected Poems\" (1923) sold about 80,000 copies. A narrative poem, \"Reynard The Fox\" (1920), has been critically compared with works by Geoffrey Chaucer, not necessarily to Masefield's credit. This was followed by \"Right Royal\" and \"King Cole\", poems in which the relationship between humanity and nature is emphasised.\nAfter \"King Cole\", Masefield turned away from long poems and back to novels. Between 1924 and 1939 he published 12 novels, which vary from stories of the sea (\"The Bird of Dawning\", \"Victorious Troy\") to social novels about modern England (\"The Hawbucks\", \"The Square Peg\"), and from tales of an imaginary land in Central America (\"Sard Harker\", \"Odtaa\") to fantasies for children (\"The Midnight Folk\", \"The Box of Delights\"). In this same period he wrote a large number of dramatic pieces. Most of these were based on Christian themes, and Masefield, to his amazement, encountered a ban on the performance of plays on biblical subjects that went back to the Reformation and had been revived a generation earlier to prevent production of Oscar Wilde's \"Salome\". However, a compromise was reached and in 1928 his \"The Coming of Christ\" was the first play to be performed in an English cathedral since the Middle Ages.\nEncouraging the speaking of verse.\nIn 1921 Masefield gave the British Academy's Shakespeare Lecture and received an honorary doctorate of literature from the University of Oxford. In 1923 he organised Oxford Recitations, an annual contest whose purpose was \"to discover good speakers of verse and to encourage 'the beautiful speaking of poetry'\". Given the numbers of contest applicants, the event's promotion of natural speech in poetical recitations, and the number of people learning how to listen to poetry, Oxford Recitations was generally deemed a success.\nMasefield was similarly a founding member of the Scottish Association for the Speaking of Verse in 1924. He later came to question whether the Oxford events should continue as a contest, considering that they might better be run as a festival. However, in 1929, after he broke with the competitive element, Oxford Recitations came to an end. The Scottish Association for the Speaking of Verse, on the other hand, continued to develop through the influence of associated figures such as Marion Angus and Hugh MacDiarmid and exists today as the Poetry Association of Scotland.\nLater years.\nIn 1930, on the death of Robert Bridges, a new poet laureate was needed. On the recommendation of the Prime Minister, Ramsay MacDonald, King George V appointed Masefield, who remained in the post until his death in 1967. The only person to hold the office for a longer period was Alfred, Lord Tennyson. On Masefield's appointment, \"The Times\" wrote of him that \"his poetry could touch to beauty the plain speech of everyday life\". Masefield took his appointment seriously and produced a large quantity of poems for royal occasions, which were sent to \"The Times\" for publication. Masefield's modesty was shown by his inclusion of a stamped and self-addressed envelope with each submission so that the poem could be returned if it was found unacceptable. Later he was commissioned to write a poem to be set to music by the Master of the King's Musick, Sir Edward Elgar, and performed at the unveiling of the Queen Alexandra Memorial by the King on 8 June 1932. This was the ode \"So Many True Princesses Who Have Gone\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;\n\"Sonnet\"\nIs there a great green commonwealth of Thought\nWhich ranks the yearly pageant, and decides\nHow Summer's royal progress shall be wrought,\nBy secret stir which in each plant abides?\nDoes rocking daffodil consent that she,\nThe snowdrop of wet winters, shall be first?\nDoes spotted cowslip with the grass agree\nTo hold her pride before the rattle burst?\nAnd in the hedge what quick agreement goes,\nWhen hawthorn blossoms redden to decay,\nThat Summer's pride shall come, the Summer's rose,\nBefore the flower be on the bramble spray?\nOr is it, as with us, unresting strife,\nAnd each consent a lucky gasp for life?\n&lt;/poem&gt;\n\"Sonnet\", in \"The Story of a Round-House\" (1915)\nAfter his appointment, Masefield was awarded the Order of Merit by King George V and many honorary degrees from British universities. In 1937 he was elected President of the Society of Authors. In 1938 he was awarded the Shakespeare Prize, one of the only two such awards made by the Hamburg-based Alfred Toepfer Foundation before the Second World War. Masefield encouraged the continued development of English literature and poetry, and began the annual awarding of the Royal Medals for Poetry for a first or second published edition of poems by a poet under the age of 35. Additionally, his speaking engagements called him further away, often on much longer tours, yet he still produced significant amounts of work in a wide variety of genres. To those he had already used he now added autobiography, producing \"New Chum\", \"In the Mill\", and \"So Long to Learn\".\nIt was not until he was about 70 that Masefield slowed his pace, mainly due to illness. In 1960 Constance died aged 93, after a long illness. Although her death was heartrending, he had spent a tiring year watching the woman he loved die. He continued his duties as poet laureate. \"In Glad Thanksgiving\", his last book, was published when he was 88 years old.\nIn late 1966 Masefield developed gangrene in his ankle. This spread to his leg and he died of the infection on 12 May 1967. In accordance with his stated wishes, he was cremated and his ashes were placed in Poets' Corner in Westminster Abbey. However, the following verse by Masefield was discovered later, addressed to his \"Heirs, Administrators, and Assigns\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLegacy.\nThe Masefield Centre at Warwick School, which Masefield attended, and John Masefield High School in Ledbury, Herefordshire, have been named in his honour.\nThe Cheshire Home built on the site of his final home at Burcot, Oxfordshire is named after him.\nInterest groups such as the John Masefield Society ensure the longevity of Masefield's opus. In 1977 Folkways Records released an album of readings of some of his poems, including some read by Masefield himself. Recordings preserved include .\nSong settings.\nIn addition to the commission for Queen Alexandra's Memorial Ode with music by Elgar, many of Masefield's short poems were set as art songs by British composers of the time. Best known by far is John Ireland's \"Sea-Fever\". Frederick Keel composed several songs drawn from the \"Salt-Water Ballads\" and elsewhere. Of these, \"Trade Winds\" was particularly popular in its day, despite the tongue-twisting challenges the text presents to the singer. Keel's defiant setting of \"Tomorrow\", written while interned at Ruhleben during World War I, was frequently programmed at the BBC Proms after the war. Another memorable wartime composition is Ivor Gurney's climactic declamation of \"By a bierside\", a setting quickly set down in 1916 during a brief spell behind the lines.\nSelected works.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCollections of poems.\nSonnets (1916)\nRight Royal (1920)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16321", "revid": "50945616", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16321", "title": "Joseph McCarthy", "text": "American politician (1908\u20131957)\nJoseph Raymond McCarthy (November 14, 1908 \u2013 May 2, 1957) was an American politician who served as a Republican U.S. senator from Wisconsin from 1947 until his death in 1957. Beginning in 1950, McCarthy became the most visible public face of a period in the United States in which Cold War tensions fueled fears of widespread communist subversion. He alleged that numerous communists and Soviet spies and sympathizers had infiltrated the United States federal government, universities, film industry, and elsewhere. Ultimately he was censured by the Senate in 1954 for refusing to cooperate with and abusing members of the committee established to investigate whether or not he should be censured. The term \"McCarthyism\", coined in 1950 in reference to McCarthy's practices, was soon applied to similar anti-communist activities. Today the term is used more broadly to mean demagogic, reckless, and unsubstantiated accusations, as well as public attacks on the character or patriotism of political opponents.\nBorn in Grand Chute, Wisconsin, McCarthy commissioned into the Marine Corps in 1942, where he served as an intelligence briefing officer for a dive bomber squadron. Following the end of World War II, he attained the rank of major. He volunteered to fly twelve combat missions as a gunner-observer. These missions were generally safe, and after one where he was allowed to shoot as much ammunition as he wanted, mainly at coconut trees, he acquired the nickname \"Tail-Gunner Joe\". Some of his claims of heroism were later shown to be exaggerated or falsified, leading many of his critics to use \"Tail-Gunner Joe\" as a term of mockery.\nA Democrat until 1944, McCarthy successfully ran for the U.S. Senate in 1946 as a Republican, narrowly defeating incumbent Robert M. La Follette Jr. in the Wisconsin Republican primary, then Democratic challenger Howard McMurray by a 61% \u2013 37% margin. After three largely undistinguished years in the Senate, McCarthy rose suddenly to national fame in February 1950 when he asserted in a speech that he had a list of \"members of the Communist Party and members of a spy ring\" who were employed in the State Department. In succeeding years after his 1950 speech, McCarthy made additional accusations of Communist infiltration into the State Department, the administration of President Harry S. Truman, the Voice of America, and the U.S. Army. He also used various charges of communism, communist sympathies, disloyalty, or sex crimes to attack a number of politicians and other individuals inside and outside of government. This included a concurrent \"Lavender Scare\" against suspected homosexuals, whose illicit sexual activity was presumed to make them vulnerable to blackmail by communists and others.\nWith the highly publicized Army\u2013McCarthy hearings of 1954, and following the suicide of Wyoming Senator Lester C. Hunt that same year, McCarthy's support and popularity faded. On December 2, 1954, the Senate voted to censure McCarthy by a vote of 67\u201322, making him one of the few senators ever to be disciplined in this fashion. He continued to rail against communism and socialism until his death at the age of 48 at Bethesda Naval Hospital in Bethesda, Maryland, on May 2, 1957, though doctors had not previously reported him to be seriously ill. His death certificate listed the cause of death as \"Hepatitis, acute, cause unknown\", which some biographers say was caused or exacerbated by alcoholism.\nEarly life and education.\nJoseph Raymond McCarthy was born on November 14, 1908, on a farm in Grand Chute, Wisconsin, the fifth of nine children. His mother, Bridget McCarthy (nee Tierney), was from County Tipperary, Ireland. His father, Timothy McCarthy, was born in the United States, the son of an Irish father and a German mother. McCarthy dropped out of junior high school at age 14 to help his parents manage their farm. He entered Little Wolf High School, in Manawa, Wisconsin, when he was 20 and graduated in one year.\nHe attended Marquette University from 1930 to 1935. McCarthy worked odd jobs while at college, including as a dishwasher, parking-lot attendant, and boxing coach. He first studied electrical engineering for two years, then law, and received a Bachelor of Laws degree in 1935 from Marquette University Law School in Milwaukee.\nCareer.\nMcCarthy was admitted to the bar in 1935. While working at a law firm in Shawano, Wisconsin, he launched an unsuccessful campaign for district attorney as a Democrat in 1936. During his years as an attorney, McCarthy made money on the side by gambling.\nIn 1939, McCarthy had better success when he ran for the nonpartisan elected post of 10th District circuit judge. McCarthy became the youngest circuit judge in the state's history by defeating incumbent Edgar V. Werner, who had been a judge for 24 years. In the campaign, McCarthy lied about Werner's age of 66, claiming that he was 73, and so allegedly too old and infirm to handle the duties of his office. Writing of Werner in \"Reds: McCarthyism In Twentieth-Century America,\" Ted Morgan wrote: \"Pompous and condescending, he (Werner) was disliked by lawyers. His judgements had often been reversed by the Wisconsin Supreme Court, and he was so inefficient that he had piled up a huge backlog of cases.\"\nMcCarthy's judicial career attracted some controversy because of the speed with which he dispatched many of his cases as he worked to clear the heavily backlogged docket he had inherited from Werner. Wisconsin had strict divorce laws, but when McCarthy heard divorce cases, he expedited them whenever possible, and he made the needs of children involved in contested divorces a priority. When it came to other cases argued before him, McCarthy compensated for his lack of experience as a jurist by demanding and relying heavily upon precise briefs from the contesting attorneys. The Wisconsin Supreme Court reversed a low percentage of the cases he heard, but he was also censured in 1941 for having lost evidence in a price fixing case.\nMilitary service.\nIn 1942, shortly after the U.S. entered World War II, McCarthy joined the United States Marine Corps, despite the fact that his judicial office exempted him from military service. His college education qualified him for a direct commission, and he entered the Marines as a first lieutenant.\nAccording to Morgan, writing in \"Reds,\" McCarthy's friend and campaign manager, attorney and judge Urban P. Van Susteren, had applied for active duty in the U.S. Army Air Forces in early 1942, and advised McCarthy: \"Be a hero\u2014join the Marines.\" When McCarthy seemed hesitant, Van Susteren asked, \"You got shit in your blood?\"\nHe served as an intelligence briefing officer for a dive bomber squadron VMSB-235 in the Solomon Islands and Bougainville for 30 months (August 1942 \u2013 February 1945), and held the rank of captain at the time he resigned his commission in April 1945. He volunteered to fly twelve combat missions as a gunner-observer. These missions were generally safe, and after one where he was allowed to shoot as much ammunition as he wanted, mainly at coconut trees, he acquired the nickname \"Tail-Gunner Joe\". McCarthy remained in the Marine Corps Reserve after the war, attaining the rank of lieutenant colonel.\nHe later falsely claimed participation in 32 aerial missions so as to qualify for a Distinguished Flying Cross and multiple awards of the Air Medal, which the Marine Corps decided to approve in 1952 under his political influence. McCarthy also publicly claimed a letter of commendation from his commanding officer and Admiral Chester W. Nimitz, Chief of Naval Operations. However, his commander revealed that McCarthy had written this letter himself, probably while preparing award citations and commendation letters for his men, and that he had signed his commander's name, after which Nimitz signed it routinely. A \"war wound\"\u2014a badly broken leg\u2014that McCarthy attributed to varying adventures involving airplane crashes or anti-aircraft fire, had in fact happened aboard ship during a raucous celebration for sailors crossing the equator for the first time. Because of McCarthy's various lies about his military heroism, his \"Tail-Gunner Joe\" nickname was used in mockery by his critics.\nMcCarthy campaigned for the Republican Senate nomination in Wisconsin while still on active duty in 1944 but was defeated by Alexander Wiley, the incumbent. After he left the Marines in April 1945, five months before the end of the Pacific war in September 1945, McCarthy was reelected unopposed to his circuit court position. He then began a much more systematic campaign for the 1946 Republican Senate primary nomination, with support from Thomas Coleman, the Republican Party's political boss in Wisconsin. In this race, he was challenging three-term senator Robert M. La Follette Jr., founder of the Wisconsin Progressive Party and son of the celebrated Wisconsin governor and senator Robert M. La Follette Sr.\nSenate campaign.\nIn his campaign, McCarthy attacked La Follette for not enlisting during the war, although La Follette had been 46 when Pearl Harbor was bombed. He also claimed La Follette had made huge profits from his investments while he, McCarthy, had been away fighting for his country. In fact, McCarthy had invested in the stock market himself during the war, netting a profit of $42,000 in 1943 (equal to $ today). Where McCarthy got the money to invest in the first place remains a mystery. La Follette's investments consisted of partial interest in a radio station, which earned him a profit of $47,000 over two years.\nAccording to Jack Anderson and Ronald W. May, McCarthy's campaign funds, much of them from out of state, were ten times more than La Follette's and McCarthy's vote benefited from a Communist Party vendetta against La Follette. The suggestion that La Follette had been guilty of war profiteering was deeply damaging, and McCarthy won the primary nomination 207,935 votes to 202,557. It was during this campaign that McCarthy started publicizing his war-time nickname \"Tail-Gunner Joe,\" using the slogan, \"Congress needs a tail-gunner.\" Journalist Arnold Beichman later stated that McCarthy \"was elected to his first term in the Senate with support from the Communist-controlled United Electrical, Radio and Machine Workers, CIO\", which preferred McCarthy to the anti-communist Robert M. La Follette.\nIn the general election against Democratic opponent Howard J. McMurray, McCarthy won 61.2% to McMurray's 37.3%, and thus joined Alexander Wiley, whom he had challenged unsuccessfully two years earlier, in the Senate."}
{"id": "16324", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16324", "title": "John Hancock", "text": "American Founding Father (1737\u20131793)\nJohn Hancock (January 23, 1737 [O.S. January 12, 1736] \u2013 October 8, 1793) was an American Founding Father, merchant, statesman, and prominent Patriot of the American Revolution. He was the longest-serving president of the Continental Congress, having served as the second president of the Second Continental Congress and the seventh president of the Congress of the Confederation. He was the first and third governor of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. His large and stylish signature on the United States Declaration of Independence led to or becoming a colloquialism for a person's signature. He also signed the Articles of Confederation, and used his influence to ensure that Massachusetts ratified the United States Constitution in 1788.\nBefore the American Revolution, Hancock was one of the wealthiest men in the Thirteen Colonies, having inherited a profitable mercantile business from his uncle. He began his political career in Boston as a prot\u00e9g\u00e9 of Samuel Adams, an influential local politician, though the two men later became estranged. Hancock used his wealth to support the colonial cause as tensions increased between colonists and Great Britain in the 1760s. He became very popular in Massachusetts, especially after British officials seized his sloop \"Liberty\" in 1768 and charged him with smuggling. Those charges were eventually dropped; he has often been described as a smuggler in historical accounts, but the accuracy of this characterization has been questioned.\nEarly life.\nHancock was born on January 23, 1737, in Braintree, Massachusetts, in a part of town that eventually became the separate city of Quincy. He was the son of Colonel John Hancock Jr. of Braintree and Mary Hawke Thaxter (widow of Samuel Thaxter Junior), who was from nearby Hingham. As a child, Hancock became a casual acquaintance of young John Adams, whom the Reverend Hancock had baptized in 1735. The Hancocks lived a comfortable life and owned one slave to help with household work.\nAfter Hancock's father died in 1744, he was sent to live with his uncle and aunt, Thomas Hancock and Lydia (Henchman) Hancock. Thomas Hancock was the proprietor of a firm known as the House of Hancock, which imported manufactured goods from Britain and exported rum, whale oil, and fish. Thomas Hancock's highly successful business made him one of Boston's richest and best-known residents. He and Lydia, along with several servants and slaves, lived in Hancock Manor on Beacon Hill. The couple, who did not have any children of their own, became the dominant influence on John's life.\nAfter graduating from the Boston Latin School in 1750, Hancock enrolled in Harvard College and received a bachelor's degree in 1754. Upon graduation, he began to work for his uncle, just as the French and Indian War had begun. Thomas Hancock had close relations with the royal governors of Massachusetts and secured profitable government contracts during the war. John Hancock learned much about his uncle's business during these years and was trained for eventual partnership in the firm. Hancock worked hard, but he also enjoyed playing the role of a wealthy aristocrat and developed a fondness for expensive clothes.\nFrom 1760 to 1761, Hancock lived in England while building relationships with customers and suppliers. Upon returning to Boston, Hancock gradually took over the House of Hancock as his uncle's health failed, becoming a full partner in January 1763. He became a member of the Masonic Lodge of St. Andrew in October 1762, which connected him with many of Boston's most influential citizens. When Thomas Hancock died in August 1764, John inherited the business, Hancock Manor, two or three household slaves, and thousands of acres of land, becoming one of the wealthiest men in the colonies. The household slaves continued to work for John and his aunt, but were eventually freed through the terms of Thomas Hancock's will; there is no evidence that John Hancock ever bought or sold slaves.\nGrowing imperial tensions.\nAfter its victory in the Seven Years' War, the British Empire was deeply in debt. Looking for new sources of revenue, the British Parliament sought, for the first time, to directly tax the colonies, beginning with the Sugar Act 1764. The earlier Molasses Act 1733, a tax on shipments from the West Indies, had produced hardly any revenue because it was widely bypassed by smuggling, which was seen as a victimless crime. Not only was there little social stigma attached to smuggling in the colonies, but in port cities where trade was the primary generator of wealth, smuggling enjoyed considerable community support, and it was even possible to obtain insurance against being caught. Colonial merchants developed an impressive repertoire of evasive maneuvers to conceal the origin, nationality, routes, and content of their illicit cargoes. This included the frequent use of fraudulent paperwork to make the cargo appear legal and authorized. And much to the frustration of the British authorities, when seizures did happen local merchants were often able to use sympathetic provincial courts to reclaim confiscated goods and have their cases dismissed. For instance, Edward Randolph, the appointed head of customs in New England, brought 36 seizures to trial from 1680 to the end of 1682\u2014and all but two of these were acquitted. Alternatively, merchants sometimes took matters into their own hands and stole illicit goods back while impounded.\nThe Sugar Act 1764 provoked outrage in Boston, where it was widely viewed as a violation of colonial rights. Men such as James Otis and Samuel Adams argued that because the colonists were not represented in Parliament, they could not be taxed by that body; only the colonial assemblies, where the colonists were represented, could levy taxes upon the colonies. Hancock was not yet a political activist; however, he criticized the tax for economic, rather than constitutional, reasons.\nHancock emerged as a leading political figure in Boston just as tensions with Great Britain were increasing. In March 1765, he was elected as one of Boston's five selectmen, an office previously held by his uncle for many years. Soon after, Parliament passed the Stamp Act 1765, a tax on legal documents such as wills that had been levied in Britain for many years but which was wildly unpopular in the colonies, producing riots and organized resistance. Hancock initially took a moderate position: as a loyal British subject, he thought that the colonists should submit to the act even though he believed that Parliament was misguided. Within a few months Hancock had changed his mind, although he continued to disapprove of violence and the intimidation of royal officials by mobs. Hancock joined the resistance to the Stamp Act 1765 by participating in a boycott of British goods, which made him popular in Boston. After Bostonians learned of the impending repeal of the Stamp Act, Hancock was elected to the Massachusetts House of Representatives in May 1766.\nHancock's political success benefited from the support of Samuel Adams, the clerk of the House of Representatives and a leader of Boston's \"popular party\", also known as \"Whigs\" and later as \"Patriots\". The two men made an unlikely pair. Fifteen years older than Hancock, Adams had a somber, Puritan outlook that stood in marked contrast to Hancock's taste for luxury and extravagance. Apocryphal stories later portrayed Adams as masterminding Hancock's political rise so that the merchant's wealth could be used to further the Whig agenda. Historian James Truslow Adams portrays Hancock as shallow and vain, easily manipulated by Adams. Historian William M. Fowler, who wrote biographies of both men, argues that this characterization was an exaggeration and that the relationship between the two was symbiotic, with Adams as the mentor and Hancock the prot\u00e9g\u00e9.\nTownshend Acts crisis.\nAfter the repeal of the Stamp Act, Parliament took a different approach to raising revenue, passing the 1767 Townshend Acts, which established new duties on various imports and strengthened the customs agency by creating the American Customs Board. The British government believed that a more efficient customs system was necessary because many colonial American merchants had been smuggling. Smugglers violated the Navigation Acts by trading with ports outside of the British Empire and avoiding import taxes. Parliament hoped that the new system would reduce smuggling and generate revenue for the government.\nColonial merchants, even those not involved in smuggling, found the new regulations oppressive. Other colonists protested that new duties were another attempt by Parliament to tax the colonies without their consent. Hancock joined other Bostonians in calling for a boycott of British imports until the Townshend duties were repealed. In their enforcement of the customs regulations, the Customs Board targeted Hancock, Boston's wealthiest Whig. They may have suspected that he was a smuggler or they may have wanted to harass him because of his politics, especially after Hancock snubbed Governor Francis Bernard by refusing to attend public functions when the customs officials were present.\nOn April 9, 1768, two customs employees (called tidesmen) boarded Hancock's brig \"Lydia\" in Boston Harbor. Hancock was summoned, and finding that the agents lacked a writ of assistance (a general search warrant), he did not allow them to go below deck. When one of them later managed to get into the hold, Hancock's men forced the tidesman back on deck. Customs officials wanted to file charges, but the case was dropped when Massachusetts Attorney General Jonathan Sewall ruled that Hancock had broken no laws. Later, some of Hancock's most ardent admirers called this incident the first act of physical resistance to British authority in the colonies and credit Hancock with initiating the American Revolution.\n\"Liberty\" affair.\nThe next incident proved to be a major event in the coming of the American Revolution. On the evening of May 9, 1768, Hancock's sloop \"Liberty\" arrived in Boston Harbor, carrying a shipment of Madeira wine. When custom officers inspected the ship the next morning, they found that it contained 25 pipes of wine, just one fourth of the ship's carrying capacity. Hancock paid the duties on the 25 pipes of wine, but officials suspected that he had arranged to have more wine unloaded during the night to avoid paying the duties for the entire cargo. They did not have any evidence to prove this, however, since the two tidesmen who had stayed on the ship overnight gave a sworn statement that nothing had been unloaded.\nOne month later, while the 50-gun ship of the line HMS \"Romney\" was in port, one of the tidesmen changed his story: he claimed that he had been forcibly held on \"Liberty\" while it had been illegally unloaded. On June 10, customs officials seized \"Liberty\". Bostonians were already angry because \"Romney\"'s captain, John Corner, had been impressing local sailors, which arguably violated a parliamentary act regarding colonial impressment. A riot broke out when officials began to tow \"Liberty\" out to \"Romney\", which was also an arguable violation of existing legislation. The confrontation escalated when sailors and marines coming ashore to seize \"Liberty\" were mistaken for a press gang. After the riot, customs officials relocated to \"Romney\" and then to Castle William (an island fort in the harbor), claiming that they were unsafe in town. Whigs insisted that the customs officials were exaggerating the danger so that London would send troops to Boston.\nBritish officials filed two lawsuits stemming from \"Liberty\" incident: an \"in rem\" suit against the ship and an \"in personam\" suit against Hancock. Royal officials as well as Hancock's accuser stood to gain financially since, as was the custom, any penalties assessed by the court would be awarded to the governor, the informer, and the Crown, each getting a third. The first suit, filed on June 22, 1768, resulted in the confiscation of \"Liberty\" in August. Customs officials then used the ship to enforce trade regulations until it was burned by angry colonists in Rhode Island the following year.\nThe second trial began in October 1768, when charges were filed against Hancock and five others for allegedly unloading 100 pipes of wine from \"Liberty\" without paying the duties. If convicted, the defendants would have had to pay a penalty of triple the value of the wine, which came to \u00a39,000. With John Adams serving as his lawyer, Hancock was prosecuted in a highly publicized trial by a vice admiralty court, which had no jury and was not required to allow the defense to cross-examine the witnesses. After dragging out for nearly five months, the proceedings against Hancock were dropped without explanation.\nAlthough the charges against Hancock were dropped, many writers later described him as a smuggler. The accuracy of this characterization has been questioned. \"Hancock's guilt or innocence and the exact charges against him\", wrote historian John W. Tyler in 1986, \"are still fiercely debated.\" Historian Oliver Dickerson argues that Hancock was the victim of an essentially criminal racketeering scheme perpetrated by Governor Bernard and the customs officials. Dickerson believes that there is no reliable evidence that Hancock was guilty in \"Liberty\" case and that the purpose of the trials was to punish Hancock for political reasons and to plunder his property. Opposed to Dickerson's interpretation were Kinvin Wroth and Hiller Zobel, the editors of John Adams's legal papers, who argue that \"Hancock's innocence is open to question\" and that the British officials acted legally, if unwisely. Lawyer and historian Bernard Knollenberg concludes that the customs officials had the right to seize Hancock's ship, but towing it out to \"Romney\" had been illegal. Legal historian John Phillip Reid argues that the testimony of both sides was so politically partial that it is not possible to objectively reconstruct the incident.\nAside from \"Liberty\" affair, the degree to which Hancock was engaged in smuggling, which may have been widespread in the colonies, has been questioned. Given the clandestine nature of smuggling, records are scarce. If Hancock was a smuggler, no documentation of this has been found. John W. Tyler identified 23 smugglers in his study of more than 400 merchants in revolutionary Boston but found no written evidence that Hancock was one of them. Biographer William Fowler concludes that while Hancock was probably engaged in some smuggling, most of his business was legitimate, and his later reputation as the \"king of the colonial smugglers\" is a myth without foundation.\nMassacre to Tea Party.\nThe \"Liberty\" affair reinforced a previously made British decision to suppress unrest in Boston with a show of military might. The decision had been prompted by Samuel Adams's 1768 Circular Letter, which was sent to other British American colonies in hopes of coordinating resistance to the Townshend Acts. Lord Hillsborough, secretary of state for the colonies, sent four regiments of the British Army to Boston to support embattled royal officials and instructed Governor Bernard to order the Massachusetts legislature to revoke the Circular Letter. Hancock and the Massachusetts House voted against rescinding the letter and instead drew up a petition demanding Governor Bernard's recall. When Bernard returned to England in 1769, Bostonians celebrated.\nThe British troops remained, however, and tensions between soldiers and civilians. in March 1770, a crowd taunting British troops, provoking their firing on the crowd, killing of five civilians in the what locals termed the Boston Massacre. Hancock was not involved in the incident, but afterwards he led a committee to demand the removal of the troops. Meeting with Bernard's successor, Governor Thomas Hutchinson, and the British officer in command, Colonel William Dalrymple, Hancock claimed that there were 10,000 armed colonists ready to march into Boston if the troops did not leave. Hutchinson knew that Hancock was bluffing, but the soldiers were in a precarious position when garrisoned within the town, and so Dalrymple agreed to remove both regiments to Castle William. Hancock was celebrated as a hero for his role in getting the troops withdrawn. His re-election to the Massachusetts House in May was nearly unanimous.\nAfter Parliament partially repealed the Townshend duties in 1770, Boston's boycott of British goods ended. Politics became quieter in Massachusetts, although tensions remained. Hancock tried to improve his relationship with Governor Hutchinson, who in turn sought to woo Hancock away from Adams's influence. In April 1772, Hutchinson approved Hancock's election as colonel of the Boston Cadets, a militia unit whose primary function was to provide a ceremonial escort for the governor and the General Court. In May, Hutchinson even approved Hancock's election to the Council, the upper chamber of the General Court, whose members were elected by the House but subject to veto by the governor. Hancock's previous elections to the council had been vetoed, but now Hutchinson allowed the election to stand. Hancock declined the office, however, not wanting to appear to have been co-opted by the governor. Nevertheless, Hancock used the improved relationship to resolve an ongoing dispute. To avoid hostile crowds in Boston, Hutchinson had been convening the legislature outside of town; now he agreed to allow the General Court to sit in Boston once again, to the relief of the legislators.\nHutchinson had dared to hope that he could win over Hancock and discredit Adams. To some, it seemed that Adams and Hancock were indeed at odds: when Adams formed the Boston Committee of Correspondence in November 1772 to advocate colonial rights, Hancock declined to join, creating the impression that there was a split in the Whig ranks. But whatever their differences, Hancock and Adams came together again in 1773 with the renewal of major political turmoil. They cooperated in the revelation of private letters of Thomas Hutchinson, in which the governor seemed to recommend \"an abridgement of what are called \"English liberties\" to bring order to the colony. The Massachusetts House, blaming Hutchinson for the military occupation of Boston, called for his removal as governor.\nEven more trouble followed Parliament's passage of the 1773 Tea Act. On November 5, Hancock was elected as moderator at a Boston town meeting that resolved that anyone who supported the Tea Act was an \"Enemy to America\". Hancock and others tried to force the resignation of the agents who had been appointed to receive the tea shipments. Unsuccessful in this, they attempted to prevent the tea from being unloaded after three tea ships had arrived in Boston Harbor. Hancock was at the fateful meeting on December 16 where he reportedly told the crowd, \"Let every man do what is right in his own eyes.\" Hancock did not take part in the Boston Tea Party that night, but he approved of the action, although he was careful not to publicly praise the destruction of private property.\nOver the next few months, Hancock was disabled by gout, which troubled him with increasing frequency in the coming years. By March 5, 1774, he had recovered enough to deliver the fourth annual Massacre Day oration, a commemoration of the Boston Massacre. Hancock's speech denounced the presence of British troops in Boston, who he said had been sent there \"to enforce obedience to acts of Parliament, which neither God nor man ever empowered them to make\". The speech, probably written by Hancock in collaboration with Adams, Joseph Warren, and others, was published and widely reprinted, enhancing Hancock's stature as a leading Patriot.\nRevolution begins.\nParliament responded to the Tea Party with the Boston Port Act, one of the so-called Coercive Acts intended to strengthen British control of the colonies. Hutchinson was replaced as governor by General Thomas Gage, who arrived in May 1774. On June 17, the Massachusetts House elected five delegates to send to the First Continental Congress in Philadelphia, which was being organized to coordinate colonial response to the Coercive Acts. Hancock did not serve in the first Congress, possibly for health reasons or possibly to remain in charge while the other Patriot leaders were away.\nGage dismissed Hancock from his post as colonel of the Boston Cadets. In October 1774, Gage canceled the scheduled meeting of the General Court. In response, the House resolved itself into the Massachusetts Provincial Congress, a body independent of British control. Hancock was elected as president of the Provincial Congress and was a key member of the Committee of safety. The Provincial Congress created the first minutemen companies, consisting of militiamen who were to be ready for action on a moment's notice.\nOn December 1, 1774, the Provincial Congress elected Hancock as a delegate to the Second Continental Congress to replace James Bowdoin, who had been unable to attend the first Congress because of illness. Before Hancock reported to the Continental Congress in Philadelphia, the Provincial Congress unanimously re-elected him as their president in February 1775. Hancock's multiple roles gave him enormous influence in Massachusetts, and as early as January 1774 British officials had considered arresting him. After attending the Provincial Congress in Concord in April 1775, Hancock and Samuel Adams decided that it was not safe to return to Boston before leaving for Philadelphia. They stayed instead at Hancock's childhood home in Lexington.\nGage received a letter from Lord Dartmouth on April 14, 1775, advising him \"to arrest the principal actors and abettors in the Provincial Congress whose proceedings appear in every light to be acts of treason and rebellion\". On the night of April 18, Gage sent out a detachment of soldiers on the fateful mission that sparked the American Revolutionary War. The purpose of the British expedition was to seize and destroy military supplies that the colonists had stored in Concord. According to many historical accounts, Gage also instructed his men to arrest Hancock and Adams; if so, the written orders issued by Gage made no mention of arresting the Patriot leaders. Gage apparently decided that he had nothing to gain by arresting Hancock and Adams, since other leaders would simply take their place, and the British would be portrayed as the aggressors.\nAlthough Gage had evidently decided against seizing Hancock and Adams, Patriots initially believed otherwise. From Boston, Joseph Warren dispatched messenger Paul Revere to warn Hancock and Adams that British troops were on the move and might attempt to arrest them. Revere reached Lexington around midnight and gave the warning. Hancock, still considering himself a militia colonel, wanted to take the field with the Patriot militia at Lexington, but Adams and others convinced him to avoid battle, arguing that he was more valuable as a political leader than as a soldier. As Hancock and Adams made their escape, the first shots of the war were fired at Lexington and Concord. Soon after the battle, Gage issued a proclamation granting a general pardon to all who would \"lay down their arms, and return to the duties of peaceable subjects\"\u2014with the exceptions of Hancock and Samuel Adams. Singling out Hancock and Adams in this manner only added to their renown among Patriots.\nPresident of Congress.\nWith the war underway, Hancock made his way to the Continental Congress in Philadelphia with the other Massachusetts delegates. On May 24, 1775, he was unanimously elected President of the Continental Congress, succeeding Peyton Randolph after Henry Middleton declined the nomination. Hancock was a good choice for president for several reasons. He was experienced, having often presided over legislative bodies and town meetings in Massachusetts. His wealth and social standing inspired the confidence of moderate delegates, while his association with Boston radicals made him acceptable to other radicals. His position was somewhat ambiguous because the role of the president was not fully defined, and it was not clear if Randolph had resigned or was on a leave of absence. Like other presidents of Congress, Hancock's authority was mostly limited to that of a presiding officer. He also had to handle a great deal of official correspondence, and he found it necessary to hire clerks at his own expense to help with the paperwork.\nIn Congress on June 15, 1775, Massachusetts delegate John Adams nominated George Washington as commander-in-chief of the army then gathered around Boston. Years later, Adams wrote that Hancock had shown great disappointment at not getting the command for himself. This brief comment from 1801 is the only source for the oft-cited claim that Hancock sought to become commander-in-chief. In the early 20th century, historian James Truslow Adams wrote that the incident initiated a lifelong estrangement between Hancock and Washington, but some subsequent historians have expressed doubt that the incident, or the estrangement, ever occurred. According to historian Donald Proctor, \"There is no contemporary evidence that Hancock harbored ambitions to be named commander-in-chief. Quite the contrary.\" Hancock and Washington maintained a good relationship after the alleged incident, and in 1778 Hancock named his only son \"John George Washington Hancock\". Hancock admired and supported General Washington, even though Washington politely declined Hancock's request for a military appointment.\nWhen Congress recessed on August 1, 1775, Hancock took the opportunity to wed his fianc\u00e9e, Dorothy \"Dolly\" Quincy. The couple was married on August 28 in Fairfield, Connecticut. They had two children, neither of whom survived to adulthood. Their daughter Lydia Henchman Hancock was born in 1776 and died ten months later. Their son John was born in 1778 and died in 1787 after suffering a head injury while ice skating.\nWhile president of Congress, Hancock became involved in a long-running controversy with Harvard. As treasurer of the college since 1773, he had been entrusted with the school's financial records and about \u00a315,000 in cash and securities. In the rush of events at the onset of the Revolutionary War, Hancock had been unable to return the money and accounts to Harvard before leaving for Congress. In 1777, a Harvard committee headed by James Bowdoin, Hancock's chief political and social rival in Boston, sent a messenger to Philadelphia to retrieve the money and records. Hancock was offended, but he turned over more than \u00a316,000, though not all of the records, to the college. When Harvard replaced Hancock as treasurer, his ego was bruised and for years he declined to settle the account or pay the interest on the money he had held, despite pressure put on him by Bowdoin and other political opponents. The issue dragged on until after Hancock's death, when his estate finally paid the college more than \u00a31,000 to resolve the matter.\nHancock served in Congress through some of the darkest days of the Revolutionary War. The British drove Washington from New York and New Jersey in 1776, which prompted Congress to flee to Baltimore. Hancock and Congress returned to Philadelphia in March 1777 but were compelled to flee six months later when the British occupied Philadelphia. Hancock wrote innumerable letters to colonial officials, raising money, supplies, and troops for Washington's army. He chaired the Marine Committee and took pride in helping to create a small fleet of American frigates, including the USS \"Hancock\", which was named in his honor.\nSigning the Declaration.\nHancock was president of Congress when the Declaration of Independence was adopted and signed. He is primarily remembered by Americans for his large, flamboyant signature on the Declaration, so much so that \"John Hancock\" became, in the United States, an informal synonym for \"signature\". According to legend, Hancock signed his name largely and clearly so that King George could read it without his spectacles, but the story is apocryphal and originated years later.\nContrary to popular mythology, there was no ceremonial signing of the Declaration on July 4, 1776. After Congress approved the wording of the text on July 4, the \"fair copy\" was sent to be printed. As president, Hancock may have signed the document that was sent to the printer John Dunlap, but this is uncertain because that document is lost, perhaps destroyed in the printing process. Dunlap produced the first published version of the Declaration, the widely distributed Dunlap broadside. Hancock, as President of Congress, was the only delegate whose name appeared on the broadside, although the name of Charles Thomson, secretary of the Continental Congress but not a delegate, was also on it as \"Attested by\" implying that Hancock had signed the fair copy. This meant that until a second broadside was issued six months later with all of the signers listed, Hancock was the only delegate whose name was publicly attached to the treasonous document. Hancock sent a copy of the Dunlap broadside to George Washington, instructing him to have it read to the troops \"in the way you shall think most proper\".\nHancock's name was printed, not signed, on the Dunlap broadside; his iconic signature appears on a different document\u2014a sheet of parchment that was carefully handwritten sometime after July 19 and signed on August 2 by Hancock and those delegates present. Known as the engrossed copy, this is the famous document on display at the National Archives in Washington, D.C.\nReturn to Massachusetts.\nIn October 1777, after more than two years in Congress, Hancock requested a leave of absence. He asked Washington to arrange a military escort for his return to Boston. Although Washington was short on manpower, he nevertheless sent fifteen horsemen to accompany Hancock on his journey home. By this time Hancock had become estranged from Samuel Adams, who disapproved of what he viewed as Hancock's vanity and extravagance, which Adams believed were inappropriate in a republican leader. When Congress voted to thank Hancock for his service, Adams and the other Massachusetts delegates voted against the resolution, as did a few delegates from other states.\nBack in Boston, Hancock was re-elected to the House of Representatives. As in previous years, his philanthropy made him popular. Although his finances had suffered greatly because of the war, he gave to the poor, helped support widows and orphans, and loaned money to friends. According to biographer William Fowler, \"John Hancock was a generous man and the people loved him for it. He was their idol.\" In December 1777, he was re-elected as a delegate to the Continental Congress and as moderator of the Boston town meeting.\nHancock rejoined the Continental Congress in Pennsylvania in June 1778, but his brief time there was unhappy. In his absence, Congress had elected Henry Laurens as its new president, which was a disappointment to Hancock, who had hoped to reclaim his chair. Hancock got along poorly with Samuel Adams and missed his wife and newborn son. On July 9, 1778, Hancock and the other Massachusetts delegates joined the representatives from seven other states in signing the Articles of Confederation; the remaining states were not yet prepared to sign, and the Articles were not ratified until 1781.\nHancock returned to Boston in July 1778, motivated by the opportunity to finally lead men in combat. Back in 1776, he had been appointed as the senior major general of the Massachusetts militia. Now that the French fleet had come to the aid of the Americans, General Washington instructed General John Sullivan to lead an attack on the British garrison at Newport, Rhode Island, in August 1778. Hancock nominally commanded 6,000 militiamen in the campaign, although he let the professional soldiers do the planning and issue the orders. It was a fiasco: French Admiral d'Estaing abandoned the operation, after which Hancock's militia mostly deserted Sullivan's Continentals. Hancock suffered some criticism for the debacle but emerged from his brief military career with his popularity intact.\nAfter much delay, the Massachusetts Constitution finally went into effect in October 1780. To no one's surprise, Hancock was elected Governor of Massachusetts in a landslide, garnering over 90% of the vote. In the absence of formal party politics, the contest was one of personality, popularity, and patriotism. Hancock was immensely popular and unquestionably patriotic given his personal sacrifices and his leadership of the Second Continental Congress. Bowdoin, his principal opponent, was cast by Hancock's supporters as unpatriotic, citing among other things his refusal (which was due to poor health) to serve in the First Continental Congress. Bowdoin's supporters, who were principally well-off commercial interests from Massachusetts coastal communities, cast Hancock as a foppish demagogue who pandered to the populace.\nHancock governed Massachusetts through the end of the Revolutionary War and into an economically troubled postwar period, repeatedly winning re-election by wide margins. Hancock took a hands-off approach to governing, avoiding controversial issues as much as possible. According to William Fowler, Hancock \"never really led\" and \"never used his strength to deal with the critical issues confronting the commonwealth.\" Hancock governed until his surprise resignation on January 29, 1785. Hancock cited his failing health as the reason, but he may have become aware of growing unrest in the countryside and wanted to get out of office before the trouble came.\nHancock's critics sometimes believed that he used claims of illness to avoid difficult political situations. Historian James Truslow Adams writes that Hancock's \"two chief resources were his money and his gout, the first always used to gain popularity, and the second to prevent his losing it\". The turmoil that Hancock avoided ultimately blossomed as Shays' Rebellion, which Hancock's successor Bowdoin had to deal with. After the uprising, Hancock was re-elected in 1787, and he promptly pardoned all the rebels. The next year, a controversy arose when three free blacks were kidnapped from Boston and sent to work as slaves in the French colony of Martinique in the West Indies. Governor Hancock wrote to the governors of the islands on their behalf. As a result, the three men were released and returned to Massachusetts. Hancock was re-elected to annual terms as governor for the remainder of his life.\nFinal years.\nWhen he had resigned as governor in 1785, Hancock was again elected as a delegate to Congress, known as the Confederation Congress after the ratification of the Articles of Confederation in 1781. Congress had declined in importance after the Revolutionary War and was frequently ignored by the states. Hancock was elected to serve as its president on November 23, 1785, but he never attended because of his poor health and because he was disinterested. He sent Congress a letter of resignation in June 1786.\nIn an effort to remedy the perceived defects of the Articles of Confederation, delegates were first sent to the Annapolis Convention in 1786 and then to the Philadelphia Convention in 1787, where they drafted the United States Constitution, which was then sent to the states for ratification or rejection. Hancock, who was not present at the Philadelphia Convention, had misgivings about the Constitution's lack of a bill of rights and its shift of power to a central government. In January 1788, Hancock was elected president of the Massachusetts ratifying convention, although he was ill and not present when the convention began. Hancock mostly remained silent during the contentious debates, but as the convention was drawing to close, he gave a speech in favor of ratification. For the first time in years, Samuel Adams supported Hancock's position. Even with the support of Hancock and Adams, the Massachusetts convention narrowly ratified the Constitution by a vote of 187 to 168. Hancock's support was probably a deciding factor in the ratification.\nHancock was put forth as a candidate in the 1789 U.S. presidential election. As was the custom in an era where political ambition was viewed with suspicion, he did not campaign or even publicly express interest in the office; he instead made his wishes known indirectly. Like everyone else, Hancock knew that Washington was going to be elected as the first president, but he may have been interested in being vice president, despite his poor health. He received only four electoral votes in the election, however, none of them from his home state; the Massachusetts electors all voted for John Adams, who received the second-highest number of electoral votes and thus became vice president. Although Hancock was disappointed with his performance in the election, he continued to be popular in Massachusetts.\nHis health failing, Hancock spent his final few years as essentially a figurehead governor. With his wife at his side, he died in bed on October 8, 1793, at age 56. By order of acting governor Samuel Adams, the day of Hancock's burial was a state holiday; the lavish funeral was perhaps the grandest given to an American up to that time.\nLegacy.\nDespite his grand funeral, Hancock faded from popular memory after his death. According to historian Alfred F. Young, \"Boston celebrated only one hero in the half-century after the Revolution: George Washington.\" As early as 1809, John Adams lamented that Hancock and Samuel Adams were \"almost buried in oblivion\". In Boston, little effort was made to preserve Hancock's historical legacy. His house on Beacon Hill was torn down in 1863 after both the city of Boston and the Massachusetts legislature decided against maintaining it. According to Young, the conservative \"new elite\" of Massachusetts \"was not comfortable with a rich man who pledged his fortune to the cause of revolution\". In 1876, with the centennial of American independence renewing popular interest in the Revolution, plaques honoring Hancock were put up in Boston. In 1896, a memorial column was erected over Hancock's essentially unmarked grave in the Granary Burying Ground.\nNo full-length biography of Hancock appeared until the 20th century. A challenge facing Hancock biographers is that, compared to prominent Founding Fathers like Thomas Jefferson and John Adams, Hancock left relatively few personal writings for historians to use in interpreting his life. As a result, most depictions of him have relied on the voluminous writings of his political opponents, who were often scathingly critical of him. According to historian Charles Akers, \"The chief victim of Massachusetts historiography has been John Hancock, the most gifted and popular politician in the Bay State's long history. He suffered the misfortune of being known to later generations almost entirely through the judgments of his detractors, Tory and Whig.\"\nHancock's most influential 20th-century detractor was historian James Truslow Adams, who wrote negative portraits of Hancock in \"Harper's Magazine\" and the \"Dictionary of American Biography\" in the 1930s. Adams argued that Hancock was a \"fair presiding officer\" but had \"no great ability\", and was prominent only because of his inherited wealth. Decades later, historian Donald Proctor argued that Adams had uncritically repeated the negative views of Hancock's political opponents without doing any serious research. Adams \"presented a series of disparaging incidents and anecdotes, sometimes partially documented, sometimes not documented at all, which in sum leave one with a distinctly unfavorable impression of Hancock\". According to Proctor, Adams evidently projected his own disapproval of 1920s businessmen onto Hancock and ended up misrepresenting several key events in Hancock's career. Writing in the 1970s, Proctor and Akers called for scholars to evaluate Hancock based on his merits rather than on the views of his critics. Since that time, historians have usually presented a more favorable portrait of Hancock while acknowledging that he was not an important writer, political theorist, or military leader.\nMany places and things in the United States have been named in honor of Hancock. The U.S. Navy has named vessels USS \"Hancock\" and USS \"John Hancock\"; a World War II Liberty ship was also named in his honor. Ten states have a Hancock County named for him; other places named after him include Hancock, Massachusetts; Hancock, Michigan; Hancock, New Hampshire; Hancock, New York; and Mount Hancock in New Hampshire. The defunct John Hancock University was named for him, as was the John Hancock Financial company, founded in Boston in 1862; it had no connection to Hancock's own business ventures. The financial company passed on the name to the John Hancock Tower in Boston, the John Hancock Center in Chicago, as well as the John Hancock Student Village at Boston University. Hancock was a charter member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1780.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16326", "revid": "50718549", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16326", "title": "John W. Campbell", "text": "American science fiction writer and editor (1910\u20131971)\nJohn Wood Campbell Jr. (June 8, 1910 \u2013 July 11, 1971) was an American science fiction writer and editor. He was editor of \"Astounding Science Fiction\" (later called \"Analog Science Fiction and Fact\") from late 1937 until his death and was part of the Golden Age of Science Fiction. Campbell wrote \n\"super-science\" space opera under his own name and other stories under his primary pseudonym, Don A. Stuart. Campbell also used the pen names Karl Van Kampen and Arthur McCann. His novella \"Who Goes There?\" (1938) was adapted as the films \"The Thing from Another World\" (1951), \"The Thing\" (1982), and \"The Thing\" (2011).\nCampbell began writing science fiction at age 18 while attending MIT. He published six short stories, a novel, and eight letters in the science fiction magazine \"Amazing Stories\" from 1930 to 1931. This work established Campbell's reputation as a writer of space adventure. In 1934, he began to write science fiction stories of a different sort under the pseudonym Don A. Stuart. From 1930 until 1937, Campbell was prolific and successful under both names; he stopped writing fiction shortly after he became editor of \"Astounding\" in 1937. In his capacity as an editor, Campbell published the earliest work, and helped shape the careers of, nearly every important science-fiction author to debut between 1938 and 1946, including Isaac Asimov, Robert A. Heinlein, Theodore Sturgeon, and Arthur C. Clarke.\nBiography.\nJohn Campbell was born in Newark, New Jersey, in 1910. His father, John Wood Campbell Sr., was an electrical engineer. His mother, Dorothy (n\u00e9e Strahern) had an identical twin who visited them often. John was unable to tell them apart and said he was frequently rebuffed by the person he took to be his mother. Campbell attended the Blair Academy, a boarding school in rural Warren County, New Jersey, but did not graduate because of lack of credits for French and trigonometry.\nHe also attended, without graduating, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), where he was befriended by the mathematician Norbert Wiener (who coined the term \"cybernetics\") \u2013 but he failed German. MIT dismissed him in his junior year in 1931. After two years at Duke University, he graduated with a Bachelor of Science in physics in 1934.\nCampbell began writing science fiction at age 18 while attending MIT and sold his first stories quickly. From January 1930 to June 1931, \"Amazing Stories\" published six of his short stories, one novel, and six letters. Campbell was editor of \"Astounding Science Fiction\" (later called \"Analog Science Fiction and Fact\") from late 1937 until his death. Between December 11, 1957, and June 13, 1958, he hosted a weekly science fiction radio program called \"Exploring Tomorrow\". The scripts were written by authors such as Gordon R. Dickson and Robert Silverberg.\nCampbell and Do\u00f1a Stewart married in 1931. They divorced in 1949, and he married Margaret (Peg) Winter in 1950. He spent most of his life in New Jersey and died of heart failure at his home in Mountainside, New Jersey. He was an atheist.\nWriting career.\nEditor T. O'Conor Sloane lost Campbell's first manuscript that he accepted for \"Amazing Stories\", entitled \"Invaders of the Infinite\". \"When the Atoms Failed\" appeared in January 1930, followed by five more during 1930. Three were part of a space opera series featuring the characters Arcot, Morey, and Wade. A complete novel in the series, \"Islands of Space\", was the cover story in the Spring 1931 \"Quarterly\". During 1934\u201335 a serial novel, \"The Mightiest Machine\", ran in \"Astounding Stories\", edited by F. Orlin Tremaine, and several stories featuring lead characters Penton and Blake appeared from late 1936 in \"Thrilling Wonder Stories\", edited by Mort Weisinger.\nThe early work for \"Amazing\" established Campbell's reputation as a writer of space adventure. In 1934, he began to publish stories with a different tone using the pseudonym Don A. Stuart, which was derived from his wife's maiden name. He published several stories under this pseudonym, including \"Twilight\" (\"Astounding\", November 1934), \"Night\" (\"Astounding\", October 1935), and \"Who Goes There?\" (\"Astounding\", August 1938). \"Who Goes There?\", about a group of Antarctic researchers who discover a crashed alien vessel, formerly inhabited by a malevolent shape-changing occupant, was published in \"Astounding\" almost a year after Campbell became its editor and it was his last significant piece of fiction, at age 28. It was filmed as \"The Thing from Another World\" (1951), \"The Thing\" (1982), and again as \"The Thing\" (2011).\nEditing career.\nTremaine hired Campbell to succeed him as the editor of \"Astounding\" from its October 1937 issue. Campbell was not given full authority for \"Astounding\" until May 1938, but had been responsible for buying stories earlier. He began to make changes almost immediately, instigating a \"mutant\" label for unusual stories, and in March 1938, changing the title from \"Astounding Stories\" to \"Astounding Science-Fiction\".\nLester del Rey's first story in March 1938 was an early find for Campbell. In 1939, he published a group of new writers for the July 1939 issue of \"Astounding\". The July issue contained A. E. van Vogt's first story, \"Black Destroyer\", and Asimov's early story, \"Trends\"; August brought Robert A. Heinlein's first story, \"Life-Line\", and the next month Theodore Sturgeon's first story appeared.\nAlso in 1939, Campbell started the magazine \"Unknown\" (later \"Unknown Worlds\"). \"Unknown\" was canceled after four years due to wartime paper shortages.\nDeath.\nCampbell died in 1971 at the age of 61 in Mountainside, New Jersey. At the time of his sudden death after 34 years at the helm of \"Analog,\" Campbell's personality and editorial demands had alienated some of his writers to the point that they no longer submitted works to him. One of his writers, Theodore Sturgeon, opted to publish most of his works after 1950 and only submitted one story to \"Astounding\" during that same timeframe.\nInfluence.\n\"The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction\" wrote: \"More than any other individual, he helped to shape modern sf\", and Darrell Schweitzer credits him with having \"decreed that SF writers should pull themselves up out of the pulp mire and start writing intelligently, for adults\". After 1950, new magazines such as \"Galaxy Science Fiction\" and \"The Magazine of Fantasy &amp; Science Fiction\" moved in different directions and developed talented new writers who were not directly influenced by him. Campbell often suggested story ideas to writers (including \"Write me a creature that thinks \"as well as\" a man, or \"better than\" a man, but not \"like\" a man\") and sometimes asked for stories to match cover paintings he had already bought.\nCampbell had a strong formative influence on Asimov and eventually became a friend. Asimov credited Campbell with encouraging developments within the field of science fiction field by forgoing conventional plot points and requiring its writers to \"understand science and understand people.\" He also called Campbell \"the most powerful force in science fiction ever\" and said the \"first ten years of his editorship he dominated the field completely.\" \nCampbell encouraged Cleve Cartmill to write \"Deadline\", a short story that appeared during the wartime year of 1944, a year before the detonation of the first atomic bomb. As Ben Bova, Campbell's successor as editor at \"Analog\", wrote, it \"described the basic facts of how to build an atomic bomb. Cartmill and Campbell worked together on the story, drawing their scientific information from papers published in the technical journals before the war. To them, the mechanics of constructing a uranium-fission bomb seemed perfectly obvious.\" The FBI descended on Campbell's office after the story appeared in print and demanded that the issue be removed from the newsstands. Campbell convinced them that by removing the magazine \"the FBI would be advertising to everyone that such a project existed and was aimed at developing nuclear weapons\" and the demand was dropped.\nCampbell was also responsible for the grim and controversial ending of Tom Godwin's short story \"The Cold Equations\". Writer Joe Green recounted that Campbell had rejected Godwin's 'Cold Equations' on three different occasions due to disagreements over the fate of the female protagonist.\nBetween December 11, 1957, and June 13, 1958, Campbell hosted a weekly science fiction radio program called \"Exploring Tomorrow\".\nViews.\nSlavery, race, and segregation.\nGreen wrote that Campbell \"enjoyed taking the 'devil's advocate' position in almost any area, willing to defend even viewpoints with which he disagreed if that led to a livelier debate\". As an example, he wrote:\n[Campbell] pointed out that the much-maligned 'peculiar institution' of slavery in the American South had in fact provided the blacks brought there with a higher standard of living than they had in Africa\u00a0... I suspected, from comments by Asimov, among others\u00a0\u2013 and some \"Analog\" editorials I had read\u00a0\u2013 that John held some racist views, at least in regard to blacks.\nHowever, Green also said about this stance that \"rapidly increasing mechanization after 1850 would have soon rendered slavery obsolete anyhow. It would have been better for the USA to endure it a few more years than suffer the truly horrendous costs of the Civil War.\"\nIn a June 1961 editorial called \"Civil War Centennial\", Campbell argued that slavery had been a dominant form of human relationships for most of history and that the present was unusual in that anti-slavery cultures dominated the planet.\nIt's my bet that the South would have been integrated by 1910. The job would have been done\u00a0\u2013 and done right\u00a0\u2013 half a century sooner, with vastly less human misery, and with almost no bloodshed\u00a0... The only way slavery has ever been ended, anywhere, is by introducing industry\u00a0... If a man is a skilled and competent machinist\u00a0\u2013 if the lathes work well under his hands\u00a0\u2013 the industrial management will be forced, to remain in business, to accept that fact, whether the man be black, white, purple, or polka-dotted.\nAccording to Michael Moorcock, Campbell suggested that some people preferred slavery.\nHe also, when faced with the Watts riots of the mid-sixties, seriously proposed and went on to proposing that there were 'natural' slaves who were unhappy if freed. I sat on a panel with him in 1965, as he pointed out that the worker bee when unable to work dies of misery, that the moujiks when freed went to their masters and begged to be enslaved again, that the ideals of the anti-slavers who fought in the Civil War were merely expressions of self-interest and that the blacks were 'against' emancipation, which was fundamentally why they were indulging in 'leaderless' riots in the suburbs of Los Angeles.\nBy the 1960s, Campbell began to publish controversial essays supporting segregation and other remarks and writings surrounding slavery and race, which distance him from many in the science fiction community. In 1963, Campbell published an essay supporting segregated schools and arguing that \"the Negro race\" had failed to \"produce super-high-geniuses\". In 1965, he continued his defense of segregation and related practices, critiquing \"the arrogant defiance of law by many of the Negro 'Civil Rights' groups\". On February 10, 1967, Campbell rejected Samuel R. Delany's \"Nova\" a month before it was ultimately published, with a note and phone call to his agent explaining that he did not feel his readership \"would be able to relate to a black main character\".\nAll these views were reflected in the depiction of aliens in \"Astounding\"/\"Analog\". Throughout his editorship, Campbell demanded that depiction of contact between aliens and humans must favor humans. For example, Campbell accepted Isaac Asimov's proposal for \"Homo Sol\" (in which humans rejected an invitation to join a galactic federation) in January 1940, which was published later that year in the September edition of \"Astounding Science Fiction\". Similarly, Arthur C. Clarke's \"Rescue Party\" and Fredric Brown's \"Arena\" (which formed the basis of the \"\" episode ) and \"Letter to a Phoenix\" (all first appeared in \"Astounding\") also depict humans more favorably than aliens.\nMedicine and health.\nCampbell was a critic of government regulation of health and safety, excoriating numerous public health initiatives and regulations.\nCampbell was a heavy smoker throughout his life and was seldom seen without his customary cigarette holder. In the \"Analog\" of September 1964, nine months after the Surgeon General's first major warning about the dangers of cigarette smoking had been issued (January 11, 1964) Campbell ran an editorial, \"A Counterblaste to Tobacco\" that took its title from the anti-smoking book of the same name by King James I of England. In it, he stated that the connection to lung cancer was \"esoteric\" and referred to \"a barely determinable possible correlation between cigarette smoking and cancer\". He said that tobacco's calming effects led to more effective thinking. In a one-page piece about automobile safety in \"Analog\" dated May 1967, Campbell wrote of \"people suddenly becoming conscious of the fact that cars kill more people than cigarettes do, even if the antitobacco alarmists were completely right...\"\nIn 1963, Campbell published an angry editorial about Frances Oldham Kelsey who, while at the FDA, refused to permit thalidomide to be sold in the United States.\nIn other essays, Campbell supported crank medicine, arguing that government regulation was more harmful than beneficial and that regulating quackery prevented the use of many possible beneficial medicines (\"e.g.\", krebiozen).\nPseudoscience, parapsychology, and politics.\nIn the 1930s, Campbell became interested in Joseph Rhine's theories about ESP (Rhine had already founded the Parapsychology Laboratory at Duke University when Campbell was a student there), and over the following years his growing interest in parapsychology would be reflected in the stories he published when he encouraged the writers to include these topics in their tales, leading to the publication of numerous works about telepathy and other \"psionic\" abilities. This post-war \"psi-boom\" has been dated by science fiction scholars to roughly the mid-1950s to the early 1960s, and continues to influence many popular culture tropes and motifs. Campbell rejected the Shaver Mystery in which the author claimed to have had a personal experience with a sinister ancient civilization that harbored fantastic technology in caverns under the earth.\nHis increasing beliefs in pseudoscience would eventually start to isolate and alienate him from some of his writers, including Asimov. He wrote favorably about such things as the \"Dean drive\", a device that supposedly produced thrust in violation of Newton's third law, and the \"Hieronymus machine\", which could supposedly amplify psi powers.\nIn 1949, Campbell worked closely with L. Ron Hubbard on the techniques that Hubbard later turned into Dianetics. When Hubbard's therapy failed to find support from the medical community, Campbell published the earliest forms of Dianetics in \"Astounding\". He wrote of L. Ron Hubbard's initial article in \"Astounding\" that \"[i]t is, I assure you in full and absolute sincerity, one of the most important articles ever published.\"\nCampbell continued to promote Hubbard's theories until 1952, when the pair split acrimoniously over the direction of the movement.\nAsimov wrote: \"A number of writers wrote pseudoscientific stuff to ensure sales to Campbell, but the best writers retreated, I among them.\u00a0...\" Elsewhere Asimov went on to further explain\nCampbell championed far-out ideas\u00a0... He pained very many of the men he had trained (including me) in doing so, but felt it was his duty to stir up the minds of his readers and force curiosity right out to the border lines. He began a series of editorials\u00a0... in which he championed a social point of view that could sometimes be described as far right (he expressed sympathy for George Wallace in the 1968 national election, for instance). There was bitter opposition to this from many (including me \u2013 I could hardly ever read a Campbell editorial and keep my temper).\nAssessment by peers.\nDamon Knight described Campbell as a \"portly, bristled-haired blond man with a challenging stare\". \"Six-foot-one, with hawklike features, he presented a formidable appearance,\" said Sam Moskowitz. \"He was a tall, large man with light hair, a beaky nose, a wide face with thin lips, and with a cigarette in a holder forever clamped between his teeth\", wrote Asimov.\nAlgis Budrys wrote that \"John W. Campbell was the greatest editor SF has seen or is likely to see, and is in fact one of the major editors in all English-language literature in the middle years of the twentieth century. All about you is the heritage of what he built\".\nAsimov said that Campbell was \"talkative, opinionated, quicksilver-minded, overbearing. Talking to him meant listening to a monologue...\" Knight agreed: \"Campbell's lecture-room manner was so unpleasant to me that I was unwilling to face it. Campbell talked a good deal more than he listened, and he liked to say outrageous things.\"\nBritish novelist and critic Kingsley Amis dismissed Campbell brusquely: \"I might just add as a sociological note that the editor of \"Astounding,\" himself a deviant figure of marked ferocity, seems to think he has invented a psi machine.\"\nSeveral science-fiction novelists have criticized Campbell as prejudiced \u2013 Samuel R. Delany for Campbell's rejection of a novel due to the black main character, and Joe Haldeman in the dedication of \"Forever Peace\", for rejecting a novel due to a female soldier protagonist.\nBritish science-fiction novelist Michael Moorcock, as part of his \"Starship Stormtroopers\" editorial, said Campbell's \"Astounding\" and its writers were \"wild-eyed paternalists to a man, fierce anti-socialists\" with \"[stories] full of crew-cut wisecracking, cigar-chewing, competent guys (like Campbell's image of himself)\"; they sold magazines because their \"work reflected the deep-seated conservatism of the majority of their readers, who saw a Bolshevik menace in every union meeting\". He viewed Campbell as turning the magazine into a vessel for right-wing politics, \"by the early 1950s\u00a0... a crypto-fascist deeply philistine magazine pretending to intellectualism and offering idealistic kids an 'alternative' that was, of course, no alternative at all\".\nSF writer Alfred Bester, an editor of \"Holiday Magazine\" and a sophisticated Manhattanite, recounted at some length his \"one demented meeting\" with Campbell, a man he imagined from afar to be \"a combination of Bertrand Russell and Ernest Rutherford\". The first thing Campbell said to him was that Freud was dead, destroyed by the new discovery of Dianetics, which, he predicted, would win L. Ron Hubbard the Nobel Peace Prize. Campbell ordered the bemused Bester to \"think back. Clear yourself. Remember! You can remember when your mother tried to abort you with a button hook. You've never stopped hating her for it.\" Bester commented: \"It reinforced my private opinion that a majority of the science-fiction crowd, despite their brilliance, were missing their marbles.\"\nAsimov remained grateful for Campbell's early friendship and support. He dedicated \"The Early Asimov\" (1972) to him, and concluded it by stating that \"There is no way at all to express how much he meant to me and how much he did for me except, perhaps, to write this book evoking, once more, those days of a quarter century ago\". His final word on Campbell was that \"in the last twenty years of his life, he was only a diminishing shadow of what he had once been.\" Even Heinlein, perhaps Campbell's most important discovery and a \"fast friend\", tired of him.\nPoul Anderson wrote that Campbell \"had saved and regenerated science fiction\", which had become \"the product of hack pulpsters\" when he took over \"Astounding\". \"By his editorial policies and the help and encouragement he gave his writers (always behind the scenes), he raised both the literary and the intellectual standard anew. Whatever progress has been made stems from that renaissance\".\nAwards and honors.\nCampbell and \"Astounding\" shared one of the inaugural Hugo Awards with H. L. Gold and \"Galaxy\" at the 1953 World Science Fiction Convention. Subsequently, Campbell and \"Astounding\" won the Hugo Award for Best Professional Editor seven additional times as well as winning the Hugo Award for Best Professional Magazine four times. Campbell and \"Analog\" won the Hugo Award for Best Professional Magazine yet another four times and Campbell's novella \"Who Goes There?\" also won a Hugo Award for Best Novella, bringing his total award count to seventeen.\nShortly after Campbell's death in 1971, the University of Kansas science fiction program\u2014now the Center for the Study of Science Fiction\u2014established the annual John W. Campbell Memorial Award for Best Science Fiction Novel and also renamed after him its annual Campbell Conference. The World Science Fiction Society established the annual John W. Campbell Award for Best New Writer. All three memorials became effective in 1973. However, following Jeannette Ng's August 2019 acceptance speech of the award for Best New Writer at Worldcon 77, in which she criticized Campbell's politics and called him a fascist, the publishers of \"Analog\" magazine announced that the John W. Campbell Award for Best New Writer would immediately be renamed to \"The \"Astounding\" Award for Best New Writer\".\nThe Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame inducted Campbell in 1996, in its inaugural class of two deceased and two living persons.\nCampbell and \"Astounding\" shared one of the inaugural Hugo Awards with H. L. Gold and \"Galaxy\" at the 1953 World Science Fiction Convention. Subsequently, he won the Hugo Award for Best Professional Magazine seven times to 1965. In 2018, he won a retrospective Hugo Award for Best Editor, Short Form (1943).\nThe Martian impact crater Campbell was named after him.\nWorks.\nThis shortened bibliography lists each title once. Some titles that are duplicated are different versions, whereas other publications of Campbell's with different titles are simply selections from or retitlings of other works, and have hence been omitted. The main bibliographic sources are footnoted from this paragraph and provided much of the information in the following sections.\nMemorial works.\nMemorial works (Festschrift) include:\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16327", "revid": "12240634", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16327", "title": "Joule", "text": "SI unit of energy\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nThe joule ( , or ; symbol: J) is the unit of energy in the International System of Units (SI). In terms of SI base units, one joule corresponds to one kilogram-metre squared per second squared (1 J \n 1 kg\u22c5m2\u22c5s\u22122). One joule is equal to the amount of work done when a force of one newton displaces a body through a distance of one metre in the direction of that force. It is also the energy dissipated as heat when an electric current of one ampere passes through a resistance of one ohm for one second. It is named after the English physicist James Prescott Joule (1818\u20131889).\nDefinition.\nAccording to the International Bureau of Weights and Measures the joule is defined as \"the work done when the point of application of 1 MKS unit of force [newton] moves a distance of 1 metre in the direction of the force.\"\nIn terms of SI base units and in terms of SI derived units with special names, the joule is defined as\nOne joule is also equivalent to any of the following:\nThe joule is named after James Prescott Joule. As with every SI unit named after a person, its symbol starts with an upper case letter (J), but when written in full, it follows the rules for capitalisation of a common noun; i.e., \"joule\" becomes capitalised at the beginning of a sentence and in titles but is otherwise in lower case.\nHistory.\nThe CGS system had been declared official in 1881, at the first International Electrical Congress.\nThe erg was adopted as its unit of energy in 1882. Wilhelm Siemens, in his inauguration speech as chairman of the British Association for the Advancement of Science (23 August 1882) first proposed the \"joule\" as unit of heat, to be derived from the electromagnetic units ampere and ohm, in cgs units equivalent to .\nThe naming of the unit in honour of James Prescott Joule (1818\u20131889), at the time retired and aged 63, followed the recommendation of Siemens:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Such a heat unit, if found acceptable, might with great propriety, I think, be called the Joule, after the man who has done so much to develop the dynamical theory of heat.\nAt the second International Electrical Congress, on 31 August 1889, the joule was officially adopted alongside the watt and the \"quadrant\" (later renamed to henry).\nJoule died in the same year, on 11 October 1889.\nAt the fourth congress (1893), the \"international ampere\" and \"international ohm\" were defined, with slight changes in the specifications for their measurement, with the \"international joule\" being the unit derived from them.\nIn 1935, the International Electrotechnical Commission (as the successor organisation of the International Electrical Congress) adopted the \"Giorgi system\", which by virtue of assuming a defined value for the magnetic constant also implied a redefinition of the joule. The Giorgi system was approved by the International Committee for Weights and Measures in 1946. The joule was now no longer defined based on electromagnetic unit, but instead as the unit of work performed by one unit of force (at the time not yet named newton) over the distance of 1 metre. The joule was explicitly intended as the unit of energy to be used in both electromagnetic and mechanical contexts. The ratification of the definition at the ninth General Conference on Weights and Measures, in 1948, added the specification that the joule was also to be preferred as the unit of heat in the context of calorimetry, thereby officially deprecating the use of the calorie. This is the definition declared in the modern International System of Units in 1960.\nThe definition of the joule as J\u00a0=\u00a0kg\u22c5m2\u22c5s\u22122 has remained unchanged since 1946, but the joule as a derived unit has inherited changes in the definitions of the second (in 1960 and 1967), the metre (in 1983) and the kilogram (in 2019).\nPractical examples.\nOne joule represents (approximately):\nConversions.\n1 joule is equal to (approximately unless otherwise stated):\nUnits with exact equivalents in joules include:\nNewton-metre and torque.\nIn mechanics, the concept of force (in some direction) has a close analogue in the concept of torque (about some angle):\nA result of this similarity is that the SI unit for torque is the newton-metre, which works out algebraically to have the same dimensions as the joule, but they are not interchangeable. The General Conference on Weights and Measures has given the unit of energy the name \"joule\", but has not given the unit of torque any special name, hence it is simply the newton-metre (N\u22c5m) \u2013 a compound name derived from its constituent parts. The use of newton-metres for torque but joules for energy is helpful to avoid misunderstandings and miscommunication.\nThe distinction may be seen also in the fact that energy is a scalar quantity \u2013 the dot product of a force vector and a displacement vector. By contrast, torque is a vector \u2013 the cross product of a force vector and a distance vector. Torque and energy are related to one another by the equation\nformula_1\nwhere \"E\" is energy, \"\u03c4\" is (the vector magnitude of) torque, and \"\u03b8\" is the angle swept (in radians). Since plane angles are dimensionless, it follows that torque and energy have the same dimensions.\nWatt-second.\nA watt-second (symbol W\u00a0s or W\u22c5s) is a derived unit of energy equivalent to the joule. The watt-second is the energy equivalent to the power of one watt sustained for one second. While the watt-second is equivalent to the joule in both units and meaning, there are some contexts in which the term \"watt-second\" is used instead of \"joule\", such as in the rating of photographic electronic flash units.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16328", "revid": "9203640", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16328", "title": "Jeepster Records", "text": "Jeepster Records is an English, London-based independent record label, founded in 1995, and specializing in British indie and alternative bands, particularly Glasgow-based acts. It is most notable for its signing of Belle and Sebastian and Snow Patrol.\nEarly success.\nJeepster Records was founded in 1995 by Mark Jones and Stefano D\u2019Andrea, through a mutual interest in the contemporary indie scene. Following their establishment and after extensive scouting, the label signed their first act, the newly formed Belle and Sebastian, in August 1996. In November of the same year, the band's first album with Jeepster, \"If You're Feeling Sinister\" was released. This established both Belle and Sebastian and Jeepster, and enabled them to release several EPs with Belle and Sebastian throughout 1997, as well as signing their second act, Snow Patrol, later in the year. 1998 then saw increased activity, with the signing of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Salako, and the release of albums for all three of their signed bands; most notably Belle and Sebastian's \"The Boy With The Arab Strap\".\nThe label's strong relationship with Belle and Sebastian enabled them in 1999 to sign Stuart David's side-project Looper, and Isobel Campbell's solo project The Gentle Waves, releasing albums for each that same year, along with a string of EPs and singles for their entire roster. The label enjoyed further good publicity when Belle and Sebastian won Best Newcomer in the 1999 Brit Awards. Later that year, Jeepster reissued Belle and Sebastian's debut album \"Tigermilk\", which had previously been available only on limited issue vinyl.\n2000 saw new albums released for Belle and Sebastian, Looper (band), and The Gentle Waves, as well as Belle and Sebastian's first appearance on \"Top of the Pops\". In June of the same year, Belle and Sebastian had their first UK Top Ten hit with their fourth studio album, Fold Your Hands Child, You Walk Like a Peasant which entered the UK Album Charts at No.10, spending four weeks in the charts. Towards the end of the year, the label released the \"It's a Cool Cool Christmas\" compilation on CD in association with XFM, with proceeds going to The Big Issue charity. The album was only available during this Christmas period, and featured Belle and Sebastian and Snow Patrol, as well as numerous other bands including Grandaddy, The Flaming Lips and Teenage Fanclub. The following year marked the release of Snow Patrol's second album \"When It's All Over We Still Have To Clear Up\" which would later go gold, along with their debut album \"Songs For Polarbears\".\nDormant period.\nDespite critical acclaim for its acts, Jeepster was financially troubled by 2002 due to increasing recording and marketing costs, and an unsustainable reliance on one director for financial support. This forced the label to decline renewal of the contracts of their most successful artists and concentrate solely on marketing their existing catalogue. Stefano D'Andrea and Mark Jones resigned from the day to day running of the label, and Joanne D'Andrea took over management of the catalogue. While they were unable to retain their signed artists for ongoing releases and could not afford to sign new acts for this period, there were several additions to the back catalogue in the next few years.\nThe label released a Belle and Sebastian DVD in 2003, \"Fans Only\", and in 2005 \"Push Barman to Open Old Wounds\", a compilation comprising all of Belle and Sebastian's singles and EPs released under Jeepster. This was followed in 2006 by extended re-issues of Songs for Polarbears and \"When It's All Over We Still Have to Clear Up\", which included all their B-sides as bonus tracks.\nLater releases.\nIn a stronger financial position by April 2006, largely due to the commercial success of Snow Patrol on signing to a major label, Jeepster announced its first new signing in years, Reading-based act SixNationState. Following renewed scouting of the Glasgow underground scene, the label soon after announced the signing of another band, Parka, in November of the same year.\nFollowing several singles releases by both bands, the label released its first new album in six and a half years in late 2007: SixNationState's self-titled debut album. In May 2008, Parka's own debut, \"Attack of the Hundred Yard Hardman\" was also released.\nBefore the end of 2008, Jeepster would release another Belle and Sebastian compilation, \"The BBC Sessions\", collecting the tracks that the band had recorded for the BBC in 1996, which included rarities and unreleased songs, together with live recordings from Belfast.\nJeepster contributed six songs to the Polydor Records Snow Patrol compilation \"Up To Now\" in 2009.\nIn 2016, a limited release of 1200 vinyl box sets \"The Jeepster Singles Collection\", containing all 12\" versions of the early Belle and Sebastian EPs, together with original fanzines, press photo, DVD and scrapbook, was made available to celebrate the 21st Anniversary of the label.\nSnow Patrol's When It's All Over We Still Have to Clear Up was again reissued in 2019 on limited vinyl, with a gold 7\" containing two previously unreleased tracks.\nIn 2020, the Belle and Sebastian album If You're Feeling Sinister was listed in Rolling Stone's 500 Greatest Albums of All Time at No. 481.\nThe Jeepster charity album It's a Cool Cool Christmas was reissued for the first time on vinyl in 2021, in aid of War Child (charity) UK and with the blessing of all original artists.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16329", "revid": "50156125", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16329", "title": "John Chrysostom", "text": "Archbishop of Constantinople (347\u2013407)\nJohn Chrysostom (; ; c.\u2009347 \u2013 14 September 407) was an important Church Father who served as Archbishop of Constantinople. He is known for his preaching and public speaking, his denunciation of abuse of authority by both ecclesiastical and political leaders, his \"Divine Liturgy of Saint John Chrysostom\", and his ascetic sensibilities. He was also the author of \"Adversus Judaeos\" and was strongly against Judaism. The epithet (\"Chrysostomos\", anglicized as Chrysostom) means \"golden-mouthed\" in Greek and denotes his celebrated eloquence. Chrysostom was among the most prolific authors in the early Christian Church.\nHe is honored as a saint in the Eastern Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox, Catholic, Anglican, and Lutheran churches, as well as in some others. The Eastern Orthodox, together with the Byzantine Catholics, hold him in special regard as one of the Three Holy Hierarchs (alongside Basil of Caesarea and Gregory of Nazianzus). Along with them and Athanasius of Alexandria he is also regarded as one of the four Great Greek Church Fathers. The feast days of John Chrysostom in the Eastern Orthodox Church are 14 September, 13 November and 27 January. In the Catholic Church, he is recognised as a Doctor of the Church. Because the date of his death is occupied by the feast of the Exaltation of the Holy Cross (14 September), the General Roman Calendar celebrates him since 1970 on the previous day, 13 September; from the 13th century to 1969 it did so on 27 January, the anniversary of the translation of his body to Constantinople. Of other Western churches, including Anglican provinces and Lutheran churches, some commemorate him on 13 September, others on 27 January. John Chrysostom is honored on the calendars of the Church of England and the Episcopal Church on 13 September. The Coptic Church also recognizes him as a saint (with feast days on 16 Thout and 17 Hathor).\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nJohn was born in Antioch, Roman Syria (modern-day Antakya, Hatay, Turkey) in 347. Different scholars describe his mother Anthusa as a pagan or as a Christian. His father was a high-ranking military officer. John's father died soon after his birth and he was raised by his mother. He was baptised in 368 or 373, and tonsured as a reader (one of the minor orders of the Church). It is sometimes said that he was bitten by a snake when he was ten years old, resulting in infection from the bite.\nAs a result of his mother's influential connections in the city, John began his education under the rhetorician Libanius. From Libanius, John acquired the skills for a career in rhetoric, as well as a love of the Greek language and literature. Eventually, he became a lawyer.\nAs he grew older, however, John became more deeply committed to Christianity and went on to study theology under Diodorus of Tarsus, founder of the re-constituted School of Antioch. According to the Christian historian Sozomen, Libanius was supposed to have said on his deathbed that John would have been his successor \"if the Christians had not taken him from us\".\nJohn lived in extreme asceticism and became a hermit in about 375; he spent the next two years continually standing, scarcely sleeping, and committing the Bible to memory. As a consequence of these practices, his stomach and kidneys were permanently damaged and poor health forced him to return to Antioch.\nDiaconate and service in Antioch.\nJohn was first appointed as a reader in the church of Antioch by Zeno of Verona upon the latter's return from Jerusalem. Later, he was ordained as a deacon in 381 by the bishop Meletius of Antioch who was not then in communion with Alexandria and Rome. After the death of Meletius, John separated himself from the followers of Meletius, without joining Paulinus II of Antioch, the rival of Meletius for the bishopric of Antioch. But after the death of Paulinus II (388) he was ordained a presbyter (priest) by Evagrius of Antioch, the successor of Paulinus by the Eustathius of Antioch faction in the city. He was destined later to bring about reconciliation between Flavian I of Antioch, Alexandria, and Rome, thus bringing those three sees into communion for the first time in nearly seventy years.\nIn Antioch, over the course of twelve years (386\u2013397), John gained popularity because of the eloquence of his public speaking at the Golden Church, Antioch's cathedral, especially his insightful expositions of Bible passages and moral teaching. The most valuable of his works from this period are his homilies on various books of the Bible. He emphasised charitable giving and was concerned with the spiritual and temporal needs of the poor. He spoke against abuse of wealth and personal property:Do you wish to honour the body of Christ? Do not ignore him when he is naked. Do not pay him homage in the temple clad in silk, only then to neglect him outside where he is cold and ill-clad. He who said: \"This is my body\" is the same who said: \"You saw me hungry and you gave me no food\", and \"Whatever you did to the least of my brothers you did also to me\"... What good is it if the Eucharistic table is overloaded with golden chalices when your brother is dying of hunger? Start by satisfying his hunger and then with what is left you may adorn the altar as well.\nHis straightforward understanding of the Scriptures \u2013 in contrast to the Alexandrian tendency towards allegorical interpretation \u2013 meant that the themes of his talks were practical, explaining the Bible's application to everyday life. Such straightforward preaching helped Chrysostom to garner popular support.\nOne incident that happened during his service in Antioch illustrates the influence of his homilies. When Chrysostom arrived in Antioch, Flavian, the bishop of the city, had to intervene with emperor Theodosius I on behalf of citizens who had gone on a rampage mutilating statues of the emperor and his family. During the weeks of Lent in 387, John preached more than twenty homilies in which he entreated the people to see the error of their ways. These made a lasting impression on the general population of the city: many pagans converted to Christianity as a result of the homilies. The city was ultimately spared from severe consequences.\nArchbishop of Constantinople.\nIn the autumn of 397, John was appointed archbishop of Constantinople, after having been nominated without his knowledge by the eunuch Eutropius. He had to leave Antioch in secret due to fears that the departure of such a popular figure would cause civil unrest.\nDuring his time as archbishop, he adamantly refused to host lavish social gatherings, which made him popular with the common people, but unpopular with wealthy citizens and the clergy. His reforms of the clergy were also unpopular. He told visiting regional preachers to return to the churches they were meant to be serving \u2013 without any pay-out. He also founded a number of hospitals in Constantinople.\nHis time in Constantinople was more tumultuous than his time in Antioch. Theophilus I of Alexandria, the patriarch of Alexandria, wanted to bring Constantinople under his sway and opposed John's appointment to Constantinople. Theophilus had disciplined four Egyptian monks (known as \"the Tall Brothers\") over their support of Origen's teachings. They fled to John and were welcomed by him. Theophilus therefore accused John of being too partial to the teaching of Origen. He made another enemy in Aelia Eudoxia, wife of emperor Arcadius, who assumed that John's denunciations of extravagance in feminine dress were aimed at her. Eudoxia, Theophilus and other of his enemies held a synod in 403 (the Synod of the Oak) to charge John, in which his connection to Origen was used against him. It resulted in his deposition and banishment. He was called back by Arcadius almost immediately, as the people became \"tumultuous\" over his departure, even threatening to burn the imperial palace. There was an earthquake the night of his arrest, which Eudoxia took for a sign of God's anger, prompting her to ask Arcadius for John's reinstatement.\nPeace was short-lived. A silver statue of Eudoxia was erected in the Augustaion, near the Constantinian Hagia Sophia, his cathedral. John denounced the dedication ceremonies as pagan and spoke against the empress in harsh terms: \"Again Herodias raves, again she dances, and again desires to receive John's head on a charger\", an allusion to the Biblical events surrounding the death of John the Baptist. Once again he was banished, this time to the Caucasus in Abkhazia. His banishment sparked riots among his supporters in the capital, and in the fighting the cathedral built by Constantius II was burnt down, necessitating the construction of the second cathedral on the site, the Theodosian Hagia Sophia.\nAround 405, John began to lend moral and financial support to Christian monks who were enforcing the emperors' anti-pagan laws, by destroying temples and shrines in Phoenicia and nearby regions.\nExile and death.\nThe causes of John's exile are not clear, though Jennifer Barry suggests that they have to do with his connections to Arianism. Other historians, including Wendy Mayer and Geoffrey Dunn, have argued that \"the surplus of evidence reveals a struggle between Johannite and anti-Johannite camps in Constantinople soon after John's departure and for a few years after his death\". Faced with exile, John Chrysostom wrote an appeal for help to three churchmen: Pope Innocent I; Venerius, the bishop of Mediolanum (Milan); and Chromatius, the bishop of Aquileia. In 1872, church historian William Stephens wrote:\nThe Patriarch of the Eastern Rome appeals to the great bishops of the West, as the champions of an ecclesiastical discipline which he confesses himself unable to enforce or to see any prospect of establishing. No jealousy is entertained of the Patriarch of the Old Rome by the patriarch of the New Rome. The interference of Innocent is courted, a certain primacy is accorded him, but at the same time he is not addressed as a supreme arbitrator; assistance and sympathy are solicited from him as from an elder brother, and two other prelates of Italy are joint recipients with him of the appeal.\nPope Innocent I protested John's banishment from Constantinople to the town of Cucusus (G\u00f6ksun) in Cappadocia, but to no avail. Innocent sent a delegation to intercede on behalf of John in 405. It was led by Gaudentius of Brescia; Gaudentius and his companions, two bishops, encountered many difficulties and never reached their goal of entering Constantinople.\nJohn wrote letters which still held great influence in Constantinople. As a result of this, he was further exiled from Cucusus (where he stayed from 404 to 407) to Pitiunt (Pityus) (in modern Georgia). He never reached this destination alive, as he died at Comana Pontica (modern-day G\u00fcmenek, Tokat, Turkey) on 14 September 407 during the journey. He died in the Presbyterium or community of the clergy belonging to the church of Saint Basiliscus of Comana. His last words are said to have been \"\" (\"Glory be to God for all things\").\nVeneration and canonisation.\nJohn came to be venerated as a saint soon after his death. Almost immediately after, an anonymous supporter of John (known as pseudo-Martyrius) wrote a funeral oration to reclaim John as a symbol of Christian orthodoxy. But three decades later, some of his adherents in Constantinople remained in schism. Proclus, archbishop of Constantinople (434\u2013446), hoping to bring about the reconciliation of the Johannites, preached a homily praising his predecessor in the Church of Hagia Sophia. He said, \"O John, your life was filled with sorrow, but your death was glorious. Your grave is blessed and reward is great, by the grace and mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ O graced one, having conquered the bounds of time and place! Love has conquered space, unforgetting memory has annihilated the limits, and place does not hinder the miracles of the saint.\"\nThese homilies helped to mobilize public opinion, and the patriarch received permission from the emperor to return Chrysostom's relics to Constantinople, where they were enshrined in the Church of the Holy Apostles on 28 January 438. The Eastern Orthodox Church commemorates him as a \"Great Ecumenical Teacher\", with Basil of Caesarea and Gregory of Nazianzus. These three saints, in addition to having their own individual commemorations throughout the year, are commemorated together on 30 January, a feast known as the Synaxis of the Three Hierarchs.\nIn the Eastern Orthodox Church, there are several feast days dedicated to him:\nIn 1908 Pope Pius X named him the patron saint of preachers.\nWritings.\nSome 700 sermons and 246 letters by John Chrysostom survive, plus biblical commentaries, moral discourses, and theological treatises.\nHomilies.\nGeneral.\nChrysostom's extant homiletical works are vast, including many hundreds of exegetical homilies on both the New Testament (especially the works of Paul the Apostle) and the Old Testament (particularly on Genesis). Among his exegetical works are sixty-seven homilies on Genesis, fifty-nine on the Psalms, ninety on the Gospel of Matthew, eighty-eight on the Gospel of John, and fifty-five on the Acts of the Apostles. The best known of his many homilies is an extremely brief one, the Paschal Homily (\"Hieratikon\"), which is read at the first service of Pascha (Easter), the midnight Orthros (Matins), in the Eastern Orthodox Church.\nThe homilies were written down by stenographers and subsequently circulated, revealing a style that tended to be direct and greatly personal, but formed by the rhetorical conventions of his time and place. In general, his homiletical theology displays much characteristics of the Antiochian school (i.e., more literal in interpreting biblical events), but he also uses a good deal of the allegorical interpretation more associated with the Alexandrian school.\nJohn's social and religious world was formed by the continuing and pervasive presence of paganism in the life of the city. One of his regular topics was the paganism in the culture of Constantinople, and in his homilies, he thunders against popular pagan amusements: the theatre, horseraces, and the revelry surrounding holidays. In particular, he criticizes Christians for taking part in such activities:\nIf you ask [Christians] who is Amos or Obadiah, how many apostles there were or prophets, they stand mute; but if you ask them about the horses or drivers, they answer with more solemnity than sophists or rhetors.\nCyril of Alexandria attributed the destruction of the Ephesian Temple of Artemis to John Chrysostom, referring to him as \"the destroyer of the demons and overthrower of the temple of Diana\". A later Archbishop of Constantinople, Proclus of Constantinople repeated the allegation, saying \"In Ephesus, he despoiled the art of Midas\". Both claims are considered spurious.\nCare of the needy.\nOne of the recurring features of John's homilies is his emphasis on care for the needy: he was \"perhaps the most ardent preacher on social justice\" of all the eastern fathers. Echoing themes found in the Gospel of Matthew, he calls upon the rich to lay aside materialism in favor of helping the poor, often employing all of his rhetorical skills to shame wealthy people to abandon conspicuous consumption: Do you pay such honor to your excrements as to receive them into a silver chamber-pot when another man made in the image of God is perishing in the cold?\nAlong these lines, he wrote often about the need for almsgiving and its importance alongside fasting and prayer, e.g. \"prayer without almsgiving is unfruitful\".\nHomilies against Jews and Judaizing Christians.\nDuring his first two years as a presbyter in Antioch (386\u2013387), John denounced Jews and Christians in a series of eight homilies delivered to Christians in his congregation who were taking part in Jewish festivals and other Jewish observances. It is disputed whether the main targets were specifically the so called \"Judaizers\" or Jews in general. His homilies were expressed in the conventional manner, using the uncompromising rhetorical form known as the \"psogos\" (Greek: blame, censure).\nOne of the purposes of these homilies was to prevent Christians from participating in Jewish customs, and thus prevent the perceived erosion of Chrysostom's flock. In his homilies, John criticized those \"Judaizing Christians\", who were participating in Jewish festivals and taking part in other Jewish observances, such as the shabbat, submitted to circumcision and made pilgrimage to Jewish holy places. There had been a revival of Jewish faith and tolerance in Antioch in 361, so Chrysostom's followers and the greater Christian community were in contact with Jews frequently, and Chrysostom was concerned that this interaction would draw Christians away from their faith identity.\nJohn claimed that synagogues were full of Christians, especially Christian women, on the shabbats and Jewish festivals, because they loved the solemnity of the Jewish liturgy and enjoyed listening to the shofar on Rosh Hashanah, and applauded famous preachers in accordance with the contemporary custom. Due to Chrysostom's stature in the Christian church, both locally and within the greater church hierarchy, his sermons were fairly successful in spreading anti-Jewish sentiment.\nIn Greek, the homilies are called \"Kata Ioudai\u014dn\" (), which is translated as in Latin and \"Against the Jews\" in English. The original Benedictine editor of the homilies, Bernard de Montfaucon, gives the following footnote to the title: \"A discourse against the Jews; but it was delivered against those who were Judaizing and keeping the fasts with them [the Jews]\".\nAccording to Patristics scholars, opposition to any particular view during the late 4th century was conventionally expressed in a manner, using the rhetorical form known as the psogos, whose literary conventions were to vilify opponents in an uncompromising manner; thus, it has been argued that to call Chrysostom an \"anti-Semite\" is to employ anachronistic terminology in a way incongruous with historical context and record. This does not preclude assertions that Chrysostom's theology was a form of anti-Jewish supersessionism.\nHis sermons against Jews gave further momentum to the idea that Jews are collectively responsible for the death of Jesus.\nHomily against homosexuality.\nJohn Chrysostom's most notable discourse in this regard is his fourth homily on , where he argues as follows:\nAll these affections then were vile, but chiefly the mad lust after males; for the soul is more the sufferer in sins, and more dishonored, than the body in diseases. ... [The men] have done an insult to nature itself. And a yet more disgraceful thing than these is it, when even the women seek after these intercourses, who ought to have more sense of shame than men.\nHe says the active male victimizes the passive male in a way that leaves him more enduringly dishonored than even a victim of murder since the victim of this act must \"live under\" the shame of the \"insolency\". The victim of a murder, by contrast, carries no dishonor. He asserts that punishment will be found in Hell for such transgressors and that women can be guilty of the sin as much as men. Chrysostom argues that the male passive partner has effectively renounced his manhood and become a woman \u2013 such an individual deserves to be \"driven out and stoned\". He attributes the cause to \"luxury\". \"Do not, he means (Paul), because you have heard that they burned, suppose that the evil was only in desire. For the greater part of it came of their luxuriousness, which also kindled into flame their lust\".\nAccording to scholar Michael Carden, Chrysostom was particularly influential in shaping early Christian thought that same-sex desire was an evil, claiming that he altered a traditional interpretation of Sodom as a place of inhospitality to one where the sexual transgressions of the Sodomites became paramount. However, other scholars \u2013 such as Kruger and Nortj\u00e9-Meyer \u2013 dispute this, arguing that the author of the Epistle of Jude already interpreted the sin of Sodom as homosexuality in the New Testament.\nTreatises.\nApart from his homilies, a number of John's other treatises have had a lasting influence. One such work is John's early treatise \"Against Those Who Oppose the Monastic Life\", written while he was a deacon (sometime before 386), which was directed to parents, pagan as well as Christian, whose sons were contemplating a monastic vocation. Chrysostom wrote that, already in his day, it was customary for Antiochenes to send their sons to be educated by monks.\nAnother important treatise written by John is titled \"On the Priesthood\" (written 390\u2013391, it contains in Book 1 an account of his early years and a defence of his flight from ordination by bishop Meletius of Antioch, and then proceeds in later books to expound on his exalted understanding of the priesthood). Two other notable books by John are \"Instructions to Catechumens\" and \"On the Incomprehensibility of the Divine Nature\". In addition, he wrote a series of letters to the deaconess Olympias, of which seventeen are extant.\nLiturgy.\nBeyond his preaching, the other lasting legacy of John is his influence on Christian liturgy. Two of his writings are particularly notable. He harmonized the liturgical life of the church by revising the prayers and rubrics of the Divine Liturgy, or celebration of the Holy Eucharist. To this day, Eastern Orthodox and Eastern Catholic Churches of the Byzantine Rite typically celebrate the Divine Liturgy of Saint John Chrysostom as the normal Eucharistic liturgy, although his connection with it remains a matter of debate among experts.\nLegacy and influence.\nDuring a time when city clergy were subject to criticism for their high lifestyle, John was determined to reform his clergy in Constantinople. These efforts were met with resistance and limited success. He was seen as an excellent preacher whose homilies and writings are still studied and quoted. As a theologian, he has been and continues to be very important in Eastern Christianity, and is generally considered among the Three Holy Hierarchs of the Greek Church, but has been less important to Western Christianity. His writings have survived to the present day more so than any of the other Greek Fathers.\nCatechism of the Catholic Church.\nThe Catechism of the Catholic Church cites him in eighteen sections, particularly his reflections on the purpose of prayer and the meaning of the Lord's Prayer:\nConsider how [Jesus Christ] teaches us to be humble, by making us see that our virtue does not depend on our work alone but on grace from on high. He commands each of the faithful who prays to do so universally, for the whole world. For he did not say \"thy will be done in me or in us\", but \"on earth\", the whole earth, so that error may be banished from it, truth take root in it, all vice be destroyed on it, virtue flourish on it, and earth no longer differ from heaven.\nProtestant clergy.\nProtestant clerics, such as Richard Salter Storrs, refer to him as \"one of the most eloquent preachers who ever since apostolic times have brought to men the divine tidings of truth and love\", and the 19th-century John Henry Newman, a former Anglican but by this stage a Catholic, described John as a \"bright, cheerful, gentle soul; a sensitive heart\".\nMusic and literature.\nJohn's liturgical legacy has inspired several musical compositions, including Sergei Rachmaninoff's \"Liturgy of St. John Chrysostom\", Op. 31, composed in 1910, one of his two major unaccompanied choral works; Pyotr Tchaikovsky's \"Liturgy of St. John Chrysostom\", Op. 41; and Ukrainian composer Kyrylo Stetsenko's \"Liturgy of St. John Chrysostom\", Arvo P\u00e4rt's \"Litany\" sets Chrysostom's twenty-four prayers, one for each hour of the day, for soli, mixed choir and orchestra. And the compositions of Alexander Grechaninovs \"Liturgy of Johannes Chrysostomos\" No. 1, Op. 13 (1897), \"Liturgy of Johannes Chrysostomos\", No. 2, Op. 29 (1902), \"Liturgia Domestica (Liturgy Johannes Chrysostomos\" No. 3), Op. 79 (1917) and \"Liturgy of Johannes Chrysostomos\" No. 4, Op. 177 (1943) are noteworthy.\nJames Joyce's novel \"Ulysses\" includes a character named Mulligan who brings \"Chrysostomos\" into another character (Stephen Dedalus)'s mind because Mulligan's gold-stopped teeth and his gift of the gab earn him the title which St. John Chrysostom's preaching earned him, \"golden-mouthed\": \"[Mulligan] peered sideways up and gave a long low whistle of call, then paused awhile in rapt attention, his even white teeth glistening here and there with gold points. Chrysostomos\".\nLegend of the penance of Saint John Chrysostom.\nA late medieval legend relates that, when John Chrysostom was a hermit in the desert, he was approached by a royal princess in distress. John, thinking she was a demon, at first refused to help her, but the princess convinced him that she was a Christian and would be devoured by wild beasts if she were not allowed to enter his cave. He therefore admitted her, carefully dividing the cave in two parts, one for each of them. In spite of these precautions, the sin of fornication was committed, and in an attempt to hide it the distraught John took the princess and threw her over a precipice. He then went to Rome to beg absolution, which was refused. Realising the appalling nature of his crimes, Chrysostom made a vow that he would never rise from the ground until his sins were expiated, and for years he lived like a beast, crawling on all fours and feeding on wild grasses and roots. Subsequently, the princess reappeared, alive, and suckling John's baby, who miraculously pronounced his sins forgiven. This last scene was very popular from the late 15th century onwards as a subject for engravers and artists. The theme was depicted by Albrecht D\u00fcrer around 1496, Hans Sebald Beham and Lucas Cranach the Elder, among others. Martin Luther mocked this same legend in his \"Die L\u00fcgend von S. Johanne Chrysostomo\" (1537) to analyse the pitfalls of the Christian Legendary (hagiography).\nRelics.\nJohn Chrysostom died in the city of Comana in 407 on his way to his place of exile. There his relics remained until 438 when, thirty years after his death, they were transferred to Constantinople during the reign of the empress Aelia Eudoxia's son, the emperor Theodosius II (408\u2013450), under the guidance of John's disciple, Proclus of Constantinople, who by that time had become archbishop of Constantinople (434\u2013447).\nMost of John's relics were looted from Constantinople by crusaders in 1204 and taken to Rome, but some of his bones were returned to the Orthodox Church on 27 November 2004 by Pope John Paul II. Since 2004 the relics have been enshrined in the Church of St. George, Istanbul.\nThe skull, however, having been kept at the monastery at Vatopedi on Mount Athos in northern Greece, was not among the relics that were taken by the crusaders in the 13th century. In 1655, at the request of Tsar Alexei Mikhailovich, the skull was taken to Russia, for which the monastery was compensated in the sum of 2,000 rubles. In 1693, having received a request from the Vatopedi Monastery for the return of Saint John's skull, Tsar Peter the Great ordered that the skull remain in Russia but that the monastery was to be paid 500 rubles every four years. The Russian state archives document these payments up until 1735. The skull was kept at the Moscow Kremlin, in the Cathedral of the Dormition of the Mother of God, until 1920, when it was confiscated by the Soviets and placed in the Museum of Silver Antiquities. In 1988, in connection with the 1,000th anniversary of the Baptism of Russia, the head, along with other important relics, was returned to the Russian Orthodox Church and kept at the Epiphany Cathedral, until being moved to the Cathedral of Christ the Saviour after its restoration.\nToday, the monastery at Vatopedi posits a rival claim to possessing the skull of John Chrysostom, and there a skull is venerated by pilgrims to the monastery as that of Saint John. Two sites in Italy also claim to have the saint's skull: the Basilica di Santa Maria del Fiore in Florence and the \"Dal Pozzo\" chapel in Pisa. The right hand of Saint John is preserved at Philotheou Monastery on Mount Athos, and numerous smaller relics are scattered throughout the world.\nCollected works.\nWidely used editions of Chrysostom's works are available in Greek, Latin, English, and French. The Greek edition is edited by Sir Henry Savile (eight volumes, Eton, 1613); the most complete Greek and Latin edition is edited by Bernard de Montfaucon (thirteen volumes, Paris, 1718\u20131738, republished in 1834\u20131840, and reprinted in Migne's \"Patrologia Graeca\", volumes 47\u201364). There is an English translation in the first series of the \"Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers\" (London and New York, 1889\u20131890). A selection of his writings has been published more recently in the original with facing French translation in \"Sources Chr\u00e9tiennes\".\nNotes and references.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16333", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16333", "title": "James Heckman", "text": "American economist (born 1944)\nJames Joseph Heckman (born April 19, 1944) is an American economist and Nobel laureate who serves as the Henry Schultz Distinguished Service Professor in Economics at the University of Chicago, where he is also a professor at the college, a professor at the Harris School of Public Policy, Director of the Center for the Economics of Human Development (CEHD), and co-director of Human Capital and Economic Opportunity (HCEO) Global Working Group. He is also a professor of law at the Law School, a senior research fellow at the American Bar Foundation, and a research associate at the NBER. He received the John Bates Clark Medal in 1983, and the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences in 2000, which he shared with Daniel McFadden. He is known principally for his pioneering work in econometrics and microeconomics.\nHeckman is noted for his contributions to selection bias and self-selection in quantitative analysis in the social sciences, especially the Heckman correction, which earned him the Nobel Prize in Economics. He is also well known for his empirical research in labor economics and his scholarship on the efficacy of early childhood education programs. As of June 2024, according to RePEc, he is the third-most influential economist in the world.\nEarly years.\nHeckman was born to John Jacob Heckman and Bernice Irene Medley in Chicago, Illinois. He received his B.A. in mathematics from Colorado College in 1965 and his Ph.D. in economics from Princeton University in 1971 after completing a doctoral dissertation titled \"Three essays on the supply of labor and the demand for goods\" under the supervision of Stanley W. Black.\nCareer.\nHe served as an assistant professor at Columbia University before he moved to the University of Chicago, in 1973. He has been a dissertation advisor for over 70 students, including Carolyn Heinrich, George Borjas, Stephen Cameron, Mark Rosenzweig, and Russ Roberts.\nIn addition to serving as the Henry Schultz Distinguished Service Professor and director of the Economics Research Center in the department of economics, Heckman is also a professor of law at the Law School and a professor at the Harris School of Public Policy, where he is director of both the Center for Social Program Evaluation and Center for the Study of Childhood Development. He also serves as a member of the Becker Friedman Institute for Research in Economics's Research Council. Heckman has held many appointments at other institutions and notably served as the Distinguished Chair of Microeconometrics at University College London (2004\u20132008), a professor of Science and Society at University College Dublin (2005\u20132014), and as the Alfred Cowles Distinguished Visiting Professor at Yale University (2008\u20132011). His current appointments include Presidential Scholar-in-Residence at the University of Southern California's Leonard D. Schaeffer Center for Health Policy and Economics (2015\u2013) and International Research Fellow at the Institute for Fiscal Studies (2014\u2013).\nCenter for the Economics of Human Development.\nFounded in 2014 and directed by Heckman, the Center for the Economics of Human Development (CEHD), at the University of Chicago, umbrellas his multiple research areas and initiatives that encompass rigorous empirical research to determine effective human capital policies and program design. CEHD initiatives include the Human Capital and Economic Opportunity Global Working Group, the Pritzker Consortium on Early Childhood Development, the Heckman Equation, the Research Network on the Determinants of Life Course Capabilities and Outcomes, and the Asian Family in Transition Initiative.\nResearch.\nHeckman is noted for his contributions to selection bias and self-selection analysis, especially Heckman correction, which earned him the Nobel Prize in Economics. He is also well known for his empirical research in labor economics, particularly regarding the efficacy of early childhood education programs.\nHis work has been devoted to the development of a scientific basis for economic policy evaluation, with special emphasis on models of individuals and disaggregated groups, and the problems and possibilities created by heterogeneity, diversity, and unobserved counterfactual states. He developed a body of new econometric tools that address these issues. His research has given policymakers important new insights into areas such as education, jobtraining, the importance of accounting for general equilibrium in the analysis of labor markets, anti-discrimination law, and civil rights. He demonstrated a strong causal effect of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 in promoting African-American economic progress. He has recently demonstrated that the high school dropout rate is increasing in the US. He has studied the economic benefits of sorting in the labor market, the ineffectiveness of active labor market programs, and the economic returns to education.\nHis recent research focuses on inequality, human development and lifecycle skill formation, with a special emphasis on the economics of early childhood education. He is currently conducting new social experiments on early childhood interventions and reanalyzing old experiments. He is also studying the emergence of the underclass in the US and Western Europe. For example, he showed that a high IQ only improved an individual's chances of financial success by 1 or 2%. Instead, \"conscientiousness,\" or \"diligence, perseverance and self-discipline,\" are what led to financial success.\nIn the early 1990s, his pioneering research, on the outcomes of people who obtain the GED certificate, received national attention.\nHeckman has published over 300 articles and several books. His books include \"Inequality in America: What Role for Human Capital Policy?\" (with Alan Krueger); \"Evaluating Human Capital Policy, Law, and Employment: Lessons from Latin America and the Caribbean\" (with Carmen Pages); the \"Handbook of Econometrics\", volumes 5, 6A, and 6B (edited with Edward Leamer); \"Global Perspectives on the Rule of Law,\" (edited with R. Nelson and L. Cabatingan); and \"The Myth of Achievement Tests: The GED and the Role of Character in American Life\" (with John Eric Humphries and Tim Kautz).\nHe is currently co-editor of the \"Journal of Political Economy\". He is also a member of the National Academy of Sciences (USA) and the American Philosophical Society. He is a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, the Econometric Society (of which he is also former president), the Society of Labor Economics, the American Statistical Association, and the International Statistical Institute.\nAwards.\nHeckman has received numerous awards for his work, including the John Bates Clark Medal of the American Economic Association in 1983, the 2005 and 2007 Dennis Aigner Award for Applied Econometrics from the \"Journal of Econometrics\", the 2005 Jacob Mincer Award for Lifetime Achievement in Labor Economics, the 2005 Ulysses Medal from the University College Dublin, the 2007 Theodore W. Schultz Award from the American Agricultural Economics Association, the Gold Medal of the President of the Italian Republic awarded by the International Scientific Committee of the Pio Manz\u00fa Centre in 2008, the Distinguished Contributions to Public Policy for Children Award from the Society for Research in Child Development in 2009, the 2014 Frisch Medal from the Econometric Society, the 2014 Spirit of Erikson Award from the Erikson Institute, and the 2016 Dan David Prize for Combating Poverty.\nPersonal life.\nHeckman in 1979 married sociologist Lynne Pettler-Heckman, who died July 8, 2017. They had two children: a son, Jonathan (b. 1982) who is an associate professor of physics at the University of Pennsylvania, and a daughter, Alma (b. 1986), who is an associate professor of history at the University of California at Santa Cruz.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16334", "revid": "12824384", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16334", "title": "Judith of Poland", "text": "12th-century Margravine consort of Brandenburg\nJudith of Poland (, ; b. c. 1130/35 \u2013 died 8 July 1171/75) was a member of the House of Piast and by marriage margravine of Brandenburg.\nEarly years.\nJudith was the daughter of Duke Boles\u0142aw III Wrymouth of Poland by his second wife, Salomea of Berg. She was probably named after either her paternal grandmother, Judith of Bohemia, or her older half-sister, the princess of Murom. Judith was one of the youngest children of her parents; her date of birth remains unknown. According to Polish medieval chronicles, she was sent to Hungary as a bride of the son of King B\u00e9la II. According to the \"Annales Cracovienses Compilati\", this event took place in 1136; since it can be assumed that the Polish princess was younger than her betrothed, and also are known the birth dates of the youngest children of Boles\u0142aw III (Agnes in 1137 and Casimir in 1138), Judith in consequence could have been born between 1130 and 1135.\nThe marriage never took place: by 1146, the engagement was broken with the consent of both parties and Judith returned to Poland. The reason for this may have been the wedding of Mieszko (Judith's brother) with the Hungarian princess Elisabeth (daughter of King B\u00e9la II), which sufficiently secured the Polish-Hungarian alliance.\nMargravine of Brandenburg.\nIn Kruszwica on 6 January 1148 Judith married Otto, eldest son of Albert the Bear, the first Margrave of Brandenburg. This union was contracted in connection with the Ascanian efforts to support the Junior Dukes in opposition to King Conrad III of Germany, who supported the deposed High Duke W\u0142adys\u0142aw II as legal ruler of Poland. During her marriage, she bore her husband two sons, Otto (who later succeeded his father as Margrave of Brandenburg) in 1149, and Henry (who inherited the Counties of Tangerm\u00fcnde and Gardelegen) in 1150.\nNothing is known about the political role that Judith had to play in Germany. After his father's death in 1170, Otto became the second Margrave of Brandenburg and Judith the Margravine consort.\nDeath and aftermath.\nLike her birth date, Judith's date of death remains unknown. Only the day, 8 July, is known thanks to the \"Regesta Historia Brandenburgensis\", which records the death in \"\"VIII Id Jul\" of \"Juditha marchionissa gemma Polonorum\"\". By contrast, the year of death can be determined only through indirect sources. In documents from 1170 Judith is named as a living person. It is assumed that Judith died between 1171 and 1175. She was buried in the Brandenburg Cathedral.\nJudith's oldest son, Otto II, inherited the Margraviate of Brandenburg after the death of his father in 1184. He never married or had children; because his brother Henry died before him (in 1192) also without issue, after Otto II's death in 1205 Brandenburg was inherited by his younger half-brother Albert II, son of Otto I and Ada.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16336", "revid": "38848426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16336", "title": "Jeffrey Archer", "text": "English author and politician (born 1940)\nJeffrey Howard Archer, Baron Archer of Weston-super-Mare (born 15 April 1940) is an English novelist and former politician. He was Member of Parliament (MP) for Louth (Lincolnshire) from 1969 to 1974, but did not seek re-election after a financial scandal that left him almost bankrupt.\nArcher revived his fortunes as a novelist. His novel \"Kane and Abel\" (1979) remains one of the best-selling books in the world, with an estimated 34 million copies sold worldwide. Overall his books have sold more than 320 million copies worldwide.\nArcher was the deputy chairman of the Conservative Party from 1985 to 1986; he resigned after a newspaper accused him of paying money to a prostitute. In 1987 he won a civil case and was awarded large damages because of this claim. He was made a life peer in 1992 and subsequently became the first Conservative candidate to be selected as a candidate for mayor of London. He ended his candidacy in 1999 after it emerged that he had lied in the case in 1987. In 2001 he was sentenced to four years of imprisonment for perjury and perverting the course of justice, ending his active political career. He was released early in 2003.\nEarly life.\nJeffrey Howard Archer was born in the City of London Maternity Hospital in Holloway, London on 15 April 1940. He was two weeks old when his family moved to Somerset, eventually settling in the seaside town of Weston-super-Mare, where Archer spent most of his early life.\nHis father, William (died 1956), was 64 years old when Jeffrey Archer was born. Early in his career, Archer gave conflicting accounts to the press of his father's supposed, but non-existent, military career. William Archer was, in fact, a bigamist, fraudster, and conman, who impersonated another William Archer, a deceased war medal holder. He was at different times employed as a chewing gum salesman in New York and a mortgage broker in London. In the latter capacity, he was charged at the Old Bailey with a series of fraud offences. On being released on bail, he absconded to the US under the name William Grimwood.\nIn the US, William Archer fathered a child, Rosemary Turner (21 June 1917 \u2013 11 October 1986), Jeffrey's half-sister. In 1940 Rosemary married lawyer Brien McMahon who went on to become the Democratic senator for Connecticut (1945\u20131952) and a contender for the Democratic presidential nomination in 1952. After Brien McMahon's death that year, Rosemary married, in 1953, the Belgian ambassador to Washington, Baron Silvercruys. The First Lady, Mamie Eisenhower, was the guest-of-honour at their wedding.\nAs a boy Archer dreamed of being captain of the Bristol Rovers Football Club. He is still a fan of the club.\nWellington School.\nIn 1951, Archer won a scholarship to Wellington School in Somerset (not Wellington College in Berkshire, as he was later inclined to claim) after passing the 11-plus. At this time his mother, Lola, was employed as a journalist on Weston's local newspaper, the \"Weston Mercury\". She wrote a weekly column entitled \"Over the Teacups\", and frequently wrote about Jeffrey, calling him 'Tuppence'. Although Archer enjoyed the local fame this brought him, it caused him to be the victim of bullying while at Wellington School.\nArcher left school with O-levels in English literature, art, and history. He then spent a few years in a variety of jobs, including training with the army and a short period with the Metropolitan Police. He later worked as a physical education teacher, first at Vicar's Hill, a preparatory school in Hampshire, and later at Dover College in Kent.\nOxford.\nIn 1963 Archer was offered a place at the University of Oxford Delegacy of Extra-Mural Studies to study for a Diploma of Education. The course was based in the department, and Archer became a member of Brasenose College. There have been claims that Archer provided false evidence of his academic qualifications to Brasenose, the apparent citing of an American institution which was actually a bodybuilding club, for instance, in gaining admission to the course. It has also been alleged Archer provided false statements about three non-existent A-Level passes and a U.S. university degree. Although the diploma course only lasted a year, Archer spent a total of three years at Oxford. At Oxford, Archer was successful in athletics, competing in sprinting and hurdling, and became president of the Oxford University Athletic Club in 1965\u20131966. His opposite number at the University of Cambridge, Wendell Mottley, became a lifelong friend. Television coverage survives of him making false starts in a 1964 sprint race, but he was not disqualified. He gained a blue in athletics and went on to run for England, and once competed for Great Britain. His time of 10.6 seconds for 100 metres is the joint second fastest time by a University of Oxford student.\nArcher raised money for the charity Oxfam, obtaining the support of The Beatles in a fundraising drive. The band accepted his invitation to visit the Principal's lodge at Brasenose College, where they were photographed with Archer and dons of the college, although they did not play there. The critic Sheridan Morley, then a student at Merton, was present and recalled the occasion:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;At the interval I went to the toilet, and there beside me was Ringo Starr. He asked if I knew this Jeffrey Archer bloke. I said everyone in Oxford was trying to work out who he was. Ringo said: \"He strikes me as a nice enough fella, but he's the kind of bloke who would bottle your piss and sell it.\"\nEarly career.\nAfter leaving Oxford, Archer continued as a charity fundraiser, initially working for the National Birthday Trust, a medical charity that promoted safe childbirth, before joining the United Nations Association (UNA) as its chief fundraiser. The then chairman of the UNA, Humphry Berkeley, alleged that there were numerous discrepancies in Archer's expense claims while he worked at the UNA.\nAround this time, Archer began a career in politics, serving as a Conservative councillor for Havering on the Greater London Council (1967\u20131970).\nArcher set up his own fundraising and public relations company, Arrow Enterprises, in 1969. That same year he opened an art gallery, the Archer Gallery, in Mayfair. The gallery specialised in modern art, including pieces by the sculptor and painter Leon Underwood. The gallery ultimately lost money, however, and Archer sold it two years later.\nMember of Parliament.\nAt 29, Archer was elected Member of Parliament (MP) for the Lincolnshire constituency of Louth, holding the seat for the Conservative Party in a by-election on 4 December 1969. Archer beat Ian Gow to the selection after winning over a substantial proportion of younger members at the selection meeting. The national party had concerns about Archer's selection, specifically relating to the UNA expenses allegations made by Humphry Berkeley, himself a former Conservative MP. Berkeley tried to persuade the Conservative Central Office that Archer was unsuitable as a parliamentary candidate. Archer brought a defamation action against Berkeley and the story was kept out of the press, although a truncated version of the story did appear in \"The Times\". The case was eventually settled out of court, with Archer agreeing to pay legal costs of around \u00a330,000.\nLouth constituency had three key areas: Louth, Cleethorpes, and Immingham. During his time as an MP, Archer was a regular at the Immingham Conservative Club in the most working-class part of the constituency. In 1970 he took part in the Kennedy Memorial Test, a 50-mile running/walking race from Louth to Skegness and back.\nIn parliament, Archer was on the left of the Conservative Party, rebelling against some of his party's policies. He advocated free TV licences for elderly people and was against museum entrance charges. In 1971, he employed David Mellor to deal with his correspondence. He tipped Mellor to reach the cabinet. In an interview, in February 1999 Archer said, \"I hope we don't return to extremes. I'm what you might call centre-right but I've always disliked the right wing as much as I've disliked the left wing.\"\nFinancial crisis.\nIn 1974, Archer was a casualty of a fraudulent investment scheme involving a Canadian company called Aquablast. The debacle lost him his first fortune and left him almost \u00a3500,000 in debt. Warned by \"Daily Mirror\" reporter Revel Barker \u2013 whom he misidentified as a fellow Oxford student \u2013 that as a bankrupt he could not be an MP, he announced that he would not be standing in the October 1974 general election \"Because of financial difficulties\".\nWhile he was a witness in the Aquablast case in Toronto in 1975, Archer was accused of stealing three suits from a department store. Archer denied the accusation for many years, but in the late 1990s he finally acknowledged that he had taken the suits, although he claimed that at the time he had not realised he had left the shop. No charges were ever brought.\nWriting career.\nArcher wrote his first book, \"Not a Penny More, Not a Penny Less\", in the autumn of 1974, as a means of avoiding bankruptcy. The book was picked up by the literary agent Deborah Owen and published first in the U.S., then eventually in Britain in the autumn of 1976. A radio adaptation was aired on BBC Radio 4 in the early 1980s and a BBC Television adaptation of the book was broadcast in 1990.\n\"Kane and Abel\" (1979) proved to be his best-selling work, reaching number one on \"The New York Times\" bestsellers list. Like most of his early work, it was edited by Richard Cohen, the Olympic fencing gold-medallist. It was made into a television mini-series by CBS in 1985, starring Peter Strauss and Sam Neill. The following year, Granada TV screened a 10-part adaptation of another Archer bestseller, \"First Among Equals\", which told the story of four men and their quest to become prime minister. In the U.S. edition of the novel, the character of Andrew Fraser was eliminated, reducing the number of protagonists to three.\nAs well as novels and short stories, Archer has also written three stage plays. The first, \"Beyond Reasonable Doubt\", opened in 1987 and ran at the Queen's Theatre in London's West End for over a year. Archer's next play, \"Exclusive\", opened at the Strand Theatre, London, in September 1989. It was not well received by critics, and closed after a few weeks. His final play, \"The Accused\", opened at the Theatre Royal, Windsor on 26 September 2000, before transferring to the Theatre Royal Haymarket in the West End in December.\nIn 1988, author Kathleen Burnett accused Archer of plagiarizing a story she had written, and including it in his short-story collection, \"A Twist in the Tale\". Archer denied he had plagiarized the story, claiming he had simply been inspired by the idea.\nWhile Archer's books are commercially successful, critics have been generally unfavorable towards his writing. Journalist Hugo Barnacle, writing for \"The Independent\" about \"The Fourth Estate\" (1996), thought the novel, while demonstrating that \"the editors don't seem to have done any work\", was \"not wholly unsatisfactory\".\nArcher has said that he spends considerable time writing and re-writing each book. He goes abroad to write the first draft, working in blocks of two hours at a time, then writes anything up to 17 drafts in total. Since 2010, Archer has written the first draft of each new book at his villa in Mallorca, called \"Writer's Block\".\nIn 2011, Archer published the first of seven books in \"The Clifton Chronicles\" series, which follow the life of Harry Clifton from his birth in 1920, through to his funeral in 1993. The first novel in the series, \"Only Time Will Tell\", tells the story of Harry from 1920 through to 1940, and was published in the UK on 12 May 2011. The seventh and final novel in the series, \"This Was a Man\", was published on 3 November 2016.\n\"The Short, the Long and the Tall\", an illustrated collection of Archer's short stories, was published in November 2020, with watercolor illustrations by artist Paul Cox.\n\"Over My Dead Body\" was published in October 2021, and is the fourth book in a series of thrillers featuring detective William Warwick. The book was critically acclaimed and became a \"New York Times\" bestseller.\nIn January 2020, it was reported that Archer had sued his former literary agents, Curtis Brown, for \u00a3500,000 in unpaid royalties.\nDuring the India Global Forum Awards in 2025, Jeffrey Archer stated that he was working on his final novel. According to Archer, the idea for the book came to him six years earlier, and he believes the story may surpass Kane and Abel, his best-selling novel, which had reached its 134th reprint at the time.\nReturn to politics.\nDeputy party chairman.\nArcher's political career revived in the 1980s, and he became a popular speaker among the Conservative grassroots. He was appointed deputy chairman of the Conservative Party by Margaret Thatcher in September 1985. Norman Tebbit, party chairman, had misgivings over the appointment, as did other prominent members of the party, including William Whitelaw and Edward Heath. During his tenure as deputy chairman, Archer was responsible for a number of embarrassing moments, including his statement, made during a live radio interview, that many young, unemployed people were simply unwilling to find work. At the time of Archer's comment, unemployment in the UK stood at a record 3.4 million. Archer was later forced to apologise for the remark, saying that his words had been \"taken out of context\". Archer resigned as deputy chairman in October 1986 owing to a scandal caused by an article in the \"News of the World\", which led with the story \"Tory boss Archer pays vice-girl\", and claimed Archer had paid Monica Coghlan, a prostitute, \u00a32,000 through an intermediary at Victoria Station to go abroad.\n\"Daily Star\" libel case.\nShortly after the \"News of the World\" story broke, rival tabloid the \"Daily Star\" ran a story alleging Archer had paid for sex with Coghlan, something the \"News of the World\" had been careful to avoid stating directly. Archer responded by suing the \"Daily Star\". The case came to court in July 1987. Explaining the payment to Coghlan as the action of a philanthropist rather than that of a guilty man, Archer won the case and was awarded \u00a3500,000 damages. Archer stated he would donate the money to charity. However, this case would ultimately result in Archer's final exit from front-line politics some years later. The description the judge (Mr Justice Caulfield) gave of Mrs Archer in his jury instructions included: \"Remember Mary Archer in the witness-box. Your vision of her probably will never disappear. Has she elegance? Has she fragrance? Would she have, without the strain of this trial, radiance? How would she appeal? Has she had a happy married life? Has she been able to enjoy, rather than endure, her husband Jeffrey?\" The judge then went on to say of Jeffrey Archer: \"Is he in need of cold, unloving, rubber-insulated sex in a seedy hotel round about quarter to one on a Tuesday morning after an evening at the Caprice?\"\nAlthough the Archers claimed they were a normal, happily married couple, by this time, according to the journalist Adam Raphael, Jeffrey and Mary Archer were living largely separate lives. The editor of the \"Daily Star\", Lloyd Turner, was sacked six weeks after the trial by the paper's owner, Lord Stevens of Ludgate. Adam Raphael soon afterwards found proof that Archer had perjured himself at the trial, but his superiors were unwilling to take the risk of a potentially costly libel case. The \"News of the World\" later settled out-of-court with Archer, acknowledging they, too, had libelled him.\nKurdish charity and peerage.\nWhen Saddam Hussein suppressed Kurdish uprisings in 1991, Archer, with the Red Cross, set up the charity Simple Truth, a fundraising campaign on behalf of the Kurds. In May 1991, Archer organised a charity pop concert, starring Rod Stewart, Paul Simon, Sting and Gloria Estefan, who all performed free of charge. Archer stated that his charity had raised \u00a357,042,000, though it was later reported that only \u00a33 million came from the and appeal, the rest from aid projects sponsored by the British and other governments, with significant amounts pledged before the concert. The charity would later incur further controversy. Having been previously rejected, Archer was made a life peer on 27 July 1992 as Baron Archer of Weston-super-Mare, \"of Mark in the County of Somerset\". Prime Minister John Major recommended him largely because of Archer's role in aid to the Kurds. Archer and Major had been friends for a number of years.\nPolitical statements in 1990s.\nIn a speech at the 1993 Conservative conference, Archer urged then Home Secretary Michael Howard to \"stand and deliver\", saying: \"Michael, I am sick and tired of being told by old people that they are frightened to open the door, they're frightened to go out at night, frightened to use the parks and byways where their parents and grandparents walked with freedom\u00a0... We say to you: stand and deliver!\". He then attacked violent films and urged tougher prison conditions to prevent criminals from re-offending. He criticised the role of \"do-gooders\" and finished off the speech by denouncing the opposition party's law and order policies. This was a time when Archer was actively seeking another front-line political role.\nOn \"Question Time\" on 20 January 1994, Archer said that 18 should be the age of consent for gay sex, as opposed to 21, which it was at the time. Archer, though, was opposed to the age of consent for gay men being 16. Historian David Starkey was on the same edition, and said of Archer: \"Englishmen like you enjoy sitting on the fence so much because you enjoy the sensation.\" Archer has also consistently been an opponent of a return to capital punishment.\nAllegations of insider dealings.\nIn January 1994, Mary Archer, then a director of Anglia Television, attended a directors' meeting at which an impending takeover of Anglia Television by MAI, which owned Meridian Broadcasting, was discussed. The following day, Jeffrey Archer bought 50,000 shares in Anglia Television, acting on behalf of a friend, Broosk Saib. Shortly after this, it was announced publicly that Anglia Television would be taken over by MAI. As a result, the shares jumped in value, whereupon Archer sold them on behalf of his friend for a profit of \u00a377,219. The arrangements he made with the stockbrokers meant he did not have to pay at the time of buying the shares.\nAn inquiry was launched by the Stock Exchange into possible insider trading. The Department of Trade and Industry, headed by Michael Heseltine, announced that Archer would not be prosecuted owing to insufficient evidence. His solicitors admitted that he had made a mistake, but Archer later said that he had been exonerated.\nLondon mayoral candidature.\nIn 1999, Archer had been selected by the Conservative Party as candidate for the London mayoral election of 2000, with the support of two former Prime Ministers, Baroness Thatcher and John Major.\nOn 21 November 1999, the \"News of the World\" published allegations made by Ted Francis, a former friend, that Archer had committed perjury in his 1987 libel case. Archer withdrew his candidature the following day. After the allegations broke, Archer was disowned by his party. Conservative leader William Hague explained: \"This is the end of politics for Jeffrey Archer. I will not tolerate such behaviour in my party.\" On 4 February 2000, Archer was expelled from the party for five years.\nPerjury trial and imprisonment.\nTrial.\nOn 26 September 2000, Archer was charged with perjury and perverting the course of justice during the 1987 libel trial. Ted Francis was charged with perverting the course of justice. Simultaneously, Archer starred in a production of his own courtroom play \"The Accused\", staged at London's Theatre Royal Haymarket. The play concerned the court trial of an alleged murderer and assigned the role of jury to the audience, which would vote on the guilt of Archer's character at the end of each performance.\nThe perjury trial began on 30 May 2001, a month after Monica Coghlan's death in a road traffic collision. Ted Francis claimed that Archer had asked him to provide a false alibi for the night Archer was alleged to have been with Monica Coghlan. Angela Peppiatt, Archer's former personal assistant, also claimed Archer had fabricated an alibi in the 1987 trial. Peppiatt had kept a diary of Archer's movements, which contradicted evidence given during the 1987 trial. Andrina Colquhoun, Archer's former mistress, confirmed that they had been having an affair in the 1980s, thus contradicting the claim that he and Mary Archer had been \"happily married\" at the time of the trial.\nArcher never spoke during the trial, though his wife Mary again gave evidence as she had done during the 1987 trial. On 19 July 2001, Archer was found guilty of perjury and perverting the course of justice at the 1987 trial. He was sentenced to four years' imprisonment by Mr Justice Potts. Francis was found not guilty. Prominent journalists admitted to having accepted Archer's hospitality after he was convicted. Archer's mother had died shortly before he was sentenced and he was released for the day to attend her funeral.\nPrison.\nArcher was initially sent to HM Prison Belmarsh, a Category \"A\" prison, but was moved to HM Prison Wayland, a Category \"C\" prison in Norfolk, on 9 August 2001. Despite automatically qualifying as a category \"D\" prisoner, given it was a first conviction and he did not pose a serious risk of harm to the public, his status as such was suspended pending a police investigation into allegations about his Kurdish charity. He was then transferred to HM Prison North Sea Camp, an open prison, in October 2001. From there he was let out to work, briefly, at the Theatre Royal in Lincoln, and allowed occasional home visits.\nMedia reports claimed he had abused this privilege by attending a lunch with a friend, Education Secretary Gillian Shephard. In September 2002 he was transferred to a Category \"B\" prison, Lincoln. After three weeks, he was moved to the Category \"D\" HM Prison Hollesley Bay in Suffolk.\nDuring his imprisonment, Archer was visited by a number of high-profile friends, including actor Donald Sinden and entertainer Barry Humphries.\nIn October 2002, Archer repaid the \"Daily Star\" the \u00a3500,000 damages he had received in 1987, as well as legal costs and interest of \u00a31.3 million. That month, he was suspended from Marylebone Cricket Club for seven years.\nOn 21 July 2003, Archer was released on licence from Hollesley Bay after serving half of his sentence.\nHe remained a peer, there being no legal provision through which his peerage could be removed at the time other than passing a new Act of Parliament. He also retained membership of the House of Lords, which did not then have the power to expel members; however, Archer did not take an active part in parliamentary proceedings until his retirement from the Lords on 4 July 2024. Politically, he was a non-affiliated member of the House of Lords.\nPrison diaries.\nWhile in prison, Archer wrote the three-volume memoir \"A Prison Diary\", with volumes fashioned after Dante's \"Divine Comedy\", and named after the first three prisons in which he was kept. His prison term also served as inspiration for nine of the 12 short stories in the collection \"Cat O' Nine Tales\".\nKurdish aid controversy.\nIn July 2001, shortly after Archer was jailed for perjury, Scotland Yard began investigating allegations that millions of pounds had disappeared from his Kurdish charity. In 1991, Archer had claimed to have raised \u00a357,042,000. In 1992, the Kurdish Disaster Fund wrote to Archer, complaining: \"You must be concerned that the Kurdish refugees have seen hardly any of the huge sums raised in the west in their name.\" Kurdish groups claimed that little more than \u00a3250,000 had been received by groups in Iraq.\nA British Red Cross-commissioned KPMG audit of the cash showed no donations were handled by Archer and any misappropriation was \"unlikely\"; however, KPMG also could find no evidence to support Archer's claims to have raised \u00a331.5 million from overseas governments. The police said they would launch a \"preliminary assessment of the facts\" from the audit but were not investigating the Simple Truth fund.\nSubsequent incidents.\nIn 2004, the government of Equatorial Guinea alleged that Archer was one of the financiers of the failed 2004 coup d'\u00e9tat attempt against it, citing bank details and telephone records as evidence. In 2009, Archer said: \"I am completely relaxed about it. Mr Mann [Simon Mann, the English mercenary leader of the coup] has made clear that it's nothing to do with me.\" In 2011, Mann, imprisoned in Equatorial Guinea for his role in leading the failed 2004 coup d'\u00e9tat but released on humanitarian grounds later, told \"The Daily Telegraph\" that his forthcoming book, \"Cry Havoc\", would reveal \"the financial involvement of a controversial and internationally famous member of the British House of Lords in the plot, backed up by banking records.\" He claimed documents from the bank accounts in Guernsey of two companies Mann used as vehicles for organising the coup, showed a 'J\u2009H Archer' paying $135,000 into one of the firms.\nPersonal life.\nArcher has been married to Mary Weeden since July 1966. They met at the University of Oxford, where Weeden was studying chemistry at St Anne's College. She went on to specialise in solar power.\nThey have two children: William Archer (born 1972), a theatrical producer, and James Archer (born 1974), a financial adviser and businessman.\nIn 1979, the Archers purchased the Old Vicarage, Grantchester, a house associated with the poet Rupert Brooke. Every summer, they host a lavish garden party in the grounds to celebrate their wedding anniversary. Following the near-bankruptcy of the Aquablast scandal, by the early 1980s, Archer was back in a comfortable financial position and began to hold shepherd's pie and Krug parties for prominent people at his London penthouse, which overlooks the River Thames and the Houses of Parliament.\nOn 26 February 2006, on Andrew Marr's \"Sunday AM\" programme, Archer said he had no interest in returning to front-line politics and would pursue his writing instead.\nArcher in fiction.\nArcher was satirically portrayed as a misunderstood secret agent, saviour of Britain and mankind and \"overall thoroughly good chap\", by actor Damian Lewis in the BBC drama \"\" (2002). Scriptwriter Guy Jenkin explained that \"my Jeffrey Archer is the man who has frequently saved Britain over the last 30 years. He's beloved of all women he comes across, all men, all dogs\u2014he's a superhero.\" Ian Hislop and Nick Newman's 1994 BBC Radio 4 satirical series \"Gush\" purported to be \"written by master storyteller Archie Jeffries\".\nIn the Amazon series \"Good Omens\", which is based on a novel by Terry Pratchett and Neil Gaiman, a reference is made by one of the angels in Aziraphale's bookshop: \"Something smells evil.\" Aziraphale replies, \"Oh, that would be the Jeffrey Archer books, I'm afraid.\"\nIn the \"Doctor Who\" episode \"Silence in the Library'\", the Doctor mentions that the Library has whole continents of Jeffrey Archer.\nWorks.\nArcher has published 42 works, which have been translated into 33 languages, with combined sales of more than 275 million copies.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16339", "revid": "16788173", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16339", "title": "Johannes Brahms", "text": "German composer and pianist (1833\u20131897)\nJohannes Brahms (; ; 7 May 1833 \u2013 3 April 1897) was a German composer, virtuoso pianist, and conductor of the mid-Romantic period. His music is noted for its rhythmic vitality and freer treatment of dissonance, often set within studied yet expressive contrapuntal textures. He adapted the traditional structures and techniques of a wide historical range of earlier composers. His includes four symphonies, four concertos, a Requiem, much chamber music, and hundreds of folk-song arrangements and , among other works for symphony orchestra, piano, organ, and choir.\nBorn to a musical family in Hamburg, Brahms began composing and concertizing locally in his youth. He toured Central Europe as a pianist in his adulthood, premiering many of his own works and meeting Franz Liszt in Weimar. Brahms worked with Ede Rem\u00e9nyi and Joseph Joachim, seeking Robert Schumann's approval through the latter. He gained both Robert and Clara Schumann's strong support and guidance. Brahms stayed with Clara in D\u00fcsseldorf, becoming devoted to her amid Robert's insanity and institutionalization. The two remained close, lifelong friends after Robert's death. Brahms never married, perhaps in an effort to focus on his work as a musician and scholar. He was a self-conscious, sometimes severely self-critical composer.\nThough innovative, his music was considered relatively conservative within the polarized context of the War of the Romantics, an affair in which Brahms regretted his public involvement. His compositions were largely successful, attracting a growing circle of supporters, friends, and musicians. Eduard Hanslick celebrated them polemically as absolute music, and Hans von B\u00fclow even cast Brahms as the successor of Johann Sebastian Bach and Ludwig van Beethoven, an idea Richard Wagner mocked. Settling in Vienna, Brahms conducted the Singakademie and Gesellschaft der Musikfreunde, programming the early and often \"serious\" music of his personal studies. He considered retiring from composition late in life but continued to write chamber music, especially for Richard M\u00fchlfeld.\nBrahms' contributions and craftsmanship were admired by his contemporaries like Anton\u00edn Dvo\u0159\u00e1k, whose music he enthusiastically supported, and a variety of later composers. Max Reger and Alexander Zemlinsky reconciled Brahms's and Wagner's often contrasted styles. So did Arnold Schoenberg, who emphasized Brahms's \"progressive\" side. He and Anton Webern were inspired by the intricate structural coherence of Brahms's music, including what Schoenberg termed its developing variation. It remains a staple of the concert repertoire, continuing to influence composers into the 21st century.\nBiography.\nYouth (1833\u20131850).\nUpbringing.\nBrahms's father, Johann Jakob Brahms, was from the town of Heide in Holstein. Against his family's will, Johann Jakob pursued a career in music, arriving in Hamburg at age 19. He found work playing double bass for jobs; he also played in a sextet in the Alster-pavilion in Hamburg's Jungfernstieg. In 1830, Johann Jakob was appointed as a horn player in the Hamburg militia. He married Johanna Henrika Christiane Nissen the same year. A middle-class seamstress 17 years his senior, she enjoyed writing letters and reading despite an apparently limited education.\nJohannes Brahms was born in 1833. His sister Elisabeth (Elise) had been born in 1831 and a younger brother Fritz Friedrich was born in 1835. The family then lived in poor apartments in the G\u00e4ngeviertel quarter of Hamburg and struggled economically. (Johann Jakob even considered emigrating to the United States when an impresario, recognizing Johannes's talent, promised them fortune there.) Eventually Johann Jakob became a musician in the Philharmonisches Staatsorchester Hamburg playing double bass, horn, and flute. For enjoyment, he played first violin in string quartets. The family moved over the years to ever better accommodation in Hamburg.\nTraining.\nJohann Jakob gave his son his first musical training; Johannes also learnt to play the violin and the basics of playing the cello. From 1840 he studied piano with Otto Friedrich Willibald Cossel. Cossel complained in 1842 that Brahms \"could be such a good player, but he will not stop his never-ending composing.\"\nAt the age of 10, Brahms made his debut as a performer in a private concert including Beethoven's Quintet for Piano and Winds Op. 16 and a piano quartet by Mozart. He also played as a solo work an \u00e9tude of Henri Herz. By 1845 he had written a piano sonata in G minor. His parents disapproved of his early efforts as a composer, feeling that he had better career prospects as a performer.\nFrom 1845 to 1848 Brahms studied with Cossel's teacher, the pianist and composer Eduard Marxsen. Marxsen had been a personal acquaintance of Beethoven and Schubert, admired the works of Mozart and Haydn, and was a devotee of the music of J. S. Bach. Marxsen conveyed to Brahms the tradition of these composers and ensured that Brahms's own compositions were grounded in that tradition.\nRecitals.\nIn 1847 Brahms made his first public appearance as a solo pianist in Hamburg, playing a fantasy by Sigismund Thalberg. His first full piano recital, in 1848, included a fugue by Bach as well as works by Marxsen and contemporary virtuosi such as Jacob Rosenhain. A second recital in April 1849 included Beethoven's \"Waldstein\" sonata and a waltz fantasia of his own composition and garnered favourable newspaper reviews.\nPersistent stories of the impoverished adolescent Brahms playing in bars and brothels have only anecdotal provenance, and many modern scholars dismiss them; the Brahms family was relatively prosperous, and Hamburg legislation very strictly forbade music in, or the admittance of minors to, brothels.\nJuvenilia.\nBrahms's juvenilia comprised piano music, chamber music and works for male voice choir. Under the pseudonym 'G. W. Marks', some piano arrangements and fantasies were published by the Hamburg firm of Cranz in 1849. The earliest of Brahms's works which he acknowledged (his \"Scherzo\" Op. 4 and the song \"Heimkehr\" Op. 7 no. 6) date from 1851. However, Brahms was later assiduous in eliminating all his juvenilia. Even as late as 1880, he wrote to his friend Elise Giesemann to send him his manuscripts of choral music so that they could be destroyed.\nEarly adulthood (1850\u20131862).\nCollaboration and travel.\nIn 1850 Brahms met the Hungarian violinist Ede Rem\u00e9nyi and accompanied him in a number of recitals over the next few years. This was his introduction to \"gypsy-style\" music such as the \"csardas\", which was later to prove the foundation of his most lucrative and popular compositions, the two sets of \"Hungarian Dances\" (1869 and 1880). 1850 also marked Brahms's first contact (albeit a failed one) with Robert Schumann; during Schumann's visit to Hamburg that year, friends persuaded Brahms to send the former some of his compositions, but the package was returned unopened.\nIn 1853 Brahms went on a concert tour with Rem\u00e9nyi, visiting the violinist and composer Joseph Joachim at Hanover in May. Brahms had earlier heard Joachim playing the solo part in Beethoven's Violin Concerto and been deeply impressed. Brahms played some of his own solo piano pieces for Joachim, who remembered fifty years later: \"Never in the course of my artist's life have I been more completely overwhelmed\". This was the beginning of a friendship which was lifelong, albeit temporarily derailed when Brahms took the side of Joachim's wife in their divorce proceedings of 1883.\nBrahms admired Joachim as a composer, and in 1856 they were to embark on a mutual training exercise to improve their skills in (in Brahms's words) \"double counterpoint, canons, fugues, preludes or whatever\". Bozarth notes that \"products of Brahms's study of counterpoint and early music over the next few years included \"dance pieces, preludes and fugues for organ, and neo-Renaissance and neo-Baroque choral works\".\nAfter meeting Joachim, Brahms and Rem\u00e9nyi visited Weimar, where Brahms met Franz Liszt, Peter Cornelius, and Joachim Raff, and where Liszt performed Brahms's Op. 4 Scherzo at sight. Rem\u00e9nyi claimed that Brahms then slept during Liszt's performance of his own Sonata in B minor; this and other disagreements led Rem\u00e9nyi and Brahms to part company.\nThe Schumanns and Leipzig.\nBrahms visited D\u00fcsseldorf in October 1853, and, with a letter of introduction from Joachim, was welcomed by the Schumanns. Robert, greatly impressed and delighted by the 20-year-old's talent, published an article entitled \"Neue Bahnen\" (\"New Paths\") in the 28 October issue of the journal \"Neue Zeitschrift f\u00fcr Musik\" nominating Brahms as one who was \"fated to give expression to the times in the highest and most ideal manner\".\nThis praise may have aggravated Brahms's self-critical standards of perfection and dented his confidence. He wrote to Schumann in November 1853 that his praise \"will arouse such extraordinary expectations by the public that I don't know how I can begin to fulfil them\". While in D\u00fcsseldorf, Brahms participated with Schumann and Schumann's pupil Albert Dietrich in writing a movement each of a violin sonata for Joachim, the \"F-A-E Sonata\", the letters representing the initials of Joachim's personal motto \"Frei aber einsam\" (\"Free but lonely\").\nSchumann's accolade led to the first publication of Brahms's works under his own name. Brahms went to Leipzig where Breitkopf &amp; H\u00e4rtel published his Opp. 1\u20134 (the Piano Sonatas nos. 1 and 2, the Six Songs Op. 3, and the Scherzo Op. 4), whilst Bartholf Senff published the Third Piano Sonata Op. 5 and the Six Songs Op. 6. In Leipzig, he gave recitals including his own first two piano sonatas, and met with Ferdinand David, Ignaz Moscheles, and Hector Berlioz, among others.\nAfter Schumann's attempted suicide and subsequent confinement in a mental sanatorium near Bonn in February 1854 (where he died of pneumonia in 1856), Brahms based himself in D\u00fcsseldorf, where he supported the household and dealt with business matters on Clara's behalf. Clara was not allowed to visit Robert until two days before his death, but Brahms was able to visit him and acted as a go-between.\nBrahms began to feel deeply for Clara, who to him represented an ideal of womanhood. But he was conflicted about their romantic association and resisted it, choosing the life of a bachelor in an apparent effort to focus on his craft. Nonetheless, their intensely emotional relationship lasted until Clara's death. In June 1854 Brahms dedicated to Clara his Op. 9, the \"Variations on a Theme of Schumann\". Clara continued to support Brahms's career by programming his music in her recitals.\nEarly compositions, reception, and polemics.\nAfter the publication of his Op. 10 Ballades for piano, Brahms published no further works until 1860. His major project of this period was the Piano Concerto in D minor, which he had begun as a work for two pianos in 1854 but soon realized needed a larger-scale format. Based in Hamburg at this time, he gained, with Clara's support, a position as musician to the tiny court of Detmold, the capital of the Principality of Lippe, where he spent the winters of 1857 to 1860 and for which he wrote his two Serenades (1858 and 1859, Opp. 11 and 16). In Hamburg he established a women's choir for which he wrote music and conducted. To this period also belong his first two Piano Quartets (Op. 25 and Op. 26) and the first movement of the third Piano Quartet, which eventually appeared in 1875.\nThe end of the decade brought professional setbacks for Brahms. The premiere of the First Piano Concerto in Hamburg on 22 January 1859, with the composer as soloist, was poorly received. Brahms wrote to Joachim that the performance was \"a brilliant and decisive \u2013 failure\u00a0... [I]t forces one to concentrate one's thoughts and increases one's courage\u00a0... But the hissing was too much of a good thing\u00a0...\" At a second performance, audience reaction was so hostile that Brahms had to be restrained from leaving the stage after the first movement. As a consequence of these reactions Breitkopf and H\u00e4rtel declined to take on his new compositions. Brahms consequently established a relationship with other publishers, including Simrock, who eventually became his major publishing partner.\nBrahms further made an intervention in 1860 in the debate on the future of German music which seriously misfired. Together with Joachim and others, he prepared an attack on Liszt's followers, the so-called \"New German School\" (although Brahms himself was sympathetic to the music of Richard Wagner, the School's leading light). In particular they objected to the rejection of traditional musical forms and to the \"rank, miserable weeds growing from Liszt-like fantasias\". A draft was leaked to the press, and the \"Neue Zeitschrift f\u00fcr Musik\" published a parody which ridiculed Brahms and his associates as backward-looking. Brahms never again ventured into public musical polemics.\nFailed aspirations.\nBrahms's personal life was also troubled. In 1859 he became engaged to Agathe von Siebold. The engagement was soon broken off, but even after this Brahms wrote to her: \"I love you! I must see you again, but I am incapable of bearing fetters. Please write me\u00a0... whether\u00a0... I may come again to clasp you in my arms, to kiss you, and tell you that I love you.\" They never saw one another again, and Brahms later confirmed to a friend that Agathe was his \"last love\".\nBrahms had hoped to be given the conductorship of the Hamburg Philharmonic, but in 1862 this post was given to baritone Julius Stockhausen. Brahms continued to hope for the post. But he demurred when he was finally offered the directorship in 1893, as he had \"got used to the idea of having to go along other paths\".\nMaturity (1862\u20131876).\nMove to Vienna.\nIn autumn 1862 Brahms made his first visit to Vienna, staying there over the winter. Although Brahms entertained the idea of taking up conducting posts elsewhere, he based himself increasingly in Vienna and soon made it his home. In 1863, he was appointed conductor of the Wiener Singakademie. He surprised his audiences by programming many works by the early German masters such as Heinrich Sch\u00fctz and J. S. Bach, and other early composers such as Giovanni Gabrieli; more recent music was represented by works of Beethoven and Felix Mendelssohn. Brahms also wrote works for the choir, including his Motet, Op. 29. Finding however that the post encroached too much of the time he needed for composing, he left the choir in June 1864.\nFrom 1864 to 1876 he spent many of his summers in Lichtental on the north side of Vienna, where Clara Schumann and her family also spent some time. His house in Lichtental, where he worked on many of his major compositions including \"A German Requiem\" and his middle-period chamber works, is preserved as a museum.\nWagner and his circle.\nIn Vienna Brahms became an associate of two close members of Wagner's circle, his earlier friend Peter Cornelius and Karl Tausig, and of Joseph Hellmesberger Sr. and Julius Epstein, respectively the Director and head of violin studies, and the head of piano studies, at the Vienna Conservatoire. Brahms's circle grew to include the notable critic (and opponent of the 'New German School') Eduard Hanslick, the conductor Hermann Levi and the surgeon Theodor Billroth, who were to become among his greatest advocates.\nIn January 1863 Brahms met Richard Wagner for the first time, for whom he played his \"Handel Variations\" Op. 24, which he had completed the previous year. The meeting was cordial, although Wagner was in later years to make critical, and even insulting, comments on Brahms's music. Brahms however retained at this time and later a keen interest in Wagner's music, helping with preparations for Wagner's Vienna concerts in 1862/63, and being rewarded by Tausig with a manuscript of part of Wagner's \"Tannh\u00e4user\" (which Wagner demanded back in 1875). The \"Handel Variations\" also featured, together with the first Piano Quartet, in his first Viennese recitals, in which his performances were better received by the public and critics than his music.\nRequiem and personal beliefs.\nIn February 1865 Brahms's mother died, and he began to compose his large choral work \"A German Requiem\", Op. 45, of which six movements were completed by 1866. Premieres of the first three movements were given in Vienna, but the complete work was first given in Bremen in 1868 to great acclaim. A seventh movement (the soprano solo \"Ihr habt nun Traurigkeit\") was added for the equally successful Leipzig premiere (February 1869). The work went on to receive concert and critical acclaim throughout Germany and also in England, Switzerland and Russia, marking effectively Brahms's arrival on the world stage.\nBaptised into the Lutheran church as an infant and confirmed at age fifteen in St. Michael's Church, Brahms has been described as an agnostic and a humanist. The devout Catholic Anton\u00edn Dvo\u0159\u00e1k wrote in a letter: \"Such a man, such a fine soul \u2013 and he believes in nothing! He believes in nothing!\" When asked by conductor Karl Reinthaler to add additional explicitly religious text to his \"German Requiem\", Brahms is reported to have responded, \"As far as the text is concerned, I confess that I would gladly omit even the word German and instead use Human; also with my best knowledge and will I would dispense with passages like . On the other hand, I have chosen one thing or another because I am a musician, because I needed it, and because with my venerable authors I can't delete or dispute anything. But I had better stop before I say too much.\"\nMounting successes and failed romance.\nBrahms also experienced at this period popular success with works such as his first set of \"Hungarian Dances\" (1869), the \"Liebeslieder Waltzes\", Op. 52, (1868/69), and his collections of lieder (Opp. 43 and 46\u201349). Following such successes he finally completed a number of works that he had wrestled with over many years such as the cantata \"Rinaldo\" (1863\u20131868), his first two string quartets Op. 51 nos. 1 and 2 (1865\u20131873), the third piano quartet (1855\u20131875), and most notably his first symphony which appeared in 1876, but which had been begun as early as 1855.\nDuring 1869, Brahms felt himself falling in love with the Schumanns' daughter Julie (then aged 24 to his 36). He did not declare himself. When later that year Julie's engagement to Count Marmorito was announced, he wrote and gave to Clara the manuscript of his \"Alto Rhapsody\" (Op. 53). Clara wrote in her diary that \"he called it \"his\" wedding song\" and noted \"the profound pain in the text and the music\".\nFrom 1872 to 1875, Brahms was director of the concerts of the Vienna Gesellschaft der Musikfreunde, where he ensured that the orchestra was staffed only by professionals. He conducted a repertoire noted and criticized for its emphasis on early and often \"serious\" music, running from Isaac, Bach, Handel, and Cherubini to the nineteenth century composers who were not of the New German School. Among these were Beethoven, Schubert, Mendelssohn, Schumann, Joachim, Ferdinand Hiller, Max Bruch and himself (notably his large scale choral works, the \"German Requiem\", the \"Alto Rhapsody\", and the patriotic \"Triumphlied\", Op. 55, which celebrated Prussia's victory in the 1870/71 Franco-Prussian War). 1873 saw the premiere of his orchestral \"Variations on a Theme by Haydn\", originally conceived for two pianos, which has become one of his most popular works.\nSuccess (1876\u20131889).\nFirst symphonies and orchestral music.\nBrahms's First Symphony, Op. 68, appeared in 1876, though it had been begun (and a version of the first movement had been announced by Brahms to Clara and to Albert Dietrich) in the early 1860s. During the decade it evolved very gradually; the finale may not have begun its conception until 1868. Brahms was cautious and typically self-deprecating about the symphony during its creation, writing to his friends that it was \"long and difficult\", \"not exactly charming\" and, significantly, \"long and in C Minor\", which, as Richard Taruskin points out, made it clear \"that Brahms was taking on the model of models [for a symphony]: Beethoven's Fifth.\"\nDespite the warm reception the First Symphony received, Brahms remained dissatisfied and extensively revised the second movement before the work was published. There followed a succession of well-received orchestral works: the Second Symphony Op. 73 (1877), the Violin Concerto Op. 77 (1878; dedicated to Joachim, who was consulted closely during its composition), and the \"Academic Festival Overture\" (written following the conferring of an honorary degree by the University of Breslau) and \"Tragic Overture\" of 1880.\nFame, criticism, and Dvo\u0159\u00e1k.\nIn May 1876, Cambridge University offered to grant honorary degrees of Doctor of Music to both Brahms and Joachim, provided that they composed new pieces as \"theses\" and were present in Cambridge to receive their degrees. Brahms was averse to traveling to England and requested to receive the degree 'in absentia', offering as his thesis the previously performed (November 1876) symphony. But of the two, only Joachim went to England and was granted a degree. Brahms \"acknowledged the invitation\" by giving the manuscript score and parts of his First Symphony to Joachim, who led the performance at Cambridge 8 March 1877 (English premiere).\nThe commendation of Brahms by Breslau as \"the leader in the art of serious music in Germany today\" led to a bilious comment from Wagner in his essay \"On Poetry and Composition\": \"I know of some famous composers who in their concert masquerades don the disguise of a street-singer one day, the hallelujah periwig of Handel the next, the dress of a Jewish Czardas-fiddler another time, and then again the guise of a highly respectable symphony dressed up as Number Ten\" (referring to Brahms's First Symphony as a putative tenth symphony of Beethoven).\nBrahms was now recognised as a major figure in the world of music. He had been on the jury which awarded the Vienna State Prize to the (then little-known) composer Anton\u00edn Dvo\u0159\u00e1k three times, first in February 1875, and later in 1876 and 1877, and had successfully recommended Dvo\u0159\u00e1k to his publisher, Simrock. The two men met for the first time in 1877, and Dvo\u0159\u00e1k dedicated to Brahms his String Quartet, Op. 34 of that year. He also began to be the recipient of a variety of honours: Ludwig II of Bavaria awarded him the Maximilian Order for Science and Art in 1874, and the music-loving Duke George of Meiningen awarded him the Commander's Cross of the Order of the House of Meiningen in 1881.\nAt this time Brahms also chose to change his image. Having been always clean-shaven, in 1878 he surprised his friends by growing a beard, writing in September to the conductor Bernhard Scholz: \"I am coming with a large beard! Prepare your wife for a most awful sight.\" The singer George Henschel recalled that after a concert \"I saw a man unknown to me, rather stout, of middle height, with long hair and a full beard. In a very deep and hoarse voice he introduced himself as 'Musikdirektor M\u00fcller'\u00a0... an instant later, we all found ourselves laughing heartily at the perfect success of Brahms's disguise.\" The incident also displays Brahms's love of practical jokes.\nIn 1882 Brahms completed his Piano Concerto No. 2, Op. 83, dedicated to his teacher Marxsen. Brahms was invited by Hans von B\u00fclow to undertake a premiere of the work with the Meiningen Court Orchestra. This was the beginning of his collaboration with Meiningen and with von B\u00fclow, who was to rank Brahms as one of the 'Three Bs'; in a letter to his wife he wrote: \"You know what I think of Brahms: after Bach and Beethoven the greatest, the most sublime of all composers.\"\nLater symphonies and continuing recognition.\nThe following years saw the premieres of his Third Symphony, Op. 90 (1883) and his Fourth Symphony, Op. 98 (1885). Richard Strauss, who had been appointed assistant to von B\u00fclow at Meiningen, and had been uncertain about Brahms's music, found himself converted by the Third Symphony and was enthusiastic about the Fourth: \"a giant work, great in concept and invention\". Another, but more cautious, supporter from the younger generation was Gustav Mahler, who first met Brahms in 1884 and remained a close acquaintance. He considered Brahms a conservative master who was more turned toward the past than the future. He rated Brahms as technically superior to Anton Bruckner, but more earth-bound than Wagner and Beethoven.\nIn 1889, Theo Wangemann, a representative of the American inventor Thomas Edison, visited the composer in Vienna and invited him to make an experimental recording. Brahms played an abbreviated version of his first Hungarian Dance and of Josef Strauss's \"Die Libelle\" on the piano. Although the spoken introduction to the short piece of music is quite clear, the piano playing is largely inaudible due to heavy surface noise.\nIn that same year, Brahms was named an honorary citizen of Hamburg.\nLater Life (1889\u20131897).\nFriendship with J. Strauss.\nBrahms and Johann Strauss II were acquainted in the 1870s, but their close friendship belongs to the years 1889 and after. Brahms admired much of Strauss's music and encouraged the composer to sign with his publisher Simrock. In autographing a fan for Strauss's wife Adele, Brahms wrote the opening notes of \"The Blue Danube\" waltz, adding the words \"unfortunately not by Johannes Brahms\". He made the effort, three weeks before his death, to attend the premiere of Johann Strauss's operetta \"Die G\u00f6ttin der Vernunft\" (The Goddess of Reason) in March 1897.\nLate chamber music and songs.\nAfter the successful Vienna premiere of his Second String Quintet, Op. 111 in 1890, the 57-year-old Brahms came to think that he might retire from composition, telling a friend that he \"had achieved enough; here I had before me a carefree old age and could enjoy it in peace.\" He also began to find solace in escorting the mezzo-soprano Alice Barbi and may have proposed to her (she was only 28). His admiration for Richard M\u00fchlfeld, clarinettist with the Meiningen orchestra, revived his interest in composing and led him to write the Clarinet Trio, Op.\u00a0114 (1891); Clarinet Quintet, Op.\u00a0115 (1891); and the two Clarinet Sonatas, Op.\u00a0120 (1894).\nBrahms also wrote at this time his final cycles of piano pieces, Opp.\u00a0116\u2013119 and the \"Vier ernste Ges\u00e4nge\" (Four Serious Songs), Op.\u00a0121 (1896), which were prompted by the death of Clara Schumann and dedicated to the artist Max Klinger, who was his great admirer. The last of the Eleven Chorale Preludes for organ, Op.\u00a0122 (1896) is a setting of \"O Welt ich muss dich lassen\" (\"O world I must leave thee\") and the last notes that Brahms wrote. Many of these works were written in his house in Bad Ischl, where Brahms had first visited in 1882 and where he spent every summer from 1889 onwards.\nTerminal illness.\nIn the summer of 1896 Brahms was diagnosed with jaundice and pancreatic cancer, and later in the year his Viennese doctor diagnosed him with liver cancer, from which his father Jakob had died. His last public appearance was on 7 March 1897, when he saw Hans Richter conduct his Symphony No. 4; there was an ovation after each of the four movements. His condition gradually worsened and he died on 3 April 1897, in Vienna at the age of 63. Brahms is buried in the Vienna Central Cemetery in Vienna, under a monument designed by Victor Horta with sculpture by Ilse von Twardowski.\nMusic.\nThough most of his music is vocal, Brahms's major works are for orchestra, including four symphonies, two piano concertos (No. 1 in D minor; No. 2 in B-flat major), a Violin Concerto, a Double Concerto for violin and cello, and the \"Academic Festival\" and \"Tragic\" Overtures. He also wrote two Serenades.\nHis large choral work \"A German Requiem\"\u2014not a setting of the liturgical \"Missa pro defunctis\", but a setting of texts which Brahms selected from the Luther Bible\u2014was composed in three major periods of his life. An early version of the second movement was first composed in 1854 after Robert Schumann's attempted suicide (and later used in his first piano concerto). Most of the Requiem was composed after Brahms's mother's death in 1865. He added the fifth movement after the 1868 premiere, and in 1869 the final work was published.\nHis works in variation form include the \"Variations and Fugue on a Theme by Handel\" and the \"Paganini Variations\", both for solo piano, and the \"Variations on a Theme by Haydn\" (now sometimes called the \"Saint Anthony Variations\") in versions for two pianos and for orchestra. The final movement of the Symphony No. 4 is a passacaglia.\nHis chamber works include three string quartets, two string quintets, two string sextets, a clarinet quintet, a clarinet trio, a horn trio, a piano quintet, three piano quartets, and four piano trios (the A-major trio being published posthumously). He composed several instrumental sonatas with piano, including three for violin, two for cello, and two for clarinet (which were subsequently arranged for viola by the composer). His solo piano works range from his early piano sonatas and ballades to his late sets of character pieces. His Eleven Chorale Preludes, Op.\u00a0122, written shortly before his death and published posthumously in 1902, have become an important part of the organ repertoire.\nBrahms was an extreme perfectionist, which Schumann's early enthusiasm only exacerbated. He destroyed many early works\u2014including a violin sonata he had performed with Rem\u00e9nyi and violinist Ferdinand David\u2014and once claimed to have destroyed 20 string quartets before he issued his official First in 1873. Over the course of several years, he changed an original project for a symphony in D minor into his first piano concerto. In another instance of devotion to detail, he laboured over the official First Symphony for almost fifteen years, from about 1861 to 1876. Even after its first few performances, Brahms destroyed the original slow movement and substituted another before the score was published.\nStyle, influences, and historiography.\nThe music of Brahms is known for its debts to the Viennese Classical and earlier traditions, including its use of traditional genres and forms (e.g., sonata form). In the shadow of Beethoven, Brahms and his contemporaries increasingly exploited harmonies and emphasized motifs as fundamental structural elements. The music of some of his contemporaries, especially the New German School, was more obviously innovative, virtuosic, and emotional or evocative, often with well defined dramatic or programmatic elements. In this context, many like Hanslick (and more recently Harold C. Schonberg) saw in Brahms a conservative or reactionary champion of tradition and absolute music.\nSuch views have been variously challenged or qualified. In terms of technique, Brahms's use of developing variation, Carl Dahlhaus argued, was an expository procedure analogous to that of Liszt's and Wagner's modulating sequences. Though Brahms often wrote music without an explicit or public program, in his Symphony No. 4 alone he musically alluded to the second movement of Beethoven's Symphony No. 5, the texted chaconne of Bach's Cantata No. 150, and to Schumann's music, from musical cryptograms of Clara to the Fantasie in C with its use of Beethoven's \"An die ferne Geliebte\", perhaps intending these as ironic, autobiographical reflections on the work's tragic character.\nMost of his music was in fact vocal, including hundreds of folk-song arrangements and \"Lieder\" often about rural life. As was common from Schubert to Mahler, Brahms faithfully relied on such songs for melodic inspiration in his instrumental music from his very first opus, the Piano Sonata No. 1 (its Andante is based on a ). Though Brahms never wrote an opera, he was sometimes interested in composing one, and he admired Wagner's music, confining his ambivalence only to the dramaturgical precepts of Wagner's theory. In his Symphony No. 3, Brahms alluded to Wagner's \"Tannh\u00e4user\" in the first movement (mm. 31\u201335) and to \"G\u00f6tterd\u00e4mmerung\" in the second (mm. 108\u2013110).\nBrahms considered giving up composition when it seemed that other composers' innovations in extended tonality resulted in the rule of tonality being broken altogether.\nBeethoven and the Viennese Classical tradition.\nBrahms venerated Beethoven; in the composer's home, a marble bust of Beethoven looked down on the spot where he composed, and some passages in his works are reminiscent of Beethoven's style. Brahms's First Symphony bears the influence of Beethoven's Fifth, for example, in struggling toward a C\u00a0major triumph from C\u00a0minor. The main theme of the finale of the First Symphony is also reminiscent of the main theme of the finale of Beethoven's Ninth, and when this resemblance was pointed out to Brahms he replied that any dunce could see that. In 1876, when the work was premiered in Vienna, it was immediately hailed as \"Beethoven's Tenth\". Indeed, the similarity of Brahms's music to that of late Beethoven had first been noted as early as November 1853 in a letter from Albert Dietrich to Ernst Naumann.\nBrahms loved the classical composers Mozart and Haydn. He especially admired Mozart, so much so that in his final years he reportedly declared Mozart as the greatest composer. On 10 January 1896, Brahms conducted the \"Academic Festival Overture\" and both piano concertos in Berlin, and during the following celebration Brahms interrupted Joachim's toast with \"Ganz recht; auf Mozart's Wohl\" (Quite right; here's Mozart's health). Brahms also compared Mozart with Beethoven to the latter's disadvantage, in a letter to Richard Heuberger in 1896: \"Dissonance, true dissonance as Mozart used it, is not to be found in Beethoven. Look at \"Idomeneo\". Not only is it a marvel, but as Mozart was still quite young and brash when he wrote it, it was a completely new thing. You couldn't commission great music from Beethoven since he created only lesser works on commission\u2014his more conventional pieces, his variations and the like.\" Brahms collected first editions and autographs of Mozart and Haydn's works and edited performing editions.\nEarly Romantics.\nSome early Romantic composers had a major influence on Brahms, particularly Schumann, who encouraged Brahms as a young composer. During his stay in Vienna in 1862\u201363, Brahms became particularly interested in the music of Schubert. The latter's influence may be identified in works by Brahms dating from the period, such as the two piano quartets Op.\u00a025 and Op.\u00a026, and the Piano Quintet, which alludes to Schubert's String Quintet and Grand Duo for piano four hands.\nAny influence of Chopin and Mendelssohn on Brahms is less obvious. Brahms perhaps alludes to Chopin's Scherzo in B-flat minor in the Scherzo, Op.\u00a04. In the Piano Sonata, Op.\u00a05, scherzo, he may allude to the finale of Mendelssohn's Piano Trio in C minor.\nBrahms looked to older music, with its counterpoint, for inspiration. He studied the music of pre-classical composers, including Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina, Giovanni Gabrieli, Johann Adolph Hasse, Heinrich Sch\u00fctz, Domenico Scarlatti, George Frideric Handel, and Johann Sebastian Bach.\nHis friends included leading musicologists. He co-edited an edition of the works of Fran\u00e7ois Couperin with Friedrich Chrysander. He also edited works by C.\u00a0P.\u00a0E. Bach and W.\u00a0F. Bach.\nPeter Phillips heard affinities between Brahms's rhythmically charged, contrapuntal textures and those of Renaissance masters such as Giovanni Gabrieli and William Byrd. Referring to Byrd's \"Though Amaryllis dance\", Philips remarked that \"the cross-rhythms in this piece so excited E. H. Fellowes that he likened them to Brahms's compositional style.\"\nSome of Brahms's music is modeled on Baroque sources, especially Bach (e.g., the fugal finale of Cello Sonata No. 1 on Bach's \"The Art of Fugue\", the passacaglia theme of the Fourth Symphony's finale on Bach's Cantata No. 150).\nTextures.\nBrahms was a master of counterpoint. \"For Brahms,\u00a0... the most complicated forms of counterpoint were a natural means of expressing his emotions,\" writes Geiringer. \"As Palestrina or Bach succeeded in giving spiritual significance to their technique, so Brahms could turn a canon in motu contrario or a canon per augmentationem into a pure piece of lyrical poetry.\" Writers on Brahms have commented on his use of counterpoint. For example, of Op. 9, \"Variations on a Theme by Robert Schumann,\" Geiringer writes that Brahms \"displays all the resources of contrapuntal art\". In the A major piano quartet Opus 26, Jan Swafford notes that the third movement is \"demonic-canonic, echoing Haydn's famous minuet for string quartet called the 'Witch's Round'\". Swafford further opines that \"thematic development, counterpoint, and form were the dominant technical terms in which Brahms\u00a0... thought about music\".\nAllied to his skill in counterpoint was his subtle handling of rhythm and meter. Bozarth speculates that his contact with Hungarian and gypsy folk music as a teenager led to \"his lifelong fascination with the irregular rhythms, triplet figures and use of rubato\" in his compositions. The Hungarian Dances are among Brahms's most-appreciated pieces. Michael Musgrave considered that only Stravinsky approached the advancement of his rhythmic thinking.\nHis use of counterpoint and rhythm is present in \"A German Requiem\", a work that was partially inspired by his mother's death in 1865 (at a time in which he composed a funeral march that was to become the basis of Part Two, \"Denn alles Fleisch\"), but which also incorporates material from a symphony which he started in 1854 but abandoned following Schumann's suicide attempt. He once wrote that the Requiem \"belonged to Schumann\". The first movement of this abandoned symphony was re-worked as the first movement of the First Piano Concerto.\nPerformance practice.\nBrahms played principally on German and Viennese pianos. In his early years he used a piano made by the Hamburg company Baumgarten &amp; Heins. Later, in 1864, he wrote to Clara about his attraction to instruments by Streicher. In 1873 he received a Streicher piano op. 6713 and kept it in his house until his death. He wrote to Clara: \"There [on my Streicher] I always know exactly what I write and why I write one way or another.\" Another instrument in Brahms's possession was a Conrad Graf piano \u2013 a wedding present of the Schumanns, that Clara Schumann later gave to Brahms and which he kept until 1873.\nIn the 1880s for his public performances Brahms used a B\u00f6sendorfer several times. In his Bonn concerts he played on a Steinweg Nachfolgern in 1880 and a Bl\u00fcthner in 1883. Brahms also used a Bechstein in several of his concerts: 1872 in W\u00fcrzburg, 1872 in Cologne and 1881 in Amsterdam.\nReception and legacy.\nBrahms is seen as looking both backward and forward. His output was often bold in its exploration of harmony and textural elements, especially rhythm. As a result, he influenced composers of both conservative and modernist tendencies; Anthony Tommasini writes that he \"sometimes become entangled in an attempt to extend the Classical heritage while simultaneously taking progressive strides into new territory.\".\nBrahms' symphonies are prominent in the standard repertoire of symphony orchestras; only Beethoven's are more frequently performed. Brahms's have often been measured against Beethoven's.\nBrahms often sent manuscripts to friends Billroth, Elisabeth von Herzogenberg, Joachim, and Clara Schumann for review. They noted its textures and frequent dissonances, which Brahms wrote (to Henschel) that he preferred on the strong beat, \"resolve[d] ... lightly and gently!\" In 1855, Clara felt Brahms's harshness most distinguished his music from Robert's. Billroth described Brahms's dissonances as \"cutting\", \"toxic\", or (in the case of \"In stiller Nacht\") \"divine\". In 1855, Joachim noted \"steely harshness\" in the \"Benedictus\" of the \"Missa canonica\", with its \"bold independence of the voices\". But in 1856 he objected to \"extensive harshness\" in \"Geistliches Lied\", telling Brahms: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;You [are] so used to rough harmonies, of such polyphonic texture ... . ... You cannot ask that of the listener ... art [should] inspire collective delight ... .\nSome criticized Brahms's music as overly academic, dense, or muddy. Even Hanslick criticized the First Symphony as academic. (He later praised the \"harmonic and contrapuntal art\" of the Fourth Symphony's passacaglia.) Elisabeth von Herzogenberg initially considered the Fourth's first movement a \"work of [the] brain ... designed too much\" (her opinion improved within weeks). Arnold Schoenberg would later defend Brahms: \"It is not the heart alone which creates all that is beautiful [or] emotional\". Benjamin Britten lost his taste for Brahms's \"thickness of texture\" and studied expressivity.\nSchoenberg and others, among them Theodor W. Adorno and Carl Dahlhaus, sought to advance Brahms's reputation in the early and mid-20th century against the criticisms of Paul Bekker and Wagner. For Brahms's centenary in 1933, Schoenberg wrote and broadcast an essay \"Brahms the Progressive\" (rev. 1947, pub. 1950), establishing Brahms's historical continuity (perhaps self-servingly). Schoenberg portrayed him as a forward-looking innovator, somewhat polemically against the image of Brahms as an academic traditionalist. He highlighted Brahms's fondness for motivic saturation and irregularities of rhythm and phrase, terming Brahms's compositional principles \"developing variation\". In \"Structural Functions of Harmony\" (1948), Schoenberg analyzed Brahms's \"enriched harmony\" and exploration of remote tonal regions. Tommasini writes that \"at his best (the symphonies, the piano concertos, the violin concerto, the chamber works with piano, the solo piano pieces, especially the late intermezzos and capriccios that point the way to Schoenberg) Brahms has the thrilling grandeur and strangeness of Beethoven.\"\nInfluence.\nWithin his lifetime, Brahms's idiom left an imprint on several composers within his personal circle, who strongly admired his music, such as Heinrich von Herzogenberg, Robert Fuchs, and Julius R\u00f6ntgen, as well as on Gustav Jenner, who was his only formal composition pupil. Anton\u00edn Dvo\u0159\u00e1k, who received substantial assistance from Brahms, deeply admired his music and was influenced by it in several works, such as the Symphony No. 7 in D minor and the F minor Piano Trio.\nFeatures of the \"Brahms style\" were absorbed in a more complex synthesis with other contemporary (chiefly Wagnerian) trends by Hans Rott, Wilhelm Berger, Max Reger and Franz Schmidt, whereas the British composers Hubert Parry and Edward Elgar and the Swede Wilhelm Stenhammar all testified to learning much from Brahms. As Elgar said, \"I look at the Third Symphony of Brahms, and I feel like a pygmy.\" In France, Gabriel Faur\u00e9's music showed Brahmsian concern for rhythm and texture; in Russia, Sergei Taneyev was called \"the Russian Brahms\"; and in the United States, Amy Beach's musical textures were noted for their Brahmsian richness.\nFerruccio Busoni's early music shows much Brahmsian influence, and Brahms took an interest in him, though Busoni later tended to disparage Brahms. Towards the end of his life, Brahms offered substantial encouragement to Ernst von Dohn\u00e1nyi and to Alexander von Zemlinsky. Their early chamber works, those of B\u00e9la Bart\u00f3k (who was friendly with Dohn\u00e1nyi), show a thoroughgoing absorption of the Brahmsian idiom.\nSecond Viennese School.\nZemlinsky in turn taught Schoenberg, and Brahms was apparently impressed when in 1897 Zemlinsky showed him drafts of two movements of Schoenberg's early D-major quartet. Webern and later Walter Frisch identified Brahms's influence in the dense, cohesive textures and variation techniques of Schoenberg's first quartet.\nIn 1937, Schoenberg orchestrated Brahms's Piano Quartet No. 1 as an exercise suggested by Otto Klemperer to break writer's block; Klemperer regarded it as better than the original. (George Balanchine later set it to dance in \"Brahms\u2013Schoenberg Quartet\".)\nIn Anton Webern's 1933 lectures, posthumously published under the title \"The Path to the New Music\", he claimed Brahms as one who had anticipated the developments of the Second Viennese School. Webern's 1908 Passacaglia, Op. 1, is clearly in part a homage to, and development of, the variation techniques of the passacaglia-finale of Brahms's Fourth Symphony. Ann Scott argued Brahms anticipated the procedures of the serialists by redistributing melodic fragments between instruments, as in the first movement of the Clarinet Sonata, Op.\u00a0120, No.\u00a02.\nLater composers.\nStill later composers, like Milton Babbitt, Elliott Carter and Gy\u00f6rgy Ligeti paid respect to Brahms in their music, especially in terms of their treatment of meter, motives, rhythm, or texture. More recently, composers like Wolfgang Rihm (e.g., Klavierst\u00fcck Nr. 6, \"Brahmsliebewalzer\", \"Ernster Gesang\", \"Das Lesen der Schrift\", Symphonie \"N\u00e4he Fern\") and Thomas Ad\u00e8s (e.g., \"Brahms\") also engaged with Brahms's music, often as seen through Schoenberg's \"progressive\" lens.\nMemorials.\nOn 14 September 2000, Brahms was honoured in the Walhalla, a German hall of fame. He was introduced there as the 126th \"\" [honorably distinguished German] and 13th composer among them, with a bust by sculptor Milan Knobloch.\nArchives.\nBrahms left his archive \u2014 including manuscripts and early editions of his works, his correspondence, and his personal library \u2014 to the Gesellschaft der Musikfreunde. Over the next century, the Gesellschaft expanded the collection, adding documents from his friends as well as other sources about his life and work. The resulting Brahms Collection was added by UNESCO to its Memory of the World International Register in 2005, recognising it as globally important documentary heritage.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "16340", "revid": "24465790", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16340", "title": "Jean-Paul Sartre", "text": "French existentialist philosopher (1905\u20131980)\nJean-Paul Charles Aymard Sartre (, US also ; ; 21 June 1905 \u2013 15 April 1980) was a French philosopher, playwright, novelist, screenwriter, political activist, biographer, and literary critic, considered a leading figure in 20th-century French philosophy and Marxism. Sartre was one of the key figures in the philosophy of existentialism (and phenomenology). His work has influenced sociology, critical theory, post-colonial theory, and literary studies. He was awarded the 1964 Nobel Prize in Literature despite attempting to refuse it, saying that he always declined official honors and that \"a writer should not allow himself to be turned into an institution.\"\nSartre had an open relationship with prominent feminist and fellow existentialist philosopher Simone de Beauvoir. Together, Sartre and de Beauvoir challenged the cultural and social assumptions and expectations of their upbringings, which they considered bourgeois, in both lifestyles and thought. The conflict between oppressive, spiritually destructive conformity (\"mauvaise foi\", literally, 'bad faith') and an \"authentic\" way of \"being\" became the dominant theme of Sartre's early work, a theme embodied in his principal philosophical work \"Being and Nothingness\" (\"L'\u00catre et le N\u00e9ant\", 1943). Sartre provided an introduction to his philosophy in his work \"Existentialism Is a Humanism\" (\"L'existentialisme est un humanisme\", 1946), originally presented as a lecture.\nBorn in Paris, Sartre lost his father at age two and was raised primarily by his mother and grandfather, who introduced him to literature. He studied at the prestigious \u00c9cole Normale Sup\u00e9rieure, where he developed a deep interest in philosophy, influenced by thinkers like Henri Bergson, Edmund Husserl, and Martin Heidegger. Sartre's early academic career included teaching in several French lyc\u00e9es and engaging in provocative pranks and debates.\nSartre's life was marked by strong political engagement. During World War II, he was drafted, captured, and later released, after which he co-founded the resistance group Socialisme et Libert\u00e9. Though the group dissolved, Sartre became an influential voice in occupied France, contributing to underground literature and writing plays like \"No Exit\". After the war, he co-founded the journal \"Les Temps modernes\" and increasingly used his platform to advocate for political and social causes. He supported anti-colonial movements, condemned French policies in Algeria, opposed U.S. intervention in Vietnam, and aligned himself at various times with Marxism, Maoism, and anarchism. Despite declining health in his later years, Sartre remained committed to activism and intellectual debate until his death in 1980. His funeral drew 50,000 mourners.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nJean-Paul Sartre was born on 21 June 1905 in Paris as the only child of Jean-Baptiste Sartre, an officer of the French Navy, and Anne-Marie (Schweitzer). When Sartre was two years old, his father died of an illness, which he most likely contracted in Indochina. Anne-Marie moved back to her parents' house in Meudon, where she raised Sartre with help from her father Charles Schweitzer, a teacher of German who taught Sartre mathematics and introduced him to classical literature at a very early age. The theologian/organist/physician Albert Schweitzer was Sartre's cousin. When he was twelve, Sartre's mother remarried, and the family moved to La Rochelle, where he was frequently bullied, in part due to the wandering of his blind right eye (sensory exotropia).\nAs a teenager in the 1920s, Sartre became attracted to philosophy upon reading Henri Bergson's essay \"\". He attended the Cours Hattemer, a private school in Paris. He studied and earned certificates in psychology, history of philosophy, logic, general philosophy, ethics and sociology, and physics, as well as his \"dipl\u00f4me d'\u00e9tudes sup\u00e9rieures\" (roughly equivalent to an MA) in Paris at the \u00c9cole Normale Sup\u00e9rieure (ENS), an institution of higher education that was the alma mater for several prominent French thinkers and intellectuals. (His 1928 MA thesis under the title \"L'Image dans la vie psychologique: r\u00f4le et nature\" [\"Image in Psychological Life: Role and Nature\"] was supervised by Henri Delacroix.) It was at ENS that Sartre began his lifelong, sometimes fractious, friendship with Raymond Aron. Perhaps the most decisive influence on Sartre's philosophical development was his weekly attendance at Alexandre Koj\u00e8ve's seminars, which continued for a number of years.\nFrom his first years in the \u00c9cole normale, Sartre was one of its fiercest pranksters. In 1927, his antimilitarist satirical cartoon in the revue of the school, which he co-wrote with Georges Canguilhem, particularly upset the director Gustave Lanson. In the same year, with his comrades Nizan, Larroutis, Baillou and Herland, he organized a media prank following Charles Lindbergh's successful New York City\u2013Paris flight; Sartre and his friends called newspapers and informed them that Lindbergh was going to be awarded an honorary \u00c9cole degree. Many newspapers, including \"Le Petit Parisien\", announced the event on 25 May. Thousands, including journalists and curious spectators, showed up, unaware that what they were witnessing was a stunt involving a Lindbergh look-alike. The scandal led Lanson to resign.\nIn 1929 at the \u00c9cole normale, he met Simone de Beauvoir, who studied at the Sorbonne and later went on to become a noted philosopher, writer, and feminist. The two became inseparable and lifelong companions, initiating a romantic relationship, though they were not monogamous. The first time Sartre took the agr\u00e9gation, he failed. He took it a second time and virtually tied for first place with Beauvoir, although Sartre was eventually awarded first place, with Beauvoir second.\nFrom 1931 until 1945, Sartre taught at various lyc\u00e9es in Le Havre (at the Lyc\u00e9e de Le Havre, the present-day Lyc\u00e9e Fran\u00e7ois-1er (Le Havre), 1931\u20131936), Laon (at the Lyc\u00e9e de Laon, 1936\u201337), and, finally, Paris (at the Lyc\u00e9e Pasteur, 1937\u20131939, and at the Lyc\u00e9e Condorcet, 1941\u20131944; see below).\nIn 1932, Sartre read \"Voyage au bout de la nuit\" by Louis-Ferdinand C\u00e9line, a book that had a remarkable influence on him.\nIn 1933\u201334, he succeeded Raymond Aron at the Institut fran\u00e7ais d'Allemagne in Berlin where he studied Edmund Husserl's phenomenological philosophy. Aron had already advised him in 1930 to read Emmanuel Levinas's \"Th\u00e9orie de l'intuition dans la ph\u00e9nom\u00e9nologie de Husserl\" (\"The Theory of Intuition in Husserl's Phenomenology\").\nThe neo-Hegelian revival led by Alexandre Koj\u00e8ve and Jean Hyppolite in the 1930s inspired a whole generation of French thinkers, including Sartre, to discover Hegel's \"Phenomenology of Spirit\".\nWorld War II.\nIn 1939, Sartre was drafted into the French Army, where he served as a meteorologist. He was captured by German troops in 1940 in Padoux, and he spent nine months as a prisoner of war\u2014in Nancy and finally in Stalag XII-D, Trier, where he wrote his first theatrical piece, \"Bariona, ou le fils du tonnerre\", a drama concerning Christmas. It was during this period of confinement that Sartre read Martin Heidegger's \"Sein und Zeit\", later to become a major influence on his own essay on phenomenological ontology. Because of poor health (he claimed that his poor eyesight and exotropia affected his balance), Sartre was released in April 1941. According to other sources, he escaped after a medical visit to the ophthalmologist. Given civilian status, he recovered his teaching position at Lyc\u00e9e Pasteur near Paris and settled at the Hotel Mistral. In October 1941, he was given a position, previously held by a Jewish teacher who had been forbidden to teach by Vichy law, at Lyc\u00e9e Condorcet in Paris.\nAfter coming back to Paris in May 1941, he participated in the founding of the underground group \"Socialisme et Libert\u00e9\" (\"Socialism and Liberty\") with other writers Simone de Beauvoir, Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Jean-Toussaint Desanti, Dominique Desanti, Jean Kanapa, and \u00c9cole Normale students. In spring of 1941, Sartre suggested with \"cheerful ferocity\" at a meeting that the \"Socialisme et Libert\u00e9\" assassinate prominent war collaborators like Marcel D\u00e9at, but de Beauvoir noted his idea was rejected as \"none of us felt qualified to make bombs or hurl grenades\". The British historian Ian Ousby observed that the French always had far more hatred for collaborators than they did for the Germans, noting it was French people like D\u00e9at that Sartre wanted to assassinate rather than the military governor of France, General Otto von St\u00fclpnagel, and the popular slogan always was \"Death to Laval!\" rather than \"Death to Hitler!\". In August Sartre and de Beauvoir went to the French Riviera seeking the support of Andr\u00e9 Gide and Andr\u00e9 Malraux. However, both Gide and Malraux were undecided, and this may have been the cause of Sartre's disappointment and discouragement. \"Socialisme et libert\u00e9\" soon dissolved and Sartre decided to write instead of being involved in active resistance. He then wrote \"Being and Nothingness\", \"The Flies\", and \"No Exit\", none of which were censored by the Germans, and also contributed to both legal and illegal literary magazines.\nIn his essay \"Paris under the Occupation\", Sartre wrote that the \"correct\" behaviour of the Germans had entrapped too many Parisians into complicity with the occupation, accepting what was unnatural as natural:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Germans did not stride, revolver in hand, through the streets. They did not force civilians to make way for them on the pavement. They would offer seats to old ladies on the Metro. They showed great fondness for children and would pat them on the cheek. They had been told to behave correctly and being well-disciplined, they tried shyly and conscientiously to do so. Some of them even displayed a naive kindness which could find no practical expression.\nSartre noted when Wehrmacht soldiers asked Parisians politely in their German-accented French for directions, people usually felt embarrassed and ashamed as they tried their best to help out the Wehrmacht which led Sartre to remark \"We could not be \"natural\"\". French was a language widely taught in German schools and most Germans could speak at least some French. Sartre himself always found it difficult when a Wehrmacht soldier asked him for directions, usually saying he did not know where it was that the soldier wanted to go, but still felt uncomfortable as the very act of speaking to the Wehrmacht meant he had been complicit in the Occupation. Ousby wrote: \"But, in however humble a fashion, everyone still had to decide how they were going to cope with life in a fragmenting society ... So Sartre's worries ... about how to react when a German soldier stopped him in the street and asked politely for directions were not as fussily inconsequential as they might sound at first. They were emblematic of how the dilemmas of the Occupation presented themselves in daily life\". Sartre wrote the very \"correctness\" of the Germans caused moral corruption in many people who used the \"correct\" behavior of the Germans as an excuse for passivity, and the very act of simply trying to live one's day-to-day existence without challenging the occupation aided the \"New Order in Europe\", which depended upon the passivity of ordinary people to accomplish its goals.\nThroughout the occupation, it was German policy to plunder France, and food shortages were always a major problem as the majority of food from the French countryside went to Germany. Sartre wrote about the \"languid existence\" of the Parisians as people waited obsessively for the one weekly arrival of trucks bringing food from the countryside that the Germans allowed, writing: \"Paris would grow peaked and yawn with hunger under the empty sky. Cut off from the rest of the world, fed only through the pity or some ulterior motive, the town led a purely abstract and symbolic life\". Sartre himself lived on a diet of rabbits sent to him by a friend of de Beauvoir living in Anjou. The rabbits were usually in an advanced state of decay, full of maggots, and despite being hungry, Sartre once threw out one rabbit as uneatable, saying it had more maggots in it than meat. Sartre also remarked that conversations at the Caf\u00e9 de Flore between intellectuals had changed, as the fear that one of them might be a \"mouche\" (informer) or a writer of the \"corbeau\" (anonymous denunciatory letters) meant that no one really said what they meant anymore, imposing self-censorship. Sartre and his friends at the Caf\u00e9 de Flore had reasons for their fear; by September 1940, the \"Abwehr\" alone had already recruited 32,000 French people to work as \"mouches\" while by 1942 the Paris \"Kommandantur\" was receiving an average of 1,500 letters per day sent by the \"corbeaux\".\nSartre wrote under the occupation Paris had become a \"sham\", resembling the empty wine bottles displayed in shop windows as all of the wine had been exported to Germany, looking like the old Paris, but hollowed out, as what had made Paris special was gone. Paris had almost no cars on the streets during the occupation as the oil went to Germany while the Germans imposed a nightly curfew, which led Sartre to remark that Paris \"was peopled by the absent\". Sartre also noted that people began to disappear under the occupation, writing:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;One day you might phone a friend and the phone would ring for a long time in an empty flat. You would go round and ring the doorbell, but no-one would answer it. If the \"concierge\" forced the door, you would find two chairs standing close together in the hall with the fag-ends of German cigarettes on the floor between their legs. If the wife or mother of the man who had vanished had been present at his arrest, she would tell you that he had been taken away by very polite Germans, like those who asked the way in the street. And when she went to ask what had happened to them at the offices in the Avenue Foch or the Rue des Saussaies she would be politely received and sent away with comforting words\" [No. 11 Rue des Saussaies was the headquarters of the Gestapo in Paris].\nSartre wrote the \"feldgrau\" (\"field grey\") uniforms of the Wehrmacht and the green uniforms of the Order Police which had seemed so alien in 1940 had become accepted, as people were numbed into accepting what Sartre called \"a pale, dull green, unobtrusive strain, which the eye almost expected to find among the dark clothes of the civilians\". Under the occupation, the French often called the Germans \"les autres\" (\"the others\"), which inspired Sartre's aphorism in his play \"Huis clos\" (\"No Exit\") of \"l'enfer, c'est les Autres\" (\"Hell is other people\"). Sartre intended the line \"l'enfer, c'est les Autres\" at least in part to be a dig at the German occupiers.\nSartre was a very active contributor to \"Combat\", a newspaper created during the clandestine period by Albert Camus, a philosopher and author who held similar beliefs. Sartre and de Beauvoir remained friends with Camus until 1951, with the publication of Camus's \"The Rebel\". Sartre wrote extensively post-war about neglected minority groups, namely French Jews and black people. In 1946, he published \"Anti-Semite and Jew,\" after having published the first part of the essay, \"Portrait de l'antis\u00e9mite\", the year before in \"Les Temps modernes, No. 3.\" In the essay, in the course of explaining the etiology of \"hate\" as the hater's projective fantasies when reflecting on the Jewish question, he attacks antisemitism in France during a time when the Jews who came back from concentration camps were quickly abandoned. In 1947, Sartre published several articles concerning the condition of African Americans in the United States\u2014specifically the racism and discrimination against them in the country\u2014in his second \"Situations\" collection. Then, in 1948, for the introduction of L\u00e9opold S\u00e9dar Senghor's \"l'Anthologie de la nouvelle po\u00e9sie n\u00e8gre et malgache (Anthology of New Negro and Malagasy Poetry)\", he wrote \"Black Orpheus\" (re-published in \"Situations III),\" a critique of colonialism and racism in light of the philosophy Sartre developed in \"Being and Nothingness.\" Later, while Sartre was labeled by some authors as a resistant, the French philosopher and resistant Vladimir Jankelevitch criticized Sartre's lack of political commitment during the German occupation, and interpreted his further struggles for liberty as an attempt to redeem himself. According to Camus, Sartre was a writer who resisted; not a resister who wrote.\nIn 1945, after the war ended, Sartre moved to an apartment on the rue Bonaparte, where he was to produce most of his subsequent work and where he lived until 1962. It was from there that he helped establish a quarterly literary and political review, \"Les Temps modernes\" (\"Modern Times\"), in part to popularize his thought. He ceased teaching and devoted his time to writing and political activism. He would draw on his war experiences for his great trilogy of novels, \"Les Chemins de la Libert\u00e9\" (\"The Roads to Freedom\") (1945\u20131949).\nCold War politics and anticolonialism.\nThe first period of Sartre's career, defined in large part by \"Being and Nothingness\" (1943), gave way to a second period\u2014when the world was perceived as split into communist and capitalist blocs\u2014of highly publicized political involvement. Sartre tended to glorify the Resistance after the war as the uncompromising expression of morality in action, and recalled that the \"r\u00e9sistants\" were a \"band of brothers\" who had enjoyed \"real freedom\" in a way that did not exist before nor after the war. Sartre was \"merciless\" in attacking anyone who had collaborated or remained passive during the German occupation; for instance, criticizing Camus for signing an appeal to spare the collaborationist writer Robert Brasillach from being executed. His 1948 play \"Les mains sales\" (\"Dirty Hands\") in particular explored the problem of being a politically \"engaged\" intellectual. He embraced Marxism but did not join the Communist Party. For a time in the late 1940s, Sartre described French nationalism as \"provincial\" and in a 1949 essay called for a \"United States of Europe\". In an essay published in the June 1949 edition of the journal \"Politique \u00e9trang\u00e8re\", Sartre wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If we want French civilization to survive, it must be fitted into the framework of a great European civilization. Why? I have said that civilization is the reflection on a shared situation. In Italy, in France, in Benelux, in Sweden, in Norway, in Germany, in Greece, in Austria, everywhere we find the same problems and the same dangers ... But this cultural polity has prospects only as elements of a policy which defends Europe's cultural autonomy vis-\u00e0-vis America and the Soviet Union, but also its political and economic autonomy, with the aim of making Europe a single force between the blocs, not a third bloc, but an autonomous force which will refuse to allow itself to be torn into shreds between American optimism and Russian scientificism.\nAbout the Korean War, Sartre wrote: \"I have no doubt that the South Korean feudalists and the American imperialists have promoted this war. But I do not doubt either that it was begun by the North Koreans\". In July 1950, Sartre wrote in \"Les Temps Modernes\" about his and de Beauvoir's attitude to the Soviet Union:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As we were neither members of the [Communist] party nor its avowed sympathizers, it was not our duty to write about Soviet labor camps; we were free to remain aloof from the quarrel over the nature of this system, provided that no events of sociological significance had occurred.\nSartre held that the Soviet Union was a \"revolutionary\" state working for the betterment of humanity and could be criticized only for failing to live up to its own ideals, but that critics had to take in mind that the Soviet state needed to defend itself against a hostile world; by contrast Sartre held that the failures of \"bourgeois\" states were due to their innate shortcomings. The Swiss journalist Fran\u00e7ois Bondy wrote that, based on a reading of Sartre's numerous essays, speeches and interviews \"a simple basic pattern never fails to emerge: social change must be comprehensive and revolutionary\" and the parties that promote the revolutionary charges \"may be criticized, but only by those who completely identify themselves with its purpose, its struggle and its road to power\", deeming Sartre's position to be \"existentialist\".\nSartre believed at this time in the moral superiority of the Eastern Bloc, arguing that this belief was necessary \"to keep hope alive\" and opposed any criticism of Soviet Union to the extent that Maurice Merleau-Ponty called him an \"ultra-Bolshevik\". Sartre's expression \"workers of Billancourt must not be deprived of their hopes\" (Fr. \"il ne faut pas d\u00e9sesp\u00e9rer Billancourt\"), became a catchphrase meaning communist activists should not tell the whole truth to the workers in order to avoid decline in their revolutionary enthusiasm.\nIn 1954, just after Stalin's death, Sartre visited the Soviet Union, which he stated he found a \"complete freedom of criticism\" while condemning the United States for sinking into \"prefascism\". Sartre wrote about those Soviet writers expelled from the Soviet Writers' Union \"still had the opportunity of rehabilitating themselves by writing better books\". Sartre's comments on Hungarian revolution of 1956 are quite representative to his frequently contradictory and changing views. On one hand, Sartre saw in Hungary a true reunification between intellectuals and workers only to criticize it for \"losing socialist base\".\nIn 1964, Sartre attacked Khrushchev's \"Secret Speech\" which condemned the Stalinist repressions and purges. Sartre argued that \"the masses were not ready to receive the truth\".\nIn 1969, Sartre, along with other fifteen prominent French writers, including Louis Aragon and Michel Butor, signed the letter of protest against the expulsion of \"the writer most representative of the great Russian tradition, Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn \u2013 already a victim of Stalinist repression\", from the Union of Soviet Writers.\nIn 1973, he argued that \"revolutionary authority always needs to get rid of some people that threaten it, and their death is the only way\". A number of people, starting from Frank Gibney in 1961, classified Sartre as a \"useful idiot\" due to his uncritical position.\nSartre came to admire the Polish leader W\u0142adys\u0142aw Gomu\u0142ka, a man who favored a \"Polish road to socialism\" and wanted more independence for Poland, but was loyal to the Soviet Union because of the Oder\u2013Neisse line issue. Sartre's newspaper \"Les Temps Modernes\" devoted a number of special issues in 1957 and 1958 to Poland under Gomu\u0142ka, praising him for his reforms. Bondy wrote of the notable contradiction between Sartre's \"ultra Bolshevism\" as he expressed admiration for the Chinese leader Mao Zedong as the man who led the oppressed masses of the Third World into revolution while also praising more moderate Communist leaders like Gomu\u0142ka.\nAs an anti-colonialist, Sartre took a prominent role in the struggle against French rule in Algeria, and the use of torture and concentration camps by the French in Algeria. He became an eminent supporter of the FLN in the Algerian War and was one of the signatories of the \"Manifeste des 121\". Consequently, Sartre became a domestic target of the paramilitary Organisation arm\u00e9e secr\u00e8te (OAS), escaping two bomb attacks in the early '60s. He later argued in 1959 that each French person was responsible for the collective crimes during the Algerian War of Independence. (He had an Algerian mistress, Arlette Elka\u00efm, who became his adopted daughter in 1965.) He opposed U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War and, along with Bertrand Russell and others, organized a tribunal intended to expose U.S. war crimes, which became known as the Russell Tribunal in 1967.\nHis work after Stalin's death, the \"Critique de la raison dialectique\" (\"Critique of Dialectical Reason\"), appeared in 1960 (a second volume appearing posthumously). In the \"Critique\" Sartre set out to give Marxism a more vigorous intellectual defense than it had received until then; he ended by concluding that Marx's notion of \"class\" as an objective entity was fallacious. Sartre's emphasis on the humanist values in the early works of Marx led to a dispute with a leading leftist intellectual in France in the 1960s, Louis Althusser, who claimed that the ideas of the young Marx were decisively superseded by the \"scientific\" system of the later Marx. In the late 1950s, Sartre began to argue that the European working classes were too apolitical to carry out the revolution predicated by Marx, and influenced by Frantz Fanon started to argue it was the impoverished masses of the Third World, the \"real damned of the earth\", who would carry out the revolution. A major theme of Sartre's political essays in the 1960s was of his disgust with the \"Americanization\" of the French working class who would much rather watch American TV shows dubbed into French than agitate for a revolution.\nSartre was a sponsor of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee. He went to Cuba in the 1960s to meet Fidel Castro and spoke with Ernesto \"Che\" Guevara. After Guevara's death, Sartre would declare him to be \"not only an intellectual but also the most complete human being of our age\" and the \"era's most perfect man\". Sartre would also compliment Guevara by professing that \"he lived his words, spoke his own actions and his story and the story of the world ran parallel\". However, he stood against the persecution of homosexuals by Castro's government, which he compared to Nazi persecution of the Jews, and said: \"In Cuba there are no Jews, but there are homosexuals\".\nDuring a collective hunger strike in 1974, Sartre visited Red Army Faction member Andreas Baader in Stammheim Prison and criticized the harsh conditions of imprisonment.\nTowards the end of his life, Sartre began to describe himself as a \"special kind\" of anarchist.\nLater life and death.\nIn 1964, Sartre renounced literature in a witty and sardonic account of the first ten years of his life, \"Les Mots\" (\"The Words\"). The book is an ironic counterblast to Marcel Proust, whose reputation had unexpectedly eclipsed that of Andr\u00e9 Gide (who had provided the model of \"litt\u00e9rature engag\u00e9e\" for Sartre's generation). Literature, Sartre concluded, functioned ultimately as a bourgeois substitute for real commitment in the world. In October 1964, Sartre was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature, but he declined it. He was the first Nobel laureate to voluntarily decline the prize, and remains one of only two laureates to do so. According to Lars Gyllensten, in the book \"Minnen, bara minnen\" (\"Memories, Only Memories\") published in 2000, Sartre himself or someone close to him got in touch with the Swedish Academy in 1975 with a request for the prize money, but was refused. In 1945, he had refused the L\u00e9gion d'honneur. The Nobel prize was announced on 22 October 1964; on 14 October, Sartre had written a letter to the Nobel Institute, asking to be removed from the list of nominees, and warning that he would not accept the prize if awarded, but the letter went unread; on 23 October, \"Le Figaro\" published a statement by Sartre explaining his refusal. He said he did not wish to be \"transformed\" by such an award, and did not want to take sides in an East vs. West cultural struggle by accepting an award from a prominent Western cultural institution. Nevertheless, he was that year's prizewinner. \nThough his name was then a household word (as was \"existentialism\" during the tumultuous 1960s), Sartre remained a simple man with few possessions, actively committed to causes until the end of his life, such as the May 1968 strikes in Paris during the summer of 1968 during which he was arrested for civil disobedience. President Charles de Gaulle intervened and pardoned him, commenting that \"you don't arrest Voltaire\".\nIn 1975, when asked how he would like to be remembered, Sartre replied:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I would like [people] to remember \"Nausea\", [my plays] \"No Exit\" and \"The Devil and the Good Lord\", and then my two philosophical works, more particularly the second one, \"Critique of Dialectical Reason\". Then my essay on Genet, \"Saint Genet\". ... If these are remembered, that would be quite an achievement, and I don't ask for more. As a man, if a certain Jean-Paul Sartre is remembered, I would like people to remember the milieu or historical situation in which I lived, ... how I lived in it, in terms of all the aspirations which I tried to gather up within myself.\nSartre's physical condition deteriorated, partially because of the merciless pace of work (and the use of amphetamines) he put himself through during the writing of the \"Critique\" and a massive analytical biography of Gustave Flaubert (\"The Family Idiot\"), both of which remained unfinished. He had hypertension, and became almost completely blind in 1973. Sartre was a notorious chain smoker, which could also have contributed to the deterioration of his health.\nSartre died on 15 April 1980 in Paris from pulmonary edema. He had not wanted to be buried at P\u00e8re-Lachaise Cemetery between his mother and stepfather, so it was arranged that he be buried at Montparnasse Cemetery. At his funeral on Saturday, 19 April, 50,000 Parisians descended onto boulevard du Montparnasse to accompany Sartre's cortege. The funeral started at \"the hospital at 2:00 p.m., then filed through the fourteenth arrondissement, past all Sartre's haunts, and entered the cemetery through the gate on the Boulevard Edgar Quinet\". Sartre was initially buried in a temporary grave to the left of the cemetery gate. Four days later the body was disinterred for cremation at P\u00e8re-Lachaise Cemetery, and his ashes were reburied at the permanent site in Montparnasse Cemetery, to the right of the cemetery gate.\nThought.\nSartre's primary idea is that people, as humans, are \"condemned to be free\". He explained, \"This may seem paradoxical because condemnation is normally an external judgment which constitutes the conclusion of a judgment. Here, it is not the human who has chosen to be like this. There is a contingency of human existence. It is a condemnation of their being. Their being is not determined, so it is up to everyone to create their own existence, for which they are then responsible. They cannot not be free, there is a form of necessity for freedom, which can never be given up.\"\nThis theory relies upon his position that there is no creator, and is illustrated using the example of the paper cutter. Sartre says that if one considered a paper cutter, one would assume that the creator would have had a plan for it: an essence. Sartre said that human beings have no essence before their existence because there is no Creator. Thus: \"existence precedes essence\". This forms the basis for his assertion that because one cannot explain one's own actions and behavior by referring to any specific human nature, they are necessarily fully responsible for those actions. \"We are left alone, without excuse.\" \"We can act without being determined by our past which is always separated from us.\"\nSartre maintained that the concepts of authenticity and individuality have to be earned but not learned. We need to experience \"death consciousness\" so as to wake up ourselves as to what is really important; the authentic in our lives which is life experience, not knowledge. Death draws the final point when we as beings cease to live for ourselves and permanently become objects that exist only for the outside world. In this way death emphasizes the burden of our free, individual existence. \"We can oppose authenticity to an inauthentic way of being. Authenticity consists in experiencing the indeterminate character of existence in anguish. It is also to know how to face it by giving meaning to our actions and by recognizing ourselves as the author of this meaning. On the other hand, an inauthentic way of being consists in running away, in lying to oneself in order to escape this anguish and the responsibility for one's own existence.\"\nWhile Sartre had been influenced by Heidegger, the publication of \"Being and Nothingness\" did mark a split in their perspectives, with Heidegger remarking in \"Letter on Humanism:\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Existentialism says existence precedes essence. In this statement he is taking \"existentia\" and \"essentia\" according to their metaphysical meaning, which, from Plato's time on, has said that \"essentia\" precedes \"existentia\". Sartre reverses this statement. But the reversal of a metaphysical statement remains a metaphysical statement. With it, he stays with metaphysics, in oblivion of the truth of Being.\nHerbert Marcuse also had issues with Sartre's metaphysical interpretation of human existence in \"Being and Nothingness\" and suggested the work projected anxiety and meaninglessness onto the nature of existence itself: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Insofar as Existentialism is a philosophical doctrine, it remains an idealistic doctrine: it hypostatizes specific historical conditions of human existence into ontological and metaphysical characteristics. Existentialism thus becomes part of the very ideology which it attacks, and its radicalism is illusory. \nSartre also took inspiration from phenomenological epistemology, explained by Franz Adler in this way: \"Man chooses and makes himself by acting. Any action implies the judgment that he is right under the circumstances not only for the actor, but also for everybody else in similar circumstances.\" Also important is Sartre's analysis of psychological concepts, including his suggestion that consciousness exists as something other than itself, and that the conscious awareness of things is not limited to their knowledge: for Sartre intentionality applies to the emotions as well as to cognitions, to desires as well as to perceptions. \"When an external object is perceived, consciousness is also conscious of itself, even if consciousness is not its own object: it is a non-positional consciousness of itself.\" However his critique of psychoanalysis, particularly of Freud has faced some counter-critique. Richard Wollheim and Thomas Baldwin argued that Sartre's attempt to show that Sigmund Freud's theory of the unconscious is mistaken was based on a misinterpretation of Freud.\nCareer as public intellectual.\nWhile the broad focus of Sartre's life revolved around the notion of human freedom, he began a sustained intellectual participation in more public matters towards the end of the Second World War, around 1944\u20131945. Before World War II, he was content with the role of an apolitical liberal intellectual: \"Now teaching at a lyc\u00e9e in Laon ... Sartre made his headquarters the Dome caf\u00e9 at the crossing of Montparnasse and Raspail boulevards. He attended plays, read novels, and dined [with] women. He wrote. And he was published.\" Sartre and his lifelong companion, de Beauvoir, existed, in her words, where \"the world about us was a mere backdrop against which our private lives were played out\".\nThe war opened Sartre's eyes to a political reality he had not yet understood until forced into continual engagement with it: \"the world itself destroyed Sartre's illusions about isolated self-determining individuals and made clear his own personal stake in the events of the time.\" Returning to Paris in 1941, he formed the \"Socialisme et Libert\u00e9\" resistance group. In 1943, after the group disbanded, Sartre joined a writers' Resistance group, in which he remained an active participant until the end of the war. He continued to write ferociously, and it was due to this \"crucial experience of war and captivity that Sartre began to try to build up a positive moral system and to express it through literature\".\nThe symbolic initiation of this new phase in Sartre's work is packaged in the introduction he wrote for a new journal, \"Les Temps modernes\", in October 1945. Here he aligned the journal, and thus himself, with the Left and called for writers to express their political commitment. Yet, this alignment was indefinite, directed more to the concept of the Left than a specific party of the Left.\nDuring the trial of Robert Brasillach Sartre was among a small number of prominent intellectuals advocating for his execution for 'intellectual crimes'.\nSartre's philosophy lent itself to his being a public intellectual. He envisaged culture as a very fluid concept; neither pre-determined, nor definitely finished; instead, in true existential fashion, \"culture was always conceived as a process of continual invention and re-invention.\" This marks Sartre, the intellectual, as a pragmatist, willing to move and shift stance along with events. He did not dogmatically follow a cause other than the belief in human freedom, preferring to retain a pacifist's objectivity. It is this overarching theme of freedom that means his work \"subverts the bases for distinctions among the disciplines\". Therefore, he was able to hold knowledge across a vast array of subjects: \"the international world order, the political and economic organisation of contemporary society, especially France, the institutional and legal frameworks that regulate the lives of ordinary citizens, the educational system, the media networks that control and disseminate information. Sartre systematically refused to keep quiet about what he saw as inequalities and injustices in the world.\"\nSartre always sympathized with the Left, and supported the French Communist Party (PCF) until the 1956 Soviet invasion of Hungary. Following the Liberation the PCF were infuriated by Sartre's philosophy, which appeared to lure young French men and women away from the ideology of communism and into Sartre's own existentialism. From 1956 onwards Sartre rejected the claims of the PCF to represent the French working classes, objecting to its \"authoritarian tendencies\". In the late 1960s Sartre supported the Maoists, a movement that rejected the authority of established communist parties. However, despite aligning with the Maoists, Sartre said after the May events: \"If one rereads all my books, one will realize that I have not changed profoundly, and that I have always remained an anarchist.\" He would later explicitly allow himself to be called an anarchist.\nIn the aftermath of a war that had for the first time properly engaged Sartre in political matters, he set forth a body of work which \"reflected on virtually every important theme of his early thought and began to explore alternative solutions to the problems posed there\". The greatest difficulties that he and all public intellectuals of the time faced were the increasing technological aspects of the world that were outdating the printed word as a form of expression. In Sartre's opinion, the \"traditional bourgeois literary forms remain innately superior\", but there is \"a recognition that the new technological 'mass media' forms must be embraced\" if Sartre's ethical and political goals as an authentic, committed intellectual are to be achieved: the demystification of bourgeois political practices and the raising of the consciousness, both political and cultural, of the working class.\nThe struggle for Sartre was against the monopolising moguls who were beginning to take over the media and destroy the role of the intellectual. His attempts to reach a public were mediated by these powers, and it was often these powers he had to campaign against. He was skilled enough, however, to circumvent some of these issues by his interactive approach to the various forms of media, advertising his radio interviews in a newspaper column for example, and vice versa.\nSartre's role as a public intellectual occasionally put him in physical danger, such as in June 1961, when a plastic bomb exploded in the entrance of his apartment building. His public support of Algerian self-determination at the time had led Sartre to become a target of the campaign of terror that mounted as the colonists' position deteriorated. A similar occurrence took place the next year and he had begun to receive threatening letters from Oran, Algeria.\nSartre's role in this conflict included his comments in his preface to Frantz Fanon's \"The Wretched of the Earth\" that, \"To shoot down a European is to kill two birds with one stone, to destroy an oppressor and the man he oppresses at the same time: there remains a dead man and a free man\". This comment led to some criticisms from the right, such as by Brian C. Anderson and Michael Walzer. Writing for \"Dissent\", Walzer suggested that Sartre, a European, was a hypocrite for not volunteering to be killed.\nHowever, Sartre's stances regarding post-colonial conflict have not been entirely without controversy on the left; Sartre's preface is omitted from some editions of \"The Wretched of the Earth\" printed after 1967. The reason for this is his public support for Israel in the Six-Day War. Fanon's widow, Josie considered Sartre's pro-Israel stance as inconsistent with the anti-colonialist position of the book, from which his preface was eventually omitted. When interviewed at Howard University in 1978, she explained, \"when Israel declared war on the Arab countries [during the Six-Day War], there was a great pro-Zionist movement in favor of Israel among western (French) intellectuals. Sartre took part in this movement. He signed petitions favoring Israel. I felt that his pro-Zionist attitudes were incompatible with Fanon's work\". Recent reprints of Fanon's book have generally included Sartre's preface.\nLiterature.\nSartre wrote successfully in a number of literary modes and made major contributions to literary criticism and literary biography. His plays are richly symbolic and serve as a means of conveying his philosophy. The best-known, \"Huis-clos\" (\"No Exit\"), contains the famous line \"L'enfer, c'est les autres\", usually translated as \"Hell is other people.\" Aside from the impact of \"Nausea\", Sartre's major work of fiction was \"The Roads to Freedom\" trilogy which charts the progression of how World War II affected Sartre's ideas. In this way, \"Roads to Freedom\" presents a less theoretical and more practical approach to existentialism.\nJohn Huston got Sartre to script his film \"\". However it was too long and Sartre withdrew his name from the film's credits. Nevertheless, many key elements from Sartre's script survive in the finished film.\nDespite their similarities as polemicists, novelists, adapters, and playwrights, Sartre's literary work has been counterposed, often pejoratively, to that of Camus in the popular imagination. In 1948 the Roman Catholic Church placed Sartre's \"\u0153uvre\" on the \"Index Librorum Prohibitorum\" (List of Prohibited Books).\nAllegations of sexual abuse.\nIn 1993, French author\u00a0Bianca Lamblin\u00a0(originally Bianca Bienenfeld) wrote in her book\u00a0\"M\u00e9moires d'une jeune fille d\u00e9rang\u00e9e\"\u00a0(Memoirs of a deranged young girl, published in English under the title\u00a0\"A Disgraceful Affair\") of her sexual exploitation by Sartre and Beauvoir. Lamblin claims that while a student at Lyc\u00e9e Moli\u00e8re, she was sexually exploited by her teacher Beauvoir, who introduced her to Sartre a year later. Bianca wrote her\u00a0\"M\u00e9moires\"\u00a0in response to the posthumous 1990 publication of Jean-Paul Sartre's\u00a0\"Lettres au Castor et \u00e0 quelques autres: 1926\u20131963\"\u00a0(Letters to Castor and other friends), in which she noted that she was referred to by the pseudonym Louise V\u00e9drine.\nSartre and Beauvoir frequently followed this pattern, in which Beauvoir would seduce female students and then pass them on to Sartre.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16341", "revid": "46869372", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16341", "title": "John Paul Jones", "text": "Scottish-born naval officer (1747\u20131792)\nJohn Paul Jones (born John Paul; July 6, 1747 \u2013 July 18, 1792) was a British-American naval officer who served in the Continental Navy during the American Revolutionary War. Often referred to as the \"Father of the American Navy\", Jones is regarded by several commentators as one of the greatest naval commanders in the military history of the United States. \nBorn in Arbigland, Kirkcudbrightshire, Jones became a sailor at the age of thirteen, and served onboard several different merchantmen, including slave ships. After killing a mutinous subordinate, he fled to the British colony of Virginia to avoid being arrested and, in c.\u20091775, joined the newly established Continental Navy. During the ensuing war with Great Britain, Jones participated in several naval engagements with the Royal Navy. He led a naval campaign in the Irish and North Seas, attacking British naval and merchant shipping, and other civilian targets. As part of the campaign, he raided the English town of Whitehaven, won the North Channel Naval Duel and fought the Battle of Flamborough Head, gaining him an international reputation. \nLeft without a command in 1787, Jones joined the Imperial Russian Navy and rose to the rank of rear admiral. However, after Jones was accused of raping a young girl, he was forced out of the Russian navy and eventually died in Paris at the age of 45. A Freemason, Jones made many friends among U.S. political elites, including John Hancock, Thomas Jefferson, and Benjamin Franklin.\nEarly life and training.\nJohn Paul, as he was then known, was born on the estate of Arbigland near Kirkbean in the Stewartry of Kirkcudbright on the southwest coast of Scotland. His parents had married on November 29, 1733, in New Abbey, Kirkcudbrightshire. John Paul started his maritime career when he was 13, sailing out of Whitehaven in the northern English county of Cumberland as an apprentice aboard \"Friendship\" under Captain Benson. Paul's older brother William Paul had married and settled in Fredericksburg, Colony of Virginia. Virginia was the destination of many of the younger Paul's voyages.\nFor several years, Paul worked as a sailor, sailing aboard several merchant ships. In 1764, he became involved in the Atlantic slave trade, serving as third mate onboard the slave ship \"King George\"; two years later, he transferred to the crew of \"Two Friends\", a fifty-foot slave ship which operated out of Kingston, Jamaica, as first mate. After completing several voyages to West Africa, Paul left the slave trade, which he described as an \"abominable trade\", in 1768. While \"Two Friends\" was docked in Kingston, Paul booked passage on a ship to Scotland.\nPaul's career was quickly and unexpectedly advanced during his next voyage aboard the brig \"John\", which sailed from port in 1768, when both the captain and a ranking mate suddenly died of yellow fever. With the crew encouraging and voting him to it, Paul managed to navigate the ship back to a safe port, and in reward for this feat, the vessel's grateful Scottish owners made him master of the ship and its crew, giving him 10% of the cargo. He led two voyages to the West Indies before running into difficulty.\nDuring his second voyage in 1770, John Paul had one of his crew flogged after a failed mutiny over early payment of wages, leading to accusations that his discipline was \"unnecessarily cruel\". These claims were initially dismissed, but his favorable reputation was destroyed when the sailor died a few weeks later. John Paul was arrested for his involvement in the man's death. He was imprisoned in Kirkcudbright Tolbooth but later released on bail. The negative effect of this episode on his reputation is indisputable. The local governor encouraged John Paul to leave the area and change his name while on bail. The man who died of his injuries was not a usual sailor but an adventurer from a very influential Scottish family.\nLeaving Scotland, John Paul commanded a London-registered vessel named \"Betsy\", a West Indiaman mounting 22 guns, engaging in commercial speculation in Tobago for about 18 months. This came to an end, however, when he killed a mutinous crew member with a sword in a dispute over wages. Years later, in a letter to Benjamin Franklin describing the incident, John Paul claimed that the killing was committed in self-defense, but he was not willing to wait to be tried in an Admiral's Court, which would have taken months to assemble, and where the family of his first victim had been influential.\nHe felt compelled to flee. There is an 18-month gap in Jones's history, and some biographers explore the possibility that, in order to escape Tobago, he may have become a pirate. Rumors of piracy followed him, but they may have been created by his detractors. But he eventually reappeared in Fredericksburg, Virginia, leaving his fortune behind; he also sought to arrange the affairs of his brother, who had died there without leaving any immediate family. He was granted land in Frederick County, Virginia. About this time, John Paul assumed the surname of Jones (in addition to his original surname). There is a long-held tradition in North Carolina that John Paul adopted the name \"Jones\" in honor of Willie Jones of Halifax, North Carolina. Jones courted Dorothea Spotswood Dandridge, the future bride of Patrick Henry, and made a valuable friendship with Dr. John K. Read during his time in Virginia. In the summer of 1775, Jones met Joseph Hewes and other revolutionary leaders in Philadelphia.\nFrom that period, America became \"the country of his fond election\", as he afterwards expressed himself to Baron Joan Derk van der Capellen tot den Pol. It was not long afterward that John Paul Jones joined the American navy to fight against Britain.\nNaval career.\nAmerican colonies.\nSources struggle with this period of Jones's life, especially the specifics of his family situation, making it difficult to pinpoint historically Jones's motivations for emigrating to America. It is not known whether his plans were not developing as expected for the plantation or if he was inspired by a revolutionary spirit. It is known that he was elected to the American Philosophical Society in Philadelphia in 1774.\nJones left for Philadelphia shortly after settling in North America, around 1775, to volunteer his services to the newly founded Continental Navy, precursor to the United States Navy. During this time, the Navy and Marines were being formally established, and suitable ship officers and captains were in great demand. Jones's potential would likely have gone unrecognized were it not for the endorsement of Richard Henry Lee, who knew of his abilities. With help from influential members of the Continental Congress, Jones was appointed as a 1st Lieutenant of the newly converted 24-gun frigate in the Continental Navy on December 7, 1775. \nRevolutionary War command.\nEarly command.\nJones sailed from the Delaware River in February 1776 aboard \"Alfred\" on the Continental Navy's maiden cruise. It was aboard this vessel that Jones took the honour of hoisting the first U.S. ensign, the Continental Union Flag, over a naval vessel.\nThe fleet had been expected to cruise along the coast but was ordered instead by Commodore Esek Hopkins to sail for The Bahamas, where Nassau was raided for military supplies. The fleet had an unsuccessful encounter with a British packet ship on their return voyage. Jones was then assigned command of the sloop . Congress had recently ordered the construction of thirteen frigates for the American Navy, one of which was to be commanded by Jones. In exchange for this prestigious command, Jones accepted his commission aboard the smaller \"Providence\". Over the summer of 1776, as commander of \"Providence\", Jones performed various services for the Continental Navy and Congress. These services included the transport of troops, the movement of supplies, and the escort of convoys. During this time, Jones was able to assist a 'brig from Hispaniola' that was being chased by HMS \"Cerberus\" and laden with military stores. The brig was then purchased by Congress and commissioned as with Captain Hoysted Hacker in command. During a later six-week voyage to Nova Scotia, Jones captured sixteen prizes and inflicted significant damage in the Raid on Canso.\nJones's next command came as a result of Commodore Hopkins's orders to liberate hundreds of American prisoners forced to labour in coal mines in Nova Scotia, and also to raid British shipping. On November 1, 1776, Jones set sail in command of \"Alfred\" to carry out this mission. Winter conditions prevented freeing the prisoners, but the mission did result in the capture of \"Mellish\", a vessel carrying a vital supply of winter clothing intended for General John Burgoyne's troops in Canada.\nCommand of \"Ranger\".\nDespite his successes at sea, Jones' disagreements with those in authority reached a new level upon arrival in Boston on December 16, 1776. While at the port, he began feuding with Commodore Hopkins, as Jones believed that Hopkins was hindering his advancement by talking down his campaign plans. As a result of this and other frustrations, Jones was assigned the smaller command of the newly constructed on June 14, 1777, the same day that the new Stars and Stripes flag was adopted.\nAfter making the necessary preparations, Jones sailed for France on November 1, 1777, with orders to assist the American cause in any way possible. The American commissioners in France were Benjamin Franklin, Silas Deane, and Arthur Lee, and they listened to Jones's strategic recommendations. They promised him the command of , a new vessel being constructed for America by the Netherlands in Amsterdam. Britain, however, was able to divert \"L'Indien\" away from American hands by exerting pressure to ensure its sale to France instead (which had not yet allied with America). Jones was again left without a command, an unpleasant reminder of his stagnation in Boston from late 1776 until early 1777. It is thought that during this time, Jones developed his close friendship with Franklin, whom he greatly admired.\nOn February 6, 1778, France signed the Treaty of Alliance with America, formally recognizing the independence of the new American republic. Eight days later, Captain Jones's \"Ranger\" became the first American naval vessel to be formally saluted by the French, with a nine-gun salute fired from Captain La Motte-Piquet's flagship. Jones wrote of the event: \"I accepted his offer all the more for after all it was a recognition of our independence and in the nation\". On April 10, Jones set sail from Brest, France for the western coasts of Great Britain.\n\"Ranger\" attacks the British.\nJones had some early successes against British merchant shipping in the Irish Sea. He persuaded his crew on April 17, 1778, to participate in an assault on Whitehaven, the town where his maritime career had begun. Jones later wrote about the poor command qualities of his senior officers (having tactfully avoided such matters in his official report): \"'Their object', they said, 'was gain not honor'. They were poor: instead of encouraging the morale of the crew, they excited them to disobedience; they persuaded them that they had the right to judge whether a measure that was proposed to them was good or bad\". Contrary winds forced them to abandon the attempt and drive \"Ranger\" towards Ireland, causing more trouble for British shipping on the way.\nOn April 20, Jones learned from captured sailors that the Royal Navy sloop of war was anchored off Carrickfergus, Ireland. According to the diary of \"Ranger\"'s surgeon, Jones's first intention was to attack the vessel in broad daylight, but his sailors were \"unwilling to undertake it\", another incident omitted from the official report. Therefore, the attack took place just after midnight, but the mate responsible for dropping the anchor to halt \"Ranger\" right alongside \"Drake\" misjudged the timing in the dark (Jones claimed in his memoirs that the man was drunk), so Jones had to cut his anchor cable and run. The wind shifted, and \"Ranger\" recrossed the Irish Sea to make another attempt at raiding Whitehaven.\nJones led the assault with two boats of fifteen men just after midnight on April 23, hoping to set fire to and sink all of the ships anchored in Whitehaven's harbor, which numbered between 200 and 400 wooden vessels and consisted of a full merchant fleet and many coal transporters. They also hoped to terrorize the townspeople by lighting further fires. As it happened, the journey to shore was slowed by shifting winds and a strong ebb tide. They successfully spiked the town's big defensive guns to prevent them from being fired, but lighting fires proved difficult, as the lanterns in both boats had run out of fuel. To remedy this, some of the party were sent to raid a public house on the quayside, but the temptation to stop for a quick drink led to a further delay. Dawn was breaking by the time they returned and began the arson attacks, so efforts were concentrated on the coal ship \"Thompson\" in the hope that the flames would spread to adjacent vessels, all grounded by the low tide. However, in the twilight, one of the crew slipped away and alerted residents on a harbourside street. A fire alert was sounded, and large numbers of people ran to the quay, forcing the Americans to retreat and extinguishing the flames with the town's two fire engines. The townspeople's hopes of sinking Jones's boats with cannon fire were dashed because of the prudent spiking.\nJones next crossed the Solway Firth from Whitehaven to Scotland, hoping to hold for ransom Dunbar Douglas, 4th Earl of Selkirk, who lived on St Mary's Isle near Kirkcudbright. The earl, Jones reasoned, could be exchanged for American sailors impressed into the Royal Navy. The earl was discovered to be absent from his estate, so his wife entertained the officers and conducted the negotiations. Canadian historian Peter C. Newman gives credit to the governess for protecting the young heir to the Earldom of Selkirk, Thomas Douglas, and to the butler for filling a sack half with coal and topping it up with the family silver, in order to fob off the Americans. Jones claimed that he intended to return directly to his ship and continue seeking prizes elsewhere, but his crew wished to \"pillage, burn, and plunder all they could\". Ultimately, Jones allowed the crew to seize a silver plate set adorned with the family's emblem to placate their desires, but nothing else. Jones bought the plate when it was later sold off in France, and he returned it to the Earl of Selkirk after the war.\nThe attacks on St Mary's Isle and Whitehaven resulted in no prizes or profits, which would normally be shared with the crew. Throughout the mission, the crew acted as if they were aboard a privateer, not a warship, led by Lieutenant Thomas Simpson, Jones's second-in-command.\nReturn to Ireland.\nJones led \"Ranger\" back across the Irish Sea, hoping to make another attempt at \"Drake\", still anchored off Carrickfergus. Late in the afternoon of April 24, the ships, roughly equal in firepower, engaged in combat. Earlier in the day, the Americans had captured the crew of a reconnaissance boat and learned that \"Drake\" had taken on dozens of soldiers with the intention of grappling and boarding \"Ranger\", so Jones made sure that did not happen, capturing \"Drake\" after an hour-long gun battle in which British captain George Burdon was killed. Lieutenant Simpson was given command of \"Drake\" for the return journey to Brest. The ships separated during the return journey as \"Ranger\" chased another prize, leading to a conflict between Simpson and Jones. Both ships arrived at port safely, but Jones filed for a court-martial of Simpson, keeping him detained on the ship.\nPartly through the influence of John Adams, who was still serving as a commissioner in France, Simpson was cleared of the charges brought by Jones. Adams implies in his memoirs that the overwhelming majority of the evidence supported Simpson's claims. Adams seemed to believe Jones was hoping to monopolize the mission's glory, especially by detaining Simpson on board while he celebrated the capture with numerous important European dignitaries. Even with the wealth of perspectives, including the commander's, it is difficult to determine what occurred. It is clear, however, that the crew felt alienated by their commander, who might well have been motivated by his pride. Jones believed his intentions were honorable and his actions were strategically essential to the Revolution. Regardless of any controversy surrounding the mission, \"Ranger\"'s capture of \"Drake\" was one of the Continental Navy's few significant military victories during the Revolution. \"Ranger\"'s victory became an important symbol of the American spirit and served as an inspiration for the permanent establishment of the U.S. Navy after the revolution.\n\"Bonhomme Richard\".\nIn 1779, Captain Jones took command of the 42-gun , a merchant ship rebuilt and given to America by the French shipping magnate, Jacques-Donatien Le Ray. On August 14, as a vast French and Spanish invasion fleet approached England, he provided a diversion by heading for Ireland at the head of a five-ship squadron including the 36-gun , 32-gun USS \"Pallas\", 12-gun , and \"Le Cerf\", also accompanied by two privateers, and \"Granville\". When the squadron was only a few days out of Groix, \"Monsieur\" separated because of a disagreement between her captain and Jones. Several Royal Navy warships were sent towards Ireland in pursuit of Jones, but on this occasion, he continued right around the north of Scotland into the North Sea. Jones's main problems, as on his previous voyage, resulted from insubordination, particularly by Pierre Landais, captain of \"Alliance\". On September 23, the squadron met a large merchant convoy off the coast of Flamborough Head, East Yorkshire. The 44-gun British frigate and the 22-gun hired armed ship placed themselves between the convoy and Jones's squadron, allowing the merchants to escape.\nShortly after 7 p.m., the Battle of Flamborough Head began. \"Serapis\" engaged \"Bonhomme Richard\", and \"Alliance\" fired from a considerable distance at \"Countess\". After sustaining significant damage from the Serapis and Alliance's bombardment, Jones quickly recognized that he could not win a battle of big guns, and with the wind dying, made every effort to lock \"Richard\" and \"Serapis\" together (his famous, albeit apocryphal, quotation, \"I have not yet begun to fight!\" was said to have been uttered in reply to a demand to surrender in this phase of the battle). After about an hour, he succeeded, and he began clearing the British decks with his deck guns and his Marine marksmen in the rigging. \"Alliance\" sailed past and fired a broadside, doing at least as much damage to \"Richard\" as to \"Serapis\". Meanwhile, \"Countess of Scarborough\" had enticed \"Pallas\" downwind of the main battle, beginning a separate engagement. When \"Alliance\" approached this contest, about an hour after it had begun, the badly damaged \"Countess\" surrendered.\nWith \"Bonhomme Richard\" burning and sinking, it seems that her ensign was shot away; when one of the officers shouted a surrender, believing his captain to be dead, the British commander asked, seriously this time, if they had struck their colors. Jones later remembered saying something like \"I am determined to make you strike\", but the words allegedly heard by crew members and reported in newspapers a few days later were more like: \"I may sink, but I'll be damned if I strike\". An attempt by the British to board \"Bonhomme Richard\" was thwarted, and a grenade thrown by an American sailor caused the explosion of a large quantity of gunpowder on \"Serapis\"'s lower gun-deck. \"Alliance\" returned to the main battle, firing two broadsides. Again, these did at least as much damage to \"Richard\" as to \"Serapis\", but the tactic worked to the extent that \"Serapis\" was unable to move. With \"Alliance\" keeping well out of the line of his own great guns, Captain Pearson of \"Serapis\" accepted that prolonging the battle could achieve nothing, so he surrendered. Most of \"Bonhomme Richard\"'s crew transferred to other vessels, and after a day and a half of frantic repair efforts, it was decided that the ship could not be saved. \"Bonhomme Richard\" was allowed to sink, and Jones took command of \"Serapis\" for the trip to the island of Texel in neutral (but American-sympathizing) Holland.\nIn the following year, King Louis XVI of France honored Jones with the title \"Chevalier\". Jones accepted the honor and desired the title to be used thereafter: when the Continental Congress in 1787 resolved that a medal of gold be struck in commemoration of his \"valor and brilliant services\" it was to be presented to \"Chevalier John Paul Jones\". He also received from Louis XVI a decoration of \"l'Institution du M\u00e9rite Militaire\" and a sword. By contrast, in Britain at this time, he was usually denigrated as a pirate.\nJones was also admitted as an original member of The Society of the Cincinnati in Pennsylvania when it was established in 1783.\nRussian service.\nIn June 1782, Jones was appointed to command the 74-gun , but his command fell through when Congress decided to give \"America\" to the French as a replacement for the wrecked \"Le Magnifique\". As a result, he was given an assignment in Europe in 1783 to collect prize money due his former hands. At length, this too expired and Jones was left without prospects for active employment, leading him on April 23, 1787, to enter into the service of the Empress Catherine II of Russia, who placed great confidence in Jones, saying: \"He will get to Constantinople\". He was granted the name as a French subject \u041f\u0430\u0432\u0435\u043b \u0434\u0435 \u0416\u043e\u043d\u0435\u0441 (\"Pavel de Zhones\", Paul de Jones).\nJones avowed his intention, however, to preserve the condition of an American citizen and officer. As a rear admiral aboard the 24-gun flagship \"Vladimir\", he took part in the naval campaign in the Dnieper-Bug Liman, an arm of the Black Sea, into which the Southern Bug and Dnieper rivers flow, against the Turks, in concert with the Dnieper Flotilla commanded by Prince Charles of Nassau-Siegen.\nJones faced a considerably larger Turkish fleet, comprising over 100 vessels, including 18 ships of the line and 40 frigates. Jones' ships were poorly built, manned by impressed serfs, and were not fully armed. Additionally, he had to communicate with his fleet through a translator. He wanted to use a defensive strategy and bickered with Nassau Segan, who wanted to rush in and attack. Jones wanted to use a V shape with his fleet, placing it at the mouth of the Bug River to funnel the Turkish navy down the river into a killing field created by deadly crossfire, but the wind was against him. Still, he had his fleet create this formation by throwing their anchors out and dragging themselves into place. The strategy worked, and the larger Turkish navy was defeated. During the battle, Nassau Segan's flagship fled the battle to a safe position. But when the battle was won and the enemy flagship was trapped, grounded on a sandbar, Jones ordered his crew to approach and capture the flagship. Instead, his Russian captain pulled up short, anchored himself, and let Nassau Segan claim the prize. Despite Jones's successes and strategies, during this time, Potemkin's letters to Empress Catherine credited Nassau Segan for preventing Jones from gathering power at court. When Jones confronted Potemkin and told him that he (Potemkin) was being manipulated by Nassau Segan, Potemkin responded \"No one manipulates me, not even the Empress!\"\nJones (and Nassau-Siegen) repulsed the Ottoman forces from the area, but the jealous intrigues of Nassau-Siegen (and perhaps Jones's own ineptitude for Imperial politics) turned the Russian commander Prince Grigory Potemkin against Jones.\nJones was recalled to Saint Petersburg for the claimed purpose of transfer to a command in the North Sea. Other factors may have included the theoretical resentment of rival officers, some of whom were several ex-British naval officers also in Russian employment, who regarded Jones as a renegade and refused to speak to him.\nAs a foreigner among the Russian court, Jones threatened the existing power structures. He had successfully defeated the Turkish Navy and was no longer as important to the war. His immediate superior, Prince Potemkin, was known for his deviousness and court intrigue, and as a man who allowed only sycophants to serve under him, and chafed at Jones's pride and inexpert courtly intrigue. After Jones' Victory, Potemkin began to assign him impossible missions, designed to force him to fail.\nOn June 8, 1788, Jones was awarded the Order of Saint Anna, but he left the following month, an embittered man.\nIn 1789, Jones arrived in Warsaw, Poland, where he befriended Tadeusz Ko\u015bciuszko, a veteran of the American Revolutionary War. Ko\u015bciuszko advised him to leave the service of the autocratic Russia and serve another power, suggesting Sweden.\nRape suit and exile.\nOn March 31, 1789, Jones was accused of raping a 10-year-old Russian girl named Katerina Stepanova, a \"daughter of German immigrants living in St. Petersburg.\" She lived with her mother, who took care of her and began the legal proceedings.\nStepanova testified to the police that she had been summoned to Jones' apartment to sell him butter, when she was punched in the face by \"a man wearing a white uniform, gold braids and a red ribbon,\" who then gagged her with a white handkerchief and vaginally penetrated her. A regimental surgeon and a midwife both examined her and found evidence to substantiate these physical and sexual assaults. Jones' manservant, Johann Gottfried Bahl, testified that Jones had been wearing his dress uniform when Stepanova entered Jones' chamber. He reported that on looking through a keyhole he saw Jones was in a gown, not his uniform. Bahl also stated he \"...later saw the girl leaving, her lips covered in blood and face swollen from weeping. He further told the police that he entered his master\u2019s chamber to make the bed that night and discovered drops of blood on the floor.\"\nThe rape had been reported slightly over a day after it was said to have occurred, which meant the case would ordinarily not have continued due to Russian statutory codes considering any such delay evidence of consent, but Catherine intervened directly to allow the legal proceedings to continue (she was known to intercede in \"cases where women faced insurmountable odds\").\nJones hired a lawyer, who soon quit the case, speculatively by order of Catherine via the Governor-General of St. Petersburg. Jones claimed in a statement to prosecutors that he had \"often\" paid Stepanova for sex previously, but denied that he had raped her. Jones stated he had not taken her virginity and believed her to be older than was being claimed; he wrote, \"I love women, I confess, and the pleasures that one only obtains from that sex; but to get such things by force is horrible to me.\" However, Jones later claimed the accusation was entirely false, stemming from the supposed desire of Katerina's mother, Sophia Fyodorovna, to gain financially from a prominent man. He also produced Katerina's father, Stephan Holtszwarthen, to testify in court that his daughter was 12 rather than 10 years old and that his wife had left him for another man, lived in a brothel, and was herself promiscuous. Jones involved the Comte de S\u00e9gur, the French representative at the Russian court (and also Jones's last friend in the capital), to whom he claimed that Stepanova had come asking him for \"linen or lace to mend\" and then \"Performed indecent gestures,\" but that he had \"Advised her not to enter upon so vile a career; gave her some money, and dismissed her.\u201d S\u00e9gur investigated the accusation and suggested to Potemkin that it was false, and that Jones was the victim of a plot by Prince Charles for his own purposes. S\u00e9gur advanced theories that Jones had either \"offended men who shared the Empress's bed\" or else that he had angered Catherine by refusing \"advances\" from her.\nJones' appeal to Potemkin \"...fell on deaf ears, leaving Jones without Russian support against the judgment of the Russian sovereign.\" However, the international pressure applied by American and French connections via the Comte de S\u00e9gur persuaded Catherine to grant Jones two years' leave abroad, a de facto exile, rather than the usual punishment for rape by an officer of decapitation or a lifetime of penal labor; according to Jacob Bell:The Empress' actions here proved her priorities. She dismissed a tried naval commander, especially sought out by her agents abroad, during wartime, showing that she merited the allegations against Jones higher than his potential martial service.\nLater life.\nIn May 1790, Jones arrived in Paris. He still retained his position as Russian Rear Admiral, with a corresponding pension which allowed him to remain in retirement until his death two years later, but he was no longer able to find a foothold in Paris society. Thomas Carlyle wrote of him, \"Poor Paul! Hunger and dispiritment track thy sinking footsteps\". During this time he made several attempts to re-enter the service in the Russian Navy. However, Catherine did not respond to his letters, explaining to their go-between Baron von Grimm that Jones' service record was not exceptional, and that as a result of the rape suit against Jones, Russian seamen refused to serve under him. Catherine also used her influence to block attempts by Jones to join the Danish and Swedish navies.\nBy this time, his memoirs had been published in Edinburgh. Inspired by them, James Fenimore Cooper and Alexandre Dumas later wrote their own adventure novels: Cooper's 1824 novel \"\" contains fictionalized accounts of Jones's maritime activities, and Dumas' \"Captain Paul\" is a follow-up novel to \"The Pilot\", published in 1846.\nDuring this period, he wrote his \"Narrative of the Campaign of the Liman\".\nIn his addendum to the Encyclopedia of American Biography entry on Jones, Walter R. Herrick\u2014citing S. E. Morison's, \"John Paul Jones: A Sailor's Biography\" (1959)\u2014concluded \"In sum, Jones was a sailor of indomitable courage, of strong will, and of great ability in his chosen career. On the other side of the coin, it must be admitted that he was also a hypocrite, a brawler, a rake, and a professional and social climber. Although these elements of his character do not detract from his feats at sea, they do, perhaps, cast in doubt his eligibility for a prominent place in the ranks of America's immortals.\"\nDeath.\nIn June 1792, Jones was appointed U.S. Consul to treat with the Dey of Algiers for the release of American captives. Before Jones was able to fulfill his appointment, he was found dead lying face-down on his bed in his third-floor Paris apartment, No. 19 Rue de Tournon, in the 6th arrondissement, on July 18, 1792. He was 45 years old. The cause of death was interstitial nephritis. A small procession of servants, friends and loyal family walked his body for burial. He was buried in Paris at the Saint-Louis Cemetery, which belonged to the French royal family. In their obituaries, the American press had partially forgotten his achievements and some described him as a French war hero.\nUpon his death, Jones was owed significant money and land by others. He was never directly paid for his service on the \"Bonhomme Richard\", and had instead been forced to purloin part of the sum paid to the vessel's officers. Three of the seven ships he had captured were requisitioned by Denmark, which never reimbursed him; he was instead granted an annual pension by the Danish king, but it was never paid either. He was also owed nearly 13,000 acres of land in western Pennsylvania, purchased from William Trent in 1783. Jones' will left both claims to his niece Janette Taylor, who came to America in 1830 to pursue them. She seems to have been unsuccessful, and following her death in 1843, the claims were more aggressively pursued by her own successor, George Leckie Lowden. Lowden obtained restitution for the ships, but Congress ignored his petition for the land. \nJones's grave was either unmarked or the marker was stolen at an unknown point. By the time Americans began searching for his coffin in 1899, the record of his burial plot had also been lost, burned by the Paris Commune during the \"semaine sanglante\". Meanwhile, his personal papers had been transferred among several people and finally were displayed in the shop window of a New York bakery, where in 1824 a customer noticed them and purchased them. A New York newspaper described the papers as documents belonging to \"Franklin, Hancock, La Fayette and John Adams,\" failing to mention Jones himself.\nExhumation and reburial.\nIn 1905, Jones' remains were identified by U.S. Ambassador to France General Horace Porter, who had searched for six years to track down the body using a poor 1851 copy of the missing burial record. After Jones's death, Frenchman Pierrot Fran\u00e7ois Simmoneau donated over 460 francs to mummify the body. It had been preserved in alcohol and interred in a lead coffin \"in the event that should the United States decide to claim his remains, they might more easily be identified.\" Porter knew what to look for in his search. With the aid of an old map of Paris, Porter's team, which included anthropologist Louis Capitan, identified the site of the former St. Louis Cemetery for Alien Protestants. Sounding probes were used to search for lead coffins, and five coffins were ultimately exhumed. The third, unearthed on April 7, 1905, was immediately recognized as Jones' by the excavators. A post-mortem examination by Doctors Capitan and Georges Papillault confirmed their impression, finding several points by which the corpse could be identified as Jones. The autopsy confirmed the original listing of the cause of death. The face was later compared to a bust by Jean-Antoine Houdon.\nJones's body was brought to the United States aboard the , escorted by three other cruisers, one being the . On approaching the American coastline, seven United States Navy battleships joined the procession escorting Jones's body back to America. On April 24, 1906, Jones's coffin was installed in Bancroft Hall at the U.S. Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland, following a ceremony in Dahlgren Hall, presided by President Theodore Roosevelt who gave a speech paying tribute to Jones and holding him up as an example to the officers of the Navy. On January 26, 1913, the captain's remains were finally re-interred in a bronze and marble sarcophagus, designed by Sylvain Sali\u00e8res, at the Naval Academy Chapel in Annapolis.\nPosthumous pardon at Whitehaven.\nJones was given an honorary pardon in 1999 by the port of Whitehaven for his raid on the town, in the presence of Lieutenant Steve Lyons representing the United States Naval Attach\u00e9 to the UK, and Yuri Fokine the Russian Ambassador to the UK. The United States Navy was also awarded the Freedom of the Port of Whitehaven, the only time the honour has been granted in its 400-year history. The pardon and freedom were arranged by Gerard Richardson as part of the launch of the series of Maritime Festival. Richardson's of Whitehaven, a wine and coffee merchant in the town, is now the honorary consulate to the United States Navy for the Town and Port of Whitehaven. In May 2017, the US Navy consul was US Navy Rear Admiral (retired) Steve Morgan, and the deputy consul was Rob Romano.\nIn literature and the arts.\nJames Fenimore Cooper wrote a historical novel \"\", published in 1823, featuring John Paul Jones as its main character. This novel was later reinterpreted by the French writer Alexandre Dumas in \"Captain Paul\" (\"Le Capitaine Paul\"), published in 1838.\nThere is a single Hollywood film about him, \"John Paul Jones\" (1959), which includes a largely fictionalized portrayal of his private life. There is also a 45-minute documentary about him, produced in 1995. In 1923, Franklin Delano Roosevelt wrote a screenplay about Jones and sent it to Paramount Pictures founder Adolph Zukor, who politely rejected it.\nJohnny Horton wrote a sea shanty about John Paul Jones in 1960. The English folk band The Longest Johns made a song referring to him from the British perspective titled \"John Paul Jones is a Pirate\".\nJones is a featured character in the American animated historical fiction television series \"Liberty's Kids\". In the episode \"Not Yet Begun to Fight\", Jones (voiced by Liam Neeson) helps main character Sarah see that her true loyalty lies with America during the Battle of Flamborough Head.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16343", "revid": "50183741", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16343", "title": "Boulting brothers", "text": "Twin brothers and filmmakers\nJohn Edward Boulting (21 December 1913 \u2013 17 June 1985) and Roy Alfred Clarence Boulting (21 December 1913 \u2013 5 November 2001), known collectively as the Boulting brothers, were English filmmakers and identical twins who became known for their series of satirical comedies in the 1950s and 1960s. They produced many of their films through their own production company, Charter Film Productions, which they founded in 1937.\nEarly life.\nThe twin brothers were born to Arthur Boulting and his wife Rosetta (Rose) \"n\u00e9e\" Bennett in Bray, Berkshire, England, on 21 December 1913. John was the elder by half an hour. John was named Joseph Edward John Boulting and Roy was named Alfred Fitzroy Clarence Boulting. Their elder brother Sydney Boulting became an actor and stage producer as Peter Cotes; he was the original director of \"The Mousetrap\". A younger brother, Guy, died aged eight.\nBoth twins were educated at Reading School, where they formed a film society. They were extras in Anthony Asquith's 1931 film \"Tell England\" while still at school.\nAs a teenager, Roy emigrated to Canada, working for a while as a shop assistant, but also writing dialogue for at least one Canadian film. He worked his passage home aboard a cattle freighter in about 1933, working first in film sales before moving into film production as assistant director on a 1936 comedy quickie \"Apron Fools\". The money he made on his passage home went to finance the brothers' first work, a short entitled \"Ripe Earth\" (1938), about the village of Thaxted, Essex, narrated by Leo Genn.\nFrom January to November 1937, John served on the Republican side in the Spanish Civil War as an ambulance driver with the Spanish Medical Aid Committee (not, as sometimes reported, with the International Brigades), where \u2014 according to Richard Attenborough \u2014 he was nearly captured. John also served with the British Film Unit as an officer in the Royal Air Force during the Second World War. Roy served as a captain in the British Army, first with a tank regiment for more than a year and then with the Army Film Unit, where he made several short documentaries.\nCareers.\nThe brothers constituted a producer-director team. For most of their careers one produced while the other directed, but the product remained essentially a 'Boulting Brothers film'. They were socialists, as John demonstrated with his involvement in the Spanish Civil War (see above), and wanted all film, including comedies, to reflect the real world.\nCharter Film Productions.\nIn 1937, they set up Charter Film Productions and made several short features, including \"The Landlady\" (1937) and \"Consider Your Verdict\" (1938), which attracted critical and commercial attention.\nThey made quota quickies such as \"Trunk Crime\" (1939) and \"Inquest\" (1939).\nFeature films.\nBeing eager to speak out against the Third Reich, the brothers made their film, \"Pastor Hall\" (1940), a biopic of Martin Niem\u00f6ller, a German preacher who refused to kowtow to the Nazis. Roy directed and John produced. The film had to have its initial release delayed by the British Government, which was not yet ready to be openly critical of Nazism. Once released, the film was well received by the critics and the public.\nThey followed up with \"Thunder Rock\" (1942) with Michael Redgrave, a passionate anti-isolationist allegory distinguished by imaginative cinematography and a theatrical but highly atmospheric lighthouse setting. It was financed by MGM.\nMilitary service.\nIn 1941, Roy joined the Army Film Unit, where he was responsible for \"Desert Victory\", which won the Academy Award for Best Documentary in 1944. He also worked on \"Tunisian Victory\" (1944) and \"Burma Victory\" (1945). John joined the RAF Film Unit, where he made \"Journey Together\" in 1945, a dramatised documentary about the training and combat experience of a bomber crew with Richard Attenborough in the lead part. Terence Rattigan worked on the script.\nPost-war films.\nAfter the war, the Boultings made the drama \"Fame Is the Spur\" (1947) with Redgrave. More successful at the box-office was \"Brighton Rock\" (1947), starring Attenborough as the gangster \"Pinkie\" from the novel by Graham Greene. Also well liked was \"The Guinea Pig\" (1948), starring Richard Attenborough as a young working-class boy sent to a public school. It was made for Pilgrim Pictures who the Boultings left shortly afterwards. The Boultings co-directed the thriller \"Seven Days to Noon\" (1950), which won an Oscar for Best Story. It led to a less popular sequel, \"High Treason\" (1951). John directed \"The Magic Box\" (1951), a biopic of William Friese-Greene and a film containing numerous cameo appearances. It was shown at the 1951 Festival of Britain but on general release the following year proved a box office disappointment.\nHollywood-financed films.\nRoy received an offer to direct a World War Two naval film, \"Sailor of the King\" (1953), starring Jeffrey Hunter for 20th Century Fox. \"Seagulls Over Sorrento\" (1954) was another war naval story financed by a Hollywood studio (in this case MGM) with an imported star (Gene Kelly); it was not a big success. The brothers collaborated on a comedy, \"Josephine and Men\" (1955) then Roy was hired by United Artists to do an action film with Hollywood stars, \"Run for the Sun\" (1956).\nSatires.\nIn the mid-50s, the Boulting brothers became identified with \"affectionate\" satires on British institutions. The sequence began with John's \"Private's Progress\" (1956), a look at army life, starring Attenborough, Terry-Thomas and Ian Carmichael and co written by Frank Harvey. It was the second most commercially successful film in Britain in 1956.\nThey followed it with \"Lucky Jim\" (1957), set in academe, adapted from the novel by Kingsley Amis. It starred Carmichael and Terry-Thomas. \"Brothers in Law\" (1957) with Carmichael, Attenborough and Thomas, took on the legal profession. They had a break from satirising institutions with \"Happy Is the Bride\" (1958), an adaptation of \"Quiet Wedding\", then returned to it with \"Carlton-Browne of the F.O.\" (1959), focusing on diplomacy.\nThe Boultings took on increasingly powerful trade unions and ever corrupt board room power with \"I'm All Right Jack\" (1959), a sequel to \"Private's Progress\" with Carmichael, Thomas and Attenborough reprising their roles, and Harvey co-writing. The film featured a performance by Peter Sellers as trade union foreman Fred Kite. It was the most popular film at the British box office in 1959. \"Suspect\" (1960) was a return to the thriller genre for the brothers. \"A French Mistress\" (1960) was a comedy farce. \"Heavens Above!\" (1963) looked at religion in Britain, starring Sellers and Carmichael. It was a minor hit. \"Rotten to the Core\" (1965) was a heist comedy which attempted to make a star of Anton Rodgers in a Peter Sellers-type role, playing multiple parts. It featured a young Charlotte Rampling.\nHayley Mills.\nThe Boultings directed and produced the northern comedy \"The Family Way\" (1966), starring John Mills and his teenage daughter Hayley. Roy Boulting and Hayley Mills began a relationship during the shoot despite a 33-year age difference; they married in 1971. Roy wrote and directed \"Twisted Nerve\" (1968), a thriller starring Mills and Hywel Bennett. The brothers had a massive hit with \"There's a Girl in My Soup\" (1970) starring Sellers and Goldie Hawn. Roy was called in to replace the director on \"Mr. Forbush and the Penguins\" (1971), and he brought in Mills to star. The movie was not successful. Neither was the comedy \"Soft Beds, Hard Battles\" (1974) made by the brothers starring Peter Sellers. Roy Boulting lost a considerable amount of money on the film. In 1975, Roy was working on a stage play, \"The Family Games\". He worked on the script for \"The Kingfisher Caper\" (1975), starring Mills.\nLater career.\nIn the US, Roy directed \"The Last Word\" (1979), a comedy starring Richard Harris that was barely seen. When John died of cancer in 1985, Roy stopped making films. His last credit was directing an episode of the \"Miss Marple\" series for TV, \"The Moving Finger\" (1985). He was working on an adaptation of Terence Rattigan's play \"Deja Vu\" when he died. When the National Film Theatre mounted its biggest retrospective to date of British cinema in the late 1980s, Roy who launched it, introduced \"Desert Victory\". The Boulting Brother's films have been described as being \"a sensitive barometer of the changing times\".\nPersonal lives.\nJohn Boulting was married four times. He had six children: two sons by his first marriage; three daughters by his second. He also had a third son. With his first wife, Veronica, daughter of Irish barrister, John Craig Nelson Davidson, he had sons Norris (b. 1941) and Nicholas (b. 1943). Norris is the father of TV presenter and journalist Ned Boulting. With his second wife, Jacqueline (Jackie), he had three daughters: Jody, Emma and Lucy; the last of whom, Lucy Boulting Hill, has become a successful casting director. John's grandson, Jordan Stephens (son of Emma), is one half of British hip hop duo Rizzle Kicks.\nRoy Boulting was married five times. He had seven children, all sons: two by his second marriage; three by his third; one through his relationship with Victoria Vaughan; and one by his fourth. With his second wife, Jean Capon (n\u00e9e Gamage), he had sons Jonathan (b. 1944) and Laurence (b. 1945), the latter becoming a successful film producer and director in his own right. With his second marriage, in March 1951, to Enid Munnik (n\u00e9e Groenewald/Gr\u00fcnewald), he had three children: first, Fitzroy (b. 1951); then identical twins Edmund and Rupert (b. 1952). The couple divorced in 1964. Enid, an established fashion model and later fashion editor at the French magazine \"Elle\", married the 9th Earl of Hardwicke in April 1970. The model and actress Ingrid Boulting is Enid's daughter from her first marriage, to Cornelius Munnik.\nFollowing his split with his third wife, Roy entered into a relationship with another fashion model, Victoria Vaughan. They had one son together. The relationship ended with his involvement with Hayley Mills. In 1971, Roy married, for the fourth time, Hayley Mills, 33 years his junior, whom he had met on the set of \"The Family Way\". Their son is musician and filmmaker Crispian Mills. The couple separated in 1975, and divorced in 1977. His fifth and final marriage, in October 1978, was to actress Sandra Payne. They divorced in 1984.\nDeaths.\nJohn Boulting died on 17 June 1985 at his home in Sunningdale, Berkshire, and Roy Boulting 16 years later on 5 November 2001 in the Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford; both died of cancer.\nIn popular culture.\nA still from \"The Family Way\" was used for The Smiths single \"I Started Something I Couldn't Finish\".\nFilmography.\nFilms directed jointly.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFilms directed by John.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFilms directed by Roy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16345", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16345", "title": "John Frankenheimer", "text": "American film and television director (1930\u20132002)\nJohn Michael Frankenheimer (February 19, 1930 \u2013 July 6, 2002) was an American film and television director known for social dramas and action/suspense films. Among his credits are \"Birdman of Alcatraz\", \"The Manchurian Candidate\" (both 1962), \"Seven Days in May\", \"The Train\" (both 1964), \"Seconds\", \"Grand Prix\" (both 1966), \"French Connection II\" (1975), \"Black Sunday\" (1977), \"The Island of Dr. Moreau\" (1996), \"Ronin\" (1998) and \"Reindeer Games\" (2000).\nHe won four Emmy Awards\u00a0\u2013 three consecutive\u00a0\u2013 in the 1990s for directing the television movies \"Against the Wall\", \"The Burning Season\", \"Andersonville\", and \"George Wallace\", the last of which also received a Golden Globe Award for Best Miniseries or Television Film.\nFrankenheimer's nearly 40 feature films and over 50 plays for television were notable for their influence on contemporary thought. He became a pioneer of the \"modern-day political thriller\", having begun his career at the height of the Cold War.\nHe was technically highly accomplished from his days in live television; many of his films were noted for creating \"psychological dilemmas\" for his male protagonists along with having a strong \"sense of environment\", similar in style to films by director Sidney Lumet, for whom he had earlier worked as assistant director. He developed a \"tremendous propensity for exploring political situations\" which would ensnare his characters.\nMovie critic Leonard Maltin writes that \"in his time [1960s] ... Frankenheimer worked with the top writers, producers and actors in a series of films that dealt with issues that were just on top of the moment\u00a0\u2013 things that were facing us all.\"\nChildhood and schooling.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI was always a very introverted child, and as far back as seven years old, I recall finding great escape in films ... in all seriousness, I have always been terribly interested in films and it was not something that happened to me later in life. I look back and realize it was the medium I liked most.\u00a0\u2013 John Frankenheimer, quoted in \"The Cinema of John Frankenheimer\" (1968)\nFrankenheimer was born in Queens, New York City, the son of Helen Mary (\"n\u00e9e\" Sheedy) and Walter Martin Frankenheimer, a stockbroker. His father was of German Jewish descent, his mother was Irish Catholic, and Frankenheimer was raised in his mother's religion. As a youth Frankenheimer, the eldest of three siblings, struggled to assert himself with his domineering father.\nGrowing up in New York City he became fascinated with cinema at an early age, and recalls avidly attending movies every weekend. Frankenheimer reports that in 1938, at the age of seven or eight, he attended a 25-episode, 7 &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 hour marathon of \"The Lone Ranger\" accompanied by his aunt.\nIn 1947, he graduated from La Salle Military Academy in Oakdale, Long Island, New York, and in 1951 he earned a baccalaureate in English from Williams College in Williamstown, Massachusetts. As captain of the tennis team at Williams, Frankenheimer briefly considered a professional career in tennis, but reconsidered:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I gave that up when I really started acting at eighteen or nineteen, because there wasn't any time to do both ... my interest was more toward acting in those days and an actor is what I wanted to be. I did act at college and summer stock for a year. But I was really not a very good actor. I was quite shy and quite stiff...\nAir Force Film Squadron: 1951\u20131953.\nAfter graduating from Williams College, Frankenheimer was drafted into the Air Force and assigned to the Reserve Officers' Training Corps (ROTC), serving in the Pentagon mailroom at Washington, D.C. He quickly applied for and was transferred, without any formal qualifications, to an Air Force film squadron in Burbank, California. It was there that Lieutenant Frankenheimer \"really started to think seriously about directing\".\nFrankenheimer recollects his early apprenticeship with the Air Force photography unit as one of almost unlimited freedom. When he was a junior officer, Frankenheimer claimed, his superiors \"couldn't have cared less\" what he did in terms of utilizing the filmmaking equipment. Frankenheimer reports that he was free to set up the lighting, operate the camera and perform the editing on projects he personally conceived. His first film was a documentary about an asphalt manufacturing plant in Sherman Oaks, California. Lieutenant Frankenheimer recalls moonlighting, at $40-a-week, as writer, producer and cameraman making television infomercials for a local cattle breeder in Northridge, California, in which livestock were presented on the interior stage sets. (The Federal Communications Commission terminated the programming after 15 weeks.) In addition to mastering the basic elements of filmmaking, he began reading widely on film technique, including the writings of Soviet director Sergei Eisenstein.\nFrankenheimer was discharged from the military in 1953.\nTelevision's \"Golden Age\": 1953\u20131960.\nDuring his years in military service, Frankenheimer strenuously sought a film career in Southern California. Failing this, at the age of 23, he returned to New York upon his military discharge to seek work in the emerging television industry. His earnestness impressed Columbia Broadcasting System (CBS) television executives, landing him a job in the summer of 1953 to serve as a director of photography on \"The Garry Moore Show\". Frankenheimer recalls his apprenticeship at CBS:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When I stop and look back on [\"The Garry Moore Show\"] ... I was particularly well-suited for that job ... what you would do is prepare a shot for the director. He would tell you what he wanted and you would get it from the cameraman ... You'd also be responsible for the timing of the show. But I think\u00a0\u2013 well, I know\u00a0\u2013 I was born with a good eye for the camera and so the job really was playing right into what I would call my own strength.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTelevision scripts [of the 1950s] exploring problems at the societal level were systematically ignored (i.e. racial discrimination, structural poverty, and other social ills). Instead, critics complain, too many \"golden age\" dramas were little more than simplistic morality tales focusing on the everyday problems and conflicts of weak individuals confronted by personal shortcomings such as alcoholism, greed, impotence, and divorce, for example... [I]t is important to note that the \"golden age\" coincided with the Cold War era and McCarthyism and that cold-war references, such as avoiding communism and loving America, were frequently incorporated in teleplays of the mid to late 1950s.\u00a0\u2013 Anna Everett in \"Golden Age\" Museum of Broadcast Communications\nFrankenheimer was picked up as assistant to director Sidney Lumet's for CBS's historical dramatization series \"You Are There\", and further on Charles Russell's \"Danger\" and Edward R. Murrow's \"Person to Person\". In late 1954 Frankenheimer replaced Lumet as director on \"You Are There\" and \"Danger\" under a five-year contract (with a studio standard option to terminate a director with a two-week notice). Frankenheimer's directorial d\u00e9but was \"The Plot Against King Solomon\" (1954), a critical success.\nThroughout the 1950s he directed over 140 episodes of shows like \"Playhouse 90\" and \"Climax!\" under the auspices of CBS executive Hubbell Robinson and producer Martin Manulis. These included outstanding adaptations of works by Shakespeare, Eugene O'Neill, F. Scott Fitzgerald, Ernest Hemingway and Arthur Miller. Leading actors and actresses from film and stage starred in these live productions, among them Ingrid Bergman, John Gielgud, Mickey Rooney, Geraldine Page and Jack Lemmon. Frankenheimer is widely considered a preeminent figure in the so-called \"Golden Age of Television\".\nFilm historian Stephen Bowie offers this appraisal of Frankenheimer's legacy from the \"Golden Age\" of television:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Along with Sidney Lumet, John Frankenheimer was the major director to emerge from and be influenced by the aesthetics of live television drama, which flourished briefly in the US ... Frankenheimer's later fame, and his oft-repeated nostalgia for live television, have designated him as the quintessential exponent of the form: this is a crucial misconception. The aesthetics of live television were defined by their temporal and spatial limitations: all that could be shown was what could be physically created within an hour or half-hour and photographed within the confines of a small space [emphasizing] cramped blue-collar settings (\"kitchen drama\") because these were the most easily staged for live broadcast ... [though] perfectly suited to this world of emotional intimacy and physical claustrophobia, Frankenheimer reacted instinctively against it. He sought material and visual strategies that expanded the boundaries of what could be done in live television ... As the live TV director who took the medium in an explicitly cinematic direction, Frankenheimer was actually the least typical.\nFilm career.\nFrankenheimer's earliest films addressed contemporary issues such as \"juvenile delinquency, criminality and the social environment\" and are represented by \"The Young Stranger\" (1957), \"The Young Savages\" (1961) and \"All Fall Down\" (1962).\n\"The Young Stranger\" (1957).\nFrankenheimer's first foray into filmmaking occurred while he was still under contract to CBS television. The head of CBS in California, William Dozier, became the CEO of RKO movie studios. Frankenheimer was assigned to direct a film version of his television \"Climax!\" production titled \"Deal a Blow\", written by William Dozier's son, Robert. The 1956 movie version, \"The Young Stranger\", stars James MacArthur as the rebellious teenage son of a powerful Hollywood movie producer (James Daly). Frankenheimer recalled that he found his first film experience unsatisfactory:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I have a very high regard for my [television] crews, because I hand pick them; on \"The Young Stranger\" I was given a crew, and I thought they were terrible and treated me very badly. It made me very bitter about the whole experience ... I felt very confined, constricted and a bad director ... There were so many things I thought I could have done but didn't do ... As a result of this experience I was fed up with films and went back to television.\nFrankenheimer adds that in the late 1950s, television was transitioning from live productions to taped shows: \"... a live television director was like being a village blacksmith after the advent of the automobile ... I knew I had to get out...\" In 1961 Frankenheimer abandoned television and returned to filmmaking after a four-year hiatus, continuing his examination of the social themes that informed his 1957 \"The Young Stranger\". Film historian Gordon Gow distinguishes Frankenheimer's handling of themes addressing individualism and \"misfits\" during the Fifties' obsession with disaffected teenagers:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There was an especially true feeling to the problem of the 16-year-old boy who became \"The Young Stranger\" ... This film, in 1957, at the height of the problem-teen vogue, sounded a quiet note of contrast. In part, its genuine quality might be put down to the fact [both director and writer] were in their mid-twenties\u00a0\u2013 much nearer to the age of their central character [James MacArthur], about twenty himself at the time (but looking younger) ... What made it especially distinctive amid the general sensationalism was the triviality of the boy's misdemeanor: a minor bit of roughhouse in a neighborhood cinema ... The difference between \"The Young Stranger\", which attained a happy ending plausibly, and the general run of delinquent-problem movies was its moderation...\n\"The Young Savages\" (1961).\nFrankenheimer's second cinematic effort is based on novelist Evan Hunter's \"A Matter of Conviction\" (1959). United Artists publicity executives changed the box-office title to the vaguely lurid \"The Young Savages,\" to which Frankenheimer objected. The story involves the attempted political exploitation of a brazen murder involving Puerto Rican and Italian youth gangs set in New York City's Spanish Harlem. District Attorney, Dan Cole (Edward Andrews), who is seeking the state governorship, sends assistant D. A. Hank Bell (Burt Lancaster) to gather evidence to secure a conviction. Bell, who grew up in the tenement district, has escaped from his impoverished origins to achieve social and economic success. He initially adopts a cynical hostility towards the youths he investigates, which serves his own career aims. The narrative explores the human and legal complexities of the case and Bell's struggle to confront his personal and social prejudices and commitments. The film's arresting opening sequence depicting a killing, which is key to the plot, reveals Frankenheimer's origins in television. The action, \"brilliantly filmed and edited\", occurs preliminary to the credits, and is accompanied by an impelling soundtrack by composer David Amram, serving to quickly rivet audience interest.\n\"The Young Savages\", though focusing on juvenile delinquency, is cinematically a significant advance over Frankenheimer's similarly themed first film effort \"The Young Stranger\" (1957). Film historian Gerald Pratley attributes this to Frankenheimer's insistence on hand-picking his leading technical support for the project, including set designer Bert Smidt, cinematographer Lionel Lindon and scenarist JP Miller. Pratley observed:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"\"The Young Savages\" is far more alive and real than [\"The Young Stranger\"]...the youths might well be some of those we met in the first film, but now further along their delinquent ways. The acting throughout is authoritative, with vivid portrayals by the Italian and Puerto Rican players...the entire film is photographically alive with a strong, visual sense which was to characterize all of Frankenheimer's future work\u2026\"\nThough \"contrived and familiar in its social concerns\" Frankenheimer and leading man Burt Lancaster, both Liberals in their political outlook, dramatize the \"poverty, violence and despair of city life\" with a restraint such that \"the events and characters seem consistently believable.\" Frankenheimer recalled: \"I shot \"The Young Savages\" mainly to show people that I could make a movie, and while it was not completely successful, my point was proved...The film was made on a relatively cheap budget and shooting on location in New York for a Hollywood company is very expensive. Those were the days before Mayor Lindsay when you had to pay off every other cop on the beat\u2026\"\n\"All Fall Down\" (1962).\nThe coming of age film \"All Fall Down\" was both filmed and released while Frankenheimer's \"Birdman of Alcatraz\" (1962) was in post-production and his \"The Manchurian Candidate\" (1962) was in pre-production.\nThe picture was scripted by William Inge, who also wrote \"Splendor in the Grass\" (1961) and concerns character Berry-Berry (Warren Beatty), an emotionally irresponsible hustler, and his adoring younger brother Clinton (Brandon deWilde), to whom Berry-Berry appears as a romantic Byronesque figure. The elder brother's cruel treatment of Echo O'Brien (Eva Marie Saint), his lover who becomes pregnant, disabuses the naive Clinton of Berry-Berry's perfection. His anguished insight permits Clinton to achieve emotional maturity and independence. Film critic David Walsh comments:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"\"All Fall Down\" is vaguely moralistic and conformist, and the scenes of the Beatty character's comeuppance contrived in the extreme. \"All Fall Down\" is saved by the portrayals of Eva Marie Saint, quiet and gracious, as the unfortunate Echo, and Angela Lansbury, extravagant and outlandish, as Berry-Berry's mother, within whom incestuous fires appear to blaze. Critics have noted that Annabell Willart (Lansbury) was the first of three desperately controlling mothers in Frankenheimer's films of 1962: the other two played by Thelma Ritter in \"Birdman of Alcatraz\" (1962) and Lansbury again in \"The Manchurian Candidate\" (1961). In all three films, the father is either weak or absent.\"\n\"Birdman of Alcatraz\" (1962).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u201cI can't really think of a scene in \"Birdman of Alcatraz\" I liked. I like the total effect of the film, but I don't think there was any scene that stands out for me as being extraordinary in any way.\u201d \u00a0\u2013 John Frankenheimer in Gerald Pratley's \"The Cinema of John Frankenheimer\" (1969)\nBased on a biography by Thomas E. Gaddis, \"Birdman of Alcatraz\" (1962) is a documentary-like dramatization of the life of Robert Stroud, sentenced to life imprisonment in solitary confinement for killing a prison guard. While serving his sentence, Stroud (Burt Lancaster) becomes a respected expert in avian diseases though the study of canaries. Frankenheimer traces Stroud's emergence from his anti-social misanthropy towards a humane maturity, despite the brutal conditions of his incarceration.\nIn 1962, the production and filming of \"Birdman of Alcatraz\" was already underway when United Artists enlisted Frankenheimer to replace British director Charles Crichton. As such, key production decisions had already been made, and Frankenheimer regarded himself as a \"hired director\" with little direct control over the production. Producer Harold Hecht and screenwriter Guy Trosper insisted on an exhaustive adaption of the Gaddis biography. The filmed rough cut that emerged was over four hours in length. When simply editing the work was ruled out as impracticable, the script was rewritten and the film largely re-shot, producing a final cut of 2\u00bd hours. According to Frankenheimer, he had an option in the 1950s to make a television adaption of the Stroud story, but CBS was warned off by the Federal Bureau of Prisons, and the project was dropped.\n\"The Manchurian Candidate\" (1962).\nFrankenheimer's 1962 political thriller \"The Manchurian Candidate\" is widely regarded as his most remarkable cinematic work. Biographer Gerald Prately observes that \u201cthe impact of this film was enormous. With it, John Frankenheimer became a force to be reckoned with in contemporary cinema; it established him as the most artistic, realistic and vital filmmaker at work in America or elsewhere.\u201d\nFrankenheimer and producer George Axelrod bought Richard Condon's 1959 novel after it had already been turned down by many Hollywood studios. After Frank Sinatra committed to the film, they secured backing from United Artists. The plot centers on Korean War veteran Raymond Shaw, part of a prominent political family. Shaw is brainwashed by Chinese and Russian captors after his Army platoon are imprisoned. He returns to civilian life in the United States, where he becomes an unwitting \u201csleeper\u201d assassin in an international communist conspiracy to subvert and overthrow the U.S. government.\nThe film co-starred Laurence Harvey (as Sergeant Raymond Shaw), Janet Leigh, James Gregory and John McGiver. Angela Lansbury, as the mother and controller to her \u201csleeper\u201d assassin son, garnered an Academy Award nomination for a \u201criveting\u201d performance\u201d in \u201cthe greatest screen role of her career.\u201d Frank Sinatra, as Major Bennett Marco, who reverses Shaw's mind control mechanisms and exposes the conspiracy, delivers perhaps his most satisfactory film performance.\nFrankenheimer declared that both technically and conceptually, he had \u201ccomplete control\u201d over the production.\nThe technical \u201cfluency\u201d exhibited in \"The Manchurian Candidate\" reveals Frankenheimer's struggle to convey this Cold War narrative. Film historian Andrew Sarris remarked that the director was \u201cobviously sweating over his technique...instead of building sequences, Frankenheimer explodes them prematurely, preventing his films from coming together coherently.\u201d \"The Manchurian Candidate\", nonetheless, conveys the \u201cparanoia and delirium of the Cold War years\u201d through its documentary-style mise-en-sc\u00e8ne. A demonstration of Frankenheimer's bravura direction and \u201cvisual inventiveness\u201d appears in the notable brainwashing sequence, presenting the sinister proceedings from the perspective of both the perpetrator and victim. The complexity of the sequence and its antecedents in television are described by film critic Stephen Bowie:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u201cThe famous brainwashing sequence in which Frankenheimer moves seamlessly between an objective perspective (captured soldiers in a communist seminar) and a subjective one (the soldiers attending an innocuous meeting of the Ladies\u2019 Garden Society). This \"tour de force\" was a pure distillation of Frankenheimer's television technique, opening with a self-conscious 360-degree pan that utilised the \u2018wild\u2019 sets which allowed TV cameras to move into seemingly impossible positions.\u201d\nIn 1968, Frankenheimer acknowledged that the methods he used on television were \u201cthe same kind of style I used on \"The Manchurian Candidate\". It was the first time I had the assurance and self-confidence to go back to what I had been really good at in television.\u201d Compositionally, Frankenheimer concentrates his actors into \u201clong lens\u201d menage, in which dramatic interactions occur at close-up, mid-shot and long-shot, a configuration that he repeated \u201cobsessively.\u201d Film critic Stepen Bowie observes that \u201cthis style meant that Frankenheimer's early output became a cinema of exactitude rather than spontaneity.\u201d\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u201cMore and more I think that our society is being manipulated and controlled...the most important aspect is that [in 1962] this country was just recovering from the McCarthy era and nothing had ever been filmed about it. I wanted to do a picture that showed how ludicrous the whole McCarthy far-Right syndrome was and how dangerous the far-Left syndrome is...\"The Manchurian Candidate\" dealt with the McCarthy era, the whole idea of fanaticism, the far-Right and the far-Left being really the same thing, and the idiocy of it. I wanted to show that and I think we did.\u201d- John Frankenheimer in Gerald Pratley's \"The Cinema of John Frankenheimer\" (1969)\n\"The Manchurian Candidate\" was released in the post-Red Scare period of the early 1960s, when anti-Communist political ideology still prevailed. Just one month after the film's release, the John F. Kennedy administration was in the midst of the Cuban Missile Crisis and nuclear brinkmanship with the Soviet Union.\nThat Frankenheimer and screenwriter Axelrod persisted in the production is a measure of their political liberalism, in a historical period when, according to biographer Gerald Pratley, \u201cit was clearly dangerous to speak of politics in the out-spoken, satiric vein that characterized this picture.\u201d Film critic David Walsh adds that \u201cthe level of conviction and urgency\u201d that informs \"The Manchurian Candidate\", reflects \u201cthe relative confidence and optimism American liberals felt in the early 1960s.\u201d\nFrankenheimer's \u201cterrifying parable\u201d of the American political milieu was sufficiently well-received to avoid its summary rejection by distributors.\n\"The Manchurian Candidate\", due to its subject matter and its proximity to the Kennedy assassination is inextricably linked to that event. Frankenheimer acknowledged as much when, in 1968, he described \"The Manchurian Candidate\" as \"a horribly prophetic film. It's frightening what's happened in our country since that film was made.\"\nAfter completing \"The Manchurian Candidate\", Frankenheimer recalls that he was determined to continue filmmaking: \u201cI wanted to initiate the project, I wanted to have full control, I never wanted to go back to be hired as a director again.\u201d He was offered a contract to direct a biopic about French singer Edith Piaf, with Natalie Wood in the starring role. He emphatically rejected the offer when he learned that Piaf's songs would be sung in English, rather than in the original French.\nIn 1963, Frankenheimer and screenwriter George Axelrod were introduced to the producer Edward Lewis, considering a TV production concerning the American Civil Liberties Union. When the project was deemed too expensive for television, Frankenheimer was approached by actor and producer Kirk Douglas, who was an associate of Lewis, to purchase and adapt to film the novel \"Seven Days in May\" by Fletcher Knebel and Charles W. Bailey II.\n\"Seven Days in May\" (1964).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u201cTelevision screens, glimpsed throughout \"Seven Days in May\", are one of the most recognisable Frankenheimer trademarks...Frankenheimer became the first filmmaker to acknowledge television's roles in modern society as an intrusion upon privacy and as a tool by which the powerful manipulate others.\u201d\u2014Film critic Stephen Bowie in \"John Frankenheimer\" Senses of Cinema (2006)\n\"Seven Days in May\" (1964), based closely on Fletcher Knebel and Charles W. Bailey II's best-selling novel and a screenplay by Rod Serling, dramatizes an attempted military coup d\u2019\u00e9tat in the United States, set in 1974. The perpetrators are led by General James M. Scott (Burt Lancaster), chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS), a virulently anti-Communist authoritarian. When US President Jordan Lyman (Fredric March) negotiates a nuclear disarmament treaty with the Soviet Union\u2014an act that Scott considers treasonable\u2014Scott mobilizes his military cabal. Operating at a remote base in West Texas, they prepare to commandeer the nation's communication networks and seize control of Congress. When Scott's JCS aide Colonel Martin \u201cJiggs\u201d Casey (Kirk Douglas) discovers the planned coup, he is appalled, and convinces President Lyman as to the gravity of the threat. Lyman mobilizes his own governmental loyalists, and a clash over Constitutional principles between Lyman and Scott plays out in the Oval Office, with the President denouncing the General as a traitor to the US Constitution. When Scott is exposed publicly, his military supporters abandon him, and the conspiracy collapses. Frankenheimer points to the topical continuity of his political thrillers:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u201c\"Seven Days in May\" was as important to me as \"The Manchurian Candidate\". I felt that the voice of the military was much too strong...the General MacArthur syndrome was very much in evidence...\"Seven Days in May\" was the opportunity to illustrate what a tremendous force the military-industrial complex is...we did not ask the Pentagon for co-operation because we knew we wouldn't get it.\u201d\nThe character of General Scott has been identified by film historians as a composite of two leading military and political figures: Curtis LeMay and Edwin Walker. The film places great emphasis on the sanctity of US Constitutional norms as a bulwark against encroachments by anti-democratic elements in the United States. Biographer Gerald Pratley writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u201cAn aspect to admire is Frankenheimer's use of speeches given by President Lyman. Scoffed by some critics as [reflecting] \u2018respectable, liberal lines\u2019, they are delivered by March with complete naturalism at times where they are logically called for, and with great honesty and conviction. They restate familiar [Constitutional] principles...Frankenheimer handles them pointedly but never in a propagandistic way\u2026\u201d\nFilm critic Joanne Laurier adds that \u201cscreenwriter Rod Serling and Frankenheimer's major theme is the need for the military to be subordinated to elected civilian rule.\u201d As visual emphasis \u201cthe opening credits of \"Seven Days in May\" roll over an image of the original 1787 draft of the Constitution of the United States.\n\"Seven Days in May\" has been widely praised for the high caliber of the performances by the cast. Biographer Charles Higham writes that \u201cthe film is played with extraordinary skill, proving that Frankenheimer's intensity communicated itself successfully to his actors.\u201d\nFrankenheimer, a former Air Force officer who worked briefly in the Pentagon, anticipated hostility from the military establishment to the premise of \"Seven Days in May\". Indeed, internal memos circulated in the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) registering alarm that \"Seven Days in May\" could potentially damage the bureau's reputation. Film critics Joanne Laurier and David Walsh report that \"The military and FBI took a very definite note of Seven Days in May, revealing their intense sensitivity to such criticism. A memo uncovered in Ronald Reagan's FBI file reveals that the bureau was concerned the film would be used as Communist propaganda and was therefore \u2018harmful to our Armed Forces and Nation.\u2019\" President Kennedy personally expressed approval for the film adaption, and his Press Secretary Pierre Salinger permitted Frankenheimer to view the Oval Office so as to sketch its interior.\n\"Seven Days in May\", filmed in the summer of 1963, was scheduled for release in December that year, but was delayed due to the assassination of President John F. Kennedy in November. The release of director Stanley Kubrick's satire \"Dr. Strangelove\" (1964) was similarly postponed.\nFrankenheimer recognized the \u201cprophetic\u201d aspects of his \"The Manchurian Candidate\" (1962), a film that examines conspiratorial political assassinations. The historical context in which \"Seven Days in May\" appeared inevitably links it to the 1963 Kennedy assassination. Film critic David Walsh makes the connection explicit: \u201cBy the time \"Seven Days in May\" reached movie theaters, Kennedy had been assassinated, in an operation widely believed to have been organized by those with CIA or military connections.\u201d\n\"Seven Days in May\" was well received by critics and movie-goers.\n\"The Train\" (1964).\nIn early 1964, Frankenheimer was reluctant to embark upon another film project due to fatigue: \"\"The Train\" is a film I had no intention of ever doing [and was] not a subject that I cared that much about...I'd just finished \"Seven Days in May\" (1964). I was quite tired.\"\nAdapted from the novel \"Le Front de l'Art: D\u00e9fense des collections fran\u00e7aises, 1939\u20131945\" by Rose Valland, the documentary-styled picture examines the desperate struggle by the French Resistance to intercept a train loaded with priceless art treasures and sabotage it before Wehrmacht officers could escape with it to Nazi Germany. The film dramatizes a contest of wills between French railway inspector Labiche (Burt Lancaster) and German art connoisseur Colonel von Waldheim (Paul Scofield), tasked with seizing the art work. Shooting for \"The Train\" had commenced in France when filmmaker Arthur Penn, originally enlisted to direct the adaptation, was dismissed by actor-producer Lancaster, allegedly over personal incompatibility and irreconcilable interpretive differences.\nFrankenheimer, who had successfully directed Lancaster on three previous films, consented to replace Penn, but with grave reservations, considering the screenplay \u201calmost appalling\u201d and noting that \u201cthe damn train didn't leave the station until p. 140.\u201d Frankenheimer postponed production of \"Seconds\" (1966) to accommodate Lancaster's production.\nFilming for \"The Train\" was temporarily shut down and the existing footage discarded. Frankenheimer, in collaboration with screenwriters Nedrick Young (uncredited), Franklin Coen, Frank Davis and Walter Bernstein framed an entirely new script that combined suspense, intrigue and action, reflecting Lancaster's prerequisites.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u201cThe point I wanted to make [in \"The Train\"] was that no work of art is worth a human life. That's what the film is about. I feel that very deeply. But to say that the film is a statement of a theme like that is really being unfair to the film...the lives of people, what they do and how they think, feel and behave, is in itself important...Honesty and reality are reflected in people's attitudes-without individuals having to perform great deeds or being great heroes or villains proclaiming great messages about life...\"The Train\" is this kind of movie.\u201d\u2014John Frankenheimer in Gerald Pratley's \"The Cinema of John Frankenheimer\" (1969).\nFrankenheimer inserts an ethical question into the narrative: Is it justified to sacrifice a human life to save a work of art? His controversial answer was emphatically, no. Film critic Stephen Bowie observes \u201c\u201cFrankenheimer's thesis\u2014that human life has more value than art\u2014may seem simplistic, but it adds an essential moral component to what would otherwise be just an expensive live-action version of an electric train set.\u201d \"The Train\" is lauded for its documentary-like realism and Frankenheimer's masterful integration of the human narrative with its tour-de-force action scenes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Smashing up trains was easy to do. It's every boy's childhood fantasy. There isn't a child who ever owned an electric train, who didn't want to do a wreck with it, putting a car across the track and sending an engine into it. Well of course, we did just that.\u201d\u2014John Frankenheimer in Gerald Pratley's \"The Cinema of John Frankenheimer\" (1969).\n Biographer Gerald Pratley offers this appraisal of Frankenheimer's handling of the complex series of train sequences, discerning the influence of Soviet director Sergei Eisenstein:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u201cFrankenheimer's expert sense of narrative carries the events along with ever mounting drama and excitement, and at times overwhelming tragedy as men are shot and killed...he can wreck trains and stage air raids, and yet he sustains his characters on a high level of interest...Frankenheimer's insistence on using natural backgrounds gives a tremendous feeling of reality to the film. The stark, dramatic outlines of the camouflaged armored locomotive emerging from the sheds is worthy of Eisenstien; the chase into the tunnel showing the locomotive stopping inches from the opening, and the engineer pulling on the whistle chain, is masterly.\u201d\nFilm critic Tim Palen elaborates on Frankenheimer's technical expertise in \"The Train\": \u201cThe director makes excellent use of wide angle lenses, long tracking shots, and extreme close-ups whilst maintaining depth of field...deliberately ensures that elaborate camera movement and cutting was planned so that \u2018logistically you knew where each train was,\u2019 in relation to the action.\u201d \"The Train\" exemplifies the centrality of technical applications that began to characterize Frankenheimer's approach to film in the late 1960s \u201cbrandishing style for its own sake.\u201d\n\"The Train\"\u2019s original screenplay received an Academy Award nomination. It had cost $6.7 million. and was one of the 13 most popular films in the UK in 1965.\n\"Seconds\" (1966).\n\"Seconds\", based on a novel by David Ely and with a screenplay by Lewis John Carlino, presents a surreal and disturbing tale of a disillusioned corporate executive, Arthur Hamilton (John Randolph). In an effort to escape his empty existence, he submits to a traumatic surgical procedure that transforms his body into that of a younger man, Tony Wilson (Rock Hudson). Randolph's effort to erase his former self in a new persona proves futile and leads to his horrific demise. Biographer Gerald Pratley describes \"Seconds\" as \u201ca cold, grey, frightening picture of a dehumanized world...based on the age-old search for eternal youth...an amalgam of mystery, horror and science fiction\u2026\u201d\nFrankenheimer explained his thematic objectives:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u201cAn individual is what he is, and he has to live with his life. He cannot change anything, and all of today's literature and films about escapism are just rubbish because you cannot and should not ever escape from what you are. Your experience is what makes you the person that you are...That's really what the film is about. It's also about this nonsense in society that you must always be young, this accent on youth in advertising...I wanted to make a matter-of-fact yet horrifying portrait of big business that will do anything for anybody providing you are willing to pay for it [and] the belief that all you need to do in life is to be financially successful.\u201d\nFrankenheimer acknowledged his difficulty in casting for the elderly and demoralized Arthur Hamilton, which required the director to convincingly show his metamorphosis, both surgically and physiologically, into the youthful and artistic Tony Wilson. A dual role played by a single actor was considered, with Frankenheimer advocating for British actor Laurence Olivier. Paramount rejected this in favor of two players, in which one actor (Randolph) undergoes a radical transformation to emerge with the appearance and identity of the other (Hudson). Rock Hudson's portrayal of Wilson introduced a troubling plausibility issue that Frankenheimer fully recognized: \u201cWe knew we were going to have a terrible time getting audiences to believe that the man who went into the operating room (Randolph) could emerge as Rock Hudson, citing the physical disparity between the actors as problematic. Film historian Gerald Pratley concurs: \u201cthe weakness [in \"Seconds\"] is trying to convince audiences that the actor playing Hamilton could emerge, after plastic surgery, as Wilson in the form of Rock Hudson. This is where the star system has worked against Frankeheimer.\u201d\nFrankenheimer identified the source of the film's weakness less as the physical disparities in his actors, and more as his difficulties in conveying the themes required to explain Wilson's inability to adjust socially to his new life: \"We thought we had shown why [Wilson] failed, but after the film was finished I realized we had not.\"\nFrankenheimer's technical prowess is on display in \"Seconds\", where the director and his cameraman James Wong Howe experimented with various lenses, including the 9.5\u00a0mm fisheye lens to achieve the \"distortion and exaggeration\" that would dramatize Hamilton's struggle to \"break free of his emotional straightjacket\".\nHowe and Frankenheimer's use of visual distortions are central to revealing his character's hallucinatory mental states, and according to Frankenheimer \u201calmost psychedelic\u201d. In one scene, a total of four Arriflexes are brought to bear to emphasis Hamilton's sexual impotency with his estranged wife. Film historian Peter Wilshire considers Frankenheimer's choice of James Wong Howe as cameraman for the project was his \u201cmost important directional decision.\u201d Howe was nominated at the Academy Awards in Best Cinematography for his efforts.\nAt Frankenheimer's urging, Paramount executives agreed to enter \"Seconds\" at the 1966 Cannes Film Festival, hoping the film might confer prestige on the studio and enhance box office returns. On the contrary, Seconds was savaged by European critics at the film competition, regarding it as misanthropic and \u201ccruel\u201d. Frankenheimer recalled \u201cit was a disaster\u201d and declined to attend the festival's post-preview press conference. In the aftermath of this fiasco, Paramount withdraw promotional resources, and \"Seconds\" failed at the box office. As consolation for its critical and commercial failures, \"Seconds\" was ultimately rewarded with a cult following among cineastes.\nCritical appraisal of the film has varied widely. Gerald Pratley, in 1968, declares that \"Seconds\", despite its poor reception in 1966, will one day be recognized as \u201ca masterpiece.\u201d Film critic Peter Wilshire offers qualified praise: \u201cIn spite of its obvious weaknesses, \"Seconds\" is an extremely complex, innovative, and ambitious film.\u201d Brian Baxter disparages \"Seconds\" as \u201cembarrassing...unconvincing, even as science fiction.\u201d and critic David Walsh considers \"Seconds\" \u201cparticularly wrongheaded, strained and foolish.\u201d Biographer Charles Higham writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; \u201c\"Seconds\", superbly shot by James Wong Howe...fails to achieve the political portrait of the California rich which would have made it a triumph. The important central passages at Malibu have all the softness of a dream-come-true. By conspiring with his own target, Frankenheimer shows that corruption has crept up on him. Not even a powerful climax\u2014the hero preferring death in New York to \u2018life\u2019 in Malibu, returning to be killed in a horrifying operating room scene\u2014alters the fact that the film has been compromised.\u201d\n\"Grand Prix\" (1966).\nBy the mid-sixties, Frankenheimer had emerged as one of Hollywood's leading directors. As such, M-G-M provided lavish financing for \"Grand Prix\" (1966), Frankenheimer's first color film and shot in 70mm Cinerama. A former amateur race car driver himself, he approached the project with genuine enthusiasm.\nThe screenplay by Robert Alan Aurthur and an uncredited Frankenheimer, concerns the professional and personal fortunes of Formula One racer Pete Aron (James Garner) during an entire season of competitive racing. The action climaxes at Monza, where Aron, Scott Stoddard (Brian Bedford), Jean Pierre Sarti (Yves Montand) and Nino Barlini (Antonio Sab\u00e0to Sr.) compete for the championship, with tragic results.\nWishing to craft a highly realistic rendering of racing and its milieu, he assembled a panoply of innovative film techniques with ingenious apparatus and special effects. Working closely with cinematographer Lionel Lindon, Frankenheimer mounted cameras directly onto the race cars, eliminating process shots and providing audiences with a driver's-eye view of the action. \nFrankenheimer incorporated split-screens to juxtapose documentary-like interviews of the racers with high-speed action shots on the track. Frankenheimer explains his use of the \u201chydrogen cannon\u201d:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u201cThe special effects, the accidents, were very hard to do. I had an excellent special effects man, Milton Rice, who devised a hydrogen cannon which worked on the principle of a pea shooter. The car was attached to a shaft and when the hydrogen exploded the car was literally propelled through the air like a projectile at about 125 to 135 miles an hour and you could aim it anywhere you wanted it to go. And all the wrecks were done that way. They were real cars. No models at all. Everything was very real. And that's why it was good\u2026\u201d\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u201cI'm not saying it's my best film. But it is certainly one of the most satisfactory film I\u2019ve made...to be able to indulge your fantasies with ten-and-a-half million dollars is, I think, marvelous.\u201d\u2014John Frankenheimer on \"Grand Prix\" in Gerald Pratley's \"The Cinema of John Frankenheimer\"(1969)\nCharacterized largely by Frankenheimer's bravura application of his striking cinematic style, \"Grand Prix\" has been termed \u201clargely a technical exercise\u201d by film critic David Walsh and \u201cbrandishing style for its own sake\u201d according to The Film Encyclopedia. Film historian Andrew Sarris observed that Frankenheimer's style had \u201cdegenerated into an all-embracing academicism, a veritable glossary of film techniques.\u201d\nA commercial success, \"Grand Prix\" garnered three Oscars at the Academy Awards for Best Sound Effects (by Gordon Daniel), Best Editing (Henry Berman, Stu Linder and Frank Santillo), and for Best Sound Recording (Franklin Milton and Roy Charman).\n\"The Extraordinary Seaman\" (1969).\nFrankenheimer's first foray into \u201clight comedy\u201d represents a major departure from his often dystopian and dramatic work addressing social issues and his big budget action films. \"The Extraordinary Seaman\" presents a menagerie of misfit characters set in the final days of World War II in the Pacific theatre. British Lt. Commander Finchhaven, RN (David Niven), a ghost, is condemned to a Flying Dutchman-like existence, roaming the seas in his ship \"Curmudgeon\" in search of redemption for his shameful ineptitude during a World War I combat mission. During World War II, the \"Curmudgeon\" is chartered, then beached on a remote Pacific Island by party goers. Four castaway American sailors stumble upon the unseaworthy vessel: Lt. Morton Krim (Alan Alda), Cook 3/C W.W. J. Oglethorpe (Mickey Rooney), Gunner's Mate Orville Toole (Jack Carter) and Seaman 1/C Lightfoot Star (Manu Tupou). Jennifer Winslow (Faye Dunaway), the proprietor of a jungle garage, provides supplies to repair the derelict \"Curmudgeon\" for passage off the island. Commander Finchaven enlists the largely incompetent crew to seek out and sink a Japanese battleship and thus vindicate his family honor. The 79-minute picture depicts the crew's subsequent \u201chazards and misadventures.\u201d \n\"The Extraordinary Seaman\", based on a screenplay and story by Phillip Rock, is a spoof of war-time conventions and clich\u00e9s which integrates newsreel clips from the period for comic effect.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n \u201cI don't think you can make an anti-war film by killing a lot of people and by showing \u2018how horrible war is\u2019 in the last five minutes after you\u2019ve had two hours of fun with machine guns and bombs...I mean, one of the most atrocious war films ever made is \"The Green Berets\" (1968). I'm against violence like this...I think it's totally wrong that at the end of it they try to justify all this violence by some pretentious statement. I will not make a film like that. I don't believe in it.\u201d\u2014John Frankenheimer in Gerald Pratley's \"The Cinema of John Frankenheimer\" (1969)\nFrankenheimer engages in a mock-heroic burlesque, titling the film's episodes \u201cGrand Alliance\u201d, \u201cThe Gathering Storm\u201d, \u201cTheir Finest Hour\u201d, The Hinge of Fate\u201d and \u201cTriumph and Tragedy\u201d, borrowed from Winston Churchill's post-war memoirs.\nFilmed during the Vietnam War, film historian Gerald Pratley discerns \u201ca strong thematic relationship\u201d between Frankenheimer's opposition to US invasion of Indo-China and \"The Extraordinary Seaman\". Frankenheimer recalls that he and screenwriter Phillip Rock \u201cdecided we could really use this premise [of a ghostly naval officer] to make an anti-war statement. I think we did, and it terrified MGM.\"\nMetro-Goldwyn-Mayer delayed the release of the film for two years, reportedly due its poor response among critics and \u201cdismal screenings\u201d, though Frankenheimer attributes the delay to legalities obtaining release of historic newsreel footage. The studio made only perfunctory efforts to promote and exhibit the film after \"The Extraordinary Seaman\"'s poor critical reviews and weak box-office response.\n\"The Fixer\" (1968).\nFrankenheimer approached his film adaption of Bernard Malamud's \"The Fixer\" with alacrity, obtaining the galleys for the 1966 novel in advance of its publication. \"The Fixer\" is based on the 1913 persecution and trial of the Jewish peasant Menahem Mendel Beilis, accused of Blood Libel during the reign of Czar Nicholas II\n\"The Fixer\" was widely praised by movie critics for Frankenheimer's success in eliciting outstanding performances from Alan Bates as the brutalized Yakov Shepsovitch Bok, Dirk Bogarde as Boris Bibikov, his humane court appointed defense attorney, and David Warner as Count Odoevsky. Minister of Justice. Bates received his only Academy Award nomination for Best Actor in this role. Renata Adler of \"The New York Times\" observed \"the direction, by John Frankenheimer, is powerful and discreet. It averts its eyes at the easy, ugly consummations of violence...and gives you credit for imagining the result.\" This, despite Frankenheimer's admission that \"there is a very violent scene in \"The Fixer\"\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"You have to show what this man [Bok] went through in five years of prison, and what his captors did to him. The executives at Metro were worried about this one scene. They said \u2018with the climate of today it is dangerous to show this.\u2019 I said \u2018it has to be in there.\u2019 This is the scene where the Russians come and beat him for refusing to be converted to Christianity...it is not a scene of violence just put there for its own sake. I hope the audience feels this...I don't believe in violence for the sake of exploitation.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u201c\"The Fixer\" investigates the fact that the victory Yakov Bok won was being brought to trial...the Minister of Justice, Count Odoevsky, offers Bok a pardon. And Bok says \u2018no\u2019...That, I think, is probably the best scene in the film...\"The Fixer\" is about the dignity of a human being who never knew he had this strength in him, and suddenly finds it within him...Bok is not a [literary] man. He's a peasant and you see this great strength developed within him. That's what the film is about. It has nothing to do with the fact that he is a Jew. It could be any man, any time, anywhere...I think this is a very good story to tell.\u201d\u2014John Frankenheimer in Gerald Pratley's \"The Cinema of John Frankenheimer\" (1969)\nWhereas Frankenheimer was deeply gratified with his cinematic handling of Malamud's Pulitzer Prize\u2013winning work, declaring \"I feel better about \"The Fixer\" than anything I've ever done in my life\", a number of movie critics registered severe critiques. Film critic Roger Ebert wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Frankenheimer's task was to make a film that, in itself, would make a moral statement. He has failed. The film has little reality of its own; instead, it draws its power and emotion from the raw material of its subject matter...The temptation is to praise the film because we agree with its message. This is the same critical fallacy that led to praise of \"Judgment at Nuremberg\" (1961)\u2014a corrupt, commercial film\u2014because we disapproved of Nazi war crimes, A movie doesn't become good simply by taking the correct ideological position.\"\nEbert adds: \"What were needed were fewer self-conscious humanistic speeches... Frankenheimer should have shown us his hero's suffering, and the Kafkaesque legal tortures of the state, without commenting on them.\"\nFilm critic Renata Adler singles out screenwriter and blacklist victim Dalton Trumbo for disparagement:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAdler concludes: \"it is not enough to put [Bok-Bates] in a few clich\u00e9 predicaments...[the dialogue] becomes demeaning and vulgar when drawn out with hack-plot fiction approximations of eloquence.\" Biographer Charles Higham dismisses the film, writing that \"since the commercial failure of \"Seconds\" (1966), Frankenheimer's films have been mediocre, ranging from \"The Fixer\" (1968) to \"The Horsemen\" (1971).\"\nFrankenheimer became a close friend of Senator Robert F. Kennedy during the making of \"The Manchurian Candidate\" in 1962. In 1968, Kennedy, who hoped to become the Democratic presidential candidate that year, asked him to make some commercials for use in the presidential campaign. On the night the Senator was assassinated in June 1968, Frankenheimer had driven him from Los Angeles Airport to the Ambassador Hotel for his acceptance speech.\n\"The Gypsy Moths\" was a romantic drama about a troupe of barnstorming skydivers and their impact on a small midwestern town. The celebration of Americana starred Frankenheimer regular Lancaster, reuniting him with \"From Here to Eternity\" co-star Deborah Kerr, and it also featured Gene Hackman. The film failed to find an audience, but Frankenheimer claimed it was one of his favorites.\n1970s.\nFrankenheimer followed this with \"I Walk the Line\" in 1970. The film, starring Gregory Peck and Tuesday Weld, about a Tennessee sheriff who falls in love with a moonshiner's daughter, was set to songs by Johnny Cash. Frankenheimer's next project took him to Afghanistan. \"The Horsemen\" focused on the relationship between a father and son, played by Jack Palance and Omar Sharif. Sharif's character, an expert horseman, played the Afghan national sport of buzkashi.\n\"Impossible Object\", also known as \"Story of a Love Story\", suffered distribution difficulties and was not widely released. Next came a four-hour film of O'Neill's \"The Iceman Cometh\", in 1973, starring Lee Marvin, and the decidedly offbeat \"99 and 44/100% Dead\", a crime black comedy starring Richard Harris.\nWith his fluent French and knowledge of French culture, Frankenheimer was asked to direct \"French Connection II\", set entirely in Marseille. With Hackman reprising his role as New York cop Popeye Doyle, the film was a success and got Frankenheimer his next job. \"Black Sunday\", based on author Thomas Harris's only non-Hannibal Lecter novel up to that point, involves an Israeli Mossad agent (Robert Shaw) chasing a pro-Palestinian terrorist (Marthe Keller) and a PTSD-afflicted Vietnam vet (Bruce Dern), who plan a spectacular mass murder involving the Goodyear Blimp which flies over the Super Bowl. It was shot on location at the actual Super Bowl X in January 1976 in Miami, with the use of a real Goodyear Blimp. The film tested very highly, and Paramount and Frankenheimer had high expectations for it, but it was not a hit (with Paramount blaming the failure on the special effects work in the climax, and Universal Studios releasing the similarly themed thriller \"Two-Minute Warning\" only six months prior).\nIn 1977, Carter DeHaven hired Frankenheimer to direct William Sackheim and Michael Kozoll's screenplay for \"First Blood\". After considering Michael Douglas, Powers Boothe, and Nick Nolte for the role of John Rambo, Frankenheimer cast Brad Davis. He also cast George C. Scott as Colonel Trautman. However, the production was abandoned after Orion Pictures acquired its distributor Filmways, and Sackheim and Kozoll's script would be rewritten by Sylvester Stallone as the basis for Ted Kotcheff's 1982 film.\nFrankenheimer is quoted in Champlin's biography as saying that his alcohol problem caused him to do work that was below his own standards on \"Prophecy\" (1979), an ecological monster movie about a mutant grizzly bear terrorizing a forest in Maine.\n1980s.\nIn 1981, Frankenheimer travelled to Japan to shoot the cult martial-arts action film \"The Challenge\", with Scott Glenn and Japanese actor Toshiro Mifune. He told Champlin that his drinking became so severe while shooting in Japan that he actually drank on set, which he had never done before, and as a result he entered rehab on returning to America. The film was released in 1982, along with his HBO television adaptation of the acclaimed play \"The Rainmaker\".\nIn 1985, Frankenheimer directed an adaptation of the Robert Ludlum bestseller \"The Holcroft Covenant\", starring Michael Caine. That was followed the next year with another adaptation, \"52 Pick-Up\", from the novel by Elmore Leonard. \"Dead Bang\" (1989) followed Don Johnson as he infiltrated a group of white supremacists. In 1990, he returned to the Cold War political thriller genre with \"The Fourth War\" with Roy Scheider (with whom Frankenheimer had worked previously on \"52 Pick-Up\") as a loose cannon Army colonel drawn into a dangerous personal war with a Soviet officer. It was not a commercial success.\n1990s.\nMost of his 1980s films were less than successful, both critically and financially, but Frankenheimer was able to make a comeback in the 1990s by returning to his roots in television. He directed two films for HBO in 1994: \"Against the Wall\" and \"The Burning Season\" that won him several awards and renewed acclaim. The director also helmed two films for Turner Network Television, \"Andersonville\" (1996) and \"George Wallace\" (1997), that were highly praised.\nFrankenheimer's 1996 film \"The Island of Doctor Moreau\", which he took over after the firing of original director Richard Stanley, was the cause of countless stories of production woes and personality clashes and received scathing reviews. Frankenheimer was said to be unable to stand Val Kilmer, the young co-star of the film and whose disruption had reportedly led to the removal of Stanley half a week into production. When Kilmer's last scene was completed, Frankenheimer reportedly said, \"Now get that bastard off my set.\" He also stated, \"There are two things I will never ever do in my whole life: I will never climb Mt. Everest and I will never work with Val Kilmer ever again.\" The veteran director also professed that \"Will Rogers never met Val Kilmer\". In an interview, Frankenheimer refused to discuss the film, saying only that he had a miserable time making it.\nHowever, his next film, 1998's \"Ronin\", starring Robert De Niro, was a return to form, featuring Frankenheimer's now trademark elaborate car chases woven into a labyrinthine espionage plot. Co-starring an international cast including Jean Reno and Jonathan Pryce, it was a critical and box-office success. As the 1990s drew to a close, he even had a rare acting role, appearing in a cameo as a U.S. general in \"The General's Daughter\" (1999). He earlier had an uncredited cameo as a TV director in his 1977 film \"Black Sunday\".\nLast years and death.\nFrankenheimer's last theatrical film, 2000's \"Reindeer Games\", starring Ben Affleck, underperformed. In 2001, he worked on the BMW action short-film \"Ambush\" for the promotional series \"The Hire\", starring Clive Owen. Frankenheimer's final film, \"Path to War\" (2002) for HBO was nominated for numerous awards. A look back at the Vietnam War, it starred Michael Gambon as President Lyndon Johnson along with Alec Baldwin and Donald Sutherland.\nFrankenheimer was scheduled to direct \"\", but it was announced before filming started that he was withdrawing, citing health concerns. Paul Schrader replaced him. About a month later he died suddenly in Los Angeles, California, from a stroke due to complications following spinal surgery at the age of 72.\nPolitics.\nFrankenheimer was born into a politically conservative family and attended a Catholic military academy. He served as a junior officer in the US Air Force during the Korean War. In his youth, he briefly considered entering the priesthood.\nHe came of age during the height of the Red Scare and the Anti-Communist House Un-American Activities Committee investigations during the early 1950s, a period that saw the blacklisting of left-wing filmmakers and screenwriters by the Hollywood studios. Frankenheimer's early liberal political sensibilities first manifested themselves in disputes with his conservative father, a stockbroker:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When I was in high school, I started disagreeing a lot with my father on politics, because he was really very conservative. He really wanted the status quo, and I didn't want the status quo. The whole racial question really, really bothered me. I came from New York, and one of my first girlfriends was an African-American dancer. And this caused a furor of sorts within my family.\nFrankenheimer's \u201cliberal sensibility\u201d emerged professionally when he began his apprenticeship in the early TV industry:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When I got into live television [in 1952], there was the whole business of McCarthy\u2014you can't imagine how terrible that was. That really galvanized me into a political arena. And of course in live television it was very hard to do political stuff because there was the blacklist. You could do anything psychological, but nothing sociological.\nFilm critic David Walsh notes that \u201cany medium which emerged as the profit-driven property of large American corporations and under the close scrutiny of the US authorities in the midst of the Cold War, with its anticommunism, conformism and generally stagnant intellectual climate, would inevitably be deformed by those processes...Frankenheimer worked and apparently thrived within this overall artistic and ideological framework.\u201d\nPolitical relationships with the Kennedys.\nIn a 1998 interview with film critic Alex Simon, Frankenheimer recalled that his first contact with Kennedy family politics occurred during the 1960 presidential campaigns: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I was probably the best-known television director around. And I was approached to do some work for John Kennedy. And I don't know...I was 30 years old. I was going through a divorce [with wife Carolyn Miller], and I just didn't want to deal with it, so I said no.\nIn light of Kennedy's assassination in November 1963, Frankenheimer lamented, \"Then he was killed, and I'd always felt guilty about not having done that work for him early on.\" \nDuring his filming of \"The Manchurian Candidate\" (1962), Frankenheimer reports that he and producer/screenwriter George Axelrod were anxious that the Kennedy administration might object to the plot, which graphically depicts an assassination attempt on a liberal presidential candidate by a right-wing conspiracy. When cast member Frank Sinatra, a personal friend of Kennedy, was sent to sound out his reaction to the film, Kennedy (who had read the Richard Condon novel) responded enthusiastically: \"I love \"The Manchurian Candidate\". Who's going to play the mother?\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u201c...There is no such thing as an unpolitical man. You have to take a stand in life. I was very impressed with and devoted to Senator Robert Kennedy. I believe in what he stood for...I arranged, supervised and directed all his television film appearances. I dedicated myself to that in full...his death was an irreplaceable loss...I think he represented everything that was good in this country. And there's been a terrible void since he was killed.\u201d - John Frankenheimer in Gerald Pratley's \"The Cinema of John Frankenheimer\" (1969)\nWhen Frankenheimer began pre-production on his political thriller \"Seven Days in May\" (1964) in the summer of 1963, he approached Kennedy's press secretary, Pierre Salinger, to arrange to film a segment on location in vicinity of the White House. The story concerns a political coup organized by a fascistic Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (played by Burt Lancaster) to depose the liberal president (played by Fredric March) and install a military dictatorship. Kennedy approved the picture and accommodated Frankenheimer by withdrawing to his home in Hyannisport for the weekend during the White House shoot.\nAs to whether Frankenheimer ever met Kennedy, the director offered contradictory versions. To biographer Gerald Pratley in 1968, Frankenheimer said, \"I never had the pleasure of meeting [JFK] personally\" but noted that Kennedy had fully supported the production of \"Seven Days in May\". In 1998, during an interview with film critic Alex Simon, Frankenheimer recalled that Kennedy purportedly said to Salinger, \"if it's John Frankenheimer [directing \"Seven Days in May\"] I want to meet him.\" Frankenheimer adds, \u201cSo I met him, went to a press conference with him. He was wonderful to me.\u201d\nFrankenheimer regarded Kennedy's assassination as a profound calamity for America: \u201cI think we lost our innocence as a country with John F. Kennedy's death.\u201d\nFilm critics Joanne Laurier and David Walsh observe that \u201cThe Kennedy assassination marked a historical turning point. One of its aims, in which it ultimately succeeded, was to shift US government policies to the right and intimidate political opposition.\u201d\nFrankenheimer's most significant bond with the Kennedys was his political and personal relationship with Senator Robert F. Kennedy, to whom he quickly committed his services during the 1968 presidential campaign: \u201cWhen [Robert Kennedy] declared his candidacy in '68, I immediately called [campaign manager] Pierre Salinger and said \u2018Pierre, I want to be part of this.\u2019\" \nFrankenheimer reports that he filmed Robert Kennedy's campaign appearances and coached the senator on improving his political persona, providing this support for Kennedy over three months in the spring of 1968.\nFrankenheimer was devastated by RFK's assassination in June 1968, due in part to his proximity to the event. Kennedy spent the night before the California primary in Frankenheimer's Malibu home. He had first been scheduled to accompany Kennedy through the Ambassador Hotel after the candidate's victory speech in the California primaries. Early news reports listed Frankenheimer as one of the wounded in Kennedy's entourage. Frankenheimer and spouse Evans Evans were waiting at a side entrance of the Ambassador Hotel to pick up Kennedy when he emerged from the press conference and drive him to their home. According to Frankenheimer, they witnessed police removing Sirhan Sirhan, later convicted of the shooting, from the premises, then discovered Kennedy had been mortally wounded.\nTraumatized by the event, Frankenheimer withdrew from politics, and after completing \"The Gypsy Moths\" (1969) moved to France to study the culinary arts. He recalled in 1998: \u201cYeah. I managed to finish one film, \"The Gypsy Moths\", but I just felt like 'What's the point? What does any of this really matter?' I mean, when you're a part of something like that and then all of the sudden it's taken away with just one bullet [snaps fingers]. It really makes you take stock in what's important...That's when I went to France, and that's when I went to Le Cordon Bleu, because I just had to do something else with my life, and I really couldn't go near politics for a long time after that.\u201d Walsh comments:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Frankenheimer's social concerns largely disappeared from his work for the next two decades. He became identified more and more as an \"action director\" with competent and uninspired works such as \"French Connection II\" (1975) and \"Black Sunday\" (1977). The first is memorable principally for the strain of violence, indeed sadistic violence, which appears in Frankenheimer's work. This reached something of a height in the grisly and pointless \"52 Pick-Up\" (1986) and endured in Frankenheimer's work through his final feature films, including \"Ronin\" (1998) and \"Reindeer Games\" (2000).\nArchive.\nThe moving image collection of John Frankenheimer is held at the Academy Film Archive.\nFilmography.\nTelevision.\nTV series\nTV movies\nPersonal life.\nHe was married to Carolyn Miller from 1954 to 1962, and they had two daughters, Elise and Kristi. He then married actress Evans Evans in 1963, and they remained married until his death in 2002 from a stroke due to complications following spinal surgery.\nAwards and nominations.\nBritish Academy Film Awards\nCannes Film Festival\nNew York Film Critics Circle Award\nVenice Film Festival\nFrankenheimer was also a member of the Television Hall of Fame, and was inducted in 2002.\nOscar-related Performances.\nThese actors have received Academy Award nominations for these respective roles in Frankenheimer's feature film.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16346", "revid": "49409179", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16346", "title": "John Jellicoe, 1st Earl Jellicoe", "text": "Royal Navy Admiral of the Fleet (1859\u20131935)\nAdmiral of the Fleet John Rushworth Jellicoe, 1st Earl Jellicoe, (5 December 1859 \u2013 20 November 1935) was a Royal Navy officer. He fought in the Anglo-Egyptian War and the Boxer Rebellion and commanded the Grand Fleet at the Battle of Jutland in May 1916 during the First World War. His handling of the fleet at that battle was controversial. Jellicoe made no serious mistakes and the German High Seas Fleet retreated to port, at a time when defeat would have been catastrophic for Britain, but the public was disappointed that the Royal Navy had not won a more dramatic victory given that they outnumbered the enemy. Jellicoe later served as First Sea Lord, overseeing the expansion of the Naval Staff at the Admiralty and the introduction of convoys, but was relieved at the end of 1917. He also served as the governor-general of New Zealand in the early 1920s.\nEarly life.\nJellicoe was born on 5 December 1859 in Southampton, Hampshire. Jellicoe was the son of John Henry Jellicoe, a captain in the Royal Mail Steam Packet Company, and Lucy Henrietta Jellicoe (n\u00e9e Keele). He was educated at Field House School in Rottingdean and aboard the training ship , which he joined as a naval cadet in 1872. He was made a midshipman in the steam frigate in September 1874 before transferring to the ironclad in the Mediterranean Fleet in July 1877. Promoted to sub-lieutenant on 5 December 1878, he joined , flagship of the Mediterranean Fleet, as signal sub-lieutenant in 1880. Promoted to lieutenant on 23 September 1880, he returned to HMS \"Agincourt\" in February 1881 and commanded a rifle company of the Naval Brigade at Ismailia during the Egyptian war of 1882. \nEarly career.\nJellicoe qualified as a gunnery officer in 1883 and was appointed to the staff of the gunnery school in May 1884. He joined the turret ship as gunnery officer in September 1885 and was awarded the Board of Trade Silver Medal for rescuing the crew of a capsized steamer near Gibraltar in May 1886. He joined the battleship in April 1886 and was put in charge of the experimental department at HMS \"Excellent\" in December 1886 before being appointed an assistant to the Director of Naval Ordnance in September 1889. \nPromoted to commander on 30 June 1891, Jellicoe joined the battleship in the Mediterranean Fleet in March 1892. He transferred to the battleship in 1893 (the flagship of the Commander-in-Chief of the Mediterranean Fleet, Vice Admiral Sir George Tryon) and was aboard when it collided with and sank off Tripoli in Lebanon on 22 June 1893. He was then appointed to the new flagship, , in October 1893. \nPromoted to captain on 1 January 1897, Jellicoe became a member of the Admiralty's Ordnance Committee. He served as captain of the battleship and chief of staff to Vice Admiral Sir Edward Seymour during the Seymour Expedition to relieve the legations at Peking during the Boxer Rebellion in June 1900. He was badly wounded during the Battle of Beicang and told he would die but confounded the attending doctor and chaplain by living. He was appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath and given the German Order of the Red Eagle, 2nd class, with Crossed Swords for services rendered in China. \"Centurion\" returned to the United Kingdom in August 1901, and was paid off the following month, when Captain Jellicoe and the crew went on leave. He became Naval Assistant to Third Naval Lord and Controller of the Navy in February 1902 and was given command of the armoured cruiser on the North America and West Indies Station in August 1903.\nNaval career.\nHigh command.\nAs a protege of Admiral John Fisher, Jellicoe became Director of Naval Ordnance in 1905 and, having been appointed a Commander of the Royal Victorian Order on the occasion of launching of on 10 February 1906, he was also made an Aide-de-Camp to the King on 8 March 1906. Promoted to rear admiral on 8 February 1907, he pushed hard for funds to modernise the navy, supporting the construction of new -type battleships and s. He supported F. C. Dreyer's improvements in gunnery fire-control systems, and favoured the adoption of Dreyer's \"Fire Control Table\", a form of mechanical computer for calculating firing solutions for warships. Jellicoe arranged for the output of naval ordnance to be transferred from the War Office to the Admiralty.\nJellicoe was appointed second-in-command of the Atlantic Fleet in August 1907, hoisting his flag in the battleship . He was appointed Knight Commander of the Royal Victorian Order on the occasion of the King's Review of the Home Fleet in the Solent on 3 August 1907. He went on to be Third Sea Lord and Controller of the Navy in October 1908 and, having taken part in the funeral of King Edward VII in May 1910, he became Commander-in-Chief, Atlantic Fleet in December 1910, hoisting his flag in the battleship . He advanced to Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath on the Coronation of King George V on 19 June 1911 and confirmed in the rank of vice admiral on 18 September 1911. He went on to be Second-in-Command of the Home Fleet, hoisting his flag in the battleship , in December 1911 and, having also been appointed commander of the 2nd Battle Squadron in May 1912, joined the Royal Commission on Fuel and Engines on 1 August 1912. He became Second Sea Lord in December 1912.\nFirst World War.\nAt the start of the First World War, the First Lord of the Admiralty Winston Churchill, removed Admiral George Callaghan, Commander-in-Chief of the Home Fleet (August 1914). Jellicoe was promoted to full admiral on 4 August 1914 and assigned command of the renamed Grand Fleet in Admiral Callaghan's place, though he was appalled by the treatment of his predecessor. He was advanced to Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath on 8 February 1915.\nWhen Fisher (First Sea Lord) and Churchill (First Lord of the Admiralty) both had to leave office (May 1915) after their quarrel over the Dardanelles, Jellicoe wrote to Fisher: \"We owe you a debt of gratitude for having saved the Navy from a continuance in office of Mr Churchill, and I hope that never again will any politician be allowed to usurp the functions that he took upon himself to exercise\".\nJellicoe commanded the British Grand Fleet at the Battle of Jutland in May 1916, the largest (and only major) clash of dreadnoughts, albeit an indecisive one. His handling of the Grand Fleet during the battle remains controversial, with some historians characterising Jellicoe as too cautious and other historians faulting the battlecruiser commander, Admiral David Beatty, for making various tactical errors. Jellicoe certainly made no significant mistakes during the battle: based on limited intelligence, he correctly deployed the Grand Fleet with a turn to port so as to \"cross the T\" of the German High Seas Fleet as it appeared. After suffering heavy damage from shells, the German fleet turned 180 degrees and headed away from the battle. At the time the British public expressed disappointment that the Royal Navy had not won a victory on the scale of the 1805 Battle of Trafalgar. Churchill described Jellicoe later as \"the only man on either side who could lose the war in an afternoon\" \u2013essentially hinting that Jellicoe's decision to prefer caution was strategically correct. He was appointed a member of the Order of Merit on 31 May 1916, advanced to Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order on 17 June 1916 and awarded the Grand Cross of the French Legion of Honour on 15 September 1916.\nFirst Sea Lord.\nJellicoe was appointed First Sea Lord in November 1916. His term of office saw Britain brought within danger of starvation by German unrestricted U-Boat warfare. \nAt the War Committee (a Cabinet Committee which discussed strategy in 1915\u201316) in November 1916, the admirals present, including Jellicoe, told Lloyd George that convoys presented too large a target for enemy ships, and that merchant ship masters lacked the discipline to \"keep station\" in a convoy. In February 1917, Maurice Hankey wrote a memorandum for Lloyd George calling for the introduction of \"scientifically organised convoys\", almost certainly after being persuaded by Commander Henderson and the Shipping Ministry officials with whom he was in contact. After a breakfast meeting (13 February 1917) with Lloyd George, Carson (First Lord of the Admiralty) and Admirals Jellicoe and Duff agreed to \"conduct experiments\". However, convoys were not in general use until August 1917, by which time shipping losses to U-boats were already falling from their April peak.\nJellicoe continued to take a pessimistic view, advising the War Policy Committee (a Cabinet Committee which discussed strategy in 1917) during planning meetings for the Third Ypres Offensive in June and July that nothing could be done to defeat the U-boats. However, removing Jellicoe in July, as Lloyd George wanted, would have been politically impossible given Conservative anger at the return of Churchill (still blamed for the Dardanelles) to office as Minister of Munitions. In August and September Lloyd George was preoccupied with Third Ypres and the possible transfer of resources to Italy, whilst the new First Lord of the Admiralty, Sir Eric Campbell Geddes, was reforming the Naval Staff (including creating a post for Wemyss as Deputy First Sea Lord). Geddes and Lloyd George met with Balfour and Carson (both former First Lords of the Admiralty) on 26 October to discuss sacking Jellicoe after he had failed to act on \"secret, but absolutely reliable\" information about a German attack on a Norwegian convoy, but again nothing came of this as Lloyd George was soon preoccupied by the Battle of Caporetto and the setting up of the Supreme War Council. Geddes wanted to return to his previous job in charge of military transportation in France, and by December it was clear that Lloyd George would have to sack Jellicoe or lose Geddes.\nJellicoe was rather abruptly dismissed by Geddes in December 1917. Before he left for leave on Christmas Eve he received a letter from Geddes demanding his resignation. Geddes' letter stated that he was still in the building and available to talk, but after consulting Admiral Halsey Jellicoe replied in writing that he would \"do what was best for the service\". The move became public knowledge two days later.\nThe Christmas holiday, when Parliament was not sitting, provided a good opportunity to remove Jellicoe with a minimum of fuss. Geddes squared matters with the King and with the Grand Fleet commander Admiral Beatty (who had initially written to Jellicoe of his \"dismay\" over his sacking and promised to speak to Geddes, but then did not write to him again for a month) over the holiday. The other Sea Lords talked of resigning (although Jellicoe advised them not to do so), especially when Geddes suggested in a meeting (31 December) that Balfour and Carson had specifically recommended Jellicoe's removal at the 26 October meeting; they had not done so, although Balfour's denial was less than emphatic. There was no trouble from the generals, who had a low opinion of Jellicoe. In the end the Sea Lords remained in place, whilst Carson remained a member of the War Cabinet, resigning in January over Irish Home Rule.\nAlthough it was pretended that the decision had been Geddes' alone, he let slip in the Naval Estimates debate (6 March 1918) that he had been conveying \"the decision of the Government\", i.e. of Lloyd George, who had never put the matter to the War Cabinet. MPs picked up on his slip immediately, and Bonar Law (Conservative Leader) admitted in the same debate that he too had had prior knowledge.\nAs First Sea Lord Jellicoe was awarded the Grand Cordon of the Belgian Order of Leopold on 21 April 1917, the Russian Order of St. George, 3rd Class on 5 June 1917, the Grand Cross of the Italian Military Order of Savoy on 11 August 1917 and the Grand Cordon of the Japanese Order of the Rising Sun on 29 August 1917.\nLater life.\nAfter war.\nJellicoe was created Viscount Jellicoe of Scapa Flow on 7 March 1918.\nAt the Supreme War Council at the start of June 1918, amidst concerns that\u2014following the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk\u2014the Germans were about to requisition the Russian Black Sea Fleet, Lloyd George proposed Jellicoe as Allied Supreme Naval Commander in the Mediterranean. The French were in favour of a combined Allied naval command, but the Italians were not, so nothing came of the suggestion.\nJellicoe was promoted to Admiral of the Fleet on 3 April 1919. He became Governor-General of New Zealand in September 1920 and while there also served as Grand Master of New Zealand's Masonic Grand Lodge. Following his return to England, he was created Earl Jellicoe and Viscount Brocas of Southampton in the County of Southampton on 1 July 1925. He also served as the Commissioner for London Boy Scouts from 1925 to 1928. He was made a Deputy Lieutenant of Hampshire in 1932. He died of pneumonia at his home in Kensington in London on 20 November 1935 and was buried in St Paul's Cathedral.\nLegacy.\nIn 1919, \"Sleep, beneath the wave! a requiem\" with words by Rev. Alfred Hall and Music by Albert Ham was \"Dedicated to Admiral Viscount Jellicoe.\"\nThe attempt of his official biographer, Admiral Reginald Bacon, to portray him as the conqueror of the U-boats is, in John Grigg's view, absurd, as the main decisions were allegedly taken by other men. Bacon also claimed that his elevation to a viscountcy on dismissal was a deliberate snub, but in fact Sir John French, the former Commander-in-Chief of the BEF, was only a viscount at the time (both he and Jellicoe became Earls subsequently), while Fisher was never more than a Baron. Bacon's neutrality may be questionable as he had himself been sacked by Geddes from command of the Dover Patrol, replaced by Roger Keyes, shortly after Jellicoe's removal.\nFamily.\nJellicoe married, at Holy Trinity Church, Sloane Street, on 1 July 1902, Florence Gwendoline Cayzer, daughter of the shipping magnate Sir Charles Cayzer. His brother, Rev. Frederick Jellicoe (1858\u20131927), conducted the service. Lord and Lady Jellicoe had a son and five daughters. His son George Jellicoe, 2nd Earl Jellicoe, had a military career during the Second World War, after which he was a parliamentarian and a businessman.\nHonours.\nRibbon bar (incomplete)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16347", "revid": "45014986", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16347", "title": "Sandy Woodward", "text": "Royal Navy Admiral (1932\u20132013)\nAdmiral Sir John Forster \"Sandy\" Woodward, (1 May 1932 \u2013 4 August 2013) was a senior Royal Navy officer who commanded the Task Force of the Falklands War.\nEarly life.\nWoodward was born on 1 May 1932 at Marazion, near Penzance, Cornwall, to a bank clerk. He was educated at Stubbington House School, preparatory school in Stubbington, Hampshire. He then continued his education at the Britannia Royal Naval College in Dartmouth, Devon.\nNaval career.\nOn graduation from the Royal Naval College Dartmouth Woodward joined the Royal Navy in 1946. He became a submariner in 1954, and was promoted to lieutenant that May. In 1960 he passed the Royal Navy's rigorous Submarine Command Course known as \"The Perisher\", and received his first command, the T-class submarine HMS \"Tireless\". Promoted to lieutenant-commander in May 1962, he then commanded HMS \"Grampus\" before becoming the second in command of the nuclear fleet submarine HMS \"Valiant\". In 1967, he was promoted to commander and became the Instructor (known as \"Teacher\") of The Perisher Course. He took command of HMS \"Warspite\" in December 1969. He was promoted to the rank of captain in 1972. In 1974, he became Captain of Submarine Training and in 1976 he took command of HMS \"Sheffield\".\nHe became Head of Naval Plans in the Ministry of Defence in 1978. In July 1981, he was promoted to rear admiral and appointed as Flag Officer First Flotilla.\nFalklands War.\nIn 1982, he commanded HMS \"Hermes\" aircraft carrier group, Task Group 317.8, in the Falklands War. The Commander-in-Chief Fleet Admiral Sir John Fieldhouse, served as the Task Force commander, CTF-317. The task group containing the amphibious ships which launched the invasion TG 317.0 was commanded by Commodore Michael Clapp, with Task Group 317.1 being the landing force itself.\nHe worked out the timetable for the campaign, starting from the end and working to the start. Knowing that the Argentine forces had to be defeated before the Southern Hemisphere winter made conditions too bad, he set a latest date by which the land forces had to be ashore, that in turn set a latest date by which control of the air had to be achieved, and so on.\nHe was based aboard the Hermes. He left the detailed management of the air war to the Hermes' operations room whilst he kept an eye on it from his own operations room. According to 801 squadron's commander account, he was a submarines' man and, probably influenced by the 800 squadron aboard the Hermes, had no accurate knowledge of the performances of the radar of the Sea Harrier. All this would be detrimental in part to the air defense of the Task Group.\nPossibly the best known single incident was the sinking of the ARA \"General Belgrano\". He knew that \"General Belgrano\", and particularly her Exocet-armed escorts, were a threat to the task force and he ordered that she be sunk. Admiral Sir George Zambellas credited \"Woodward's inspirational leadership and tactical acumen ... [as] a major factor in shaping the success of the British forces in the South Atlantic\".\nWoodward was knighted for his services in the conflict. He wrote a book entitled \"One Hundred Days\", co-authored by Patrick Robinson, describing his Falklands experiences.\nLater career.\nIn 1983, Woodward was appointed Flag Officer Submarines and NATO Commander Submarines Eastern Atlantic. In 1984, he was promoted to vice admiral, and in 1985 he was Deputy Chief of the Defence Staff (Commitments). In 1987, he was promoted to admiral. That year he also served, as Commander-in-Chief Naval Home Command and Flag Aide-de-Camp to the Queen. Woodward retired in 1989.\nLater life.\nThe first edition of Woodward's memoirs was published in 1992. They were well received and were updated in 2003 and 2012 with updated recollections as well as responses to the memoirs and responses made by Commodore Michael Clapp. In his later life Woodward wrote various opinion pieces for British newspapers regarding defence matters, particularly the Strategic Defence and Security Review.\nDeath.\nHe died of heart failure in his 82nd year on 4 August 2013 at Bosham, West Sussex. A memorial service was held for him at Chichester Cathedral on 14 November 2013, with Admiral Sir George Zambellas representing the Queen.\nPersonal life.\nWoodward married Charlotte McMurtrie in 1960, the marriage producing a son and a daughter. Lady Woodward died in 2022.\nHonours and decorations.\nOn 11 October 1982, Woodward was appointed Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath (KCB) 'in recognition of service within the operations in the South Atlantic'. In the 1989 Queen's Birthday Honours, he was appointed Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the British Empire (GBE).\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16351", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16351", "title": "Jules Verne/Around the World in 80 Days", "text": ""}
{"id": "16352", "revid": "41625025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16352", "title": "JIC", "text": "JIC may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "16354", "revid": "38469862", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16354", "title": "Johann Friedrich Endersch", "text": "German mathematician and cartographer (1705\u20131769)\nJohann Friedrich Endersch (25 October 1705 \u2013 28 March 1769) was a German cartographer and mathematician, Royal Mathematician to King Augustus III of Poland.\nLife.\nEndersch was born in D\u00f6rnfeld an der Heide, Schwarzburg-Rudolstadt, Thuringia, but lived most of his life in Elbing (Elbl\u0105g), Royal Prussia in the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth.\nIn 1755 Endersch completed for Imperial Prince-Bishop Adam Stanis\u0142aw Grabowski (\"Celsissimo ac Reverendissimo S. Rom. Imp. Principi Domino Adam Stanislao in Grabowo Grabowski Episcopo Warmiensi et Sambiesi, Terrarum Prussiae Praesidis ...\") a map of Warmia titled \"Tabula Geographica Episcopatum Warmiensem in Prussia Exhibens\". The map, detailing the towns of Warmia, was commissioned for the court of Holy Roman Emperor Francis I.\nEndersch also made a copper etching that depicted a galiot that had been built in Elbing in 1738 and was named \"D' Stadt Elbing\" (German for \"City of Elbl\u0105g\").\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16355", "revid": "525927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16355", "title": "James Blaylock", "text": "American fantasy author\nJames Paul Blaylock (born September 20, 1950) is an American fantasy author. He is noted for a distinctive, humorous style, as well as being one of the pioneers of the steampunk genre of science fiction. Blaylock has cited Jules Verne, H. G. Wells, Robert Louis Stevenson, Arthur Conan Doyle and Charles Dickens as his inspirations.\nHe was born in Long Beach, California; studied English at California State University, Fullerton, receiving an M.A. in 1974; and lives in Orange, California, teaching creative writing at Chapman University. He taught at the Orange County School of the arts until 2013. Many of his books are set in Orange County, California, and can more specifically be termed \"fabulism\"\u00a0\u2013 that is, fantastic things happen in our present-day world, rather than in high fantasy, where the setting is often some other world. His works have also been categorized as magic realism.\nHe and his friends Tim Powers and K. W. Jeter were mentored by Philip K. Dick. Along with Powers, Blaylock invented the poet William Ashbless. Blaylock and Powers have often collaborated with each other on writing stories, including \"The Better Boy\", \"On Pirates\", and \"The William Ashbless Memorial Cookbook\".\nBlaylock previously served as director of the Creative Writing Conservatory at the Orange County High School of the Arts until 2013, where Powers has also been Writer in Residence.\nHe has been married to his wife, Viki Blaylock, for more than 40 years. They have two sons.\nAwards.\nBlaylock's short story \"Thirteen Phantasms\" won the 1997 World Fantasy Award for best Short Fiction. \"Paper Dragons\" won the award in 1986. \"Homunculus\" won the Philip K. Dick award in 1987.\nBibliography.\nThe \"Balumnia\" Trilogy.\nWhimsical fantasy inspired, according to the author, by \"The Wind in the Willows\" and \"The Hobbit\".\nThe \"Narbondo / St. Ives Universe\" Series.\nNovels.\nSharing the character of villain Ignacio Narbondo; \"The Digging Leviathan\" and its sequel \"Zeuglodon\" are contemporary fantasies set in 1960s California, while the remainder are steampunk novels set in Victorian England.\nCollections.\nAll short fiction (except for the novelette \"Lord Kelvin's Machine\") and two novels have appeared in two collections by Subterranean Press:\nThe \"Christian\" Trilogy.\nPresent-day fantasy using Christian elements, such as the Holy Grail and the thirty pieces of silver paid to Judas.\nThe \"Ghosts\" Trilogy.\nPresent-day Californian ghost stories.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16356", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16356", "title": "Jerry Pournelle", "text": "American writer and scientist (1933\u20132017)\nJerry Eugene Pournelle (; August 7, 1933 \u2013 September 8, 2017) was an American scientist in the area of operations research and human factors research, a science fiction writer, essayist, journalist, and one of the first bloggers. In the 1960s and early '70s, he worked in the aerospace industry, but eventually focused on his writing career. In an obituary in \"Gizmodo\", he was described as \"a tireless ambassador for the future.\"\nPournelle's hard science fiction writing received multiple awards. In addition to his solo writing, he wrote several novels with collaborators including Larry Niven. Pournelle served a term as President of the Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America.\nPournelle's journalism focused primarily on the computer industry, astronomy, and space exploration. From the 1970s until the early 1990s, he contributed to the computer magazine \"Byte\", writing from the viewpoint of an intelligent user, with the oft-cited credo, \"We do this stuff so you won't have to.\" He created one of the first blogs, entitled \"Chaos Manor\", which included commentary about politics, computer technology, space technology, and science fiction.\nPournelle held paleoconservative political views, which were sometimes expressed in his fiction. He was one of the founders of the Citizens' Advisory Council on National Space Policy, which developed some of the Reagan Administration's space initiatives, including the earliest versions of what would become the Strategic Defense Initiative.\nEarly years.\nPournelle was born in Shreveport, Louisiana, the seat of Caddo Parish in northwestern Louisiana, and later lived with his family in Capleville, Tennessee, an unincorporated area near Memphis. Percival Pournelle, his father, was a radio advertising executive and general manager of several radio stations. Ruth Pournelle, his mother, was a teacher, although during World War II, she worked in a munitions factory.\nHe attended first grade at St. Anne's Elementary School, in Memphis, which had two grades to a classroom. Beginning with third grade, he attended Coleville Consolidated Elementary School, in Colevile, which had about 25 pupils per grade and four rooms and four teachers for 8 grades Pournelle attended high school at Christian Brothers College in Memphis, run by the De La Salle Christian Brothers; despite its name, it was a high school at the time.\nHe served in the United States Army during the Korean War. In 1953\u201354, after his military service, Pournelle attended the University of Iowa in Iowa City. Subsequently, he studied at the University of Washington, where he received a B.S. in psychology on June 11, 1955; an M.S. in psychology (experimental statistics) on March 21, 1958; and a Ph.D. in political science in March 1964.\nHis master's thesis is titled \"Behavioural observations of the effects of personality needs and leadership in small discussion groups\", and is dated 1957. Pournelle's Ph.D. dissertation is titled \"The American political continuum; an examination of the validity of the left-right model as an instrument for studying contemporary American political 'isms'\".\nPersonal life.\nPournelle married Roberta Jane Isdell in 1959; the couple had five children. His wife, his son, naval officer Phillip, and daughter, archaeologist Jennifer, have also written science fiction in collaboration with their father.\nIn 2008, Pournelle battled a brain tumor, which appeared to respond favorably to radiation treatment. An August 28, 2008 report on his weblog claimed he was now cancer-free. Pournelle suffered a stroke on December 16, 2014, for which he was hospitalized for a time. By June 2015, he was writing again, though impairment from the stroke had slowed his typing. Pournelle died in his sleep of heart failure at his home in Studio City, California, on September 8, 2017.\nFaith and worldview.\nPournelle was raised a Unitarian. He converted to Roman Catholicism while attending Christian Brothers College.\nPournelle was introduced to Malthusian principles upon reading the book \"Road to Survival\" by the ecologist (and ornithologist) William Vogt, who depicted an Earth denuded of species other than humans, all of them headed for squalor. Concerned about the Malthusian dangers of human overpopulation, and considering the Catholic Church's position on contraception to be untenable, he left the Catholic Church while an undergraduate at the University of Iowa. Pournelle eventually returned to religion, and for a number of years was a high church Anglican, claiming that Anglican theology was virtually identical to Catholic theology, with the exception that the Anglicans accepted as moral the use of birth control.\nPournelle eventually returned to the Catholic Church, as his other beliefs were consistent with the Catholic communion, although he did not agree with the Church's position on birth control. Despite his estrangement from the Catholic Church, he opposed having the government require that Catholic institutions provide access to birth control or abortion. He wrote that Sunday attendance at St. Francis de Sales Catholic Church, in Sherman Oaks, Los Angeles, was part of his family's routine. Upon his death, his family arranged a memorial mass at the church, on 16 September 2017.\nCareer.\nPournelle was an intellectual prot\u00e9g\u00e9 of Russell Kirk and Stefan T. Possony. Pournelle wrote numerous publications with Possony, including \"The Strategy of Technology\" (1970). \"The Strategy\" has been used as a textbook at the United States Military Academy (West Point), the United States Air Force Academy (Colorado Springs), the Air War College, and the National War College.\nHe told fellow author Robert Heinlein, Pournelle recalled, \"that once I got into advance plans at Boeing I probably wrote more science fiction than he did, and I didn't have to put characters in mine\". In the late 1950s, while conducting operations research at the company, he envisioned a weapon consisting of massive tungsten rods dropped from high above the Earth. These super-dense, super-fast kinetic energy projectiles delivered enormous destructive force to the target without contaminating the environs with radioactive isotopes, as would occur with a nuclear bomb. Pournelle named his superweapon \u201cProject Thor\u201d. Others called it \"Rods from God\". Pournelle headed the Human Factors Laboratory at Boeing, where his group did pioneering work on astronaut heat tolerance in extreme environments. His group also did experimental work that resulted in certification of the passenger oxygen system for the Boeing 707 airplane. He later worked as a Systems Analyst in a design and analysis group at the company, where he did strategic analysis of proposed new weapons systems.\nIn 1964, Pournelle joined the Aerospace Corporation in San Bernardino, California where he was Editor of \"Project 75\", a major study of all ballistic missile technology for the purpose of making recommendations to the US Air Force on investment in technologies required to build the missile force to be deployed in 1975. After Project 75 was completed Pournelle became manager of several advanced concept studies.\nAt North American Rockwell\u2019s Space Division, Pournelle was associate director of operations research, where he took part in the Apollo program and general operations.\nHe was founding President of the Pepperdine Research Institute. In 1989, Pournelle, Max Hunter, and retired Army Lieutenant General Daniel O. Graham made a presentation to then Vice President Dan Quayle promoting development of the DC-X rocket.\nPournelle was among those who in 1968 signed a pro-Vietnam War advertisement in \"Galaxy Science Fiction\". During the 1970s and 1980s, he also published articles on military tactics and war gaming in the military simulations industry in Avalon Hill's magazine \"The General\". That led him into correspondences with some of the early figures in \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" and other fantasy role-playing games.\nTwo of his collaborations with Larry Niven reached the top rankings in the New York Times Best Seller List. In 1977, \"Lucifer's Hammer\" reached number two. \"Footfall\" \u2014 wherein Heinlein was a thinly veiled minor character \u2014 reached the number one spot in 1986.\nPournelle served as President of the Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America in 1973.\nIn 1994, Pournelle's friendly relationship with Newt Gingrich led to Gingrich securing a government job for Pournelle's son, Richard. At the time, Pournelle and Gingrich were reported to be collaborating on \"a science fiction political thriller.\" Pournelle's relationship with Gingrich was long established even then, as Pournelle had written the preface to Gingrich's book, \"Window of Opportunity\" (1985).\nYears after \"Byte\" shuttered, Pournelle wrote his Chaos Manor column online. He reprised it at Byte.com, which he helped launch with journalist Gina Smith, John C. Dvorak, and others. However, after a shakeup, he announced that rather than stay at United Business Media, he would follow Smith, Dvorak, and 14 other news journalists to start an independent tech and politics site called anewdomain.net. As an active director of that site and others it launched, Pournelle wrote, edited, and worked with young writers and journalists on the craft of writing about science and tech.\nFiction.\nBeginning during his tenure at Boeing Company, Pournelle submitted science fiction short stories to John W. Campbell, the editor of \"Astounding Science Fiction\" (later called \"Analog Science Fiction and Fact\"), but Campbell did not accept any of Pournelle's submissions until shortly before Campbell's death in 1971, when he accepted for publication Pournelle's novelette \"Peace with Honor.\" From the beginning, Pournelle's work has engaged strong military themes. Several books are centered on a fictional mercenary infantry force known as \"Falkenberg's Legion\". There are strong parallels between these stories and the \"Childe Cycle\" mercenary stories by Gordon R. Dickson, as well as Heinlein's \"Starship Troopers\", although Pournelle's work takes far fewer technological leaps than either of these.\nPournelle was one of the few close friends of H. Beam Piper and was granted by Piper the rights to produce stories set in Piper's Terro-Human Future History. This right has been recognized by the Piper estate. Pournelle worked for some years on a sequel to \"Space Viking\" but abandoned this in the early 1990s, however John F. Carr and Mike Robertson completed this sequel, entitled \"The Last Space Viking\", and it was published in 2011.\nIn 2013, \"Variety\" reported that motion picture rights to Pournelle's novel \"Janissaries\" had been acquired by the newly formed Goddard Film Group, headed by Gary Goddard. The IMDb website reported that the film was in development, and that husband-and-wife writing team, Judith and Garfield Reeves-Stevens, had written the screenplay.\nPseudonyms and collaborations.\nPournelle began fiction writing non-SF work under a pseudonym in 1965. His early SF was published under the name \"Wade Curtis\", in \"Analog\" and other magazines. Some works were also published under the name \"J.E. Pournelle\".\nIn the mid-1970s, Pournelle began a fruitful collaboration with Larry Niven; he has also collaborated on novels with Roland J. Green, Michael F. Flynn, and Steven Barnes, and collaborated as an editor on an anthology series \"The Endless Frontier\" with John F. Carr.\nIn 2010, his daughter Jennifer R. Pournelle (writing as J.R. Pournelle), an archaeology professor, e-published a novel \"Outies\", an authorized sequel to the \"Mote in God's Eye\" series.\nJournalism and tech writing.\nComputing at Chaos Manor.\nPournelle began using a computer to write in 1977 on the advice of his \"mad\" friend Dan MacLean. He wrote the \"Computing at Chaos Manor\" column in \"Byte\", describing experiences with computer hardware and software, some purchased and some sent by vendors for review, at his home office. Because Pournelle was then, according to the magazine, \"virtually \"Byte's\" only writer who was a mere user\u2014he didn't create compilers and computers, he merely used them\", it began as \"The User's Column\" in July 1980. Subtitled \"Omikron TRS-80 Boards, NEWDOS+, and Sundry Other Matters\", an Editor's Note accompanied the article:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The other day we were sitting around the \"Byte\" offices listening to software and hardware explosions going off around us in the microcomputer world. We wondered, \"Who could cover some of the latest developments for us in a funny, frank (and sometimes irascible) style?\" The phone rang. It was Jerry Pournelle with an idea for a funny, frank (and sometimes irascible) series of articles to be presented in \"Byte\" on a semi-regular (i.e.: every 2 to 3 months) basis, which would cover the wild microcomputer goings-on at the Pournelle House (\"Chaos Manor\") in Southern California. We said yes. Herewith the first installment\u00a0...\nPournelle stated that\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This will be a column by and for computer users, and with rare exceptions I won't discuss anything I haven't installed and implemented here in Chaos Manor. At Chaos Manor we have computer users ranging in sophistication from my 9-year-old through a college-undergraduate assistant and up to myself. (Not that I'm the last word in sophistication, but I do sit here and pound this machine a lot; if I can't get something to work, it takes an expert.) Fair warning, then: the very nature of this column limits its scope. I can't talk about anything I can't run on my machines, nor am I likely to discuss things I have no use for.\nAmong recurring characters were Pournelle's family members, friends, and many computers. He introduced to readers \"my friend Ezekiel, who happens to be a Cromemco Z-2 with iCom 8-inch soft-sectored floppy disk drives\"; he also owned a TRS-80 Model I, and the first subject discussed in the column was an add-on that permitted it to use the same data and CP/M applications as the Cromemco. The next column appeared in December 1980 with the subtitle \"BASIC, Computer Languages, and Computer Adventures\"; Ezekiel II, a Compupro S-100 CP/M system, debuted in March 1983. Other computers received nicknames, such as Zorro, Pournelle's \"colorful\" Zenith Z-100, and Lucy Van Pelt, a \"fussbudget\" IBM PC; he referred to generic PC compatibles as \"PClones\". Pournelle often denounced companies that announced vaporware, sarcastically writing that they would arrive \"Real Soon Now\" (later abbreviated to just \"RSN\"), and those that used software copy protection. As part of a redesign in June 1984, the magazine renamed the popular column to \"Computing at Chaos Manor\", and the accompanying letter column became \"Chaos Manor Mail\".\nPournelle preferred 8-inch floppy disks to 5 1/4 inch disks as late as 1982, and still used \"Zeke\" to write as late as 1987, but admitted that he would soon have to use PCs because tools like Borland Sidekick were unavailable. He hesitated, Pournelle said, because Niven would buy two exact copies of his writing computer and software. He announced in February 1989 that the Smithsonian had asked for \"Zeke\" as part of a history of computing. A memorable column in August 1989 was \"The Great Power Spike\", which gives a digital necropsy of his electronic equipment after high voltage transmission wires dropped onto the power line for his neighborhood.\nAfter the print version of \"Byte\" ended publication in the United States, Pournelle continued publishing the column for the online version and international print editions of \"Byte\". In July 2006, Pournelle and \"Byte\" declined to renew their contract and Pournelle moved the column to his own web site, Chaos Manor Reviews.\nOther technical writing.\nPournelle claimed to be the first author to have written a published book contribution using a word processor on a personal computer, in 1977.\nIn the 1980s, Pournelle was an editor and columnist for \"Survive\", a survivalist magazine. He wrote the monthly column \"The Micro Revolution\" for \"Popular Computing\" from April 1984 until the magazine's closure in December 1985. The column focused on the ways microcomputers were reshaping society.\nIn 2011, Pournelle joined journalist Gina Smith, pundit John C. Dvorak, political cartoonist Ted Rall, and several other Byte.com staff reporters to launch an independent tech and political news site, aNewDomain.net Pournelle served as director of aNewDomain until his death.\nAfter 1998, Pournelle maintained a website with a daily online journal, \"View from Chaos Manor,\" a blog dating from before the use of that term. It is a collection of his \"Views\" and \"Mail\" from a large variety of readers. This is a continuation of his 1980s blog-like online journal on GEnie. He said he resists using the term \"blog\" because he considered the word ugly, and because he maintained that his \"View\" is primarily a vehicle for writing rather than a collection of links. In his book \"Dave Barry in Cyberspace\", humorist Dave Barry has fun with Pournelle's guru column in \"Byte\" magazine.\nSoftware.\nPournelle, in collaboration with his wife, Roberta (who was an expert on reading education) wrote the commercial education software program called Reading: The Learning Connection.\nPolitics.\nPournelle served as campaign research director for the mayoral campaign of 1969 for Los Angeles Mayor Sam Yorty (Democrat), working under campaign director Henry Salvatori. The election took place on May 27, 1969. Pournelle was later named Executive Assistant to the Mayor in charge of research in September 1969, but resigned from the position after two weeks. After leaving Yorty's office, in 1970 he was a consultant to the Professional Educators of Los Angeles (PELA), a group opposed to the unionization of school teachers in LA.\nHe is sometimes quoted as describing his politics as \"somewhere to the right of Genghis Khan.\" Pournelle resisted others classifying him into any particular political group, but acknowledged the approximate accuracy of the term paleoconservatism as applying to him. He distinguished his conservativism from the alternative neoconservatism, noting that he had been drummed out of the Conservative movement by \"the egregious Frum\", referring to prominent neoconservative, David Frum. Notably, Pournelle opposed the Gulf War and the Iraq War, maintaining that the money would be better spent developing energy technologies for the United States. According to a \"Wall Street Journal\" article, \"Pournelle estimates that for what the Iraq war has cost so far, the United States could have paid for a network of nuclear power stations sufficient to achieve energy independence, and bankrupt the Arabs for once and for all.\"\nPournelle chart.\nPournelle created the Pournelle chart in his doctoral dissertation, a 2-dimensional coordinate system used to distinguish political ideologies. It is a cartesian diagram in which the X-axis gauges opinion toward state and centralized government (farthest right being state worship, farthest left being the idea of a state as the \"ultimate evil\"), and the Y-axis measures the belief that all problems in society have rational solutions (top being complete confidence in rational planning, bottom being complete lack of confidence in rational planning).\nStrategic Defense Initiative.\nIn a 1997 article, Norman Spinrad wrote that Pournelle had written the SDI portion of Ronald Reagan's State of the Union Address, as part of a plan to use SDI to get more money for space exploration using the larger defense budget. Pournelle wrote in response that while the Citizens' Advisory Council on National Space Policy \"wrote parts of Reagan's 1983 SDI speech, and provided much of the background for the policy, we certainly did not write the speech\u2026 We were not trying to boost space, we were trying to win the Cold War\". The Council's first report in 1980 became the transition team policy paper on space for the incoming Reagan administration. The third report was quoted in the Reagan \"Star Wars\" speech.\nPournelle's laws.\nPournelle suggested several \"laws\". He used the term \"Pournelle's law\" for the expression \"One user, one CPU\". He later amended this to \"One user, at least one CPU\" in a column in \"InfoWorld\". He also used the term \"Pournelle's law\" for \"Silicon is cheaper than iron.\" That is, a computer is cheaper to upgrade than replace. A second aspect of this law was Pournelle's prediction that hard disk drives would eventually be replaced by solid-state memory, although he admitted that bubble memory had failed to do so as he had expected. He has also used \"Pournelle's law\" to apply to the importance of checking cable connections when diagnosing computer problems: \"You'll find by and large, the trouble is a cable.\" Another Pournelle's Law is \"If you don\u2019t know what you\u2019re doing, deal with those who do\".\nPournelle's iron law of bureaucracy.\nAnother \"law\" of his is \"Pournelle's iron law of bureaucracy\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In any bureaucracy, the people devoted to the benefit of the bureaucracy itself always get in control and those dedicated to the goals that the bureaucracy is supposed to accomplish have less and less influence, and sometimes are eliminated entirely.\nHe eventually restated it as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Pournelle's Iron Law of Bureaucracy states that in any bureaucratic organization there will be two kinds of people: First, there will be those who are devoted to the goals of the organization. Examples are dedicated classroom teachers in an educational bureaucracy, many of the engineers and launch technicians and scientists at NASA, even some agricultural scientists and advisors in the former Soviet Union collective farming administration. Secondly, there will be those dedicated to the organization itself. Examples are many of the administrators in the education system, many professors of education, many teachers union officials, much of the NASA headquarters staff, etc. The Iron Law states that in every case the second group will gain and keep control of the organization. It will write the rules, and control promotions within the organization.\nHis blog, \"The View from Chaos Manor\", often references apparent examples of the law. Some of Pournelle's standard themes that recur in the stories are: welfare states become self-perpetuating, building a technological society requires a strong defense and the rule of law, and \"those who forget history are condemned to repeat it\".\nAwards.\nPournelle never won a Hugo Award. He said, \"Money will get you through times of no Hugos better than Hugos will get you through times of no money.\" The Mote in God's Eye and Inferno were both nominated for a Nebula Award for Best Novel in 1975.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16360", "revid": "199747", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16360", "title": "Barlaam and Josaphat", "text": "Legendary Christian saints\nBarlaam and Josaphat, also known as Bilawhar and Budhasaf, are Christian saints. Their story tells of the conversion of Josaphat to Christianity. According to tradition, an Indian king persecuted the Christian Church in his realm. After astrologers predicted that his own son would some day become a Christian, the king imprisoned the young prince Josaphat, who nevertheless met the hermit Saint Barlaam and converted to Christianity. After much tribulation the young prince's father accepted the Christian faith, turned over his throne to Josaphat, and retired to the desert to become a hermit. Josaphat himself later abdicated and went into seclusion with his old teacher Barlaam.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nThe story of Barlaam and Josaphat is a Christianized and later version of the story of Siddhartha Gautama, who became the Buddha. The tale derives from a second to fourth century Sanskrit Mahayana Buddhist text, via a Manichaean version, then the Arabic \"Kit\u0101b Bilawhar wa-B\u016bd\u0320\u0101saf\" (Book of Bilawhar and Budhasaf), current in Baghdad in the eighth century, from where it entered into Middle Eastern Christian circles before appearing in European versions.\nThe first Christianized adaptation was the Georgian epic \"Balavariani\" dating back to the 10th century. A Georgian monk, Euthymius of Athos, translated the story into Greek, some time before he died in an accident while visiting Constantinople in 1028. There the Greek adaptation was translated into Latin in 1048 and soon became well known in Western Europe as \"Barlaam and Josaphat\". The Greek legend of \"Barlaam and Ioasaph\" is sometimes attributed to the 8th century John of Damascus, but F. C. Conybeare argued it was transcribed by Euthymius in the 11th century.\nThe story of Barlaam and Josaphat was popular in the Middle Ages, appearing in such works as the \"Golden Legend\", and a scene there involving three caskets eventually appeared, via Caxton's English translation of a Latin version, in Shakespeare's \"The Merchant of Venice\". The poet Chardri produced an Anglo-Norman version, \"La vie de seint Josaphaz\", in the 13th century. The story of Josaphat and Barlaam also occupies a great part of book xv of the Speculum Historiale (Mirror of History) by the 13th century French encyclopedist Vincent of Beauvais.\nOne of the Marco Polo manuscripts notes the remarkable similarity between the tale of \"Sakyamuni Burkham\" (the name that Polo uses for the Buddha) and St. Josaphat, apparently unaware of the origins of the Josaphat story.\nTwo Middle High German versions were produced: one, the \"Laubacher \"Barlaam\"\", by Bishop Otto II of Freising and another, \"Barlaam und Josaphat\", a romance in verse, by Rudolf von Ems. The latter was described as \"perhaps the flower of religious literary creativity in the German Middle Ages\" by Heinrich Heine.\nIn the 16th century, the story of Josaphat was re-told as a defence of monastic life during the Protestant Reformation and of free will against Protestant doctrines regarding predestination.\nLegend.\nAccording to the legend, King Abenner in India persecuted the Christian Church in his realm, founded by the Apostle Thomas. When astrologers predicted that his own son would some day become a Christian, Abenner had the young prince Josaphat isolated from external contact. Despite the imprisonment, Josaphat met the hermit Saint Barlaam and converted to Christianity. Josaphat kept his faith even in the face of his father's anger and persuasion. Eventually Abenner converted, turned over his throne to Josaphat, and retired to the desert to become a hermit. Josaphat himself later abdicated and went into seclusion with his old teacher Barlaam.\nNames.\nIn this context, the name Josaphat is derived from the Sanskrit \"bodhisattva\". The Sanskrit word was changed to ' in Middle Persian texts in the 6th or 7th century, then to ' or ' in an 8th-century Arabic document (Arabic initial \"b\" \ufe91\u200e changed to \"y\" \ufef3\u200e by duplication of a dot in handwriting). This became ' in Georgian in the 10th century, and that name was adapted as \"Ioasaph\" () in Greece in the 11th century, and then was assimilated to \"Iosaphat/Josaphat\" in Latin.\nThe name Barlaam derives from the Arabic name \"Bilawhar\" () borrowed through Georgian ( ) into Byzantine Greek ( ). The Arabic \"Bilawhar\" has historically been thought to derive from the Sanskrit \"bhagavan\", an epithet of the Buddha, but this derivation is unproven and others have been proposed. Almuth Degener suggests derivation from Sanskrit \"purohita\" through a hypothetical Middle Persian intermediate.\nThe name of Josaphat's father, King Abenner, derives from the Greek name \"Abenner\" (), although another Greek version of the legend gives this name as \"Avenir\" (). These Greek names were adapted from the Georgian \"Abeneser\" (; later shortened to , ), which was itself derived from the Arabic version of the legend where he is named King \"Junaysar\" (). According to I.V. Abuladze, during borrowing from Arabic to Georgian, misplaced \"i'j\u0101m\" resulted in the misreading of \"Junaysar\" as \"Habeneser\", after which the initial \"H\"- was omitted. The origin of the Arabic name is unclear.\nSainthood.\nFeast days.\nBarlaam and Josaphat were included in earlier editions of the Roman Martyrology with a joint feast day on 27 November, however, they were not included in the Roman Missal. Since 1960 a different Saint, St. Josephat, Bishop and Martyr, has a celebration on 16 November. \nBarlaam and Josaphat were entered into the Greek Orthodox liturgical calendar on 26 August \"Julian\" (8 September \"Gregorian\"), and into liturgical calendar of the Slavic tradition of the Eastern Orthodox Church, on 19 November \"Julian\" (2 December \"Gregorian\").\nTexts.\nThere are a large number of different books in various languages, all dealing with the lives of Saints Barlaam and Josaphat in India. In this hagiographic tradition, the life and teachings of Josaphat have many parallels with those of the Buddha. \"But not till the mid-nineteenth century was it recognised that, in Josaphat, the Buddha had been venerated as a Christian saint for about a thousand years.\" This was ascertained through the researches of Edouard de Laboulaye and Felix Liebrecht in 1859-1860. The authorship of the work is disputed. The origins of the story may be a Central Asian manuscript written in the Manichaean tradition. This book was translated into Georgian and Arabic.\nGreek manuscripts.\nThe best-known version in Europe comes from a separate, but not wholly independent, source, written in Greek, and, although anonymous, attributed to \"John the monk\". It was first attributed to John of Damascus in the 12th century. Although this attribution was attacked in the 19th century, George Ratcliffe Woodward and Harold Mattingly sum up the arguments in favor of John of Damascus' authorship as follows: The work's doctrine is remarkably similar to St. John's, to the point where \"in many passages the resemblance amounts almost to verbal identity\"; there are frequent quotations from St. John's favorite authors, such as St. Gregory of Nazianus and St. Basil; \"The defence of images, coupled with the denunciation of Idolatry, the enthusiasm for the monastic ideal, and the scant regard shown for the bishops and the secular clergy, almost compel us to place the work in the time of the Iconoclastic Controversy. The position, taken up and defended, is exactly that of the Icon-venerators; and we regard this fact alone as conclusive evidence for an eighth century date.\"; that St. John was often known as \"John the Monk\", so the fact that he wasn't specifically named in the earliest manuscripts doesn't rule him out.\nNonetheless, many modern scholars do not accept this attribution, citing much evidence pointing to Euthymius of Athos, a Georgian who died in 1028.\nThe modern edition of the Greek text, from the 160 surviving variant manuscripts (2006), with introduction (German, 2009) is published as Volume 6 of the works of John the Damascene by the monks of the Abbey of Scheyern, edited by Robert Volk. It was included in the edition due to the traditional ascription, but marked \"spuria\" as the translator is the Georgian monk Euthymius the Hagiorite (ca. 955\u20131028) at Mount Athos and not John the Damascene of the monastery of Saint Sabas in the Judaean Desert. The 2009 introduction includes an overview.\nEnglish manuscripts.\nAmong the manuscripts in English, two of the most important are the British Library MS Egerton 876 (the basis for Ikegami's book) and \"MS Peterhouse 257\" (the basis for Hirsh's book) at the University of Cambridge. The book contains a tale similar to The Three Caskets found in the \"Gesta Romanorum\" and later in Shakespeare's \"The Merchant of Venice\".\nEditions.\nCroatian.\nThree Croatian versions exist, all translations from Italian. The older Shtokavian untitled version originated in the Republic of Ragusa and was transcribed to a codex from an earlier source in the 17th century, while the younger Chakavian translations, one manuscript and one printed, originated in the beginning of the 18th century. The book was published by Petar Ma\u00e7ukat in Venice in 1708 and titled Xivot S[veto]ga Giosafata obrachien od Barlaama and is currently held in the National and University Library in Zagreb. Both manuscripts were published in 1913 by Czech slavist Josef Kar\u00e1sek and Croatian philologist Franjo Fancev and reprinted in 1996. The Chakavian translations had a common source while the older Shtokavian one used an earlier Italian version as well as the \"Golden Legend\".\nHungarian\nOld Norse.\nBarlaams saga ok J\u00f3safats is an Old Norse (specifically Old Norwegian) rendering of the story of \"Barlaam and Josaphat\". This Old Norwegian version is based on a Latin translation from the 12th century; the saga of Gu\u00f0mundur Arason records that it was translated by King Haakon III Sverresson (died 1204). There are several other Old Norse versions of the same story, translated independently from different sources. There are two Old Swedish versions, the older of which draws on the \"Golden Legend\", while the younger uses the \"Speculum historiale\" as its main source. The early sixteenth-century Icelandic legendary Reykjah\u00f3larb\u00f3k includes a version translated from Low German.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16362", "revid": "49106402", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16362", "title": "Jaggies", "text": "Jagged edge artifacts in raster images\nJaggies are visual artifacts in raster images, most frequently from aliasing, which in turn is often caused by non-linear mixing effects producing high-frequency components, or missing or poor anti-aliasing filtering prior to sampling.\nJaggies are stair-like lines that appear where there should be \"smooth\" straight lines or curves. For example, when a nominally straight, un-aliased line steps across one pixel either horizontally or vertically, a \"dogleg\" occurs halfway through the line, where it crosses the threshold from one pixel to the other.\nJaggies should not be confused with most compression artifacts, which are a different phenomenon.\nCauses.\nJaggies occur due to the \"staircase effect\". This is because a line represented in raster mode is approximated by a sequence of pixels. Jaggies can occur for a variety of reasons, the most common being that the output device (display monitor or printer) does not have sufficient resolution to portray a smooth line. In addition, jaggies often occur when a bit-mapped image is scaled to a higher resolution. This is one of the advantages that vector graphics have over bitmapped graphics \u2013 a vector image can be losslessly scaled to any arbitrary resolution or stretched infinitely in either axis without introducing jaggies.\nSolutions.\nThe effect of jaggies can be reduced by a graphics technique known as spatial anti-aliasing. Anti-aliasing smooths out jagged lines by surrounding them with transparent pixels to simulate the appearance of fractionally-filled pixels when viewed at a distance. The downside of anti-aliasing is that it reduces contrast \u2013 rather than sharp black/white transitions, there are shades of gray \u2013 and the resulting image can appear fuzzy. This is an inescapable trade-off: if the resolution is insufficient to display the desired detail, the output will either be jagged, fuzzy, or some combination thereof. While machine learning-based upscaling techniques such as DLSS can be used to infer this missing information, other types of artifacts may be introduced in the process.\nIn real-time 3D rendering such as in video games, various anti-aliasing techniques are used to remove jaggies created by the edges of polygons and other contrasting lines. Since anti-aliasing can impose a significant performance overhead, games for home computers often allow users to choose the level and type of anti-aliasing in use in order to optimize their experience, whereas on consoles this setting is typically fixed for each title to ensure a consistent experience. While anti-aliasing is generally implemented through graphics APIs like DirectX and Vulkan, some consoles such as the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 are also capable of anti-aliasing to little direct performance cost by way of dedicated hardware which performs anti-aliasing on the contents of the framebuffer once it has been rendered by the GPU. Jaggies in bitmaps, such as sprites and surface materials, are most often dealt with by separate texture filtering routines, which are far easier to perform than anti-aliasing filtering. Texture filtering became ubiquitous on PCs after the introduction of 3Dfx's Voodoo GPU.\nNotable uses of the term.\nIn the 1985 game \"Rescue on Fractalus!\" for the Atari 8-bit computers, the graphics depicting the cockpit of the player's spacecraft contains two window struts, which are not anti-aliased and are therefore very \"jagged\". The developers made fun of this and named the in-game enemies \"Jaggi\", and also initially titled the game \"Behind Jaggi Lines!\". The latter idea was scrapped by the marketing department before release.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16364", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16364", "title": "Judicial economy", "text": "Judicial economy or procedural economy is the principle that the limited resources of the legal system or a given court should be conserved by the refusal to decide one or more claims raised in a case. For example, the plaintiff may claim that the defendant's actions violated three distinct laws. Having found for the plaintiff for a violation of the first law, the court then has the discretion to exercise judicial economy and refuse to make a decision on the remaining two claims, on the grounds that the finding of one violation should be sufficient to satisfy the plaintiff.\nThreshold issue in a given case.\nIn the presence of a threshold issue that will ultimately decide a case, a court may, depending on the degree of prejudice to the litigants rights, elect to hear that issue rather than proceeding with a full-blown trial.\nClass action lawsuits.\nClass action lawsuits are another example of judicial economy in action, as they are often tried as a single case, yet involve many cases with similar facts. Rather than trying each case individually, which would unduly burden the judicial system, the cases can be consolidated into a class action.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16365", "revid": "1314535264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16365", "title": "Jury instructions", "text": "Legal rules from a judge to jurors\nJury instructions, also known as charges or directions, are a set of legal guidelines given by a judge to a jury in a court of law. They are an important procedural step in a trial by jury, and as such are a cornerstone of criminal process in many common law countries.\nThe purpose of instructions are to inform the jury about the legal principles and standards that they must apply in order to reach a verdict. This ensures that criminal trials are fair and lawful. They are typically delivered after closing arguments, but sometimes may be delivered mid-trial if necessary. Jury instructions are distinct from a directed verdict, where the judge orders the jury to deliver a particular verdict.\nIn some cases, the instructions given by a judge to the jury are incorrect, which may (depending on the issue) result in a mistrial.\nContent of jury instructions.\nJury instructions often cover the following issues:\nUse of templates.\nJury instructions are typically drafted using standardized language and templates, which are formulated from various sources such as jury instruction manuals, legal treatises, and case law. However, judges often modify these standard instructions to fit the unique circumstances and legal issues present in each case. Attorneys from both sides may also request specific instructions or modifications and may object to proposed instructions, but the final decision on the content and wording of the instructions lies with the judge.\nIssues.\nRole in appeals.\nJury instructions play a significant role in the appellate process; errors or omissions in the instructions can provide grounds for an appeal. Appellate courts may review instructions given to the jury to determine if they were made in a legally permissible manner. If the appellate court finds an error in the instructions process, it may, if sufficiently problematic, reverse a decision or order a new trial.\nComprehending jury instructions.\nA significant issue with standard jury instructions is the language comprehension difficulties for the average juror. The purpose of jury instructions is to inform jurors of relevant laws and their application in the process of coming to a verdict. However, studies have shown that juries consistently run into problems understanding the instructions given to them. Poor comprehension is noted across juror demographics, as well as across legal contexts. Various linguistic features of legalese or legal English, such as complex sentence structures and technical jargon, have been pinpointed as major factors contributing to low comprehension.\nSimplifying jury instructions through the use of plain English has been shown to markedly increase juror comprehension. In one study of California\u2019s jury instructions in cases involving the death penalty, approximately 200 university students participated in a research experiment. Half of the participants heard the original standard instructions written in legal English, and half heard revised instructions in plain English. Instructions were read twice to each group, and the participants then answered questions for researchers to gauge their understanding. The results showed a notable disparity in comprehension between the two groups. The group that received revised instructions demonstrated stronger understanding of relevant points such as key concepts, and the ability to differentiate between legal terms.\nIn another California study, jury instructions were again simplified to make them easier for jurors to understand. The courts moved cautiously because, although verdicts are rarely overturned due to jury instructions in civil court, this is not the case in criminal court. For example, the old instructions on burden of proof in civil cases read:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Preponderance of the evidence means evidence that has more convincing force than that opposed to it. If the evidence is so evenly balanced that you are unable to say that the evidence on either side of an issue preponderates, your finding on that issue must be against the party who had the burden of proving it.\nThe new instructions read:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When I tell you that a party must prove something, I mean that the party must persuade you, by the evidence presented in court, that what he or she is trying to prove is more likely to be true than not true. This is sometimes referred to as 'the burden of proof.'\nResistance to the movement towards the revision of standard jury instructions exists as well. This is due to the concern that moving away from legal English will result in jury instructions becoming imprecise. There is also the belief that jurors prefer judges to speak in legal language so that they come across as educated and respectable.\nJury nullification instructions.\nThere is also debate, particularly active in the US, over whether juries that are to judge a criminal case should be informed of the possibility of jury nullification during jury instructions. One argument states that if juries have the power of jury nullification, then they should be informed of it and that neglecting to do so is an act of intervention. Another argument states that defendants should be judged according to the law, and that jury nullification interferes with this process. It is also debated that instructions permitting jury nullification is to be criticized as promoting chaos, as it brings the decision between having a structured set of rules and having less of said rules for a more free set of choices that could also promote the likes of anarchy and tyranny.\nStudies have indicated that being informed of jury nullification is likely to affect the judgement of juries when they decide on verdicts. One study that looked into 144 juries showed that they were less harsh on sympathetic defendants and harsher on unsympathetic defendants when they had been briefed on jury nullification. Another study that looked into 45 juries showed that they were likelier to reach a guilty verdict in drunk driving cases and less likely in euthanasia cases, with no reported difference in likelihood in murder cases, with the inclusion of explicit jury nullification details in jury instructions.\nSpecific jurisdictional issues.\nUnited States.\nUnder the American judicial system, juries are often the trier of fact when they serve in a trial. In other words, it is their job to sort through disputed accounts presented in evidence. The judge decides questions of law, meaning he or she decides how the law applies to a given set of facts. Jury instructions are given to the jury by the judge, who usually reads them aloud to the jury. The judge issues a judge's charge to inform the jury how to act in deciding a case. The jury instructions provide something of a flowchart on what verdict jurors should deliver based on what they determine to be true. Put another way, \"If you believe A (set of facts), you must find X (verdict). If you believe B (set of facts), you must find Y (verdict).\" Jury instructions can also serve an important role in guiding the jury how to consider certain evidence.\nAll 50 states have a model set of instructions, usually called \"pattern jury instructions\", which provide the framework for the charge to the jury; sometimes, only names and circumstances have to be filled in for a particular case. Often they are much more complex, although certain elements frequently recur. For instance, if a criminal defendant chooses not to testify, the jury will often be instructed not to draw any negative conclusions from that decision. Many jurisdictions are now instructing jurors not to communicate about the case through social networking services like Facebook and Twitter.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe judge presents directions to the jury court, after overlapping instructions have been provided by a DVD and a jury manager.\nAustralia.\nIn Australia, as in other common law jurisdictions, jury instructions serve as essential guidelines for jurors in both criminal and civil trials, although trial by jury for civil matters is now rare. Each state and territory has its own legislation and rules governing jury instructions; although commonalities exist across the jurisdictions. These commonalities are due to harmonious legislation, and a nationally unified common law.\nTo promote consistency and clarity in jury instructions, Australian jurisdictions have developed standard jury directions or \"Bench Books\" that provide judges with templates and guidance on instructing jurors. The Bench Books are regularly updated to reflect changes in legislation and case law. Examples include the Victorian Criminal Charge Book, the New South Wales Criminal Trial Bench Book, and the Queensland Supreme and District Courts Benchbook.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16366", "revid": "16405733", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16366", "title": "Jurisprudence", "text": "Theoretical study of law\nJurisprudence, also known as theory of law or philosophy of law, is the examination in a general perspective of what law is and what it ought to be. It investigates issues such as the definition of law; legal validity; legal norms and values; and the relationship between law and other fields of study, including economics, ethics, history, sociology, and political philosophy.\nModern jurisprudence began in the 18th century and was based on the first principles of natural law, civil law, and the law of nations. Contemporary philosophy of law addresses problems internal to law and legal systems and problems of law as a social institution that relates to the larger political and social context in which it exists. Jurisprudence can be divided into categories both by the type of question scholars seek to answer and by the theories of jurisprudence, or schools of thought, regarding how those questions are best answered:\nThe terms \"philosophy of law\" and \"jurisprudence\" are often used interchangeably, though jurisprudence sometimes encompasses forms of reasoning that fit into economics or sociology.\nOverview.\nWhereas lawyers are interested in what the law is on a specific issue in a specific jurisdiction, analytical philosophers of law are interested in identifying the features of law shared across cultures, times, and places. Taken together, these foundational features of law offer the kind of universal definition philosophers are after. The general approach allows philosophers to ask questions about, for example, what separates law from morality, politics, or practical reason. While the field has traditionally focused on giving an account of law's nature, some scholars have begun to examine the nature of domains within law, e.g. tort law, contract law, or criminal law. These scholars focus on what makes certain domains of law distinctive and how one domain differs from another. A particularly fecund area of research has been the distinction between tort law and criminal law, which more generally bears on the difference between civil and criminal law.\nIn addition to analytic jurisprudence, legal philosophy is also concerned with normative theories of law. \"Normative jurisprudence involves normative, evaluative, and otherwise prescriptive questions about the law.\"\nEtymology and terminology.\nThe English word is derived from the Latin, . is the genitive form of meaning law, and meaning prudence (also: discretion, foresight, forethought, circumspection). It refers to the exercise of good judgment, common sense, and caution, especially in the conduct of practical matters. The word first appeared in written English in 1628, at a time when the word \"prudence\" meant knowledge of, or skill in, a matter. It may have entered English via the French , which appeared earlier.\nHistory.\nAncient jurisprudence begins with various Dharma\u015b\u0101stra texts of India. Dharmasutras of \u0100pasta\u1e43ba and Baudh\u0101yana are examples.\nIn Ancient China, the Daoists, Confucians, and Legalists all had competing theories of jurisprudence.\nJurisprudence in ancient Rome had its origins with the \"periti\"\u2014experts in the \"jus\" \"mos maiorum\" (traditional law), a body of oral laws and customs. Praetors established a working body of laws by judging whether or not singular cases were capable of being prosecuted either by the \"edicta\", the annual pronunciation of prosecutable offences, or in extraordinary situations, additions made to the \"edicta\". A \"iudex\" (originally a magistrate, later a private individual appointed to judge a specific case) would then prescribe a remedy according to the facts of the case.\nThe sentences of the \"iudex\" were supposed to be simple interpretations of the traditional customs, but\u2014apart from considering what traditional customs applied in each case\u2014soon developed a more equitable interpretation, coherently adapting the law to newer social exigencies. The law was then adjusted with evolving \"institutiones\" (legal concepts), while remaining in the traditional mode. Praetors were replaced in the 3rd century BC by a laical body of \"prudentes\". Admission to this body was conditional upon proof of competence or experience. Under the Roman Empire, schools of law were created, and practice of the law became more academic. From the early Roman Empire to the 3rd century, a relevant body of literature was produced by groups of scholars, including the Proculians and Sabinians. The scientific nature of the studies was unprecedented in ancient times. After the 3rd century, \"juris prudentia\" became a more bureaucratic activity, with few notable authors. It was during the Eastern Roman Empire (5th century) that legal studies were once again undertaken in depth, and it is from this cultural movement that Justinian's was born.\nModern jurisprudence began in the 18th century and was based on the first principles of natural law, civil law, and the law of nations.\nNatural law.\nNatural law holds that there are rational objective limits to the power of rulers, the foundations of law are accessible through reason, and it is from these laws of nature that human laws gain force. The moral theory of natural law asserts that law is inherent in nature and constitutive of morality, at least in part, and that an objective moral order, external to human legal systems, underlies natural law.\nOn this view, while legislators can enact and even successfully enforce immoral laws, such laws are \"legally\" invalid. The view is captured by the maxim: \"an unjust law is no law at all\", where 'unjust' means 'contrary to the natural law.' Natural law theory has medieval origins in the philosophy of Thomas Aquinas, especially in his \"Treatise on law\". In late 20th century, John Finnis revived interest in the theory and provided a modern reworking of it. For one, Finnis has argued that the maxim \"an unjust law is no law at all\" is a poor guide to the classical Thomist position.\nIn its general sense, natural law theory may be compared to both state-of-nature law and general law understood on the basis of being analogous to the laws of physical science. Natural law is often contrasted to positive law which asserts law as the product of human activity and human volition. Another approach to natural-law jurisprudence generally asserts that human law must be in response to compelling reasons for action. There are two readings of the natural-law jurisprudential stance.\nAristotle.\nAristotle is often said to be the father of natural law. Like his philosophical forefathers Socrates and Plato, Aristotle posited the existence of natural justice or natural right (\"dikaion physikon\", \"\u03b4\u03b9\u03ba\u03b1\u03af\u03bf\u03bd \u03c6\u03c5\u03c3\u03b9\u03ba\u03cc\u03bd\", Latin \"ius naturale\"). His association with natural law is largely due to how he was interpreted by Thomas Aquinas. This was based on Aquinas' conflation of natural law and natural right, the latter of which Aristotle posits in Book V of the \"Nicomachean Ethics\" (Book IV of the \"Eudemian Ethics\"). Aquinas's influence was such as to affect a number of early translations of these passages, though more recent translations render them more literally.\nAristotle's theory of justice is bound up in his idea of the golden mean. Indeed, his treatment of what he calls \"political justice\" derives from his discussion of \"the just\" as a moral virtue derived as the mean between opposing vices, just like every other virtue he describes. His longest discussion of his theory of justice occurs in \"Nicomachean Ethics\" and begins by asking what sort of mean a just act is. He argues that the term \"justice\" actually refers to two different but related ideas: general justice and particular justice. When a person's actions toward others are completely virtuous in all matters, Aristotle calls them \"just\" in the sense of \"general justice\"; as such, this idea of justice is more or less coextensive with virtue. \"Particular\" or \"partial justice\", by contrast, is the part of \"general justice\" or the individual virtue that is concerned with treating others equitably.\nAristotle moves from this unqualified discussion of justice to a qualified view of political justice, by which he means something close to the subject of modern jurisprudence. Of political justice, Aristotle argues that it is partly derived from nature and partly a matter of convention. This can be taken as a statement that is similar to the views of modern natural law theorists. But it must also be remembered that Aristotle is describing a view of morality, not a system of law, and therefore his remarks as to nature are about the grounding of the morality enacted as law, not the laws themselves.\nThe best evidence of Aristotle's having thought there was a natural law comes from the \"Rhetoric\", where Aristotle notes that, aside from the \"particular\" laws that each people has set up for itself, there is a \"common\" law that is according to nature. The context of this remark, however, suggests only that Aristotle thought that it could be rhetorically advantageous to appeal to such a law, especially when the \"particular\" law of one's own city was adverse to the case being made, not that there actually was such a law. Aristotle, moreover, considered certain candidates for a universally valid, natural law to be wrong. Aristotle's theoretical paternity of the natural law tradition is consequently disputed.\nThomas Aquinas.\nThomas Aquinas is the foremost classical proponent of natural theology, and the father of the Thomistic school of philosophy, for a long time the primary philosophical approach of the Roman Catholic Church. The work for which he is best known is the \"Summa Theologiae\". One of the thirty-five Doctors of the Church, he is considered by many Catholics to be the Church's greatest theologian. Consequently, many institutions of learning have been named after him.\nAquinas distinguished four kinds of law: eternal, natural, divine, and human:\nNatural law is based on \"first principles\":\n\"...\u00a0this is the first precept of the law, that good is to be done and promoted, and evil is to be avoided. All other precepts of the natural law are based on this\u00a0...\"\nThe desires to live and to procreate are counted by Aquinas among those basic (natural) human values on which all other human values are based.\nSchool of Salamanca.\nFrancisco de Vitoria was perhaps the first to develop a theory of \"ius gentium\" (law of nations), and thus is an important figure in the transition to modernity. He extrapolated his ideas of legitimate sovereign power to international affairs, concluding that such affairs ought to be determined by forms respecting of the rights of all and that the common good of the world should take precedence before the good of any single state. This meant that relations between states ought to pass from being justified by force to being justified by law and justice. Some scholars have upset the standard account of the origins of International law, which emphasises the seminal text \"De iure belli ac pacis\" by Hugo Grotius, and argued for Vitoria and, later, Su\u00e1rez's importance as forerunners and, potentially, founders of the field. Others, such as Koskenniemi, have argued that none of these humanist and scholastic thinkers can be understood to have founded international law in the modern sense, instead placing its origins in the post-1870 period.\nFrancisco Su\u00e1rez, regarded as among the greatest scholastics after Aquinas, subdivided the concept of \"ius gentium\". Working with already well-formed categories, he carefully distinguished \"ius inter gentes\" from \"ius intra gentes\". \"Ius inter gentes\" (which corresponds to modern international law) was something common to the majority of countries, although, being positive law, not natural law, it was not necessarily universal. On the other hand, \"ius intra gentes\", or civil law, is specific to each nation.\nLon Fuller.\nWriting after World War II, Lon L. Fuller defended a secular and procedural form of natural law. He emphasised that the (natural) law must meet certain formal requirements (such as being impartial and publicly knowable). To the extent that an institutional system of social control falls short of these requirements, Fuller argued, we are less inclined to recognise it as a system of law, or to give it our respect. Thus, the law must have a morality that goes beyond the societal rules under which laws are made.\nJohn Finnis.\nSophisticated positivist and natural law theories sometimes resemble each other and may have certain points in common. Identifying a particular theorist as a positivist or a natural law theorist sometimes involves matters of emphasis and degree, and the particular influences on the theorist's work. The natural law theorists of the distant past, such as Aquinas and John Locke made no distinction between analytic and normative jurisprudence, while modern natural law theorists, such as John Finnis, who claim to be positivists, still argue that law is moral by nature. In his book \"Natural Law and Natural Rights\" (1980, 2011), John Finnis provides a restatement of natural law doctrine.\nAnalytic jurisprudence.\nUnlike experimental jurisprudence, which investigates the content of legal concepts using the methods of social science, analytical jurisprudence seeks to provide a general account of the nature of law through the tools of conceptual analysis. The account is general in the sense of targeting universal features of law that hold at all times and places.\nAnalytic, or \"clarificatory\", jurisprudence takes a neutral point of view and uses descriptive language when referring to various aspects of legal systems. This was a philosophical development that rejected natural law's fusing of what law is and what it ought to be. David Hume argued, in \"A Treatise of Human Nature\", that people invariably slip from describing what the world \"is\" to asserting that we therefore \"ought\" to follow a particular course of action. But as a matter of pure logic, one cannot conclude that we \"ought\" to do something merely because something \"is\" the case. So analysing and clarifying the way the world \"is\" must be treated as a strictly separate question from normative and evaluative questions of what \"ought\" to be done.\nThe most important questions of analytic jurisprudence are: \"What are laws?\"; \"What is \"the\" law?\"; \"What is the relationship between law and power/sociology?\"; and \"What is the relationship between law and morality?\" Legal positivism is the dominant theory, although there is a growing number of critics who offer their own interpretations.\nHistorical school.\nHistorical jurisprudence came to prominence during the debate on the proposed codification of German law. In his book \"On the Vocation of Our Age for Legislation and Jurisprudence\", Friedrich Carl von Savigny argued that Germany did not have a legal language that would support codification because the traditions, customs, and beliefs of the German people did not include a belief in a code. Historicists believe that law originates with society.\nSociological jurisprudence.\nAn effort systematically to inform jurisprudence from sociological insights developed from the beginning of the twentieth century, as sociology began to establish itself as a distinct social science, especially in the United States and in continental Europe. In Germany, Austria and France, the work of the \"free law\" theorists (e.g. Ernst Fuchs, Hermann Kantorowicz, Eugen Ehrlich and Fran\u00e7ois G\u00e9ny) encouraged the use of sociological insights in the development of legal and juristic theory. The most internationally influential advocacy for a \"sociological jurisprudence\" occurred in the United States, where, throughout the first half of the twentieth century, Roscoe Pound, for many years the Dean of Harvard Law School, used this term to characterise his legal philosophy. In the United States, many later writers followed Pound's lead or developed distinctive approaches to sociological jurisprudence. In Australia, Julius Stone strongly defended and developed Pound's ideas.\nIn the 1930s, a significant split between the sociological jurists and the American legal realists emerged. In the second half of the twentieth century, sociological jurisprudence as a distinct movement declined as jurisprudence came more strongly under the influence of analytical legal philosophy; but with increasing criticism of dominant orientations of legal philosophy in English-speaking countries in the present century, it has attracted renewed interest. Increasingly, its contemporary focus is on providing theoretical resources for jurists to aid their understanding of new types of regulation (for example, the diverse kinds of developing transnational law) and the increasingly important interrelations of law and culture, especially in multicultural Western societies. As an approach to jurisprudence, sociological jurisprudence uses the resources of social science to serve value-oriented juristic purposes. As such, it should be distinguished from sociology of law which as a field of social science has no necessary commitment to juristic aims.\nLegal positivism.\nLegal positivism is the view that the content of law is dependent on social facts and that a legal system's existence is not constrained by morality. Within legal positivism, theorists agree that law's content is a product of social facts, but theorists disagree whether law's validity can be explained by incorporating moral values. Legal positivists who argue against the incorporation of moral values to explain law's validity are labeled exclusive (or hard) legal positivists. Joseph Raz's legal positivism is an example of exclusive legal positivism. Legal positivists who argue that law's validity can be explained by incorporating moral values are labeled inclusive (or soft) legal positivists. The legal positivist theories of H.\u00a0L.\u00a0A. Hart and Jules Coleman are examples of inclusive legal positivism.\nLegal positivism has traditionally been associated with three doctrines: the pedigree thesis, the separability thesis, and the discretion thesis. The pedigree thesis says that the right way to determine whether a directive is law is to look at the directive's source. The thesis claims that it is the fact that the directive was issued by the proper official within a legitimate government, for example, that determines the directive's legal validity\u2014not the directive's moral or practical merits. The separability thesis states that law is conceptually distinct from morality. While law might contain morality, the separability thesis states that \"it is in no sense a necessary truth that laws reproduce or satisfy certain demands of morality, though in fact they have often done so.\" Legal positivists disagree about the extent of the separability thesis. Exclusive legal positivists, notably Joseph Raz, go further than the standard thesis and deny that it is possible for morality to be a part of law at all. The discretion thesis states that judges create new law when they are given discretion to adjudicate cases where existing law underdetermines the result.\nThomas Hobbes.\nHobbes was a social contractarian and believed that the law had peoples' tacit consent. He believed that society was formed from a state of nature to protect people from the state of war that would exist otherwise. In \"Leviathan\", Hobbes argues that without an ordered society life would be \"solitary, poor, nasty, brutish and short.\" It is commonly said that Hobbes's views on human nature were influenced by his times. The English Civil War and the Cromwellian dictatorship had taken place; and, in reacting to that, Hobbes felt that absolute authority vested in a monarch, whose subjects obeyed the law, was the basis of a civilized society.\nBentham and Austin.\nJohn Austin and Jeremy Bentham were early legal positivists who sought to provide a descriptive account of law that describes the law as it is. Austin explained the descriptive focus for legal positivism by saying, \"The existence of law is one thing; its merit and demerit another. Whether it be or be not is one enquiry; whether it be or be not conformable to an assumed standard, is a different enquiry.\" For Austin and Bentham, a society is governed by a sovereign who has de facto authority. Through the sovereign's authority come laws, which for Austin and Bentham are commands backed by sanctions for non-compliance. Along with Hume, Bentham was an early and staunch supporter of the utilitarian concept, and was an avid prison reformer, advocate for democracy, and firm atheist. Bentham's views about law and jurisprudence were popularized by his student John Austin. Austin was the first chair of law at the new University of London, from 1829. Austin's utilitarian answer to \"what is law?\" was that law is \"commands, backed by threat of sanctions, from a sovereign, to whom people have a habit of obedience\". H.\u00a0L.\u00a0A. Hart criticized Austin and Bentham's early legal positivism because the command theory failed to account for individual's compliance with the law.\nHans Kelsen.\nHans Kelsen is considered one of the preeminent jurists of the 20th century and has been highly influential in Europe and Latin America, although less so in common law countries. His Pure Theory of Law describes law as \"binding norms\", while at the same time refusing to evaluate those norms. That is, \"legal science\" is to be separated from \"legal politics\". Central to the Pure Theory of Law is the notion of a 'basic norm' ()\u2014a hypothetical norm, presupposed by the jurist, from which all \"lower\" norms in the hierarchy of a legal system, beginning with constitutional law, are understood to derive their authority or the extent to which they are binding. Kelsen contends that the extent to which legal norms are binding, their specifically \"legal\" character, can be understood without tracing it ultimately to some suprahuman source such as God, personified Nature or\u2014of great importance in his time\u2014a personified State or Nation.\nH.\u00a0L.\u00a0A. Hart.\nIn the English-speaking world, the most influential legal positivist of the twentieth century was H.\u00a0L.\u00a0A. Hart, professor of jurisprudence at Oxford University. Hart argued that the law should be understood as a system of social rules. In \"The Concept of Law\", Hart rejected Kelsen's views that sanctions were essential to law and that a normative social phenomenon, like law, cannot be grounded in non-normative social facts.\nHart claimed that law is the union of primary rules and secondary rules. Primary rules require individuals to act or not act in certain ways and create duties for the governed to obey.\nSecondary rules are rules that confer authority to create new primary rules or modify existing ones. Secondary rules are divided into rules of adjudication (how to resolve legal disputes), rules of change (how laws are amended), and the rule of recognition (how laws are identified as valid). The validity of a legal system comes from the \"rule of recognition\", which is a customary practice of officials (especially barristers and judges) who identify certain acts and decisions as sources of law. In 1981, Neil MacCormick wrote a pivotal book on Hart (second edition published in 2008), which further refined and offered some important criticisms that led MacCormick to develop his own theory (the best example of which is his \"Institutions of Law\", 2007). Other important critiques include those of Ronald Dworkin, John Finnis, and Joseph Raz.\nIn recent years, debates on the nature of law have become increasingly fine-grained. One important debate is within legal positivism. One school is sometimes called \"exclusive legal positivism\" and is associated with the view that the legal validity of a norm can never depend on its moral correctness. A second school is labeled \"inclusive legal positivism\", a major proponent of which is Wil Waluchow, and is associated with the view that moral considerations may, but do not necessarily, determine the legal validity of a norm.\nJoseph Raz.\nJoseph Raz's theory of legal positivism argues against the incorporation of moral values to explain law's validity. In Raz's 1979 book \"The Authority of Law\", he criticised what he called the \"weak social thesis\" to explain law. He formulates the weak social thesis as \"(a) Sometimes the identification of some laws turn on moral arguments, but also with, (b) In all legal systems the identification of some law turns on moral argument.\" Raz argues that law's authority is identifiable purely through social sources, without reference to moral reasoning. This view he calls \"the sources thesis\". Raz suggests that any categorisation of rules beyond their role as authority is better left to sociology than to jurisprudence. Some philosophers used to contend that positivism was the theory that held that there was \"no necessary connection\" between law and morality; but influential contemporary positivists\u2014including Joseph Raz, John Gardner, and Leslie Green\u2014reject that view. Raz claims it is a necessary truth that there are vices that a legal system cannot possibly have (for example, it cannot commit rape or murder).\nLegal realism.\nLegal realism is the view that a theory of law should be descriptive and account for the reasons why judges decide cases as they do. Legal realism had some affinities with the sociology of law and sociological jurisprudence. The essential tenet of legal realism is that all law is made by humans and thus should account for reasons besides legal rules that led to a legal decision.\nThere are two separate schools of legal realism: American legal realism and Scandinavian legal realism. American legal realism grew out of the writings of Oliver Wendell Holmes. At the start of Holmes's \"The Common Law\", he claims that \"[t]he life of the law has not been logic: it has been experience\". This view was a reaction to legal formalism that was popular the time due to the Christopher Columbus Langdell. Holmes's writings on jurisprudence also laid the foundations for the predictive theory of law. In his article \"The Path of the Law\", Holmes argues that \"the object of [legal] study...is prediction, the prediction of the incidence of the public force through the instrumentality of the courts.\"\nFor the American legal realists of the early twentieth century, legal realism sought to describe the way judges decide cases. For legal realists such as Jerome Frank, judges start with the facts before them and then move to legal principles. Before legal realism, theories of jurisprudence turned this method around where judges were thought to begin with legal principles and then look to facts.\nIt has become common today to identify Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr., as the main precursor of American Legal Realism (other influences include Roscoe Pound, Karl Llewellyn, and Justice Benjamin Cardozo). Karl Llewellyn, another founder of the U.S. legal realism movement, similarly believed that the law is little more than putty in the hands of judges who are able to shape the outcome of cases based on their personal values or policy choices.\nThe Scandinavian school of legal realism argued that law can be explained through the empirical methods used by social scientists. Prominent Scandinavian legal realists are Alf Ross, Axel H\u00e4gerstr\u00f6m, and Karl Olivecrona. Scandinavian legal realists also took a naturalist approach to law.\nDespite its decline in popularity, legal realism continues to influence a wide spectrum of jurisprudential schools today, including critical legal studies, feminist legal theory, critical race theory, sociology of law, and law and economics.\nCritical legal studies.\nCritical legal studies are a new theory of jurisprudence that has developed since the 1970s. In 1977 a group of members of the Law and Society Association struck out on a new theoretical direction. The legal ideas of Peter Gabel, Morton Horwitz, Duncan Kennedy, Karl Klare, Mark Tushnet, and Roberto Unger have now found influence in many law schools. The theory can generally be traced to American legal realism and is considered \"the first movement in legal theory and legal scholarship in the United States to have espoused a committed Left political stance and perspective\". It holds that the law is largely contradictory, and can be best analyzed as an expression of the policy goals of a dominant social group. Roberto Mangabeira Unger and other authors in the movement contrast critical legal studies as a method, critical in approach, from the impersonal purposes and principles made necessary in legal reasoning such as formalism. He writes that it was \"consequently also by rejecting judges as the chief addressees of legal analysis, and refusing to take the question\u2014how should judges decide cases?\u2014as the defining problem in jurisprudence.\" According to Unger the new American legal analysis will unlock the democratic potential of free societies in the same way earlier capitalistic economies benefited from the protection of private rights such as contracts and property.\nLegal interpretivism.\nAmerican legal philosopher Ronald Dworkin's legal theory attacks legal positivists that separate law's content from morality. In his book \"Law's Empire\", Dworkin argued that law is an \"interpretive\" concept that requires barristers to find the best-fitting and most just solution to a legal dispute, given their constitutional traditions. According to him, law is not entirely based on social facts, but includes the best moral justification for the institutional facts and practices that form a society's legal tradition. It follows from Dworkin's view that one cannot know whether a society has a legal system in force, or what any of its laws are, until one knows some truths about the moral justifications of the social and political practices of that society. It is consistent with Dworkin's view\u2014in contrast with the views of legal positivists or legal realists\u2014that no-one in a society may know what its laws are, because no-one may know the best moral justification for its practices.\nInterpretation, according to Dworkin's \"integrity theory of law\", has two dimensions. To count as an interpretation, the reading of a text must meet the criterion of \"fit\". Of those interpretations that fit, however, Dworkin maintains that the correct interpretation is the one that portrays the practices of the community in their best light, or makes them \"the best that they can be\". But many writers have doubted whether there is a single best moral justification for the complex practices of any given community, and others have doubted whether, even if there is, it should be counted as part of the law of that community.\nTherapeutic jurisprudence.\nConsequences of the operation of legal rules or legal procedures\u2014or of the behavior of legal actors (such as lawyers and judges)\u2014may be either beneficial (therapeutic) or harmful (anti-therapeutic) to people. Therapeutic jurisprudence (\"TJ\") studies law as a social force (or agent) and uses social science methods and data to study the extent to which a legal rule or practice affects the psychological well-being of the people it impacts.\nNormative jurisprudence.\nIn addition to the question, \"What is law?\", legal philosophy is also concerned with normative, or \"evaluative\" theories of law. What is the goal or purpose of law? What moral or political theories provide a foundation for the law? What is the proper function of law? What sorts of acts should be subject to punishment, and what sorts of punishment should be permitted? What is justice? What rights do we have? Is there a duty to obey the law? What value has the rule of law? Some of the different schools and leading thinkers are discussed below.\nVirtue jurisprudence.\nAretaic moral theories, such as contemporary virtue ethics, emphasize the role of character in morality. Virtue jurisprudence is the view that the laws should promote the development of virtuous character in citizens. Historically, this approach has been mainly associated with Aristotle or Thomas Aquinas. Contemporary virtue jurisprudence is inspired by philosophical work on virtue ethics.\nDeontology.\nDeontology is the \"theory of duty or moral obligation\". The philosopher Immanuel Kant formulated one influential deontological theory of law. He argued that any rule we follow must be able to be universally applied, i.e. we must be willing for everyone to follow that rule. A contemporary deontological approach can be found in the work of the legal philosopher Ronald Dworkin.\nUtilitarianism.\nUtilitarianism is the view that the laws should be crafted so as to produce the best consequences for the greatest number of people. Historically, utilitarian thinking about law has been associated with the philosopher Jeremy Bentham. John Stuart Mill was a pupil of Bentham's and was the torch bearer for utilitarian philosophy throughout the late nineteenth century. In contemporary legal theory, the utilitarian approach is frequently championed by scholars who work in the law and economics tradition.\nJohn Rawls.\nJohn Rawls was an American philosopher; a professor of political philosophy at Harvard University; and author of \"A Theory of Justice\" (1971), \"Political Liberalism\", \"\", and \"The Law of Peoples\". He is widely considered one of the most important English-language political philosophers of the 20th century. His theory of justice uses a method called \"original position\" to ask us which principles of justice we would choose to regulate the basic institutions of our society if we were behind a \"veil of ignorance\". Imagine we do not know who we are\u2014our race, sex, wealth, status, class, or any distinguishing feature\u2014so that we would not be biased in our own favour. Rawls argued from this \"original position\" that we would choose exactly the same political liberties for everyone, like freedom of speech, the right to vote, and so on. Also, we would choose a system where there is only inequality because that produces incentives enough for the economic well-being of all society, especially the poorest. This is Rawls's famous \"difference principle\". Justice is fairness, in the sense that the fairness of the original position of choice guarantees the fairness of the principles chosen in that position.\nThere are many other normative approaches to the philosophy of law, including constitutionalism, critical legal studies and libertarian theories of law.\nExperimental jurisprudence.\nExperimental jurisprudence seeks to investigate the content of legal concepts using the methods of social science, unlike the philosophical methods of traditional jurisprudence.\nList of philosophers of law.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16367", "revid": "44704152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16367", "title": "Jury trial", "text": "Type of legal trial\nA jury trial, or trial by jury, is a legal proceeding in which a jury makes findings of fact and reaches a verdict. It is distinguished from a bench trial, in which a judge or panel of judges makes all decisions.\nJury trials are used in a significant share of serious criminal cases in many common law judicial systems, but not all. Juries or lay judges have also been incorporated into the legal systems of many civil law countries for criminal cases.\nThe use of jury trials, which evolved within common law systems rather than civil law systems, has had a profound impact on the nature of American civil procedure and criminal procedure rules, even if a bench trial is actually contemplated in a particular case. In general, the availability of a jury trial if properly demanded has given rise to a system in which fact finding is concentrated in a single trial rather than multiple hearings, and appellate review of trial court decisions is greatly limited. Jury trials are of far less importance (or of no importance) in countries that do not have a common law system.\nHistory.\nGreece.\nAncient Athens had a mechanism, called \"dikasta\u00ed\", to assure that no one could select jurors for their own trial. For normal cases, the courts were made up of \"dikastai\" of up to 500 citizens. For capital cases\u2014those that involved death, loss of liberty, exile, loss of civil rights, or seizure of property\u2014the trial was before a jury of 1,001 to 1,501 \"dikastai\". In such large juries, they rule by majority. Juries were appointed by lot. Jurists cast a ceramic disk with an axle in its middle: the axle was either hollow or solid. Thus the way they voted was kept secret because the jurists would hold their disk by the axle by thumb and forefinger, thus hiding whether its axle was hollow or solid. Since Periclean times, jurists were compensated for their sitting in court, with the amount of one day's wages.\nThe institution of trial by jury was ritually depicted by Aeschylus in \"The Eumenides\", the third and final play of his \"Oresteia\" trilogy. In the play, the innovation is brought about by the goddess Athena, who summons twelve citizens to sit as jury. The god Apollo takes part in the trial as the advocate for the defendant Orestes and the Furies as prosecutors for the slain Clytemnestra. In the event the jury is split six to six, Athena dictates that the verdict should henceforth be for acquittal.\nRoman Republic and Empire.\nFrom the beginning of the republic and in the majority of civil cases towards the end of the empire, there were tribunals with the characteristics of the jury in the sense that Roman judges were civilian, lay and not professionals. Capital trials were held in front of hundreds or thousands of 'juries' in the commitias or centuries, the same as in Athenian trials. Roman law provided for the yearly selection of judices, who would be responsible for resolving disputes by acting as jurors, with a praetor performing many of the duties of a judge. High government officials and their relatives were barred from acting as judices, due to conflicts of interest. Those previously found guilty of serious crimes (felonies) were also barred as were gladiators for hire, who likely were hired to resolve disputes through trial by combat. The law was as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The peregrine praetor (literally, traveling judge) within the next ten days after this law is passed by the people or plebs shall provide for the selection of 450 persons in this State who have or have had a knight's census\u00a0... provided that he does not select a person who is or has been plebeian tribune, quaestor, triumvir capitalis, military tribune in any of the first four legions, or triumvir for granting and assigning lands, or who is or has been in the Senate, or who has fought or shall fight as a gladiator for hire\u00a0... or who has been condemned by the judicial process and a public trial whereby he cannot be enrolled in the Senate, or who is less than thirty or more than sixty years of age, or who does not have his residence in the city of Rome or within one mile of it, or who is the father, brother, or son of any above-described magistrate, or who is the father, brother, or son of a person who is or has been a member of the Senate, or who is overseas.\nIslamic law.\nIn classical Islamic jurisprudence, litigants in court may obtain notarized statements from between three and twelve witnesses. When the statements of all witnesses are consistent, the notaries will certify their unanimous testimony in a legal document, which may be used to support the litigant's claim. The notaries serve to free the judge from the time-consuming task of hearing the testimony of each eyewitness himself, and their documents serve to legally authenticate each oral testimony. The Maliki school of Islamic jurisprudence requires two notaries to collect a minimum of twelve eyewitness statements in certain legal cases, including those involving unregistered marriages and land disputes. John Makdisi has compared this to English Common Law jury trials under King Henry II, surmising a link between the king\u2019s reforms and the legal system of the Kingdom of Sicily.\nHoly Roman Empire and modern Germany.\nA Swabian ordinance of 1562 called for the summons of jurymen ('), and various methods were in use in Emmendingen, Oppenau, and Oberkirch. Hauenstein's charter of 1442 secured the right to be tried in all cases by 24 fellow equals, and in Freiburg the jury was composed of 30 citizens and councilors. The modern jury trial was first introduced in the Rhenish provinces in 1798, with a court consisting most commonly of 12 citizens (').\nThe system whereby citizens were tried by their peers chosen from the entire community in open court was gradually superseded by a system of professional judges in Germany, in which the process of investigation was more or less confidential and judgements were issued by judges appointed by the state. In Constance the jury trial was suppressed by decree of the Habsburg monarchy in 1786. The Frankfurt Constitution of the failed Revolutions of 1848 called for jury trials for \"the more serious crimes and all political offenses\", but was never implemented after the Frankfurt Parliament was dissolved by W\u00fcrttemberg dragoons. An 1873 draft on criminal procedure produced by the Prussian Ministry of Justice proposed to abolish the jury and replace it with the mixed system, causing a significant political debate. In the Weimar Republic the jury was abolished by the Emminger Reform of 4 January 1924.\nBetween 1948 and 1950 in American-occupied Germany and the Federal Republic of Germany, Bavaria returned to the jury trial as it had existed before the 1933 emergency decrees, but they were again abolished by the 1950 Unification Act (\"\") for the Federal Republic. In 1979, the United States tried the East German LOT Flight 165 hijacking suspects in the United States Court for Berlin in West Berlin, which declared the defendants had the right to a jury trial under the United States Constitution, and hence were tried by a West German jury.\nEngland and Wales.\nAccording to George Macaulay Trevelyan in \"A Shortened History of England\", during the Viking occupation:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The Scandinavians, when not on the Viking warpath, were a litigious people and loved to get together in the \"thing\" [governing assembly] to hear legal argument. They had no professional lawyers, but many of their farmer-warriors, like Nj\u00e1ll \u00deorgeirsson, the truth-teller, were learned in folk custom and in its intricate judicial procedure. A Danish town in England often had, as its main officers, twelve hereditary 'law men.' The Danes introduced the habit of making committees among the free men in court, which perhaps made England favorable ground for the future growth of the jury system out of a Frankish custom later introduced by the Normans.\"\nThe English king \u00c6thelred the Unready set up an early legal system through the Wantage Code of Ethelred, one provision of which stated that the twelve leading thegns (minor nobles) of each wapentake (a small district) were required to swear that they would investigate crimes without a bias. These juries differed from the modern sort by being self-informing; instead of getting information through a trial, the jurors were required to investigate the case themselves.\nIn the 12th century, Henry II took a major step in developing the jury system. Henry II set up a system to resolve land disputes using juries. A jury of twelve free men were assigned to arbitrate in these disputes. As with the Saxon system, these men were charged with uncovering the facts of the case on their own rather than listening to arguments in court. Henry II also introduced what is now known as the \"grand jury\" through his Assize of Clarendon. Under the assize, a jury of free men was charged with reporting any crimes that they knew of in their hundred to a \"justice in eyre\", a judge who moved between hundreds on a circuit. A criminal accused by this jury was given a trial by ordeal.\nThe Church banned participation of clergy in trial by ordeal in 1215. Without the legitimacy of religion, trial by ordeal collapsed. The juries under the assizes began deciding guilt as well as providing accusations. The same year, trial by jury became an explicit right in one of the most influential clauses of Magna Carta. Article 39 of Magna Carta read:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIt is translated thus by Lysander Spooner in his \"Essay on the Trial by Jury\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;No free man shall be captured, and or imprisoned, or disseised of his freehold, and or of his liberties, or of his free customs, or be outlawed, or exiled, or in any way destroyed, nor will we proceed against him by force or proceed against him by arms, but by the lawful judgment of his peers, and or by the law of the land.\nAlthough it says \"and or by the law of the land\", this in no manner can be interpreted as if it were enough to have a positive law, made by the king, to be able to proceed legally against a citizen. The law of the land was the consuetudinary law, based on the customs and consent of John's subjects, and since they did not have Parliament in those times, this meant that neither the king nor the barons could make a law without the consent of the people.\nAccording to some sources, in the time of Edward III, \"by the law of the land\" had been substituted \"by due process of law\", which in those times was a trial by twelve peers.\nIn 1215, Magna Carta further secured defendants the right to a judgement of \"reputable men of the neighbourhood\"/\"their equals\" by stating that\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For a trivial offence, a free man shall be fined only in proportion to the degree of his offence, and for a serious offence correspondingly, but not so heavily as to deprive him of his livelihood. In the same way, a merchant shall be spared his merchandise, and a husbandman the implements of his husbandry, if they fall upon the mercy of a royal court. None of these fines shall be imposed except by the assessment on oath of reputable men of the neighbourhood.\nEarls and barons shall be fined only by their equals, and in proportion to the gravity of their offence.\nTo any man whom we have deprived or dispossessed of lands, castles, liberties, or rights, without the lawful judgement of his equals, we will at once restore these.\nIf we have deprived or dispossessed any Welshmen of lands, liberties, or anything else in England or in Wales, without the lawful judgement of their equals, these are at once to be returned to them. A dispute on this point shall be determined in the Marches by the judgement of equals. English law shall apply to holdings of land in England, Welsh law to those in Wales, and the law of the Marches to those in the Marches. The Welsh shall treat us and ours in the same way.\nDuring the mid-14th century, persons who had sat on the presenting jury (i.e., in modern parlance, the grand jury) were forbidden to sit on the trial jury for that crime. (25 Edw. 3. Stat 5. c. 3) (1353). Medieval juries were self-informing, in that individuals were chosen as jurors because they either knew the parties and the facts, or they had the duty to discover them. This spared the government the cost of fact-finding. Over time, English juries became less self-informing and relied more on the trial itself for information on the case. Jurors remained free to investigate cases on their own until the 17th century. Magna Carta being forgotten after a succession of benevolent reigns (or, more probably, reigns limited by the jury and the barons, and only under the rule of laws that the juries and barons found acceptable), the kings, through the royal judges, began to extend their control over the jury and the kingdom. In David Hume's \"History of England\", he tells something of the powers that the kings had accumulated in the times after Magna Carta, the prerogatives of the crown and the sources of great power with which these monarchs counted:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;One of the most ancient and most established instruments of power was the court of Star Chamber, which possessed an unlimited discretionary authority of fining, imprisoning, and inflicting corporal punishment, and whose jurisdiction extended to all sorts of offenses, contempts, and disorders, that lay not within reach of the common law. The members of this court consisted of the privy council and the judges; men who all of them enjoyed their offices during pleasure: And when the prince himself was present, he was the sole judge, and all the others could only interpose with their advice. There needed but this one court in any government, to put an end to all regular, legal, and exact plans of liberty. For who durst set himself in opposition to the crown and ministry, or aspire to the character of being a patron of freedom, while exposed to so arbitrary a jurisdiction? I much question, whether any of the absolute monarchies in Europe contain, at present, so illegal and despotic a tribunal. While so many terrors hung over the people, no jury durst have acquitted a man, when the court was resolved to have him condemned. The practice also, of not confronting witnesses to the prisoner, gave the crown lawyers all imaginable advantage against him. And, indeed, there scarcely occurs an instance, during all these reigns, that the sovereign, or the ministers, were ever disappointed in the issue of a prosecution. Timid juries, and judges who held their offices during pleasure, never failed to second all the views of the crown. And as the practice was anciently common of fining, imprisoning, or otherwise punishing the jurors, merely at the discretion of the court, for finding a verdict contrary to the direction of these dependent judges; it is obvious, that juries were then no manner of security to the liberty of the subject.\nThe first paragraph of the act that abolished the Star Chamber repeats the clause on the right of a citizen to be judged by his peers:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;WHEREAS by the great charter many times confirmed in parliament, it is enacted, That no freeman shall be taken or imprisoned, or disseised of his freehold or liberties, or free customs, or be outlawed or exiled or otherwise destroyed, and that the King will not pass upon him, or condemn him; but by lawful judgment of his peers, or by the law of the land\u00a0...\nIn 1670 two Quakers charged with unlawful assembly, William Penn and William Mead, were found not guilty by a jury. The judge then fined the jury for contempt of court for returning a verdict contrary to their own findings of fact and removed them to prison until the fine was paid. Edward Bushel, a member of the jury, nonetheless refused to pay the fine. Bushel petitioned the Court of Common Pleas for a writ of \"habeas corpus\". The ruling in the \"Bushel's Case\" was that a jury could not be punished simply on account of the verdict it returned.\nMany British colonies, including the United States, adopted the English common law system in which trial by jury is an important part. Jury trials in criminal cases were a protected right in the original United States Constitution and the Fifth, Sixth, and Seventh Amendments of the U.S. Constitution extend the right to a jury trial for both criminal and civil matters and a grand jury for serious cases.\nRole.\nIn most common law jurisdictions, the jury is responsible for finding the facts of the case, while the judge determines the law. These \"peers of the accused\" are responsible for listening to a dispute, evaluating the evidence presented, deciding on the facts, and making a decision in accordance with the rules of law and their jury instructions. Typically, the jury only judges a verdict of guilty or not guilty, but the actual penalty is set by the judge.\nVarious verdicts.\nRussia.\nFollowing the judicial reform of Alexander II in Russia, unlike in modern jury trials, jurors decided not only whether the defendant was guilty or not guilty, but they had a third choice: \"Guilty, but not to be punished\", since Alexander II believed that justice without morality was wrong.\nFrance.\nIn France and some countries organized in the same fashion, the jury and several professional judges sit together to determine guilt first. Then, if guilt is determined, they decide the appropriate penalty.\nBench trials.\nSome jurisdictions with jury trials allow the defendant to waive their right to a jury trial, thus leading to a bench trial. Jury trials tend to occur only when a crime is considered serious. In some jurisdictions, such as France and Brazil, jury trials are reserved, and compulsory, for the most severe crimes and are not available for civil cases. In Brazil, trials by jury are applied in cases of voluntary crimes against life, such as first and second degree murder, forced abortion and instigation of suicide, even if only attempted. \nIn others, jury trials are only available for criminal cases and very specific civil cases (malicious prosecution, civil fraud and false imprisonment).\nIn the United States, jury trials are available in both civil and criminal cases. In Canada, an individual charged with an indictable offence may elect to be tried by a judge alone in a provincial court, by judge alone in a superior court, or by judge and jury in a superior court; summary offences cannot be tried by jury. In England and Wales, offences are classified as summary, indictable, or either way; jury trials are not available for summary offences (using instead a summary proceeding with a panel of three lay magistrates or a district judge sitting alone), unless they are tried alongside indictable or either way offences that are themselves tried by jury, but the defendant has a right to demand a jury trial for either way offences. The situation is similar in Scotland; whereas in Northern Ireland even summary offences carry a right to jury trial, with some exceptions.\nIn the United States, because jury trials tend to be high profile, the general public tends to overestimate the frequency of jury trials. Approximately 150,000 jury trials are conducted in state courts annually, and an additional 5,000 jury trials are conducted in federal courts. Two-thirds of jury trials are criminal trials, while one-third are civil and \"other\" (e.g., family, municipal ordinance, traffic). Nevertheless, the vast majority of criminal cases are settled by plea bargain, which bypasses the jury trial.\nSome commentators contend that the guilty-plea system (and the high costs incurred in trials) unfairly coerces defendants into relinquishing their right to a jury trial.\nOthers contend that there never was a golden age of jury trials, but rather that juries in the early nineteenth century (before the rise of plea bargaining) were \"unwitting and reflexive, generally wasteful of public resources and, because of the absence of trained professionals, little more than slow guilty pleas themselves\", and that the guilty-plea system that emerged in the latter half of the nineteenth century was a superior, more cost-effective method of achieving fair outcomes.\nDiscussion.\nRobert Burns argues that the jury trial provides the discipline and rigor needed to limit raw discretion of judges and other bureaucrats. In particular, he praises the adversarial nature of the American system as a more effective way to uncover truths than the judge-led process in Europe. He further argues that being face-to-face in open court can help to bring humanity into the courtroom, by reminding decision-makers that everyone involved are humans with souls.\nIn various countries.\nOverall, jury use has been increasing worldwide.\nArgentina.\nArgentina is one of the first countries in Latin America, which has implemented trial by jury. Although it has a civil law process, since November 2015, it has a jury system for serious criminal cases.\nAustralia.\nSection 80 of the Australian Constitution provides that: \"The trial on indictment of any offence against any law of the Commonwealth shall be by jury, and every such trial shall be held in the State where the offence was committed, and if the offence was not committed within any State the trial shall be held at such place or places as the Parliament prescribes.\nThe first trials by civilian juries of 12 in the colony of New South Wales were held in 1824, following a decision of the NSW Supreme Court on 14 October 1824. The New South Wales Constitution Act 1828 (7 &amp; 8 Geo. 4. c. 73) effectively terminated trial by jury for criminal matters. Jury trials for criminal matters revived with the passing of the Jury Trials Amending Act of 1833 (NSW) (2 William IV No 12).\nChallenging potential jurors.\nThe \"voir dire\" system of examining the jury pool before selection is not permitted in Australia as it violates the privacy of jurors. Therefore, though it exists, the right to challenge for cause during jury selection cannot be employed much. Peremptory challenges are usually based on the hunches of counsel and no reason is needed to use them. All Australian states allow for peremptory challenges in jury selection; however, the number of challenges granted to the counsels in each state are not all the same. Until 1987 New South Wales had twenty peremptory challenges for each side where the offence was murder, and eight for all other cases. In 1987 this was lowered to three peremptory challenges per side, the same amount allowed in South Australia. Eight peremptory challenges are allowed for both counsels for all offences in Queensland. Victoria, Tasmania and the Northern Territory allow for six. Western Australia allows three peremptory challenges per side unless there is more than one accused in which case the prosecution can peremptorily challenge three times the number of accused and each accused has three peremptory challenges.\nMajority and unanimous verdicts in criminal trials.\nIn Australia, majority verdicts are allowed in South Australia, Victoria, Western Australia, Tasmania, the Northern Territory, New South Wales and Queensland, while the ACT requires unanimous verdicts.\nSince 1927 South Australia has permitted majority verdicts of 11-1 (or 10-1 or 9-1 in cases where the jury has been reduced) in criminal trials if a unanimous verdict cannot be reached in four hours. These are accepted in all cases except for guilty verdicts if the defendant is on trial for murder or treason.\nVictoria has accepted majority verdicts with the same conditions since 1994, though deliberations must have gone for at least six hours before a majority verdict can be made.\nWestern Australia accepted majority verdicts in 1957 for all trials except where the crime is murder or has a maximum penalty of life imprisonment: a 10-2 verdict is accepted.\nMajority verdicts of 10-2 have been allowed in Tasmania since 1936 for all cases, except murder and treason, if a unanimous decision has not been made within two hours. Since 1943, verdicts of not guilty for murder and treason have also been included, but must be deliberated for six hours.\nThe Northern Territory has allowed majority verdicts of 10-2, 10-1 and 9-1 since 1963 for all charges. Deliberation must go for at least six hours before delivering a majority verdict.\nThe Queensland \"Jury Act 1995\" (s 59F) allows majority verdicts for all crimes except for murder and other offences that carry a life sentence, although only 11-1 or 10-1 majorities are allowed.\nMajority verdicts were introduced in New South Wales in 2006. In New South Wales, a majority verdict can only be returned if the jury consists of at least 11 jurors, and the deliberation has occurred for at least eight hours or for a period that the court considers reasonable having regard to the nature and complexity of the case. Additionally, the court must be satisfied through examination of one or more of the jurors on oath that a unanimous verdict will not be reached if further deliberation were to occur.\nAustria.\nAustria, in common with a number of European civil law jurisdictions, retains elements of trial by jury in serious criminal cases.\nBelgium.\nBelgium, in common with a number of European civil law jurisdictions, retains the trial by jury through the Court of Assize for serious criminal cases and for political crimes and for press delicts (except those based on racism or xenophobia), and for crimes of international law, such as genocide and crime against humanity.\nBrazil.\nBrazil instated jury trial since 1822, surviving seven constitutions. It is limited to criminal law, specifically to intentional crimes against life.\nCanada.\nUnder Canadian law, a person has the constitutional right to a jury trial for all crimes punishable by five years of imprisonment or more. The Criminal Code also provides for the right to a jury trial for most indictable offences, including those punishable by less than five years' imprisonment, though the right is only constitutionally enshrined for those offences punishable by five years' imprisonment or more. Generally, it is the accused person who is entitled to elect whether their trial will proceed by judge alone or by judge and jury; however, for the most severe criminal offences\u2014murder, treason, intimidating Parliament, inciting to mutiny, sedition, and piracy\u2014trial by jury is mandatory unless the prosecution consents to trial by judge alone.\nJury panel exhaustion.\nCriminal Code Section 642(1): If a full jury and alternate jurors cannot be provided, the court may order the sheriff or other proper officer, at the request of the prosecutor, to summon without delay as many people as the court directs for the purpose of providing a full jury and alternate jurors.\nSection 642(2): Jurors may be summoned under subsection (1) by word of mouth, if necessary.\nSection 642(3): The names of the people who are summoned under this Section shall be added to the general panel for the purposes of the trial, and the same proceedings with respect to calling, challenging, excusing and directing them shall apply to them. \nAccording to the case of \"R v Mid-Valley Tractor Sales Limited\" (1995 CarswellNB 313), there are limitations on the powers granted by Section 642. These powers are conferred specifically upon the judge, and the section does not confer a further discretion to delegate that power to others, such as the sheriff's officer, even with the consent of counsel. The Court said that to hold otherwise would nullify the rights of the accused and the prosecution to object to a person being excused inappropriately, and may also interfere with the rights of the parties to challenge for cause. The selection of an impartial jury is the basis of a fair trial.\nThe Supreme Court of Canada also held in \"Basarabas and Spek v The Queen\" (1982 SCR 730) that the right of an accused to be present in court during the whole of his trial includes the jury selection process.\nIn \"Tran v The Queen\" (1994 2 SCR 951), it was held that an accused only has to show that they were excluded from a part of the trial that affected their vital interests, they do not have to demonstrate actual prejudice, just the potential for prejudice. As well, a valid waiver of such a right must be clear, unequivocal and done with full knowledge of the rights that the procedure was enacted to protect, as well as the effect that the waiver will have on those rights.\nChina.\nHong Kong.\nHong Kong, as a former British colony, has a common law legal system. Article 86 of Hong Kong's Basic Law, which came into force on 1 July 1997 following the handover of Hong Kong from Britain to China provides: \"The principle of trial by jury previously practised in Hong Kong shall be maintained.\"\nCriminal trials in the High Court are by jury. The juries are generally made of seven members, who can return a verdict based on a majority of five.\nThere are no jury trials in the District Court, which can impose a sentence of up to seven years' imprisonment. This is despite the fact that all court rooms in the District Court have jury boxes. The lack of juries in the District Court has been severely criticized. Clive Grossman SC in a commentary in 2009 said conviction rates were \"approaching those of North Korea\".\nMany complex commercial cases are prosecuted in the District Court rather than before a jury in the High Court. In 2009, Lily Chiang, former chairwoman of the Hong Kong General Chamber of Commerce, lost an application to have her case transferred from the District Court to the High Court for a jury trial. Justice Wright in the Court of First Instance held that there was no absolute right to a trial by jury and that the \"decision as to whether an indictable offence be tried in the Court of First Instance by a judge and jury or in the District Court by a judge alone is the prerogative of the Secretary for Justice.\" Chiang issued a statement at the time saying \"she was disappointed with the judgment because she has been deprived of a jury trial, an opportunity to be judged by her fellow citizens and the constitutional benefit protected by the Basic Law\".\nIn civil cases in the Court of First Instance jury trials are available for defamation, false imprisonment, malicious prosecution or seduction unless the court orders otherwise. A jury can return a majority verdict in a civil case.\nThe government can issue a judge-only trial order under the Hong Kong national security law, in cases which contain \"involvement of foreign elements\", \"personal safety of jurors and their family members\" or \"risk of perverting the course of justice if the trial is conducted with a jury\".\nDemocratic Republic of the Congo.\nKuba Kingdom.\nIn Kuba Kingdom in what is now the Democratic Republic of the Congo, trial by jury was established independently prior to the arrival of Europeans in 1884.\nFrance.\nIn France, a defendant is entitled to a jury trial only when prosecuted for a felony (\"crime\" in French). Crimes encompass all offenses that carry a penalty of at least 10 years' imprisonment (for natural persons) or a fine of \u20ac75,000 (for legal persons). The only court that tries by jury is the \"cour d'assises,\" in which three professional judges sit together with six or nine jurors (on appeal). Conviction requires a two-thirds majority (four or six votes).\nGreece.\nThe country that originated the concept of the jury trial retains it in an unusual form. The Constitution of Greece and Code of criminal procedure provide that felonies (Greek: \u039a\u03b1\u03ba\u03bf\u03c5\u03c1\u03b3\u03ae\u03bc\u03b1\u03c4\u03b1) are tried by a \"mixed court\" composed of three professional judges, including the President of the Court, and four lay judges who decide the facts, and the appropriate penalty if they convict. Certain felonies, such as terrorism, are exempt, due to their nature, from the jurisdiction of the \"mixed courts\" and are tried instead by the Court of Appeals both in first and second instance.\nHungary.\nHungary used a jury system from 1897 to 1919. Since 1949, Hungary uses the mixed court system. According to the Fundamental Law of Hungary, \"non-professional judges shall also participate in the administration of justice in the cases and ways specified in an Act.\" In these cases, the court adjudicates in a panel which is composed of 1 professional judge as chair of the panel and 2 lay judges or 2 professional judges and 3 lay judges. Lay judges are elected by city councils and can be Hungarian citizens between the age of 30 and 70 years who have not been convicted. Non-professional judges have the same rights and responsibilities as professional judges, meaning that if they vote against the professional judge(s), their vote will decide the verdict. According to procedural laws, the youngest judge votes first and the chair of the panel votes last in case they reach a verdict through a vote.\nIndia.\nThe history of jury trials in India dates back to the period of European colonization. In 1665, a petit jury in Madras composed of twelve English and Portuguese jurors acquitted a Mrs. Ascentia Dawes, who was on trial for the murder of her enslaved servant. During the period of Company rule in India, jury trials within a dual-court system territories were implemented in Indian territories under East India Company (EIC) control. In Presidency towns (such as Calcutta, Bombai and Madras), Crown Courts employed juries to judge European and Indian defendants in criminal cases. Outside of Presidency towns, Company Courts staffed by EIC officials judged both criminal and civil cases without the use of a jury.\nIn 1860, after the British Crown assumed control over the EIC's possessions in India, the Indian Penal Code was adopted. A year later, the Code of Criminal Procedure was adopted in 1861. These new regulations stipulated that criminal juries were only mandatory in the High courts of Presidency towns; in all other parts of British India, they were optional and rarely utilized. In cases where the defendants were either European or American, at least half of the jury was required to be European or American men, with the justification given that juries in these cases had to be \"acquainted with [the defendant's] feelings and dispositions.\"\nDuring the 20th century, the jury system in British India came under criticism from both colonial officials and independence activists. The system received no mentions in the 1950 Indian Constitution and frequently went unimplemented in many Indian legal jurisdictions after independence in 1947. In 1958, the Law Commission of India recommended its abolition in the fourteenth report that the commission submitted to the Indian government. Jury trials in India were gradually abolished during the 1960s, culminating in the 1973 Criminal Procedure Code, which remains in effect into the 21st century.\nParsis in India are legally permitted to use jury trials to decide divorces wherein randomly selected jurors (referred to in the Indian legal system as \"delegates\") from the local Parsi community are used to decide the outcome of the matrimonial disputes in question during civil trials. This jury system consists of a mixture of common law juries and the Panchayati raj form of local government, and was first implemented during the period of British rule, with the colonial administration passing the Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act in 1936. Post-independence, it was amended by the Indian government in 1988.\nIreland.\nIn the Republic of Ireland, a common law jurisdiction, jury trials are available for criminal cases before the Circuit Court, Central Criminal Court and defamation cases, consisting of twelve jurors.\nJuries only decide questions of fact; they have no role in criminal sentencing in criminal cases however they do have a role in awarding damages in defamation cases. It is not necessary that a jury be unanimous in its verdict. In civil cases, a verdict may be reached by a majority of nine of the twelve members. In a criminal case, a verdict need not be unanimous where there are not fewer than eleven jurors if ten of them agree on a verdict after considering the case for a reasonable time.\nJuries are selected from a jury panel, which is picked at random by the county registrar from the electoral register. The principal statute regulating the selection, obligations and conduct of juries is the Juries Act 1976 as amended by the Civil Law (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2008, which scrapped the upper age limit of 70. Juries are not paid, nor do they receive travel expenses. They do receive lunch for the days that they are serving; however, for jurors in employment, their employer is required to pay them as if they were present at work.\nFor certain terrorist and organised crime offences the Director of Public Prosecutions may issue a certificate that the accused be tried by the Special Criminal Court composed of three judges instead of a jury, one from the District Court, Circuit Court and High Court.\nItaly.\nThe Corte d'Assise is composed of 2 judges and 6 laypersons chosen at random among Italian citizens 30 to 65 years old. Only serious crimes like murder can be tried by the Corte d'Assise.\nJapan.\nOn May 28, 2004, the Diet of Japan enacted a law requiring selected citizens to take part in criminal court trials of certain severe crimes to make decisions together with professional judges, both on guilt and on the sentence. These citizens are called \"saiban-in\" (\u88c1\u5224\u54e1 \"lay judge\"). The \"saiban-in\" system was implemented in May 2009.\nMalaysia.\nMalaysia abolished trials by jury on 1 January 1995. The impartiality of jury trials had been brought into question for several years prior, but their abolition was expedited by the notorious Mona Fandey case in 1993. The sensational nature of the crime heightened concerns that jury verdicts could be coloured by emotions and media bias.\nNew Zealand.\nThe New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990 provides a defendant with the right to a jury trial if they are charged with a criminal offence punishable by two years' imprisonment or more. For most offences, the defendant can choose to forego a jury trial in favour of a judge-alone (bench) trial. Serious \"category 4\" offences such as murder, manslaughter and treason are always tried by jury, with some exceptions. Civil jury trials are restricted to cases involving defamation, false imprisonment or malicious prosecution.\nNew Zealand previously required jury verdicts to be passed unanimously, but since the passing of the Criminal Procedure Bill in 2009 the Juries Act 1981 has permitted verdicts to be passed by a majority of one less than the full jury (that is an 11\u20131 or a 10\u20131 majority) under certain circumstances.\nNorway.\nNorway has a system where the lower courts (\"tingrett\") is set with a judge and two lay judges, or in bigger cases two judges and three lay judges.\nAll of these judges convict or acquit, and set sentences. Simple majority is required in all cases, which means that the lay-judges are always in control.\nIn the higher court/appellate court (\"lagmannsrett\") there is a jury (\"lagrette\") of 10 members, which need a minimum of seven votes to be able to convict. The judges have no say in the jury deliberations, but jury instructions are given by the chief judge (\"lagmann\") in each case to the jury before deliberations. The \"voir-dire\" is usually set with 16 prospective jurors, which the prosecution and defence may dismiss the six persons they do not desire to serve on the jury.\nThis court (\"lagmannsretten\") is administered by a three-judge panel (usually one \"lagmann\" and two \"lagdommere\"), and if seven or more jury members want to convict, the sentence is set in a separate proceeding, consisting of the three judges and the jury foreman (\"lagrettens ordf\u00f8rer\") and three other members of the jury chosen by ballot. This way the laymen are in control of both the conviction and sentencing, as simple majority is required in sentencing.\nThe three-judge panel can set aside a jury conviction or acquittal if there has been an obvious miscarriage of justice. In that event, the case is settled by three judges and four lay-judges.\nIn May 2015, the Norwegian Parliament asked the government to bring an end to jury trials, replacing them with a bench trial (\"meddomsrett\") consisting of two law-trained judges and five lay judges (\"lekdommere\"). This has now been fully implemented as of March 2021.\nRussia.\nIn the judiciary of Russia, for serious crimes the accused has the option of a jury trial consisting of 12 jurors. The number of jury trials remains small, at about 600 per year, out of about 1\u00a0million trials. A juror must be at least 25 years old, legally competent, and without a criminal record. The 12 jurors are selected by the prosecution and defense from a list of 30\u201340 eligible candidates. The Constitution of Russia stipulates that, until the abolition of the death penalty, all defendants in a case that may result in a death sentence are entitled to a jury trial. Lawmakers are continuously chipping away at what types of criminal offenses merit a jury trial.\nThey are similar to common law juries, and unlike lay judges, in that they sit separately from the judges and decide questions of fact alone while the judge determines questions of law. They must return unanimous verdicts during the first 3 hours of deliberation, but may return majority verdicts after that, with 6 jurors being enough to acquit. They may also request that the judge show leniency in sentencing.\nJuries have granted acquittals in 15\u201320% of cases, compared with less than 1% in cases decided by judges. Juries may be dismissed and skeptical juries have been dismissed on the verge of verdicts, and acquittals are frequently overturned by higher courts.\nTrial by jury was first introduced in the Russian Empire as a result of the Judicial reform of Alexander II in 1864, and abolished after the October Revolution in 1917. They were reintroduced in the Russian Federation in 1993, and extended to another 69 regions in 2003. Its reintroduction was opposed by the Prosecutor General.\nSingapore.\nSingapore fully abolished the jury system in 1969, though jury trials for non-capital offenses had already been abolished a decade earlier. Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew, a former trial lawyer, explained why he supported the policy to the BBC and in his memoirs, saying, \"I had no faith in a system that allowed the superstition, ignorance, biases, and prejudices of seven jurymen to determine guilt or innocence.\"\nSouth Korea.\nKorean citizen participation trial was introduced to criminal cases by \"Civil Participation in Criminal Trials Act\" in 2008. In the citizen participation trial, citizens can participate as jurors in order that democratic legitimacy and trust can be enhanced. Citizen participation trial means a criminal trial that citizens participate as jurors or prospective jurors. Citizens who are selected as jurors are given an opportunity to participate in the trial by delivering a verdict on the defendant\u2019s guilt or innocence and discussing about the appropriate punishment to be imposed for a defendant who has been found guilty. A citizen participation trial is conducted only when the defendant requests it. Even if the defendant applies for a citizen participation trial, the court may, at its discretion, exclude the case from such a proceeding if it deems the trial inappropriate. \nFor cases eligible for citizen participation trial, see https://https://\nThe court seeks to enhance juror attendance rates and promote diversity in jury composition in order to ensure the fairness of trials. The court provides jurors with daily allowances and travel expenses, the amount of which varies depending on the time the trial concludes. Individuals who attend only the jury selection session but are not selected as jurors receive 60,000 KRW.\nThose who are selected as formal jurors or prospective jurors receive the following money:\n\u2013 120,000 KRW if the trial concludes before 6:00 p.m.;\n\u2013 160,000 KRW if it concludes before 9:00 p.m.;\n\u2013 200,000 KRW if it concludes before midnight; and\n\u2013 240,000 KRW if it concludes after midnight.\nCompare jury system with lay judge system.\nUnder the jury system, jurors consisting of ordinary citizens take part in the trial and deliver a verdict on guilt or innocence independently of professional judges, and the judge is bound by the verdict. Under the lay judge system, lay judges consisting of ordinary citizens join the bench with professional judges and have equal authority in determining matters of fact and law.\nThe Korean participatory trial system is distinctive in that it incorporates aspects of both the jury system and the lay judge system, modifying them to accommodate the specific circumstances of Korea.\nShadow Jury.\nThe shadow jury, organized independently of the formal jury in a citizen participation trial, attends the entire proceedings and may conduct deliberations and deliver a verdict on guilt or innocence, along with providing opinions on sentencing. However, the court does not take the shadow jurors\u2019 verdicts into account in rendering its judgment. The fact that their deliberations may be made public distinguishes them from the formal jurors.\nOrdinary citizens, acting as shadow jurors, are able to observe the vivid courtroom debates of real cases and deliberate on issues such as guilt, innocence, and sentencing in a manner similar to actual jury deliberations.\nProcedure for Jury selection.\nThe jury selection procedure refers to the process by which a certain number of prospective jurors are randomly drawn from the list of potential jurors prepared by each level of court. The court conducts questioning of the prospective jurors who appear in court to verify their qualifications and to determine whether they are capable of rendering an impartial judgment. Through this process, the court selects both formal jurors and prospective jurors. A prospective juror who is deemed unqualified to serve as a juror, or who is found to possess prejudice or bias regarding the case that would make it difficult to render an impartial verdict, may not be selected as a juror. The prosecutor and the defense counsel may each exercise a limited number of peremptory challenges against prospective jurors without stating any reason. The identities of the jurors and alternate jurors will be disclosed only after the conclusion of the arguments. When the trial begins, the jurors shall take an oath in accordance with the law to faithfully and impartially perform their duties.\nPrecedents of Citizen Participation Trial.\nA citizen participation trial was held at the Daegu District Court for five days starting on December 7. A total of 300 residents within the court\u2019s jurisdiction were selected as potential jurors, and on December 7, seven jurors and two prospective jurors were finally chosen. In the first trial, the jury unanimously returned a guilty verdict. The court sentenced the defendant to life imprisonment both in the first and second instances.\nStatus.\nBetween 2008 and 2022, 240,883 cases were eligible for citizen participation trials, of which 9,439 were filed. The application rate is 3.9%. Among 9,240 disposed cases, trials were conducted with citizen participation in 2,894 cases. The implementation rate is 31.3%.\nHomicide cases record the highest rate of application for citizen participation trials among all types of offenses.\nAfter 2020, the number of citizen participation trials declined to fewer than 100 cases per year across all categories of crime.\nFrom 2008 to 2022, the average period from the filing of a case to the first trial date was 112.9 days. During the same period, proceedings were conducted faster than the average duration of first-instance cases before the main division of the district court (119.4 days for detained defendants and 175.6 days for non-detained defendants).\nBetween 2008 and 2022, 2,894 cases, corresponding to 93.6%, showed concordance between jury verdicts and court decisions.\nSouth Africa.\nThe jury system was abolished in South Africa in 1969 by the Abolition of Juries Act, 1969. The last jury trial to be heard was in the District of Kimberley. Some judicial experts had argued that a system of whites-only juries (as was the system at that time) was inherently prejudicial to 'non-white' defendants (the introduction of nonracial juries would have been a political impossibility at that time). More recently it has been argued that, apart from being a racially divided country, South African society was, and still is, characterised by significant class differences and disparities of income and wealth that could make re-introducing the jury system problematic. Arguments for and against the re-introduction of a jury system have been discussed by South African constitutional expert Professor Pierre de Vos in the article \"Do we need a jury system?\" On 28 March 2014, the Oscar Pistorius trial was adjourned due to the illness of one of the two assessors that assist the judge on questions of fact (rather than law), in place of the jury, to reach a verdict. The legal system in the UK sees no reason to block extradition on this, as witnessed in the Shrien Dewani case.\nSweden.\nIn Sweden, juries are uncommon; the public is represented in the courts by means of lay judges (n\u00e4mndem\u00e4n). However, the defendant has the right to a jury trial in the lower court (tingsr\u00e4tt) when accused of an offence against the fundamental laws on freedom of expression and freedom of the press. If a person is accused of e.g. libel or incitement to ethnic or racial hatred, in a medium covered by the fundamental laws (e.g. a printed paper or a radio programme), they have the right to have the accusation tried by a jury of nine jurors. This applies also in civil (tort) cases under the fundamental laws. A majority of at least six jurors (out of nine) must find that the defendant has committed the alleged crime. If it does not, the defendant is acquitted or, in a civil case, held not liable. If such a majority of the jurors hold that said crime has in fact been committed, this finding is not legally binding for the court; thus, the court (three judges out of five) can still acquit the defendant or find him/her not liable. A jury acquittal may \"not\" be overruled after appeal, unlike a \"not guilty\" verdict in the district court. Hence, \"both\" the layman majority and the jury must convict to sentence a culprit; however, if the deciding two-thirds jury majority approves and the district court finds the defendant \"not\" guilty, the not guilty verdict may still be appealed to the Court of Appeals where, conversely, the professional judges outvotes the layman judges. (Should a case be appealed to the Supreme Court of Sweden, only professional judges decide, and may impose a sentence or re-impose a sentence imposed by the district court but quashed by the Court of Appeals.) In such a case, the jury provides a unique lock on the ability of the professional judges, upon appeal, outvoting the layman judges. \nIn Swedish civil process, the \"English rule\" applies to court costs. Earlier, a court disagreeing with a jury acquittal could, when deciding on the matter of such costs, set aside the English rule, and instead use the \"American rule\", that each party bears its own expense of litigation. This practice was declared to violate the rule of presumption of innocence according to article 6.2. of the European Convention on Human Rights, by the Supreme Court of Sweden, in 2012.\nSwitzerland.\nAs of 2008, only the code of criminal procedure of the Canton of Geneva provides for genuine jury trials. Several other cantons\u2014Vaud, Neuch\u00e2tel, Z\u00fcrich and Ticino\u2014provide for courts composed of both professional judges and laymen (\"Sch\u00f6ffengerichte\" / \"tribunaux d'\u00e9chevins\"). Because the unified Swiss Code of Criminal Procedure (set to enter into force in 2011) does not provide for jury trials or lay judges, however, they are likely to be abolished in the near future.\nTaiwan.\nThe Citizen Judges Act (\u570b\u6c11\u6cd5\u5b98\u6cd5) was passed by the Legislative Yuan on July 22, 2022, promulgated by the President on August 12 and was implemented on January 1, 2023. Under the act, Lay judges in Taiwan are to be randomly selected as citizen judges who would participate in trial proceedings and adjudicate cases alongside professional judges in certain felony cases. The citizen judge system is based on Japan\u2019s saiban-in system, which also resembles a lay judge system.\nUkraine.\nThe judiciary of Ukraine allows jury trials for criminal cases where the sentence can reach life imprisonment if the accused so wishes. But this seldom happens. A jury is not formed from random citizens, but only from those who have previously applied for this role who do meet certain criteria.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe United Kingdom consists of three separate legal jurisdictions, but there are some features common to all of them. In particular there is seldom anything like the U.S. voir dire system; jurors are usually just accepted without question. Controversially, in England there has been some screening in sensitive security cases, but the Scottish courts have firmly set themselves against any form of jury vetting.\nEngland and Wales.\nIn England and Wales (which have the same legal system), everyone accused of an offence which carries more than six months' imprisonment has a right to trial by jury. Minor (\"summary\") criminal cases are heard without a jury in the Magistrates' Courts. Middle-ranking (\"triable either way\") offences may be tried by magistrates or the defendant may elect trial by jury in the Crown Court. Serious (\"indictable-only\") offences, however, must be tried before a jury in the Crown Court. Juries sit in few civil cases, being restricted to false imprisonment, malicious prosecution, and civil fraud (unless ordered otherwise by a judge). Juries also sit in coroner's courts for more contentious inquests. All criminal juries consist of 12 jurors, those in a County Court having 8 jurors and Coroner's Court juries having between 7 and 11 members. Jurors must be between 18 and 75 years of age, and are selected at random from the register of voters. In the past a unanimous verdict was required. This has been changed so that, if the jury fails to agree after a given period, at the discretion of the judge they may reach a verdict by a 10\u20132 majority. This was designed to make it more difficult for jury tampering to succeed.\nIn 1999 the Home Secretary Jack Straw introduced a controversial bill to limit the right to trial by jury. This became the Criminal Justice Act 2003, which sought to remove the right to trial by jury for cases involving jury tampering or complex fraud. The provision for trial without jury to circumvent jury tampering succeeded and came into force in 2007; the provision for complex fraud cases was defeated. Lord Goldsmith, the then Attorney General, then pressed forward with the Fraud (Trials Without a Jury) Bill in Parliament, which sought to abolish jury trials in major criminal fraud trials. The Bill was subject to sharp criticism from both sides of the House of Commons before passing its second Commons reading in November 2006 but was defeated in the Lords in March 2007.\nThe trial for the first serious offence to be tried without a jury in 350 years was allowed to go ahead in 2009. Three previous trials of the defendants, who had committed armed robbery at Heathrow Airport in 2004, had been halted because of jury tampering and the Lord Chief Justice, Lord Judge, cited cost and the additional burden on the jurors as reasons to proceed without a jury. Previously in cases where jury tampering was a concern the jurors were sometimes closeted in a hotel for the duration of the trial. Liberty director of policy Isabella Sankey said that \"This is a dangerous precedent. The right to jury trial isn't just a hallowed principle but a practice that ensures that one class of people don't sit in judgement over another and the public have confidence in an open and representative justice system.\" The trial started in 2010, with the four defendants convicted on 31 March 2010 by Mr Justice Treacy at the Old Bailey.\nIn November 2025, Justice Secretary David Lammy proposed limiting the use of juries to serious crimes such as rape, murder and manslaughter in order to clear the backlog of cases, a move that has been widely criticised by other political parties and senior judges.\nGibraltar.\nBeing a Common Law jurisdiction, Gibraltar retains jury trial in a similar manner to that found in England and Wales, the exception being that juries consist of nine lay people, rather than twelve.\nScotland.\nIn Scots law the jury system has some similarities with England but some important differences; in particular, there are juries of 15 in criminal trials, with verdicts by simple majority.\nNorthern Ireland.\nIn Northern Ireland, the role of the jury trial is roughly similar to England and Wales, except that jury trials have been replaced in cases of alleged terrorist offences by courts where the judge sits alone, known as \"Diplock courts\". Diplock courts are common in Northern Ireland for crimes connected to terrorism.\nDiplock courts were created in the 1970s during The Troubles, to phase out Operation Demetrius internments, and because of the argument that juries were intimidated, though this is disputed. The Diplock courts were shut in 2007, but between 1 August 2008 and 31 July 2009, 13 non-jury trials were held, down from 29 in the previous year, and 300 trials per year at their peak.\nUnited States.\nThe availability of a trial by jury in U.S. jurisdictions varies. Because the United States legal system separated from that of the English one at the time of the American Revolution, the types of proceedings that use juries depends on whether such cases were tried by jury under English common law at that time rather than the methods used in English courts now. For example, at the time, English \"courts of law\" tried cases of torts or private law for monetary damages using juries, but \"courts of equity\" that tried civil cases seeking an injunction or another form of non-monetary relief did not. As a result, this practice continues in American civil laws, but in modern English law, only criminal proceedings and some inquests are likely to be heard by a jury.\nA distinctive feature of jury trials in the United States is that verdicts in criminal cases must be unanimous.\nThe right to a trial by jury is contained in Article Three of the United States Constitution, which states in part, \"The Trial of all Crimes...shall be by Jury\". The right was expanded with the Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution, which states in part, \"In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial, by an impartial jury\". Due to the Fourteenth Amendment, these rights also apply to the states through incorporation. Most states' constitutions also grant the right of trial by jury in lesser criminal matters, though most have abrogated that right in offenses punishable by fine only. The Supreme Court has ruled that if imprisonment is for six months or less, trial by jury is not required, meaning a state may choose whether or not to permit trial by jury in such cases. Under the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure, if the defendant is entitled to a jury trial, they may waive their right to have a jury, but both the government (prosecution) and court must consent to the waiver. Several states require jury trials for all crimes, \"petty\" or not.\nIn the cases \"Apprendi v. New Jersey\", 530 U.S. https:// (2000), and \"Blakely v. Washington\", 542 U.S. https:// (2004), the Supreme Court of the United States held that a criminal defendant has a right to a jury trial not only on the question of guilt or innocence, but on any fact used to increase the defendant's sentence beyond the maximum otherwise allowed by statutes or sentencing guidelines. This invalidated the procedure in many states and the federal courts that allowed sentencing enhancement based on \"a preponderance of evidence\", where enhancement could be based on the judge's findings alone. A jury must be unanimous for either a guilty or not guilty decision. A hung jury results in the defendants release; however, charges against the defendant are not dropped and can be reinstated if the government so chooses.\nJurors in some states are selected through voter registration and drivers' license lists. A form is sent to prospective jurors to pre-qualify them by asking the recipient to answer questions about citizenship, disabilities, ability to understand the English language, and whether they have any conditions that would excuse them from being a juror. If they are deemed qualified, a summons is issued.\nEnglish common law and the United States Constitution recognize the right to a jury trial to be a fundamental civil liberty or civil right that allows the accused to choose whether to be judged by judges or a jury.\nIn the United States, it is understood that juries usually weigh the evidence and testimony to determine questions of fact, while judges usually rule on questions of law, although the dissenting justices in the Supreme Court case \"Sparf et al. v. U.S. 156 U.S. 51 (1895)\", generally considered the pivotal case concerning the rights and powers of the jury, declared: \"It is our deep and settled conviction, confirmed by a re-examination of the authorities that the jury, upon the general issue of guilty or not guilty in a criminal case, have the right, as well as the power, to decide, according to their own judgment and consciences, all questions, whether of law or of fact, involved in that issue.\" Jury determination of questions of law, sometimes called jury nullification, cannot be overturned by a judge if doing so would violate legal protections against double jeopardy. Although a judge can throw out a guilty verdict if it was not supported by the evidence, a jurist has no authority to override a verdict that favors a defendant.\nIt was established in Bushel's Case that a judge cannot order the jury to convict, no matter how strong the evidence is. In civil cases, a special verdict can be given, but in criminal cases a general verdict is rendered, because requiring a special verdict could apply pressure to the jury, and because of the jury's historic function of tempering rules of law by common sense brought to bear upon the facts of a specific case. For this reason, Justice Black and Justice Douglas indicated their disapproval of special interrogatories even in civil cases.\nThere has been much debate about the advantages and disadvantages of the jury system, the competence or lack thereof of jurors as fact-finders, and the uniformity or capriciousness of the justice they administer. The jury has been described by one author as \"an exciting and gallant experiment in the conduct of serious human affairs\". Because they are fact-finders, juries are sometimes expected to perform a role similar to a lie detector, especially when presented with testimony from witnesses.\nA civil jury is typically made up of 6 to 12 persons. In a civil case, the role of the jury is to listen to the evidence presented at a trial, to decide whether the defendant injured the plaintiff or otherwise failed to fulfill a legal duty to the plaintiff, and to determine what the compensation or penalty should be.\nA criminal jury is usually made up of 12 members, though fewer may sit on cases involving lesser offenses. Criminal juries decide whether the defendant committed the crime as charged. In several southern states, the jury sets punishment, while in most states and at the federal level, it is set by the judge.\nPrior to 2020, under most states' laws, verdicts in criminal cases had to be unanimous, with the exception of Oregon and Louisiana. In Oregon, a 10\u20132 majority was enough to reach a verdict, except for guilty verdicts for capital crimes, which required unanimity. Louisiana also did not require unanimous juries in serious felony cases until passage of a state constitutional amendment that required unanimity for crimes committed after 2018. However, in \"Ramos v. Louisiana\", decided in April 2020, the Supreme Court of the United States ruled that convictions for serious offenses require unanimity, overturning Oregon's and Louisiana's prior allowances for split decisions.\nIn civil cases, the law (or the agreement of the parties) may permit a non-unanimous verdict.\nA jury's deliberations are conducted in private, out of sight and hearing of the judge, litigants, witnesses, and others in the courtroom.\nNot every case is eligible for a jury trial. For example, in the majority of U.S. states there is no right to a jury trial in family law actions not involving a termination of parental rights, such as divorce and custody modifications. As of 1978, eleven U.S. states allow juries in any aspect of divorce litigation, Colorado, Georgia, Illinois, Louisiana, Maine, Nevada, New York, North Carolina, Tennessee, Texas and Wisconsin. Most of these limit the right to a jury to try issues regarding grounds or entitlement for divorce only. Texas provides jury trial rights most broadly, including even the right to a jury trial on questions regarding child custody. However, anyone who is charged with a criminal offense, breach of contract or federal offence has a Constitutional right to a trial by jury.\nCivil trial procedure.\nThe right to trial by jury in a civil case in federal court is addressed by the Seventh Amendment. Importantly, however, the Seventh Amendment does not guarantee a right to a civil jury trial in state courts (although most state constitutions guarantee such a right). The Seventh Amendment provides: \"In Suits at common law, where the value in controversy shall exceed twenty dollars, the right of trial by jury shall be preserved, and no fact tried by a jury shall be otherwise re-examined in any Court of the United States, than according to the rules of the common law.\" In Joseph Story's 1833 treatise \"Commentaries on the Constitution of the United States\", he wrote, \"[I]t is a most important and valuable amendment; and places upon the high ground of constitutional right the inestimable privilege of a trial by jury in civil cases, a privilege scarcely inferior to that in criminal cases, which is conceded by all to be essential to political and civil liberty.\"\nThe Seventh Amendment does not guarantee or create any right to a jury trial; rather, it preserves the right to jury trial in the federal courts that existed in 1791 at common law. In this context, common law means the legal environment the United States inherited from England. In England in 1791, civil actions were divided into actions at law and actions in equity. Actions at law had a right to a jury, actions in equity did not. Federal Rules of Civil Procedure Rule 2 says \"[t]here is one form of action\u2014the civil action\", which abolishes the legal/equity distinction. Today, in actions that would have been \"at law\" in 1791, there is a right to a jury; in actions that would have been \"in equity\" in 1791, there is no right to a jury. However, Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 39(c) allows a court to use one at its discretion. To determine whether the action would have been legal or equitable in 1791, one must first look at the type of action and whether such an action was considered \"legal\" or \"equitable\" at that time. Next, the relief being sought must be examined. Monetary damages alone were purely a legal remedy, and thus entitled to a jury. Non-monetary remedies such as injunctions, rescission, and specific performance were all equitable remedies, and thus up to the judge's discretion, not a jury. In \"Beacon Theaters, Inc. v. Westover\", 359 U.S. https:// (1959), the US Supreme Court discussed the right to a jury, holding that when both equitable and legal claims are brought, the right to a jury trial still exists for the legal claim, which would be decided by a jury before the judge ruled on the equitable claim.\nThere is not a United States constitutional right under the Seventh Amendment to a jury trial in state courts, but in practice, almost every state except Louisiana, which has a civil law legal tradition, permits jury trials in civil cases in state courts on substantially the same basis that they are allowed under the Seventh Amendment in federal court. The right to a jury trial in civil cases does not extend to the states, except when a state court is enforcing a federally created right, of which the right to trial by jury is a substantial part.\nThe court determines the right to jury based on all claims by all parties involved. If the plaintiff brings only equitable claims but the defendant asserts counterclaims of law, the court grants a jury trial. In accordance with Beacon Theaters, the jury first determines the facts, then the judge enter judgment on the equitable claims.\nFollowing the English tradition, U.S. juries have usually been composed of 12 jurors, and the jury's verdict has usually been required to be unanimous. However, in many jurisdictions, the number of jurors is often reduced to a lesser number (such as five or six) by legislative enactment, or by agreement of both sides. Before \"Ramos v. Louisiana\", a 2020 Supreme Court ruling, some jurisdictions permitted a verdict to be returned despite the dissent of one, two, or three jurors. Subsequently, all jurisdictions required unanimity to reach a verdict.\nWaiver of jury trial.\nThe vast majority of U.S. criminal cases are not concluded with a jury verdict, but rather by plea bargain. Both prosecutors and defendants often have a strong interest in resolving the criminal case by negotiation resulting in a plea bargain. If the defendant waives a jury trial, a bench trial is held.\nFor civil cases, a jury trial must be demanded within a certain period of time per Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 38.\nIn United States Federal courts, there is no absolute right to waive a jury trial. Per Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure 23(a), only if the prosecution and the court consent may a defendant waive a jury trial for criminal cases. However, most states give the defendant the absolute right to waive a jury trial, and it has become commonplace to find such a waiver in routine contracts as a 2004 \"Wall Street Journal\" article states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For years, in an effort to avoid the slow-moving wheels of the U.S. judicial system, many American companies have forced their customers and employees to agree to settle disputes outside of the courts, through private arbitration\u00a0... but the rising cost of arbitration proceedings has led some companies to decide they might be better off in the court system after all [so long as] they don't have to tangle with juries. The new tactic [is to] let disputes go to court, but on the condition that they be heard only by a judge.\nThe article goes on to claim:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The list includes residential leases, checking-account agreements, auto loans and mortgage contracts. Companies that believe juries are biased toward plaintiffs hope this approach will boost their chances of winning in court. Critics say that unfairly denies citizens' access to the full range of legal options guaranteed by the Constitution.\nIn the years since this 2004 article, this practice has become pervasive in the US and, especially in online agreements, it has become commonplace to include such waivers to trial by jury in everything from user agreements attached to software downloads to merely browsing a website. This practice, however, means that while such waivers may have legal force in one jurisdiction\u2014in this case the United States\u2014in the jurisdiction where a verdict is sought in the absence of jury trial (or indeed the presence of a defendant, or any legal representation \"in absentia\") may well run directly counter to law in the jurisdiction\u2014such as the United Kingdom\u2014where the defendant resides, thus:\nThe judgment on \"R v Jones\" [2002] UKHL 5 issued by the United Kingdom's House of Lords states (in part, in Item 55) \"the issue has to be determined by looking at the way in which the courts handled the problem under English criminal procedure and by deciding whether, in the result, the appellant can be said to have had a fair hearing.\"\nJury trials: terminating parental rights.\nOnly five of the 50 states require or permit jury trials for cases where the state is seeking to legally sever a parent-child relationship. Oklahoma, Texas, Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming. In Virginia, the jury is called an \"advisory jury\". The remaining 46 jurisdictions have case law or statutes or local court rules or common practice that specifically prohibits a jury trial in termination of parental rights cases. The fate of a family is exclusively placed in the hands of a single judge when there is no jury trial.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16369", "revid": "3492060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16369", "title": "Justice", "text": "Concept of moral fairness and administration of the law\nIn its broadest sense, justice is the idea that individuals should be treated \"fairly\". According to the \"Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy\", the most plausible candidate for a core definition comes from the \"Institutes\" of Justinian, a 6th-century codification of Roman law, where justice is defined as \"the constant and perpetual will to render to each his due\".\nA society where justice has been achieved would be one in which individuals receive what they \"deserve\". The interpretation of what \"deserve\" means draws on a variety of fields and philosophical branches including ethics, rationality, law, religion, and fairness. The state may pursue justice by operating courts and enforcing their rulings.\nHistory.\nEarly Western theories of justice were developed in part by Ancient Greek philosophers such as Plato in his work \"The Republic\", and Aristotle, in his \"Nicomachean Ethics\" and \"Politics\". Modern-day Western notions of justice also have their roots in Christian theology, which largely follows the divine command theory, according to which God dictates morality and determines whether or not an action is seen as morally \"good\". This, in turn, determines justice.\nWestern thinkers later advanced different theories about where the foundations of justice lie. In the 17th century, philosophers such as John Locke said justice derives from natural law. Jean-Jacques Rosseau was a prominent advocate of social contract theory, which holds that justice arises from a mutual agreement among members of society to be governed within a political system.\nModern frameworks include concepts such as distributive justice, utilitarianism, retributive justice and restorative justice. \nIn broad terms, distributive justice considers what is fair based on what goods are to be distributed, between whom they are to be distributed, and what the proper distribution is, \"utilitarian\" theories look forward to the future consequences of punishment, \"retributive\" theories look back to particular acts of wrongdoing and attempt to match them with appropriate punishment, and \"restorative\" theories look at the needs of victims and society and seek to repair the harms from wrongdoing. Theories of retributive justice say justice is served by punishing wrongdoers, whereas restorative justice (also sometimes called \"reparative justice\") is an approach to justice that focuses on the needs of victims and offenders.\nPlatonic justice.\nJustice, according to Plato, is about balance and harmony. It represents the right relationship between conflicting aspects within an individual or a community. He defines justice as everyone having and doing what they are responsible for or what belongs to them. In other words, a just person is someone who contributes to society according to their unique abilities and receives what is proportionate to their contribution. They are in the right place, always striving to do their best, and reciprocating what they receive fairly and equitably. This applies both at the individual level and at the organizational and societal levels.\nTo illustrate these ideas, Plato describes a person as having three parts: reason, spirit, and desire. These parallel the three parts of a city in his philosophy, which he describes through the metaphor of a chariot: it functions effectively when the charioteer, representative of reason, successfully controls the two horses, symbolizing spirit and desire. Continuing on these themes, Plato theorizes that those who love wisdom, or philosophers, are the most ideal to govern because only they truly comprehend the nature of the good. Just like one would seek a doctor's expertise in matters of health rather than a farmer's, so should the city entrust its governance to someone knowledgeable about the good, rather than to politicians who might prioritize power over people's genuine needs. Socrates later used the parable of the ship to illustrate this point: the unjust city is like a ship in open ocean, crewed by a powerful but drunken captain (the common people), a group of untrustworthy advisors who try to manipulate the captain into giving them power over the ship's course (the politicians), and a navigator (the philosopher), the latter of whom being the only one who knows how to get the ship to port.\nDivinity and religious conceptions of justice.\nAdvocates of divine command theory say that justice and the whole of morality is the authoritative command of God. Murder is wrong and must be punished, for instance, because God says it so. Some versions of the theory assert that God must be obeyed because of the nature of God's relationship with humanity, others assert that God must be obeyed because God is goodness itself, and thus doing God's command would be best for everyone.\nAn early meditation on the divine command theory by Plato can be found in his dialogue, \"Euthyphro\". Called the Euthyphro dilemma, it goes as follows: \"Is what is morally good commanded by the gods because it is morally good, or is it morally good because it is commanded by the gods?\" The implication is that if the latter is true, then justice is beyond mortal understanding; if the former is true, then morality exists independently from the gods and is therefore subject to the judgment of mortals. A response, popularized in two contexts by Immanuel Kant and C. S. Lewis, is that it is deductively valid to say that the existence of an objective morality implies the existence of God and vice versa.\nJewish, Christian, and Muslim theology traditionally follow that justice is a present, real, right, and specifically, governing concept, along with mercy, and that justice is ultimately derived from and held by God. According to the Bible, such institutions like the Mosaic Law were created by God to require the Israelites to live by and apply God's standards of justice.\nThe Hebrew Bible describes God as saying about the Judeo-Christian-Islamic patriarch Abraham: \"No, for I have chosen him, that he may charge his children and his household after him to keep the way of the Lord by doing righteousness and justice;...\" (Genesis 18:19, NRSV). The Psalmist describes God as having \"Righteousness and justice [as] the foundation of [His] throne;...\" (Psalms 89:14, NRSV).\nThe New Testament also describes God and Jesus Christ as having and displaying justice, often in comparison with God displaying and supporting mercy (Matthew 5:7).\nIn Buddhist ethics, justice is not defined by individuals \"receiving their due,\" as in some frameworks, but by the transformation of suffering for all sentient beings by addressing their ignorance and leading them to enlightenment with skillful actions rooted in generosity, virtue, and the development of universal goodwill and compassion. The concept of karma is understood not as a system of rewards and punishments, but as the continuation of actions, thoughts, and intentions that shape future experience within an interconnected web of life. Central to this view are the principles of all beings having Buddha nature, interbeing with a deep interdependence of all things, dependent origination, which states phenomena arise in dependence upon other phenomena, and non-duality, which challenges rigid distinctions between self and other, or right and wrong as fixed absolutes. Justice, from this perspective, does not consist of assigning blame or enforcing penalties, but of recognizing shared responsibility and cultivating compassion, mindfulness, and understanding that leads beings to enlightenment and a Buddhist form of restorative justice. The notion that individuals inherently deserve either suffering or reward is often critiqued as a misinterpretation of karma that reinforces ego and separation. Instead, Buddhist justice emphasizes developing compassion, reducing suffering for all sentient beings, and supporting conditions that can lead being to enlightenment. This restorative and transformative orientation contrasts with retributive models focused on individual deserts, offering a vision of justice rooted in collective liberation rather than reparation.\nNatural law.\nMany have claimed that justice is a part of natural law. Natural law is a philosophical and legal theory that posits the existence of a set of inherent laws derived from nature and universal moral principles, which are discoverable through reason. In ethics, \"natural law theory\" asserts that certain rights and moral values are inherent in human nature and can be understood universally, independent of enacted laws or societal norms. In jurisprudence, natural law holds that there are objective legal standards based on morality that underlie and inform the creation, interpretation, and application of human-made laws. This contrasts with \"positive law\" (as in legal positivism), which emphasizes that laws are rules created by human authorities and are not necessarily connected to moral principles. Aquinas argues that because human beings have reason, and because reason is a spark of the divine, all human lives are sacred and of infinite value compared to any other created object, meaning everyone is fundamentally equal and bestowed with an intrinsic basic set of rights that no one can remove.\nModern natural law theory was used in challenging the theory of the divine right of kings, and became an alternative justification for the establishment of a social contract, positive law, and government\u2014and thus legal rights\u2014in the form of classical republicanism. John Locke was a proponent of natural law, stressing its role in the justification of property rights and the right to revolution. Natural law is closely related to the concept of natural rights. Indeed, many philosophers, jurists and scholars use natural law synonymously with natural rights or natural justice; others distinguish between natural law and natural right. Some scholars note natural law has been used by philosophers in a different sense from those mentioned above, e.g. for the law of the strongest, which can be observed to hold among all members of the animal kingdom, or as the principle of self-preservation, inherent as an instinct in all living beings.\nDespotism and skepticism.\nIn \"Republic\" by Plato, the character Thrasymachus argues that justice is the interest of the strong \u2013 merely a name for what the powerful or cunning ruler has imposed on the people.\nMutual agreement.\nAdvocates of the social contract say that justice is derived from the mutual agreement of everyone; or, in many versions, from what they would agree to under \"hypothetical\" conditions including equality and absence of bias. This account is considered further below, under 'Justice as Fairness'. The absence of bias refers to an equal ground for all people involved in a disagreement (or trial in some cases).\nSubordinate value.\nAccording to utilitarian thinkers including John Stuart Mill, justice is not as fundamental as we often think. Rather, it is derived from the more basic standard of rightness, consequentialism: what is right is what has the best consequences (usually measured by the total or average welfare caused). So, the proper principles of justice are those that tend to have the best consequences. These rules may turn out to be familiar ones such as keeping contracts; but equally, they may not, depending on the facts about real consequences. Either way, what is important is those consequences, and justice is important, if at all, only as derived from that fundamental standard. Mill tries to explain our mistaken belief that justice is overwhelmingly important by arguing that it derives from two natural human tendencies: our desire to retaliate against those who hurt us, or the feeling of self-defense and our ability to put ourselves imaginatively in another's place, sympathy. So, when we see someone harmed, we project ourselves into their situation and feel a desire to retaliate on their behalf. If this process is the source of our feelings about justice, that ought to undermine our confidence in them.\nTheories.\nIt has been said that 'systematic' or 'programmatic' political and moral philosophy in the West begins, in Plato's Republic, with the question, 'What is Justice?' According to most contemporary theories of justice, justice is overwhelmingly important: John Rawls claimed that \"Justice is the first virtue of social institutions, as truth is of systems of thought.\" In classical approaches, evident from Plato through to Rawls, the concept of 'justice' is always construed in logical or 'etymological' opposition to the concept of injustice. Such approaches cite various examples of injustice, as problems which a theory of justice must overcome. A number of post-World War II approaches do, however, challenge that seemingly obvious dualism between those two concepts. Justice can be thought of as distinct from benevolence, charity, prudence, mercy, generosity, or compassion, although these dimensions are regularly understood to also be interlinked. Justice is one of the cardinal virtues. Metaphysical justice has often been associated with concepts of fate, reincarnation or Divine Providence, i.e., with a life in accordance with a cosmic plan.\nThe equivalence of justice and fairness has been historically and culturally established.\nInstrumental theories of justice.\nInstrumental theories of justice look at the consequences of punishment for wrongdoing, looking at questions such as:\nUtilitarian justice.\nAccording to the utilitarian, justice is the maximization of the total or average welfare across all relevant individuals. Utilitarianism fights crime in three ways:\nSo, the reason for punishment is the maximization of welfare, and punishment should be of whomever, and of whatever form and severity, are needed to meet that goal. This may sometimes justify punishing the innocent, or inflicting disproportionately severe punishments, when that will have the best consequences overall (perhaps executing a few suspected shoplifters live on television would be an effective deterrent to shoplifting, for instance). It also suggests that punishment might turn out \"never\" to be right, depending on the facts about what actual consequences it has.\nRetributive and Restorative justice.\nRetributive justice argues that consequentialism is wrong, as it argues that all guilty individuals deserve appropriate punishment, based on the conviction that punishment should be proportional to the crime and for all the guilty. However, it is sometimes said that retributivism is merely revenge in disguise. However, there are differences between retribution and revenge: the former is impartial and has a scale of appropriateness, whereas the latter is personal and potentially unlimited in scale.\nRestorative justice attempts to repair the harm that was done to the victims. It encourages active participation from victims and encourages offenders to take responsibility for their actions. Restorative justice fosters dialogue between victim and offender and shows the highest rates of victim satisfaction and offender accountability. Meta-analyses of the effectivity of restorative justice show no improvement in recidivism.\nWelfare-maximization.\nAccording to the utilitarian, justice requires the maximization of the total or average welfare across all relevant individuals. This may require sacrifice of some for the good of others, so long as everyone's good is taken impartially into account. Utilitarianism, in general, says that the standard of justification for actions, institutions, or the whole world, is \"impartial welfare consequentialism\", and only indirectly, if at all, to do with rights, property, need, or any other non-utilitarian criterion. These other criteria might be indirectly important, to the extent that human welfare involves them. But even then, such demands as human rights would only be elements in the calculation of overall welfare, not uncrossable barriers to action.\nMixed theories.\nSome modern philosophers have said that Utilitarian and Retributive theories are not mutually exclusive. For example, Andrew von Hirsch, in his 1976 book \"Doing Justice\", suggested that we have a moral obligation to punish greater crimes more than lesser ones. However, so long as we adhere to that constraint then utilitarian ideals would play a significant secondary role.\nDistributive justice.\nTheories of distributive justice need to answer three questions:\nDistributive justice theorists generally do not answer questions of \"who has the right\" to enforce a particular favored distribution, while property rights theorists say that there is no \"favored distribution\". Rather, distribution should be based simply on whatever distribution results from lawful interactions or transactions (that is, transactions which are not illicit).\nFairness.\nIn his \"A Theory of Justice\", John Rawls used a social contract argument to show that justice, and especially distributive justice, is a form of fairness: an impartial distribution of goods. Rawls asks us to imagine ourselves behind a veil of ignorance that denies us all knowledge of our personalities, social statuses, moral characters, wealth, talents and life plans, and then asks what theory of justice we would choose to govern our society when the veil is lifted, if we wanted to do the best that we could for ourselves. We do not know who in particular we are, and therefore can not bias the decision in our own favor. So, the decision-in-ignorance models fairness, because it excludes selfish bias. Rawls said that each of us would reject the utilitarian theory of justice that we should maximize welfare (see above) because of the risk that we might turn out to be someone whose own good is sacrificed for greater benefits for others. Instead, we would endorse Rawls's \"two principles of justice\":\nThis imagined choice justifies these principles as the principles of justice for us, because we would agree to them in a fair decision procedure. Rawls's theory distinguishes two kinds of goods \u2013 the good of liberty rights and social and economic goods, i.e. wealth, income, and power \u2013 and applies different distributions to them \u2013 equality between citizens for liberty rights and equality unless inequality improves the position of the worst off for social and economic goods.\nIn one sense, theories of distributive justice may assert that everyone should get what they deserve. Theories vary on the meaning of what is \"deserved\". The main distinction is between theories that say the basis of just deserts ought to be held equally by everyone, and therefore derive egalitarian accounts of distributive justice \u2013 and theories that say the basis of just deserts is unequally distributed on the basis of, for instance, hard work, and therefore derive accounts of distributive justice by which some should have more than others.\nStudies at UCLA in 2008 have indicated that reactions to fairness are \"wired\" into the brain and that, \"Fairness is activating the same part of the brain that responds to food in rats... This is consistent with the notion that being treated fairly satisfies a basic need\". Research conducted in 2003 at Emory University involving capuchin monkeys demonstrated that other cooperative animals also possess such a sense and that \"inequity aversion may not be uniquely human\".\nProperty rights.\nIn \"Anarchy, State, and Utopia\", Robert Nozick said that distributive justice is not a matter of the whole distribution matching an ideal \"pattern\", but of each individual entitlement having the right kind of \"history\". It is just that a person has some good (especially, some property right) if and only if they came to have it by a history made up entirely of events of two kinds:\nIf the chain of events leading up to the person having something meets this criterion, they are entitled to it: that they possess it is just, and what anyone else does or does not have or need is irrelevant.\nOn the basis of this theory of distributive justice, Nozick said that all attempts to redistribute goods according to an ideal pattern, without the consent of their owners, are theft. In particular, redistributive taxation is theft.\nSome property rights theorists (such as Nozick) also take a consequentialist view of distributive justice and say that property rights based justice also has the effect of maximizing the overall wealth of an economic system. They explain that voluntary (non-coerced) transactions always have a property called Pareto efficiency. The result is that the world is better off in an absolute sense and no one is worse off. They say that respecting property rights maximizes the number of Pareto efficient transactions in the world and minimized the number of non-Pareto efficient transactions in the world (i.e. transactions where someone is made worse off). The result is that the world will have generated the greatest total benefit from the limited, scarce resources available in the world. Further, this will have been accomplished without taking anything away from anyone unlawfully.\nMeritocracy.\nAccording to \"meritocratic\" theories, goods, especially wealth and social status, should be distributed to match individual \"merit\", which is usually understood as some combination of talent and hard work. According to \"needs\"-based theories, goods, especially such basic goods as food, shelter, and medical care, should be distributed to meet individuals' basic needs for them. According to \"contribution\"-based theories, goods should be distributed to match an individual's contribution to the overall social good.\nIdeals and standards.\nEquality and Equity before the law.\nIn political theory, liberalism includes two traditional elements: liberty and equality. Most contemporary theories of justice emphasize the concept of equality, including Rawls' theory of justice as fairness. For Ronald Dworkin, a complex notion of equality is the sovereign political virtue. Dworkin raises the question of whether society is under a duty of justice to help those responsible for the fact that they need help. Complications arise in distinguishing matters of choice and matters of chance, as well as justice for future generations in the redistribution of resources that he advocates.\nLaw raises important and complex issues about equality, fairness, and justice. There is an old saying that 'All are equal before the law'. The belief in equality before the law is called legal egalitarianism. In criticism of this belief, the author Anatole France said in 1894, \"In its majestic equality, the law forbids rich and poor alike to sleep under bridges, beg in the streets, and steal loaves of bread.\" With this saying, France illustrated the fundamental shortcoming of a theory of legal equality that remains blind to social inequality; the same law applied to all may have disproportionately harmful effects on the least powerful.\nProportionality.\nProportionality in justice refers to the principle that rewards and punishments should correspond directly and appropriately to the merit or gravity of actions. Rooted in ancient philosophical and legal traditions, proportionality ensures fairness and balance by aligning consequences with responsibility. Plato articulated an early philosophical basis for proportionality, describing justice as a harmonious state in which each individual fulfills the role best suited to them and receives what corresponds to their actions and nature (\"Republic\", Book IV, 433a\u2013b). This principle has significantly influenced modern legal doctrines, particularly in criminal law, ethics, and human rights, emphasizing fairness and avoiding arbitrary or excessive punishment.\nSocial justice.\nSocial justice encompasses the just relationship between individuals and their society, often considering how privileges, opportunities, and wealth ought to be distributed among individuals. Social justice is also associated with social mobility, especially the ease with which individuals and families may move between social strata. Social justice is distinct from cosmopolitanism, which is the idea that all people belong to a single global community with a shared morality. Social justice is also distinct from egalitarianism, which is the idea that all people are equal in terms of status, value, or rights, as social justice theories do not all require equality. For example, sociologist George C. Homans suggested that the root of the concept of justice is that each person should receive rewards that are proportional to their contributions.\nEconomist Friedrich Hayek said that the concept of social justice was meaningless, saying that justice is a result of individual behavior and unpredictable market forces. Social justice is closely related to the concept of relational justice, which is about the just relationship with individuals who possess features in common such as nationality, or who are engaged in cooperation or negotiation.\nEquity.\nIn legal theory, equity is seen as the concept connecting law to justice, since law cannot be applied without reference to justice. In that context, justice is seen as 'the rationale and the ethical foundation of equity'. One approach towards equity in justice is community policing. Marxism is a needs-based theory, expressed succinctly in Marx's slogan \"from each according to his ability, to each according to his need\".\nRelational justice.\nRelational justice examines individual connections and societal relationships, focusing on normative and political aspects. Rawls' theory of justice aims to distribute social goods to benefit the poor, but does not consider power relations, political structures, or social meanings. Even Rawls' self-respect is not compatible with distribution. Iris Marion Young charges that distributive accounts of justice fail to provide an adequate way of conceptualizing political justice in that they fail to take into account many of the demands of ordinary life and that a relational view of justice grounded upon understanding the differences among social groups offers a better approach, one which acknowledges unjust power relations among individuals, groups, and institutional structures. Young Kim also takes a relational approach to the question of justice, but departs from Iris Marion Young's political advocacy of group rights and instead, he emphasizes the individual and moral aspects of justice. As to its moral aspects, he said that justice includes responsible actions based on rational and autonomous moral agency, with the individual as the proper bearer of rights and responsibilities. Politically, he maintains that the proper context for justice is a form of liberalism with the traditional elements of liberty and equality, together with the concepts of diversity and tolerance.\nSpeed.\nThe phrase \"Justice delayed is justice denied\" refers to the problem of slow justice. The right to speedy trial is in some jurisdictions enshrined. Higher quality justice tends to be speedy.\nSentencing.\nIn criminal law, a sentence forms the final explicit act of a judge-ruled process, and also the symbolic principal act connected to his function. The sentence can generally involve a decree of imprisonment, a fine and/or other punishments against a defendant convicted of a crime. Laws may specify the range of penalties that can be imposed for various offenses, and sentencing guidelines sometimes regulate what punishment within those ranges can be imposed given a certain set of offense and offender characteristics. The most common purposes of sentencing in legal theory are:\nIn civil cases the decision is usually known as a verdict, or judgment, rather than a sentence. Civil cases are settled primarily by means of monetary compensation for harm done (\"damages\") and orders intended to prevent future harm (for example injunctions). Under some legal systems an award of damages involves some scope for retribution, denunciation and deterrence, by means of additional categories of damages beyond simple compensation, covering a punitive effect, social disapprobation, and potentially, deterrence, and occasionally disgorgement (forfeit of any gain, even if no loss was caused to the other party).\nEvolutionary perspectives.\nEvolutionary ethics and evolution of morality suggest evolutionary bases for the concept of justice. Biosocial criminology research says that human perceptions of what is appropriate criminal justice are based on how to respond to crimes in the ancestral small-group environment and that these responses may not always be appropriate for today's societies.\nPsychology.\nThere has been research into victim's perspective of justice following crimes. Victims find respectful treatment, information and having a voice important for a sense of justice as well as the perception of a fair procedure.\nPemberton et al. proposed a \"Big 2\" model of justice in terms agency, communion and membership in a society. Victims experience a loss of perception of agency due to a loss of control, as well as a loss of communion if the offender is a member of their social group, but may also lose trust in others or institutions. It can shatter an individual's trust that they live in a just and moral world. This suggests that a sense of justice can be restored by increasing a sense of communion and agency, rather than through retribution or restoration.\nInstitutions.\nIn a world where people are interconnected but they disagree, institutions are required to instantiate ideals of justice. These institutions may be justified by their approximate instantiation of justice, or they may be deeply unjust when compared with ideal standards \u2013 consider the institution of slavery. Justice is an ideal the world fails to live up to, sometimes due to deliberate opposition to justice despite understanding, which could be disastrous. The question of institutive justice raises issues of legitimacy, procedure, codification and interpretation, which are considered by legal theorists and by philosophers of law. The United Nations Sustainable Development Goal 16 emphasizes the need for strong institutions in order to uphold justice.\nTypes of justice.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16371", "revid": "49713890", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16371", "title": "Jacob Abbott", "text": "American writer of children's books (1803-1879)\nJacob Abbott (November 14, 1803 \u2013 October 31, 1879) was an American writer of children's books and historical biographies.\nEarly life.\nOn November 14, 1803, Abbott was born in Hallowell, Maine to Jacob Abbott II and Betsey Chandler. He attended the Hallowell Academy.\nEducation.\nAbbott graduated from Bowdoin College in 1820. At some point during his years there, he supposedly added the second \"t\" to his surname, to avoid being \"Jacob Abbot the 3rd\" (although one source notes he did not actually begin signing his name with two t's until several years later).\nAbbott studied at Andover Theological Seminary in 1821, 1822, and 1824. He taught at Portland Academy and was a tutor in Amherst College during the next year.\nCareer.\nFrom 1825 to 1829 Abbott was professor of mathematics and natural philosophy at Amherst College; was licensed to preach by the Hampshire Association in 1826; founded the Mount Vernon School for Young Ladies in Boston in 1829, and was principal of it in 1829\u20131833; was pastor of Eliot Congregational Church (which he founded), at Roxbury, Massachusetts in 1834\u20131835; and was, with his brothers, a founder, and in 1843\u20131851 a principal of Abbott's Institute, and in 1845\u20131848 of the Mount Vernon School for Boys, in New York City.\nHe was a prolific author, writing juvenile fiction, brief histories, biographies, religious books for the general reader, and a few works in popular science. He wrote 180 books and was a coauthor or editor of 31 more. He died in Farmington, Maine, where he had spent part of his time after 1839, and where his brother, Samuel Phillips Abbott, founded the Abbott School.\nHis \"Rollo Books\", such as \"Rollo at Play\" and \"Rollo in Europe\", are the best known of his writings, having as their chief characters a representative boy and his associates. In them Abbott did for one or two generations of young American readers a service not unlike that performed earlier, in England and the US, by the authors of \"Evenings at Home\", \"The History of Sandford and Merton\", and \"The Parent's Assistant\". To follow up his Rollo books, he wrote of \"Uncle George\", using him to teach the young readers about ethics, geography, history, and science. He also wrote 22 volumes of biographical histories and a 10 volume set titled the \"Franconia Stories\".\nHis intention was to both amuse and educate, shown by this quotation from the Preface of \"Bruno\": The books, though called story books, are not intended to be works of amusement merely to those who may receive them, but of substantial instruction. The successive volumes will comprise a great variety, both in respect to the subjects which they treat, and to the form and manner in which the subjects will be presented; but the end and aim of all will be to impart useful knowledge, to develop the thinking and reasoning powers, to teach a correct and discriminating use of language, to present models of good conduct for imitation, and bad examples to be shunned, to explain and enforce the highest principles of moral duty, and, above all, to awaken and cherish the spirit of humble and unobtrusive, but heartfelt piety.\nHis brothers, John Stevens Cabot Abbott and Gorham Dummer Abbott, were also authors. \nSee his \"Young Christian, Memorial Edition, with a Sketch of the Author\" by Edward Abbott with a bibliography of his works.\nOther works of note: \"Lucy Books\", \"Jonas Books\", \"Harper's Story Books\", \"Marco Paul\", \"Gay Family\", and \"Juno Books\".\nPersonal life.\nOn May 18, 1829, Abbott married Harriet Vaughan. He had four sons; Benjamin Vaughan Abbott, Austin Abbott, both eminent lawyers, Lyman Abbott, and Edward Abbott, a clergyman, were also well-known authors.\nSelect Bibliography.\nBiographies.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAmerican History Series.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEducational fiction.\n[Note: dates may be revised editions]\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16372", "revid": "1175300", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16372", "title": "John Stevens Cabot Abbott", "text": "American historian (1805\u20131877)\nJohn Stevens Cabot Abbott (September 19, 1805\u00a0\u2013 June 17, 1877) was an American historian, pastor, and pedagogical writer born in Brunswick, Maine to Jacob and Betsey Abbott.\nEarly life.\nHe was a brother of Jacob Abbott, and was associated with him in the management of Abbott's Institute in New York City, and in the preparation of his series of brief historical biographies. Abbott graduated at Bowdoin College in 1825, prepared for the ministry at Andover Theological Seminary, and between 1830 and 1844, when he retired from the ministry in the Congregational Church, preached successively at Worcester, Roxbury, and Nantucket, all in Massachusetts.\nLiterary career.\nOwing to the success of his work, \"The Mother at Home\", he devoted himself from 1844 onwards, to literature. He was a voluminous writer of books on Christian ethics, and of popular histories, which were credited with cultivating a popular interest in history. He is best known as the author of the widely popular \"History of Napoleon Bonaparte\" (1855), in which the various elements and episodes in Napoleon's career are described. Abbott takes a very favourable view towards his subject throughout. Also among his principal works are: \"History of the Civil War in America\" (1863\u20131866), \"History of Napoleon III Emperor of the French\" (1868), and \"The History of Frederick II, Called Frederick the Great\" (New York, 1871). He also did a foreword to a book called Life of Boone by W.M. Bogart, about Daniel Boone in 1876.\nHis biography in \"The Biographical Dictionary of America\" (1906) states that Abbot's mind was extremely clear and active, and he could leave the subject in hand for something entirely different, and then resume his former work without the slightest inconvenience, also he had a singularly even temperament; by his personal goodness, as well as by his books, he had a great influence on the world, he continued active in work nearly to the time of his death, to which he looked forward with joy rather than resignation. The \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica (11th edition)\" stated \"He was a voluminous writer of books on Christian ethics, and of histories, which now seem unscholarly and untrustworthy, but were valuable in their time in cultivating a popular interest in history\"; and that in general, except that he did not write juvenile fiction, his work in subject and style closely resembles that of his brother, Jacob Abbott.\nMarriage and children.\nOn August 17, 1830, he married Jane Williams Bourne, daughter of Abner Bourne and Abagail Williams. Together they raised eight children: \nAs a part of the 1872 Iwakura Mission Abbott was given guardianship of Shige Nagai, a Japanese girl sent to the United States to be educated. She became one of the first piano teachers in Japan, and one of the first two Japanese women to attend a college.\nAbbott died at Fair Haven, Connecticut on 17 June 1877. In 1910, a series of twenty short biographies of historical characters by J. S. C. and Jacob Abbott, was published. His brother, Gorham Dummer Abbott, was a pioneer in women\u2019s education in the United States, as well as an author. Abbott's grandson, Willis Abbott, was a journalist and author and an editor of \"The Christian Science Monitor\".\nSelected bibliography.\nInspirational/religious.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHistorical.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBiographies.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nJuvenile.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nAttribution"}
{"id": "16373", "revid": "68509", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16373", "title": "Janus (disambiguation)", "text": "Janus is the two-faced Roman god of gates, doors, doorways, beginnings, and endings.\nJanus may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "16374", "revid": "50331924", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16374", "title": "John Brown", "text": "John Brown most often refers to:\nJohn Brown or Johnny Brown may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "16376", "revid": "48523215", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16376", "title": "J. E. B. Stuart", "text": "Confederate cavalry general (1833\u20131864)\nJames Ewell Brown \"Jeb\" Stuart (February 6, 1833\u00a0\u2013 May 12, 1864) was a Confederate cavalry general during the American Civil War. He was known to his friends as \"Jeb\", from the initials of his given names. Stuart was a cavalry commander known for his mastery of reconnaissance and the use of cavalry in support of offensive operations. While he cultivated a cavalier image (red-lined gray cape, the yellow waist sash of a regular cavalry officer, hat cocked to the side with an ostrich plume, red flower in his lapel, often sporting cologne), his serious work made him the trusted eyes and ears of Robert E. Lee's army and inspired Southern morale.\nStuart graduated from West Point in 1854 and served in Texas and Kansas with the U.S. Army. Stuart was a veteran of the frontier conflicts with Native Americans and the violence of Bleeding Kansas, and he participated in the capture of John Brown at Harpers Ferry. He resigned his commission when his home state of Virginia seceded, to serve in the Confederate Army, first under Stonewall Jackson in the Shenandoah Valley, but then in increasingly important cavalry commands of the Army of Northern Virginia, playing a role in all of that army's campaigns until his death.\nHe established a reputation as an audacious cavalry commander and on two occasions (during the Peninsula Campaign and the Maryland Campaign) circumnavigated the Union Army of the Potomac, bringing fame to himself and embarrassment to the North. At the Battle of Chancellorsville, he distinguished himself as a temporary commander of the wounded Stonewall Jackson's infantry corps.\nStuart's most famous campaign, the Gettysburg campaign, was flawed when his long separation from Lee's army left Lee unaware of Union troop movements so that Lee was surprised and almost trapped at the Battle of Gettysburg. Stuart received criticism from the Southern press as well as the proponents of the Lost Cause movement after the war. During the 1864 Overland Campaign, Union Maj. Gen. Philip Sheridan's cavalry launched an offensive to defeat Stuart, who was mortally wounded at the Battle of Yellow Tavern.\nEarly life and education.\nStuart was born at Laurel Hill Farm, a plantation in Patrick County, Virginia, near the border with North Carolina. He was the eighth of eleven children and the youngest of the five sons to survive past early age. His father, Archibald Stuart, was a War of 1812 veteran, slaveholder, attorney, and politician who represented Patrick County in both houses of the Virginia General Assembly, and also served one term in the United States House of Representatives. His mother Elizabeth Letcher Pannill Stuart ran the family farm, and was known as a strict religious woman with a good sense for business.\nHe was of Scottish descent (including some Scots-Irish). His great-grandfather, Major Alexander Stuart, commanded a regiment at the Battle of Guilford Court House during the Revolutionary War. His father Archibald was a cousin of attorney Alexander Hugh Holmes Stuart.\nStuart was educated at home by his mother and tutors until the age of twelve, when he left Laurel Hill to be educated by various teachers in Wytheville, Virginia, and at the home of his aunt Anne (Archibald's sister) and her husband Judge James Ewell Brown (Stuart's namesake) at Danville. He entered Emory and Henry College when he was fifteen, and attended from 1848 to 1850.\nDuring the summer of 1848, Stuart attempted to enlist in the U.S. Army, but was rejected as underaged. He obtained an appointment in 1850 to the United States Military Academy at West Point, New York, from Representative Thomas Hamlet Averett, the man who had defeated his father in the 1848 election. Stuart was a popular student and was happy at the Academy. Although he was not handsome in his teen years, his classmates called him by the nickname \"Beauty\", which they described as his \"personal comeliness in inverse ratio to the term employed.\" He quickly grew a beard after graduation and a fellow officer remarked that he was \"the only man he ever saw that [a] beard improved.\"\nRobert E. Lee was appointed superintendent of the academy in 1852, and Stuart became a friend of the family, seeing them socially on frequent occasions. Lee's nephew, Fitzhugh Lee, also arrived at the academy in 1852. In Stuart's final year, in addition to achieving the cadet rank of second captain of the corps, he was one of eight cadets designated as honorary \"cavalry officers\" for his skills in horsemanship. Stuart graduated 13th in his class of 46 in 1854. He ranked tenth in his class in cavalry tactics. Although he enjoyed the civil engineering curriculum at the academy and did well in mathematics, his poor drawing skills hampered his engineering studies, and he finished 29th in that discipline.\nUnited States Army.\nStuart was commissioned a brevet second lieutenant and assigned to the U.S. Regiment of Mounted Riflemen in Texas. After an arduous journey, he reached Fort Davis on January 29, 1855, and was a leader for three months on scouting missions over the San Antonio to El Paso Road. He was soon transferred to the newly formed 1st Cavalry Regiment (1855) at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas Territory, where he became regimental quartermaster and commissary officer under the command of Col. Edwin V. Sumner. He was promoted to first lieutenant in 1855.\nMarriage.\nAlso in 1855, Stuart met Flora Cooke, the daughter of the 2nd U.S. Dragoon Regiment's commander, Lieutenant Colonel Philip St. George Cooke. Burke Davis described Flora as \"an accomplished horsewoman, and though not pretty, an effective charmer\", to whom \"Stuart succumbed with hardly a struggle.\" They became engaged in September, less than two months after meeting. Stuart humorously wrote of his rapid courtship in Latin, \"Veni, Vidi, Victus sum\" (I came, I saw, I was conquered). Although a gala wedding had been planned for Fort Riley, Kansas, the death of Stuart's father on September 20 caused a change of plans and the marriage on November 14 was small and limited to family witnesses. Their first child, a girl, was born in 1856 but died the same day. On November 14, 1857, Flora gave birth to another daughter, whom the parents named Flora after her mother. The family relocated in early 1858 to Fort Riley, where they remained for three years. The couple owned two slaves until 1859, one inherited from his father's estate, the other purchased.\nBleeding Kansas.\nStuart's leadership capabilities were soon recognized. He was a veteran of the frontier conflicts with Native Americans and the antebellum violence of Bleeding Kansas. He was wounded on July 29, 1857, while fighting at Solomon River, Kansas, against the Cheyenne. Colonel Sumner ordered a charge with drawn sabers against a wave of Native American arrows. Scattering the under-armed warriors, Stuart and three other lieutenants chased one down, whom Stuart wounded in the thigh with his pistol. The Cheyenne turned and fired at Stuart with a .36 caliber Allen &amp; Thurber pepperbox pistol, striking him in the chest with a bullet, which did little more damage than to pierce the skin. Stuart returned in September to Fort Leavenworth and was reunited with his wife.\nJohn Brown.\nIn 1859, Stuart developed a new piece of cavalry equipment, for which he received patent number 25,684 on October 4\u2014a saber hook, or an \"improved method of attaching sabers to belts.\" The U.S. government paid Stuart $5,000 for a \"right to use\" license and Stuart contracted with Knorr, Nece and Co. of Philadelphia to manufacture his hook. While in Washington, D.C., to discuss government contracts, and in conjunction with his application for an appointment into the quartermaster department, Stuart heard about John Brown's raid on the U.S. Arsenal at Harpers Ferry. Stuart volunteered to be aide-de-camp to Col. Robert E. Lee and accompanied Lee with a company of U.S. Marines from the Marine Barracks, 8th &amp; I, Washington, DC and four companies of Maryland militia. While delivering Lee's written surrender ultimatum to the leader of the group, who had been calling himself Isaac Smith, Stuart recognized \"Old Osawatomie Brown\" from his days in Kansas.\nResignation.\nStuart was promoted to captain on April 22, 1861, but resigned from the U.S. Army on May 3, 1861, to join the Confederate States Army, following the secession of Virginia. On June 26, 1860, Flora gave birth to a son, Philip St. George Cooke Stuart, but Stuart changed the name to James Ewell Brown Stuart Jr. (\"Jimmie\"), in late 1861 out of disgust with his father-in-law. Upon learning that his father-in-law, Col. Cooke, would remain in the U.S. Army during the coming war, Stuart wrote to his brother-in-law (future Confederate Brig. Gen. John Rogers Cooke), \"He will regret it but once, and that will be continuously.\" When he learned that George H. Thomas, a fellow Virginian, had also decided to stay with the Union, Stuart wrote \"I would like to hang, hang Thomas as a traitor to his native state.\"\nAmerican Civil War.\nEarly service.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n[Stuart] is a rare man, wonderfully endowed by nature with the qualities necessary for an officer of light cavalry. ... Calm, firm, acute, active, and enterprising, I know no one more competent than he to estimate the occurrences before him at their true value. If you add to this army a real brigade of cavalry, you can find no better brigadier-general to command it.\n \u2014General Joseph E. Johnston, letter to Confederate President Jefferson Davis, August 1861\nStuart was commissioned as a lieutenant colonel of Virginia Infantry in the Confederate Army on May 10, 1861. Major General Robert E. Lee, now commanding the armed forces of Virginia, ordered him to report to Colonel Thomas J. Jackson at Harper's Ferry. Jackson chose to ignore Stuart's infantry designation and assigned him on July 4 to command all the cavalry companies of the Army of the Shenandoah, organized as the 1st Virginia Cavalry Regiment. He was promoted to colonel on July 16.\nAfter early service in the Shenandoah Valley, Stuart led his regiment in the First Battle of Bull Run (where Jackson got his nickname, \"Stonewall\"), and participated in the pursuit of the retreating Federals, leading to sensationalist reports in the Northern press about the dreaded Confederate \"black horse\" cavalry. He then commanded the Army's outposts along the upper Potomac River until given command of the cavalry brigade for the army then known as the Army of the Potomac (later named the Army of Northern Virginia). He was promoted to brigadier general on September 24, 1861.\nPeninsula.\nIn 1862, the Union Army of the Potomac began its Peninsula Campaign against Richmond, Virginia, and Stuart's cavalry brigade assisted General Joseph E. Johnston's army as it withdrew up the Virginia Peninsula in the face of superior numbers. Stuart fought at the Battle of Williamsburg, but in general the terrain and weather on the Peninsula did not lend themselves to cavalry operations. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nStuart and Jackson were an unlikely pair: one outgoing, the other introverted; one flashily uniformed, the other plainly dressed; one Prince Rupert and the other Cromwell. Yet Stuart's self-confidence, penchant for action, deep love of Virginia, and total abstinence from such vices as alcohol, tobacco, and pessimism endeared him to Jackson. ... Stuart was the only man in the Confederacy [who] could make Jackson laugh\u2014and who dared to do so.\n \u2014James I. Robertson Jr., \"Stonewall Jackson\"\nHowever, when General Robert E. Lee became commander of the Army of Northern Virginia, he requested that Stuart perform reconnaissance to determine whether the right flank of the Union army was vulnerable. Stuart set out with 1,200 troopers on the morning of June 12 and, having determined that the flank was indeed vulnerable, took his men on a complete circumnavigation of the Union army, returning after 150 miles on June 15 with 165 captured Union soldiers, 260 horses and mules, and various quartermaster and ordnance supplies. His men met no serious opposition from the more decentralized Union cavalry, coincidentally commanded by his father-in-law, Col. Cooke, and their total casualties amounted to one man killed. The maneuver was a public relations sensation, and Stuart was greeted with flower petals thrown in his path at Richmond. He had become as famous as Stonewall Jackson in the eyes of the Confederacy.\nNorthern Virginia.\nEarly in the Northern Virginia Campaign, Stuart was promoted to major general on July 25, 1862, and his command was upgraded to the Cavalry Division\u2014the fact that the Army of Northern Virginia's cavalry had been brigaded and were now a full division made for an important organizational advantage over the Army of the Potomac's mounted arm, which was ineffectually organized as regiments attached to infantry brigades and treated as an extension of the army signal corps. He was nearly captured and lost his signature plumed hat and cloak to pursuing Federals during a raid in August, but in a retaliatory raid at Catlett's Station the following day, managed to overrun Union army commander Major General John Pope's headquarters, and not only captured Pope's full dress uniform, but also intercepted orders that provided Lee with valuable intelligence concerning reinforcements for Pope's army.\nAt the Second Battle of Bull Run (Second Manassas), Stuart's cavalry followed the massive assault by Longstreet's infantry against Pope's army, protecting its flank with artillery batteries. Stuart ordered Brigadier General Beverly Robertson's brigade to pursue the Federals and in a sharp fight against Brigadier General John Buford's brigade, Colonel Thomas T. Munford's 2nd Virginia Cavalry was overwhelmed until Stuart sent in two more regiments as reinforcements. Buford's men, many of whom were new to combat, retreated across Lewis's Ford and Stuart's troopers captured over 300 of them. Stuart's men harassed the retreating Union columns until the campaign ended at the Battle of Chantilly.\nMaryland.\nDuring the Maryland Campaign in September 1862, Stuart's cavalry screened the army's movement north. He bears some responsibility for Robert E. Lee's lack of knowledge of the position and celerity of the pursuing Army of the Potomac under George B. McClellan. For a five-day period, Stuart rested his men and entertained local civilians at a gala ball at Urbana, Maryland. His reports make no reference to intelligence gathering by his scouts or patrols. As the Union Army drew near to Lee's divided army, Stuart's men skirmished at various points on the approach to Frederick and Stuart was not able to keep his brigades concentrated enough to resist the oncoming tide. He misjudged the Union routes of advance, ignorant of the Union force threatening Turner's Gap, and required assistance from the infantry of Major General D. H. Hill to defend the South Mountain passes in the Battle of South Mountain. His horse artillery bombarded the flank of the Union army as it opened its attack in the Battle of Antietam. By mid-afternoon, Stonewall Jackson ordered Stuart to command a turning movement with his cavalry against the Union right flank and rear, which if successful would be followed up by an infantry attack from the West Woods. Stuart began probing the Union lines with more artillery barrages, which were answered with \"murderous\" counterbattery fire and the cavalry movement intended by Jackson was never launched.\nThree weeks after Lee's army had withdrawn back to Virginia, on October 10\u201312, 1862, Stuart performed another of his audacious circumnavigations of the Army of the Potomac, his Chambersburg Raid\u2014126 miles in under 60 hours, from Darkesville, West Virginia to as far north as Mercersburg, Pennsylvania and Chambersburg and around to the east through Emmitsburg, Maryland and south through Hyattstown, Maryland and White's Ford to Leesburg, Virginia\u2014once again embarrassing his Union opponents and seizing horses and supplies, but at the expense of exhausted men and animals, without gaining much military advantage. Jubal Early referred to it as \"the greatest horse stealing expedition\" that only \"annoyed\" the enemy. Stuart gave his friend Jackson a fine, new officer's tunic, trimmed with gold lace, commissioned from a Richmond tailor, which he thought would give Jackson more of the appearance of a proper general (something to which Jackson was notoriously indifferent).\nUrged by President Lincoln to pursue Lee, McClellan slowly pushed his army south, crossing the Potomac starting on October 26. As Lee began moving to counter this, Stuart screened Longstreet's corps and skirmished numerous times in early November against Union cavalry and infantry around Mountville, Aldie, and Upperville. On November 6, Stuart was notified by telegram that his daughter Flora had died of typhoid fever on November 3, just before her fifth birthday.\nFredericksburg and Chancellorsville.\nIn the December 1862 Battle of Fredericksburg, Stuart and his cavalry\u2014most notably his horse artillery under Major John Pelham\u2014protected Stonewall Jackson's flank at Hamilton's Crossing. General Lee commended his cavalry, which \"effectually guarded our right, annoying the enemy and embarrassing his movements by hanging on his flank, and attacking when the opportunity occurred.\" Stuart reported to Flora the next day that he had been shot through his fur collar but was unhurt.\nAfter Christmas, Lee ordered Stuart to conduct a raid north of the Rappahannock River to \"penetrate the enemy's rear, ascertain if possible his position &amp; movements, &amp; inflict upon him such damage as circumstances will permit.\" With 1,800 troopers and a horse artillery battery assigned to the operation, Stuart's raid reached as far north as four miles south of Fairfax Court House, seizing 250 prisoners, horses, mules, and supplies. Tapping telegraph lines, his signalmen intercepted messages between Union commanders, and Stuart sent a personal telegram to Union Quartermaster General Montgomery C. Meigs, \"General Meigs will in the future please furnish better mules; those you have furnished recently are very inferior.\"\nOn March 17, 1863, Stuart's cavalry clashed with a Union raiding party at Kelly's Ford. The minor victory was marred by the death of Major Pelham, which caused Stuart profound grief, as he thought of him as close as a younger brother. He wrote to a Confederate congressman, \"The noble, the chivalric, the gallant Pelham is no more. ... Let the tears of agony we have shed, and the gloom of mourning throughout my command bear witness.\" Flora was pregnant at the time and Stuart told her that if it were a boy, he wanted him to be named John Pelham Stuart. (Virginia Pelham Stuart was born October 9.)\nAt the Battle of Chancellorsville, Stuart accompanied Stonewall Jackson on his famous flanking march of May 2, 1863, and started to pursue the retreating soldiers of the Union XI Corps when he received word that both Jackson and his senior division commander, Major General A. P. Hill, had been wounded. Hill, bypassing the next most senior infantry general in the corps, Brigadier General Robert E. Rodes, sent a message ordering Stuart to take command of the Second Corps. Although the delays associated with this change of command effectively ended the flanking attack the night of May 2, Stuart, who had no prior experience leading infantry, performed creditably as an infantry corps commander the following day, launching a strong and well-coordinated attack against the Union right flank at Chancellorsville. When Union troops abandoned Hazel Grove, Stuart had the presence of mind to quickly occupy it and bombard the Union positions with artillery. Stuart relinquished his infantry command on May 6 when Hill returned to duty. Stephen W. Sears wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...\u00a0It is hard to see how Jeb Stuart, in a new command, a cavalryman commanding infantry and artillery for the first time, could have done a better job. The astute Porter Alexander believed all credit was due: \"Altogether, I do not think there was a more brilliant thing done in the war than Stuart's extricating that command from the extremely critical position in which he found it.\nStonewall Jackson died on May 10 and Stuart was once again devastated by the loss of a close friend, telling his staff that the death was a \"national calamity.\" Jackson's wife, Mary Anna, wrote to Stuart on August 1, thanking him for a note of sympathy: \"I need not assure you of which you already know, that your friendship &amp; admiration were cordially reciprocated by him. I have frequently heard him speak of Gen'l Stuart as one of his warm personal friends, &amp; also express admiration for your Soldierly qualities.\"\nBrandy Station.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe grand review of June 5 was surely the proudest day of Jeb Stuart's thirty years. As he led a cavalcade of resplendent staff officers to the reviewing stand, trumpeters heralded his coming and women and girls strewed his path with flowers. Before all of the spectators the assembled cavalry brigade stretched a mile and a half. After Stuart and his entourage galloped past the line in review, the troopers in their turn saluted the reviewing stand in columns of squadrons. In performing a second \"march past\", the squadrons started off at a trot, then spurred to a gallop. Drawing sabers and breaking into the Rebel yell, the troopers rush toward the horse artillery drawn up in battery. The gunners responded defiantly, firing blank charges. Amidst this tumult of cannon fire and thundering hooves, a number of ladies swooned in their escorts' arms.\n \u2014Stephen W. Sears, \"Gettysburg\"\nReturning to the cavalry for the Gettysburg campaign, Stuart endured the two low points in his career, starting with the Battle of Brandy Station, the largest predominantly cavalry engagement of the war. By June 5, two of Lee's infantry corps were camped in and around Culpeper. Six miles northeast, holding the line of the Rappahannock River, Stuart bivouacked his cavalry troopers, mostly near Brandy Station, screening the Confederate Army against surprise by the enemy. Stuart requested a full field review of his troops by General Lee. This grand review on June 5 included nearly 9,000 mounted troopers and four batteries of horse artillery, charging in simulated battle at Inlet Station, about two miles (three\u00a0km) southwest of Brandy Station.\nLee was not able to attend the review, however, so it was repeated in his presence on June 8, although the repeated performance was limited to a simple parade without battle simulations. Despite the lower level of activity, some of the cavalrymen and the newspaper reporters at the scene complained that all Stuart was doing was feeding his ego and exhausting the horses. Lee ordered Stuart to cross the Rappahannock the next day and raid Union forward positions, screening the Confederate Army from observation or interference as it moved north. Anticipating this imminent offensive action, Stuart ordered his tired troopers back into bivouac around Brandy Station.\nArmy of the Potomac commander Major General Joseph Hooker interpreted Stuart's presence around Culpeper to be indicative of preparations for a raid on his army's supply lines. In reaction, he ordered his cavalry commander, Major General Alfred Pleasonton, to take a combined arms force of 8,000 cavalrymen and 3,000 infantry on a \"spoiling raid\" to \"disperse and destroy\" the 9,500 Confederates. Pleasonton's force crossed the Rappahannock in two columns on June 9, 1863, the first crossing at Beverly's Ford (Brigadier General John Buford's division) catching Stuart by surprise, waking him and his staff to the sound of gunfire. The second crossing, at Kelly's Ford, surprised Stuart again, and the Confederates found themselves assaulted from front and rear in a spirited melee of mounted combat. A series of confusing charges and countercharges swept back and forth across Fleetwood Hill, which had been Stuart's headquarters the previous night. After ten hours of fighting, Pleasonton ordered his men to withdraw across the Rappahannock.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIf Gen. Stuart is to be the eyes and ears of the army we advise him to see more, and be seen less. ... Gen. Stuart has suffered no little in public estimation by the late enterprises of the enemy.\n\u2014Richmond \"Enquirer\", June 12, 1863\nAlthough Stuart claimed a victory because the Confederates held the field, Brandy Station is considered a tactical draw, and both sides came up short. Pleasonton was not able to disable Stuart's force at the start of an important campaign and he withdrew before finding the location of Lee's infantry nearby. However, the fact that the Southern cavalry had not detected the movement of two large columns of Union cavalry, and that they fell victim to a surprise attack, was an embarrassment that prompted serious criticism from fellow generals and the Southern press. The fight also revealed the increased competency of the Union cavalry, and foreshadowed the decline of the formerly invincible Southern mounted arm.\nStuart's ride in the Gettysburg Campaign.\nFollowing a series of small cavalry battles in June as Lee's army began marching north through the Shenandoah Valley, Stuart may have had in mind the glory of circumnavigating the enemy army once again, desiring to erase the stain on his reputation of the surprise at Brandy Station. General Lee gave orders to Stuart on June 22 on how he was to participate in the march north. The exact nature of those orders has been argued by the participants and historians ever since, but the essence was that Stuart was instructed to guard the mountain passes with part of his force while the Army of Northern Virginia was still south of the Potomac, and that he was to cross the river with the remainder of the army and screen the right flank of Ewell's Second Corps. Instead of taking a direct route north near the Blue Ridge Mountains, however, Stuart chose to reach Ewell's flank by taking his three best brigades (those of Brigadier General Wade Hampton, Brigadier General Fitzhugh Lee, and Colonel John R. Chambliss, the latter replacing the wounded Brigadier General W. H. F. \"Rooney\" Lee) between the Union Army and Washington, moving north through Rockville to Westminster and on into Pennsylvania, hoping to capture supplies along the way and cause havoc near the enemy capital. Stuart and his three brigades departed Salem Depot at 1 a.m. on June 25.\nUnfortunately for Stuart's plan, the Union army's movement was underway and his proposed route was blocked by columns of Federal infantry, forcing him to veer farther to the east than either he or General Lee had anticipated. This prevented Stuart from linking up with Ewell as ordered and deprived Lee of the use of his prime cavalry force, the \"eyes and ears\" of the army, while advancing into unfamiliar enemy territory.\nStuart's command crossed the Potomac River at 3 a.m. on June 28. At Rockville they captured a wagon train of 140 brand-new, fully loaded wagons and mule teams. This wagon train would prove to be a logistical hindrance to Stuart's advance, but he interpreted Lee's orders as placing importance on gathering supplies. The proximity of the Confederate raiders provoked some consternation in the national capital and two Union cavalry brigades and an artillery battery were sent to pursue the Confederates. Stuart supposedly said that were it not for his fatigued horses \"he would have marched down the 7th Street Road [and] took Abe &amp; Cabinet prisoners.\"\nIn Westminster on June 29, his men clashed briefly with and overwhelmed two companies of Union cavalry, chasing them a long distance on the Baltimore road, which Stuart claimed caused a \"great panic\" in the city of Baltimore. The head of Stuart's column encountered Brigadier General Judson Kilpatrick's cavalry as it passed through Hanover and scattered it on June 30; the Battle of Hanover ended after Kilpatrick's men regrouped and drove the Confederates out of town. Stuart's brigades had been better positioned to guard their captured wagon train than to take advantage of the encounter with Kilpatrick. After a 20-mile trek in the dark, his exhausted men reached Dover on the morning of July 1, as the Battle of Gettysburg was commencing without them.\nStuart headed next for Carlisle, hoping to find Ewell. He lobbed a few shells into town during the early evening of July 1 and burned the Carlisle Barracks before withdrawing to the south towards Gettysburg. He and the bulk of his command reached Lee at Gettysburg the afternoon of July 2. He ordered Wade Hampton to cover the left rear of the Confederate battle lines, and Hampton fought against Brigadier General George Armstrong Custer at the Battle of Hunterstown before joining Stuart at Gettysburg.\nGettysburg and its aftermath.\nWhen Stuart arrived at Gettysburg on the afternoon of July 2\u2014bringing with him the caravan of captured Union supply wagons\u2014he received a rare rebuke from Lee. No one witnessed the private meeting between Lee and Stuart, but reports circulated at headquarters that Lee's greeting was \"abrupt and frosty.\" Colonel Edward Porter Alexander wrote, \"Although Lee said only, 'Well, General, you are here at last,' his manner implied rebuke, and it was so understood by Stuart.\" On the final day of the battle, Stuart was ordered to move into the enemy's rear and disrupt its line of communications at the same time Pickett's Charge was sent against the Union positions on Cemetery Ridge, but his attack on East Cavalry Field was repelled by Union cavalry under Brigadier Generals David Gregg and George Custer.\nDuring the retreat from Gettysburg, Stuart devoted his full attention to supporting the army's movement, successfully screening against aggressive Union cavalry pursuit and escorting thousands of wagons with wounded men and captured supplies over difficult roads and through inclement weather. Numerous skirmishes and minor battles occurred during the screening and delaying actions of the retreat. Stuart's men were the final units to cross the Potomac River, returning to Virginia in \"wretched condition\u2014completely worn out and broken down.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe failure to crush the Federal army in Pennsylvania in 1863, in the opinion of almost all of the officers of the Army of Northern Virginia, can be expressed in five words\u2014\"the absence of the cavalry\".\n \u2014Confederate Maj. Gen. Henry Heth\nThe Gettysburg Campaign was the most controversial of Stuart's career. He became one of the scapegoats (along with James Longstreet) blamed for Lee's loss at Gettysburg by proponents of the postbellum Lost Cause movement, such as Jubal Early. This was fueled in part by opinions of less partisan writers, such as Stuart's subordinate, Thomas L. Rosser, who stated after the war that Stuart did, \"on this campaign, \"undoubtedly\", make the fatal blunder which lost us the battle of Gettysburg.\" In Lee's report on the campaign, he wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOne of the most forceful postbellum defenses of Stuart was by Colonel John S. Mosby, who had served under him during the campaign and was fiercely loyal to the late general, writing, \"He made me all that I was in the war. ... But for his friendship I would never have been heard of.\" He wrote numerous articles for popular publications and published a book length treatise in 1908, a work that relied on his skills as a lawyer to refute categorically all of the claims laid against Stuart.\nHistorians remain divided on how much the defeat at Gettysburg was due to Stuart's failure to keep Lee informed. Edward G. Longacre argues that Lee deliberately gave Stuart wide discretion in his orders. Edwin B. Coddington refers to the \"tragedy\" of Stuart in the Gettysburg Campaign and judges that when Fitzhugh Lee raised the question of \"whether Stuart exercised the discretion \"undoubtedly given to him, judiciously\"\", the answer is no. Agreeing that Stuart's absence permitted Lee to be surprised at Gettysburg, Coddington points out that the Union commander was just as surprised. Eric J. Wittenberg and J. David Petruzzi have concluded that there was \"plenty of blame to go around\" and the fault should be divided between Stuart, the lack of specificity in Lee's orders, and Richard S. Ewell, who might have tried harder to link up with Stuart northeast of Gettysburg. Jeffry D. Wert acknowledges that Lee, his officers, and fighting by the Army of the Potomac bear the responsibility for the Confederate loss at Gettysburg, but states that \"Stuart failed Lee and the army in the reckoning at Gettysburg. ... Lee trusted him and gave him discretion, but Stuart acted injudiciously.\"\nAlthough Stuart was not rebuked or disciplined in any official way for his role in the Gettysburg campaign, it is noteworthy that his appointment to corps command on September 9, 1863, did not carry with it a promotion to lieutenant general. Edward Bonekemper wrote that since all other corps commanders in the Army of Northern Virginia carried this rank, Lee's decision to keep Stuart at major general rank, while at the same time promoting Stuart's subordinates Wade Hampton and Fitzhugh Lee to major generals, could be considered an implied rebuke. Wert wrote that there is no evidence Lee considered Stuart's performance during the Gettysburg Campaign and that it is \"more likely that Lee thought the responsibilities in command of a cavalry corps did not equal those of an infantry corps.\"\nFall 1863 and the 1864 Overland Campaign.\nLee reorganized his cavalry on September 9, creating a Cavalry Corps for Stuart with two divisions of three brigades each. In the Bristoe Campaign, Stuart was assigned to lead a broad turning movement in an attempt to get into the enemy's rear, but General Meade skillfully withdrew his army without leaving Stuart any opportunities to take advantage of. On October 13, Stuart blundered into the rear guard of the Union III Corps near Warrenton, resulting in the First Battle of Auburn. &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n[The cavalry's success in the Bristoe Campaign can be attributed] to the generalship, boldness, and untiring energy of Major-General Stuart, for it was he who directed every movement of importance, and his generalship, boldness, and energy won the unbounded confidence of officers and men, and gave the prestige of success.\n\u2014Confederate Colonel Oliver Funsten\n Ewell's corps was sent to rescue him, but Stuart hid his troopers in a wooded ravine until the unsuspecting III Corps moved on, and the assistance was not necessary. As Meade withdrew towards Manassas Junction, brigades from the Union II Corps fought a rearguard action against Stuart's cavalry and the infantry of Brigadier General Harry Hays's division near Auburn on October 14. Stuart's cavalry boldly bluffed Warren's infantry and escaped disaster. After the Confederate repulse at Bristoe Station and an aborted advance on Centreville, Stuart's cavalry shielded the withdrawal of Lee's army from the vicinity of Manassas Junction. Judson Kilpatrick's Union cavalry pursued Stuart's cavalry along the Warrenton Turnpike, but were lured into an ambush near Chestnut Hill and routed. The Federal troopers were scattered and chased five miles (eight\u00a0km) in an affair that came to be known as the \"Buckland Races\". The Southern press began to mute its criticism of Stuart following his successful performance during the fall campaign.\nThe Overland Campaign, Lieutenant General Ulysses S. Grant's offensive against Lee in the spring of 1864, began at the Battle of the Wilderness, where Stuart aggressively pushed Thomas L. Rosser's Laurel Brigade into a fight against George Custer's better-armed Michigan Brigade, resulting in significant losses. General Lee sent a message to Stuart: \"It is very important to save your Cavalry &amp; not wear it out. ... You must use your good judgment to make any attack which may offer advantages.\" As the armies maneuvered toward their next confrontation at Spotsylvania Court House, Stuart's cavalry fought delaying actions against the Union cavalry. His defense at Laurel Hill, also directing the infantry of Brigadier General Joseph B. Kershaw, skillfully delayed the advance of the Federal army for nearly five critical hours.\nYellow Tavern and death.\nThe commander of the Army of the Potomac, Major General George Meade, and his cavalry commander, Major General Philip Sheridan, quarreled about the Union cavalry's performance in the first two engagements of the Overland Campaign. Sheridan heatedly asserted that he wanted to \"concentrate all of cavalry, move out in force against Stuart's command, and whip it.\" Meade reported the comments to Grant, who replied, \"Did Sheridan say that? Well, he generally knows what he is talking about. Let him start right out and do it.\" Sheridan immediately organized a raid against Confederate supply and railroad lines close to Richmond, which he knew would bring Stuart to battle.\nSheridan moved aggressively to the southeast, crossing the North Anna River and seizing Beaver Dam Station on the Virginia Central Railroad, where his men captured a train, liberating 3,000 Union prisoners and destroying more than one million rations and medical supplies destined for Lee's army. Stuart dispatched a force of about 3,000 cavalrymen to intercept Sheridan's cavalry, which was more than three times their numbers. As he rode in pursuit, accompanied by his aide, Major Andrew R. Venable, they were able to stop briefly along the way to be greeted by Stuart's wife, Flora, and his children, Jimmie and Virginia. Venable wrote of Stuart, \"He told me he never expected to live through the war, and that if we were conquered, that he did not want to live.\"\nThe Battle of Yellow Tavern took place on May 11 at an abandoned inn located north of Richmond. The Confederate troops resisted from the low ridgeline bordering the road to Richmond, fighting for over three hours. After receiving a scouting report from Texas Jack Omohundro, Stuart led a countercharge and pushed the advancing Union troopers back from the hilltop. Stuart, on horseback, shouted encouragement from in front of Company K of the 1st Virginia Cavalry while firing his revolver at the Union troopers.\nAs the 5th Michigan Cavalry streamed in retreat past Stuart, a dismounted Union private, 44-year-old John A. Huff, turned and shot Stuart with his .44-caliber revolver from a distance of 10\u201330 yards. The large caliber round cut through Stuart's abdomen and exited an inch to the right of his spine. Stuart fell into the arms of Company K's commander, Gus W. Dorsey. Dorsey caught him and took him from his horse. Stuart told him: \"Dorsey...save your men.\" Dorsey refused to leave him and brought Stuart to the rear. \nStuart suffered great pain as an ambulance took him to Richmond to await his wife's arrival at the home of Dr. Charles Brewer, his brother-in-law. As he was being driven from the field in an ambulance wagon, Stuart noticed disorganized ranks of retreating men and called out to them his last words on the battlefield: \"Go back, go back, and do your duty, as I have done mine, and our country will be safe. Go back, go back! I had rather die than be whipped.\"\nStuart ordered his sword and spurs be given to his son. As his aide Major McClellan left his side, Confederate President Jefferson Davis came in, took Stuart's hand, and asked, \"General, how do you feel?\" Stuart answered \"Easy, but willing to die, if God and my country think I have fulfilled my destiny and done my duty.\" His last whispered words were: \"I am resigned; God's will be done.\"\nHe died at 7:38\u00a0p.m. on May 12, the following day, before Flora Stuart reached his side. He was 31 years old. Stuart was buried in Richmond's Hollywood Cemetery. Upon learning of Stuart's death, General Lee is reported to have said that he could hardly keep from weeping at the mere mention of Stuart's name and that Stuart had never given him a bad piece of information. John Huff, the private who had fatally wounded Stuart, was killed in action just a few weeks later at the Battle of Haw's Shop.\nFlora wore the black of mourning for the remainder of her life, and never remarried. She lived in Saltville, Virginia, for 15 years after the war, where she opened and taught at a school in a log cabin. She worked from 1880 to 1898 as principal of the Virginia Female Institute in Staunton, Virginia, a position for which Robert E. Lee had recommended her before his death ten years earlier. In 1907, the institute was renamed Stuart Hall School in her honor. Upon the death of her daughter Virginia, from complications in childbirth in 1898, Flora resigned from the institute and moved to Norfolk, Virginia, where she helped Virginia's widower, Robert Page Waller, in raising her grandchildren.\nShe died in Norfolk on May 10, 1923, after striking her head in a fall on a city sidewalk. She is buried alongside her husband and their daughter, Little Flora, in Hollywood Cemetery in Richmond.\nLegacy and memorials.\nLike his intimate friend, Stonewall Jackson, General J. E. B. Stuart was a legendary figure and is considered one of the greatest cavalry commanders in American history. His friend from his federal army days, Union Major General John Sedgwick, said that Stuart was \"the greatest cavalry officer ever foaled in America.\" Jackson and Stuart, both of whom were killed in battle, had colorful public images, although the latter's seems to have been more deliberately crafted. Wert wrote about Stuart:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Stuart had been the Confederacy's knight-errant, the bold and dashing cavalier, attired in a resplendent uniform, plumed hat, and cape. Amid a slaughterhouse, he had embodied chivalry, clinging to the pageantry of a long-gone warrior. He crafted the image carefully, and the image befitted him. He saw himself as the Southern people envisaged him. They needed a knight; he needed to be that knight.\nStuart's birthplace, Laurel Hill, located in Patrick County, Virginia, was purchased by the J.E.B. Stuart Birthplace Preservation Trust, Inc., in 1992 to preserve and interpret it. In December 2006, a personal Confederate battle flag, sewn by Flora Stuart, was sold in a Heritage Auction for $956,000 (including buyer's premium), a world-record price for any Confederate flag. The 34-inch by 34-inch flag was hand-sewn for Stuart by Flora in 1862, and Stuart carried it into some of his most famous battles.\nThe J. E. B. Stuart Monument, a statue of Stuart by sculptor Frederick Moynihan, used to occupy a space on Richmond's Monument Avenue at Stuart Circle. Originally dedicated in 1907, it was removed on July 7, 2020.\nNamed after Stuart.\nU.S. Route 58, in Virginia, is named the \"J.E.B. Stuart Highway\". In 1884 the town of Taylorsville, Virginia, was renamed Stuart. The British Army named two models of American-made World War II tanks, the M3 and M5, the Stuart tank in General Stuart's honor.\nSchools.\nA middle school in Jacksonville, Florida, is named for him. A high school named after him on Munson's Hill in Falls Church, Virginia, opened in 1959. In early 2017, Fairfax County Public Schools established an Ad Hoc Working Committee to assist the Fairfax County School Board in determining whether to rename the Stuart High School in Virginia, in response to suggestions from students and local community members that FCPS should not continue to honor a Confederate general who fought in support of a cause dedicated to maintaining the institution of slavery in Virginia and other states. The creation of the committee followed the circulation of a petition started by actress Julianne Moore and Bruce Cohen in 2016, which garnered over 35,000 signatures in support of changing the school's name to one honoring the late United States Supreme Court Justice Thurgood Marshall.\nOn July 27, 2017, the Fairfax County School Board approved a measure to change the school name no later than the start of the 2019 school year. The measure asked that \"Stuart High School\" be considered as a possibility for the new name. On October 27, 2017, the Fairfax County School Board voted to change the name of J.E.B. Stuart High School to \"Justice High School.\" Board member Sandy Evans from the Mason District said that the name will honor Justice Thurgood Marshall, civil rights leader Barbara Rose Johns, U.S. Army officer Louis Gonzaga Mendez Jr., and all those who have fought for justice and equality.\nOn June 18, 2018, the school board for Richmond Public Schools in Richmond, Virginia, voted 6\u20131 to rename J. E. B. Stuart Elementary School to Barack Obama Elementary School. On June 12, 2018, students of the school were given the opportunity to narrow down the choices for renaming the school from seven to three. Northside Elementary received 190 votes, Barack Obama Elementary earned 166 votes, and Wishtree Elementary received 127 votes. From there, the administration of Richmond Public Schools recommended to the school board that it rename the school after Barack Obama. Superintendent Jason Kamras said, \"It's incredibly powerful that in the capital of the Confederacy, where we had a school named for an individual who fought to maintain slavery, that now we're renaming that school after the first black president. A lot of our kids, and our kids at J. E. B. Stuart, see themselves in Barack Obama.\" The student population of the newly named Barack Obama Elementary School is made up of more than 90 percent African-American children.\nStuart Hall School is a Staunton, Virginia, co-educational school for students from pre-kindergarten to Grade 12, and it offers a boarding program from Grades 8 to 12. It was renamed in 1907 in honor of its most famous headmistress, Mrs. Flora Cooke Stuart, the widow of Confederate cavalry leader Maj. Gen. J. E. B. Stuart.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16378", "revid": "37371155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16378", "title": "John Hanson", "text": "American Founding Father and merchant (1721\u20131783)\nJohn Hanson (April 14\u00a0[O.S. April 3]\u00a01721\u00a0\u2013 November 15, 1783) was an American Founding Father, merchant, and politician from Maryland during the Revolutionary Era. In 1779, Hanson was elected as a delegate to the Continental Congress after serving in a variety of roles for the Patriot cause in Maryland. He signed the Articles of Confederation in 1781 after Maryland joined the other states in ratifying them. In November 1781, following ratification of the articles, he was elected President of the Confederation Congress\u2014a mostly ceremonial and clerical position, sometimes styled \"President of the United States in Congress assembled\"\u2014by his fellow delegates. \nHe was not the first person to hold the office. Samuel Huntington and Thomas McKean had each preceded him under the Articles of Confederation, as had five other men as President of the Continental Congress before ratification. Some Hanson descendants and biographers have falsely claimed that he was actually the first holder of the office of President of the United States, an unrelated executive position created in 1789 by the Constitution of the United States.\nEarly life.\nHanson was born in Port Tobacco Parish in Charles County in the Province of Maryland on April 14, 1721. Sources published prior to a 1940 genealogical study sometimes listed his birth date as April 13 or his year of birth as 1715. Hanson was born on a plantation called \"Mulberry Grove\" into a wealthy and prominent family. The Hanson Family was of English descent. His parents were Samuel (c. 1685\u20131740) and Elizabeth (Storey) Hanson (c. 1688\u20131764). Samuel Hanson was a planter who owned more than , and held a variety of political offices, including serving two terms in the Maryland General Assembly.\nHanson's grandfather, also named John, came to Charles County, Maryland, as an indentured servant around 1661. In 1876, a writer named George Hanson placed Hanson in his family tree of Swedish-Americans descended from four Swedish brothers who emigrated to New Sweden in 1642. This story was often repeated over the next century, but scholarly research in the late 20th century showed that Hanson was not related to those Swedish-American Hansons.\nLittle is known about Hanson's early life; he was presumably privately tutored as was customary among the wealthy of his time and place. He followed his father's path as a planter, slave owner, and public official. He was often referred to as \"John Hanson, Jr.\", to distinguish him from an older man of the same name.\nPolitical career.\nHanson's career in public service began in 1750, when he was appointed sheriff of Charles County. In 1757, he was elected to represent Charles County in the lower house of the Maryland General Assembly, where he served for twelve years, sitting on many important committees. Maryland was a proprietary colony, and Hanson aligned himself with the \"popular\" or \"country\" party, which opposed any expansion of the power of the proprietary governors at the expense of the popularly elected lower house. He was a leading opponent of the 1765 Stamp Act, chairing the committee that drafted the instructions for Maryland's delegates to the Stamp Act Congress. In protest of the Townshend Acts, in 1769 Hanson was one of the signers of a non-importation resolution that boycotted British imports until the acts were repealed.\nHanson changed course in 1769, apparently to better pursue his business interests. He resigned from the General Assembly, sold his land in Charles County, and moved to Frederick County in western Maryland. There he held a variety of offices, including deputy surveyor, sheriff, and county treasurer. When relations between Great Britain and the colonies became a crisis in 1774, Hanson became one of Frederick County's leading Patriots. He chaired a town meeting that passed a resolution opposing the Boston Port Act. In 1775, he was a delegate to the Maryland Convention, an extralegal body convened after the colonial assembly had been prorogued. With the other delegates, he signed the Association of Freemen on July 26, 1775, which expressed hope for reconciliation with Great Britain but also called for military resistance to the enforcement of the Coercive Acts.\nWith hostilities underway, Hanson chaired the Frederick County Committee of Observation, part of the Patriot organization that assumed control of local governance. Responsible for recruiting and arming soldiers, Hanson proved to be an excellent organizer, and Frederick County sent the first southern troops to join George Washington's army. Because funds were scarce, Hanson frequently paid soldiers and others with his own money. In June 1776, Hanson chaired the Frederick County meeting that urged provincial leaders in Annapolis to instruct Maryland's delegates in the Continental Congress to declare independence from Great Britain. While Congress worked on the Declaration of Independence, Hanson was in Frederick County \"making gunlocks, storing powder, guarding prisoners, raising money and troops, dealing with Tories, and doing the myriad other tasks which went with being chairman of the committee of observation\".\nHanson was elected to the newly reformed Maryland House of Delegates in 1777, the first of five annual terms. In December 1779, the House of Delegates named Hanson as a delegate to the Second Continental Congress; he began serving in Congress in Philadelphia in June 1780. \"Hanson came to Philadelphia with the reputation of having been the leading financier of the revolution in western Maryland, and soon he was a member of several committees dealing with finance.\"\nWhen Hanson was elected to Congress, Maryland was holding up the ratification of the Articles of Confederation. The state, which did not have any claims on western land, refused to ratify the Articles until the other states had ceded their western land claims. When the other states finally did so, the Maryland legislature decided in January 1781 to ratify the Articles. When Congress received notice of this, Hanson joined Daniel Carroll in signing the Articles of Confederation on behalf of Maryland on March 1, 1781. With Maryland's endorsement, the Articles officially went into effect. Many years later, some Hanson biographers claimed that Hanson had been instrumental in arranging the compromise and thus securing ratification of the Articles, but according to historian Ralph Levering, there is no documentary evidence of Hanson's opinions or actions in resolving the controversy.\nIn 1782, Hanson proclaimed on behalf of the Continental Congress for a day of \"Solemn Thanksgiving\".\nPresident of Congress.\nOn November 5, 1781, Congress elected Hanson as its president. Under the Articles of Confederation, both legislative and executive government were vested in the Congress (as it was and still is in Britain); the presidency of Congress was a mostly ceremonial position, but the office did require Hanson to serve as neutral discussion moderator, handle official correspondence, and sign documents. Hanson found the work tedious and considered resigning after just one week, citing his poor health and family responsibilities. Colleagues urged him to remain because Congress at that moment lacked a quorum to choose a successor. Out of a sense of duty, Hanson remained in office, although his term as a delegate to Congress was nearly expired. The Maryland Assembly re-elected him as a delegate on November 28, 1781, and so Hanson continued to serve as president until November 4, 1782.\nThe Articles of Confederation stipulated that presidents of Congress serve one-year terms, and Hanson became the first to do so. Contrary to the claims of some of his later advocates, however, he was not the first president to serve under the Articles nor the first to be elected under the Articles. When the Articles went into effect in March 1781, Congress did not bother to elect a new president; instead, Samuel Huntington continued serving a term that had already exceeded a year. On July 9, 1781, Samuel Johnston became the first man to be elected as president of Congress after the ratification of the Articles. He declined the office, however, perhaps to make himself available for North Carolina's gubernatorial election. After Johnston turned down the office, Thomas McKean was elected. McKean served just a few months, resigning in October 1781 after hearing news of the British surrender at Yorktown. Congress asked him to remain in office until November, when a new session of Congress was scheduled to begin. It was in that session that Hanson began to serve his one-year term. A highlight of Hanson's term was when George Washington presented Cornwallis's sword to Congress.\nLater life.\nHanson retired from public office after his one-year term as president of Congress. In poor health, he died on November 15, 1783, while visiting Oxon Hill Manor in Prince George's County, Maryland, the plantation of his nephew Thomas Hawkins Hanson. He was buried there. Hanson owned at least 223 acres of land and 11 slaves at the time of his death.\nPersonal life.\nAbout 1744, he married Jane Contee (1728\u20131812), daughter of Alexander Contee (1692\u20131740). They had eight children, including:\nLegacy.\nIn 1898, Douglas H. Thomas, a descendant of Hanson, wrote a biography promoting Hanson as the first true President of the United States. Thomas became the \"driving force\" behind the selection of Hanson as one of the two people who would represent Maryland in the National Statuary Hall Collection in Washington, D.C. Hanson was not initially on the shortlist for consideration, but he was chosen after lobbying by the Maryland Historical Society. In 1903, bronze statues of Hanson and Charles Carroll by sculptor Richard E. Brooks were added to Statuary Hall; Hanson's is currently located on the 2nd floor of the Senate connecting corridor. Small versions of these two statues (maquettes) sit on the president's desk in the Senate Chamber of the Maryland State House.\nSome historians have questioned the appropriateness of Hanson's selection for the honor of representing Maryland in Statuary Hall. According to historian Gregory Stiverson, Hanson was not one of Maryland's foremost leaders of the Revolutionary era. In 1975, historian Ralph Levering said that \"Hanson shouldn't have been one of the two Marylanders\" chosen, but he wrote that Hanson \"probably contributed as much as any other Marylander to the success of the American Revolution\". In the 21st century, Maryland lawmakers have considered replacing Hanson's statue in Statuary Hall with one of Harriet Tubman.\nThe idea that Hanson was the forgotten first president of the United States was further promoted in a 1932 biography of Hanson by journalist Seymour Wemyss Smith. Smith's book asserts that the American Revolution had two primary leaders: George Washington on the battlefield and John Hanson in politics. Smith's book, like Douglas H. Thomas's 1898 book, was one of a number of biographies written seeking to promote Hanson as the \"first President of the United States\". Regarding the opinion, historian Ralph Levering stated: \"They're not biographies by professional historians; they aren't based on research into primary sources.\" According to historian Richard B. Morris, if a president of Congress were to be called the \"first\" president of the United States, \"a stronger case could be made for Peyton Randolph of Virginia, the first president of the first and second Continental Congresses, or for John Hancock, the president of Congress when that body declared its independence.\" The claim that Hanson was a forgotten president of the United States was revived on the Internet, sometimes with a new assertion that he was actually a black man; an anachronistic photograph of Senator John Hanson of Liberia has been used to support this claim.\nIn 1972, Hanson was depicted on a 6-cent U.S. postal card, which featured his name and portrait next to the word \"Patriot\". Historian Irving Brant criticized the selection of Hanson for the card, arguing that it was a result of the \"old hoax\" promoting Hanson as the first president of the United States. In 1981, Hanson was featured on a 20-cent U.S. postage stamp. U.S. Route 50 between Washington, D.C., and Annapolis is named the John Hanson Highway in his honor. There are also middle schools located in Oxon Hill, Maryland, and Waldorf, Maryland, named after him. A former savings bank named for him was merged in the 1990s with Industrial Bank of Washington, D.C.\nIn the 1970s, a descendant of Hanson, John Hanson Briscoe, served as Speaker of the Maryland House of Delegates, which passed \"a measure establishing April 14 as John Hanson Day.\" In 2009, the John Hanson Memorial Association was incorporated in Frederick, Maryland, to create the John Hanson National Memorial and to educate Americans about Hanson as well as to educate people about the many myths written about him.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBooks, journals, and encyclopedias\nNewspapers and online sources"}
{"id": "16379", "revid": "34632768", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16379", "title": "Jedi", "text": "Organization in the Star Wars series\nJedi (), Jedi Knights, or collectively the Jedi Order are fictional characters, and often protagonists, featured in many works within the \"Star Wars\" franchise. Working symbiotically alongside the Galactic Republic, the Jedi Order is depicted as a religious, academic, meritocratic, and military-auxiliary (peacekeeping) organization whose origin dates back thousands of years before the events of the \"Star Wars\" feature films. The fictional organization has inspired a minor real-world new religious movement and online community: Jediism.\nWithin the \"Star Wars\" galaxy, the Jedi Order are powerful guardians of order and justice who, through intuition, rigorous training, and intensive self-discipline, are able to wield a supernatural power known as the Force, thus achieving the ability to move objects with the mind, perform incredible feats of strength, perceive events that are distant in time or space, and connect to certain people's thoughts. George Lucas, the creator of \"Star Wars\", explains that the Jedi are \"warrior-monks who keep peace in the universe\", avoiding the use of violence except as a last resort, with a mission to \"use their power to keep the governments of all the planets in line, so that they don't do terrible things\". The Jedi have the \"moral authority to do that\" since they are \"the most moral of anybody in the galaxy\". Throughout the franchise, Jedi are often recognizable by their robes and tunics in various shades of brown and their use of lightsabers: sword-like weapons with colorful blades made of plasma.\nMostly depicted in the franchise's Old Republic era, the Jedi Order is a monastic organization comprising members of various human and humanoid species, who train meticulously in the martial arts and cooperate intimately with the galaxy-wide Republic government, working towards bringing \"peace into the galaxy by being ambassadors and troubleshooters\", according to Lucas. Jedi characters investigate certain crimes ranging from high-profile murder to political corruption, act as diplomats between powerful interplanetary groups, protect the highest government officials of the Republic, track down fugitives, and are promoted as leaders in the Republic's army during the Clone Wars. Still, their creed demands that they defend and protect all life and use their power only for knowledge and defense, though the \"Star Wars\" franchise often portrays them in battle.\nAlong with New Age elements, Lucas developed the Jedi creed by adopting certain elements from real Eastern religions\u2014namely Buddhism and potentially Taoism. In that same vein, the Jedi creed focuses on compassion for others, mindfulness, non-attachment, and meditation, which are all characteristics of what Jedi characters call the \"light side\" of the Force. Furthermore, the Jedi view fear to be the root of suffering: fear leading to anger, anger leading to hate, and hate leading to suffering. The Jedi warn that an excess of these negative emotions can turn practitioners away from the light side of the Force towards the dark side, which embraces passions, aggression, hate, rage, fear, and bitterness as a way of life. The Sith are followers of the dark side and the traditional enemies of the Jedi. While the Sith ultimately seek violent and absolute rule over the galaxy, the Jedi work to protect democracy, harmony, and justice. With the rise of the Sith Lord Darth Sidious and the Galactic Empire, the Jedi Order is outlawed and most of its members killed in the ensuing political purge. Characters make later efforts to revive the organization.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEtymology.\nThe word \"Jedi\" was adapted by George Lucas from Japanese \u6642\u4ee3\u5287 (jidaigeki) (meaning 'period drama' motion pictures about samurai), or perhaps inspired by the words \"Jed\" (Leader) and \"Jeddak\" (King) in the Barsoom series by Edgar Rice Burroughs, a series that Lucas considered adapting to film. It has also been argued by some that the name \"Jedi\" itself actually comes from the Arabic \"Al-Jeddi\"' which means 'master of the mystic-warrior way.'\nAccording to the \"Star Wars: Rogue One \u2013 The Ultimate Visual Guide\", \"Jedi\" in-universe is derived from \"Jedha,\" a planet that was once home to a Jedi temple and was a source of kyber crystals. Kyber crystals are used to power lightsabers and were considered sacred by the Jedi Order.\nIn his book \"The Making of Star Wars: The Definitive Story Behind the Original Film\", J.W. Rinzler notes that Lucas originally considered using the term \"Jedidiah\" for his knights, but ultimately settled on \"jedi.\" Rinzler also suggests that the word may have been influenced by the term \"bodhisattva,\" which refers to a Buddhist concept of an enlightened being who chooses to remain in the world to help others.\nAnother potential influence on the word \"jedi\" is the Hebrew term \"yedid,\" which means \"beloved.\" In his book \"The Secret History of Star Wars\", Michael Kaminski suggests that Lucas may have been influenced by this term when creating the name for his knights. Kaminski notes that Lucas has cited Jewish mysticism as an inspiration for his work, and that he may have been drawn to the idea of his heroes being beloved protectors.\nInfluences.\nGeorge Lucas acknowledged that the Jedi, Sith, and other Force concepts have been inspired by many sources. These include: knighthood, chivalry, paladinism, samurai bushido, Shaolin Monastery, Feudalism, Hinduism, Qigong, Greek philosophy and mythology, Roman history and mythology, Sufism, Confucianism, Shint\u014d, Buddhism and Taoism, and numerous cinematic precursors. The works of philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche and mythologist Joseph Campbell, especially his book \"The Hero with a Thousand Faces\" (1949), directly influenced Lucas, and was what drove him to create the 'modern myth' of \"Star Wars\".\nLucas explained that the Jedi are trained, allowed and expected to love people (even their enemies, the Sith), but they are not to form attachments because attachment leads to the dark side of the Force. When one has, gets or wants a person or experience and attaches to them, one becomes afraid to lose them. The fear of loss feeds into greed, wanting to keep things, thus, an attached person is selfish and unable to let go. The fear of loss turns into anger, which will lead to hate, and hate will lead into suffering, mostly on the part of the one who is selfish, because then one will spend their lives being afraid rather than actually living. The light side is focused on compassion and giving; thus it is love, and the opposite of attachment \u2013 it is everlasting joy, devoid of fear of loss and the pain of loss. \"As long as you love other people and treat them kindly, you won't be afraid\".\nLucas, identifying himself as \"Buddhist Methodist\" or \"Methodist Buddhist\", stated that his philosophy of non-attachment depicted in his movies was influenced by the fact that he was from San Francisco, the \"Zen Buddhism capital of the United States\". In 2020, he indicated that the Jedi were \"designed to be a Buddhist monk who happened to be very good at fighting\".\nDepiction.\nAs depicted in the canon, the Jedi study and utilize the Force in order to help and protect those in need. The Jedi members, known as Jedi Knights, respect all life by defending and protecting those who cannot do it for themselves, striving for peaceful and non-combative solutions to any altercations they encounter and fighting only in self-defense and for the defense of those they protect. By training the mind and the body, the Jedi seek to improve themselves by gaining unfettered access to the Force while also seeking to improve those individuals and groups they come in contact with. Like their evil counterparts, the Sith, the main weapon of the Jedi is the lightsaber. However, according to Lucas, \"The Force really doesn't have anything to do with the lightsaber. Anybody can have a lightsaber. It's just a weapon like a pistol\".\nQui-Gon Jinn gives an insight into the Force in \"The Phantom Menace\" when he tells Anakin: \"Your focus determines your reality\". And later, he explains: \"Midi-chlorians are microscopic lifeforms that reside within all of your cells. And we are symbionts with them. Lifeforms living together for mutual advantage. Without the midi-chlorians, life could not exist and we would have no knowledge of the Force. They continually speak to us, telling us the will of The Force. When you learn to quiet your mind you'll hear them speaking to you\". In \"A New Hope\", Obi-Wan Kenobi tells Luke Skywalker: \"The Force is what gives a Jedi his power. It's an energy field created by all living things. It surrounds us, penetrates us, it binds the galaxy together.\" \". . . a Jedi can feel the Force flowing through him. It [partially] controls your actions, but it also obeys your commands\".\nThe Skywalker Saga.\nPrequel trilogy.\nThe prequel trilogy depicts the Jedi in their peak of power, headquartered at the Jedi Temple on Coruscant, and dealing with the rising presence of the dark side of the Force and the return of the Sith. In ' (1999), Jedi Master Qui-Gon Jinn (Liam Neeson) discovers nine-year-old Anakin Skywalker (Jake Lloyd), whom he believes to be the \"Chosen One\"'\" of a Jedi prophecy, destined to bring balance to the Force. At the end of \"The Phantom Menace\", following Qui-Gon's death at the hands of Darth Maul (Ray Park), Anakin is paired with his apprentice, the young Obi-Wan Kenobi (Ewan McGregor), who promises to train him.\nThe sequel, ', establishes that the Jedi forswear attachments, being in the same category of possession and striving to cultivate compassion, unconditional love instead. As revealed in the ' series, the Jedi believed romantic feelings are natural and as such, they did not prohibit them, but for a Jedi Knight, it was essential to make the right choice for the Order and not neglect their Jedi duties in the favor of their beloved, even if that would mean the end of the relationship. This proves problematic when Anakin, now a young adult (Hayden Christensen), falls in love with Padm\u00e9 Amidala (Natalie Portman). The Clone Wars, first spoken of in the original 1977 film, begin with hundreds of Jedi participating in the battle of Geonosis, before escalating into a galactic war with the Jedi as generals of the newly formed Clone Army.\nIn \"\", Yoda confides to Mace Windu (Samuel L. Jackson) that the prophecy of the Chosen One could have been misread. Sheev Palpatine (Ian McDiarmid), who is revealed to be Darth Sidious, manipulates Anakin's attachment for Padm\u00e9 and distrust and resentment of the Jedi in order to turn him to the dark side and become his Sith apprentice, Darth Vader. Betraying the Jedi and becoming a Sith, Vader begins helping Sidious to hunt down and exterminate the Jedi during the events of \"Revenge of the Sith\"; Obi-Wan Kenobi, Yoda, and Ahsoka Tano are among a handful of Jedi that avoided the initial purge.\nAs revealed in ', each clone trooper was implanted with a chip that Palpatine would activate with the verbal command Order 66. This resulted in the clones being forcibly brainwashed into viewing their Jedi generals as traitors to the Republic and subsequently summarily executing them. Darth Vader/Anakin Skywalker led the 501st Legion to carry out \"Operation Knightfall\" against the Jedi Temple, burning and slaughtering all Jedi within, including Temple-Defender Shaak Ti. Sidious deceived the people of the Republic that the Jedi were corrupted warmongers responsible for prolonging the Clone Wars, labeling them criminals with bounties placed on them. Darth Vader continued to hunt and kill nearly every surviving Jedi during the early years of the Empire, in what became known as the Great Jedi Purge.\nOriginal trilogy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For over a thousand generations, the Jedi Knights were the guardians of peace and justice in the Old Republic. Before the dark times, before the Empire.\u2014\u200a\nThe Jedi are first introduced in the 1977 motion picture \"Star Wars\" as an order of warrior monks who serve as \"the guardians of peace and justice in the galaxy\" and embrace the mystical Force. Obi-Wan Kenobi (Alec Guinness) explains that Darth Vader (David Prowse/James Earl Jones), a former apprentice and the Jedi's main enemy, helped the Galactic Empire to exterminate the Jedi, and seeks to train Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill) to be the Jedi Order's last hope. By the end of the film, which depicts the battle of Yavin, Luke is on the path to becoming a Jedi. In the sequel, \"The Empire Strikes Back\", Luke receives Jedi training from the elderly (and only surviving) Jedi Master Yoda (Frank Oz), even as he learns that Vader is, in fact, his father, former Jedi Knight Anakin Skywalker. The third film in the original trilogy, \"Return of the Jedi\", ends with Luke redeeming Vader\u2014who kills Darth Sidious to save him, thus bringing balance to the Force\u2014and helping destroy the Empire, thus fulfilling his destiny as a Jedi.\nThe two last Jedi Masters die during the events of the films, after which they return as Force spirits to help Luke.\nSequel trilogy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Now that they're extinct, the Jedi are romanticized, deified. But if you strip away the myth and look at their deeds, the legacy of the Jedi is failure. Hypocrisy, hubris. [...] At the height of their powers, they allowed Darth Sidious to rise, create the Empire, and wipe them out.\u2014\u200a\nIn \", the first film in the sequel trilogy, Luke had attempted to rebuild the Jedi Order, but his nephew Ben Solo (Adam Driver) fell to the dark side, lured by the mysterious Snoke (Andy Serkis), and destroyed his temple and other apprentices. Ben is renamed Kylo Ren and destroys all that Luke built. After Kylo's fall and the destruction of the New Jedi Order, Luke goes into a self-imposed exile on Ahch-To, believing himself and the Jedi to negatively influence the galaxy.\nIn the sequel \", the scavenger Rey (Daisy Ridley) discovers Luke on Ahch-To and convinces him to train her in the ways of the Force. During her training, Luke explains that the past Jedi allowed Darth Sidious to rise to power. She also discovers several ancient Jedi texts hidden away in a tree. Rey learns the truth about Ben's fall to the dark side and believes herself to be his only chance of redemption. Luke decides to stay on Ahch-To and attempts to burn down the tree with the texts, but cannot bring himself to do so. However, Yoda appears as a Force spirit and burns the tree, teaching him that failure is just as important as success, and those masters are defined by those who surpass them. Near the end of the film, Luke confronts Kylo on the planet Crait. It is subsequently revealed that Luke had been projecting himself from Ahch-To; he dies from the effort and becomes one with the Force. Rey is shown to have taken the sacred Jedi texts before she left Ahch-To, to continue her training.\nIn \"\", the final film of the sequel trilogy, it is discovered that Darth Sidious created Snoke and has returned from death and has been secretly manipulating events from the Sith world Exegol. In his last attempt to reclaim the galaxy, Sidious unveils the Final Order, a massive fleet of \"Xyston\"-class Star Destroyers built by the Sith Eternal. The Emperor offers the Sith fleet to Kylo Ren in exchange for killing the last remaining Jedi, Rey, who is revealed to be his granddaughter. After the death of Kylo's mother, Leia Organa (Carrie Fisher), Kylo returns to the light and reclaims his identity as Ben Solo. At the end of the film, Ben joins Rey as she confronts Sidious. Rey channels the power of the past Jedi to destroy Sidious and the Sith\u2014thus bringing balance back to the Force\u2014before dying herself. Ben sacrifices his life to revive Rey and becomes one with the Force. With peace and justice restored to the galaxy, Rey lives on to start the Jedi Order again.\nAnthologies and derivative works.\nIn a deleted scene from \"\", the \"Lost Twenty\" is the name given to a group of Jedi Masters\u2014numbering twenty in total\u2014who left the Jedi Order throughout its history. The first 12 of this Lost Twenty became \"Dark Jedi\" who eventually founded the first Sith Empire. In the years preceding the Clone Wars, Jedi Master Dooku left the Jedi Order as a result of differences with his fellow Jedi, becoming the 20th Jedi Master in the history of the Order to do so. To showcase the failures of the Jedi they created statues of the fallen Jedi and placed them in the Jedi Temple Archives.\nThe animated television series \"\" depicts the battles of the Clone Wars, focusing on the Jedi and clone troopers they lead against the Separatists and its Sith leaders. The series reveals that Anakin trained an apprentice, Ahsoka Tano, between \"Attack of the Clones\" and \"Revenge of the Sith\". Later arcs explore the foundations of Order 66 and Darth Sidious' manipulation of the Jedi Order.\nThe animated television series \"Star Wars Rebels\" reveals that Ahsoka and a Jedi named Kanan Jarrus survived the purge; the latter trains a new apprentice, Ezra Bridger. The series also reveals that, following the start of the purge with Order 66, Sidious commissioned the Inquisitorius, a group of former Jedi who had turned to the dark side for various reasons, to aid Darth Vader in hunting down the remaining Jedi.\nThe \"Clone Wars\" spinoff series \"\" follows the titular group of enhanced clones, who disobey Order 66 and instead choose to save a younger Kanan after his master is killed by the other clones.\nThe canon video game ' introduces Cal Kestis, a former Padawan hiding from the Empire who accidentally exposes his Force abilities to aid someone, putting him on the Inquisitors' radar. Kestis gets aid from Cere Junda, another Jedi Knight in hiding. In the 2023 sequel, ', it is revealed that mercenary Bode Akuna was also a survivor of Order 66.\nIn the limited series \"Obi-Wan Kenobi\", the Great Jedi Purge is depicted in a flashback in which Reva Sevander, future Inquisitor called Third Sister, escapes from the clones during the night of Order 66.\nMembers.\nThe exact size of the pre-purge Jedi's membership and operations are never specified. However, in the \"Star Wars Rebels\" episode \"Path of the Jedi\", Kanan Jarrus stated: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There were around 10,000 Jedi Knights defending the galaxy. Now, we are few. But in those days, we had small outposts, temples spread throughout the stars. The Empire sought out these temples and destroyed many of them...\nYoda.\nYoda was a wise, experienced, and powerful Grand Master of the Jedi of an unknown species and the oldest known prophet in existence (having lived at least 900 years), considered the wisest and most powerful Jedi Master within the \"Star Wars\" universe.\nMace Windu.\nMace Windu was a human Jedi Master of the Order and one of the last members of the Order's upper echelons before the fall of the Galactic Republic.\nPlo Koon.\nPlo Koon was a Kel Dor Jedi Master who served as a General during the Clone Wars and a member of the Jedi Council. Koon led the 442nd Siege Battalion in the Battle of Cato Neimoidia, in which he was shot down by his own troops upon the occurrence of Order 66.\nKit Fisto.\nKit Fisto was a Nautolan Jedi Master, who served as a member of the Jedi Order during the Clone Wars. During the attempted arrest of Chancellor Palpatine, Fisto was killed by the Sith Lord in a duel, leaving Mace Windu to face the Chancellor alone.\nCount Dooku.\nCount Dooku was a human Jedi Master who was trained by Yoda and mentored Qui-Gon Jinn, who later fell to the dark side and became the Sith Lord Darth Tyranus. He is one of the main antagonists of the prequel trilogy. He led the war against the Jedi and the Republic until his demise aboard General Grievous' ship in the Battle of Coruscant at the hands of Anakin Skywalker.\nQui-Gon Jinn.\nQui-Gon Jinn was a wise human Jedi Master, who was trained by Count Dooku and mentored Obi-Wan Kenobi. Unlike other, more conservative Jedi, he valued living in the moment as the best way to embrace the Force. He was well-known for listening to the Force more than to the Jedi Code, a trait that often put him at odds with the Jedi High Council. He refused to take a seat on the Council, despite him being among the wisest of the Jedi. Jinn was both the Jedi to discover the Sith's return after a millennium, upon being attacked by Darth Maul during a mission to protect Queen Padm\u00e9 Amidala of Naboo, and the one to find the ability to become a Force spirit after death, though he wasn't capable of having a physical body. Following his death at Darth Maul's hands, Jinn guided both Yoda and Obi-Wan to the ability to become a physical Force spirit after death. Within the Disney+ TV series, \"Obi-Wan Kenobi\", Qui-Gon Jinn appears as a force spirit following Darth Vader's defeat to Obi-Wan Kenobi in a duel. He communes with Kenobi before returning to the Force. In \"\", he appears as a disembodied voice alongside other past Jedi, empowering Rey to face a rejuvenated Darth Sidious.\nObi-Wan Kenobi.\nObi-Wan Kenobi was a human Jedi Master who trained Anakin Skywalker, at the behest of his deceased master Qui-Gon Jinn, and later Anakin's son Luke Skywalker, making him one of the main characters in the \"Star Wars\" franchise. Having fought in the Clone Wars, Obi-Wan proved himself an adept strategist, duelist, and spy, as his leadership style heavily favours subterfuge and misdirection while commanding clone troopers, or wielding the Force. Due to his charisma and persuasion skills, he became known as 'The Negotiator' during the Clone Wars. Obi-Wan best exemplifies the Jedi Code: in spite of Darth Vader's betrayal and his master (Qui-Gon Jinn) being killed by his nemesis, Darth Maul, he never fell into darkness. As one of the few survivors of Order 66 following the Galactic Republic's transformation into the Galactic Empire, Obi-Wan hid on the desert planet Tatooine, watching over Anakin's son Luke, knowing that he would one day grow to become a Jedi and defeat Vader. In \"Obi-Wan Kenobi\", while Obi-Wan hid on Tatooine, Senator Bail Organa's daughter, Leia Organa, was captured upon the request of the Third Sister. Obi-Wan was sent to rescue the ten-year old Princess, and, after retrieving Leia on the planet Daiyu, was forced to duel his former apprentice Darth Vader on the planet Mapuzo, before escaping. Leia Organa, who was imprisoned by the Third Sister on the planet Nur, is saved by Obi-Wan Kenobi a second time before the two escape to the planet Jabiim with aid from the Path. Vader and Kenobi duel once more following Obi-Wan's attempted escape from the planet and Kenobi defeats his former apprentice, allowing Leia to return to her parents. Following this event, Qui-Gon Jinn appears before Kenobi as a force spirit, after years of failed attempts by Obi-Wan to communicate with the deceased Jedi Master. Obi-Wan mentored Luke Skywalker in the Jedi arts, before meeting his demise at the hands of his former apprentice aboard the Death Star, though he continued guiding Luke as a Force spirit. In ', Obi-Wan's voice can briefly be heard just after Rey's force vision when she came into contact with Anakin's lightsaber. In ', Obi-Wan appears as a disembodied voice alongside other past Jedi, empowering Rey to face a rejuvenated Darth Sidious.\nAnakin Skywalker.\nAnakin Skywalker was a human Jedi Knight, one of the main protagonists of the prequel trilogy, and the central antagonist of the original trilogy. He is the Chosen One, being born of the Force. He was apprenticed to Obi-Wan Kenobi and proved to be a very gifted duelist and Force user and despite being appointed to the Jedi High Council at the age of 22, he was not given the title of Jedi Master. He secretly married Padm\u00e9 Amidala at the onset of the Clone Wars and has two children, Luke Skywalker and Leia Organa. He was eventually seduced to the dark side by the Sith Lord, Darth Sidious, and became the Sith Lord Darth Vader, serving the Galactic Empire. While he was a member of the Jedi Order, he trained a Padawan of his own, Ahsoka Tano during the Clone Wars. Vader was eventually redeemed by his son in \"Return of the Jedi\" and gave his own life to save Luke, killing Sidious and bringing balance to the Force, thus fulfilling the prophecy of the Chosen One. In \", Anakin appears as a disembodied voice alongside other past Jedi, empowering Rey to face a rejuvenated Sidious.\nAhsoka Tano.\nAhsoka Tano is a Togruta Jedi Padawan discovered on her homeworld of Shili by Jedi Master Plo Koon. Plo brought her to Coruscant to train as a Jedi. She eventually became the Padawan learner of Anakin Skywalker during the Clone Wars. Among many campaigns, Ahsoka found herself advising rebels on the planet Onderon, including Steela and Saw Gerrera, in their fight against the Confederacy. These rebels would eventually form part of the basis of the Alliance for the Restoration of the Republic, a relationship that would later prove beneficial to her. She was accused of bombing the hangar at the Jedi Temple on Coruscant before Anakin cleared her name. However, the Jedi Council's response during the ordeal soured her faith in the Order, and she left the Order to forge her own path in the galaxy. She briefly returned in the service of the Republic during the final days of the Clone Wars, when she led part of the 501st Clone Legion in the siege of Mandalore to capture the Sith Lord Darth Maul, who attempted to warn her that Anakin would soon fall to the dark side. Shortly after capturing Maul, Ahsoka was betrayed by her clone troopers as part of Order 66, but she managed to escape alongside Clone Captain Rex (whose control chip she removed). Years later, Ahsoka served the nascent Rebel Alliance as the spymaster and head of its intelligence network, directing operations behind the codename Fulcrum. After the Galactic Civil War, she began searching for Ezra Bridger and Grand Admiral Thrawn, who had gone missing in the Unknown Regions. Ahsoka is one of the few Jedi to survive past the Imperial era and into the New Republic era. After the fall of the Empire, Ahsoka took on Sabine Wren as her apprentice. In \", Ahsoka appears as only a voice alongside other past Jedi, empowering Rey to face a rejuvenated Darth Sidious.\nCal Kestis.\nCal Kestis was a human Jedi Padawan and the main protagonist of \"\". Trained by Jaro Tapal, Cal witnessed his master's death during Order 66, which he himself barely managed to survive. During the Imperial era, he lived on Bracca, working as a scrapyard rigger and hiding his Force powers. While scrapping a freighter, an accident forced Cal to reveal his Force abilities to save a co-worker, exposing him to the Empire, who dispatched two Inquisitors to hunt him down. On the run, Cal was rescued by Cere Junda, a Jedi Knight also in hiding, and worked with her and other allies to find a Jedi Holocron containing a list of Force-sensitive children, which could be used to rebuild the Jedi Order. Once their mission was completed, Cal decided to destroy the Holocron, believing it to be better for those children to discover their own destinies.\nKanan Jarrus.\nKanan Jarrus (born Caleb Dume) was a human Jedi Padawan who fought for the Rebellion during its formation. First introduced as a main character of the animated television series \"Star Wars Rebels\", Jarrus was known to be the leader of a small rebel cell called the Spectres, operating on the planet Lothal. As a survivor of Order 66, Jarrus was forced to break certain Jedi traditions to avoid being detected by Imperial forces that continued their mission to eliminate any Jedi on sight, such as eschewing traditional Jedi robes or occasionally using a blaster, a weapon typically shunned by Jedi. Although he lost his master Depa Billaba to Order 66 before he could ascend the ranks of the Jedi Order, he was tasked with training the young Force-sensitive Ezra Bridger throughout his eventual service to the larger Rebellion. Ultimately, Jarrus died to save his friends, in particular Hera Syndulla, who would later give birth to her and Jarrus' son, Jacen Syndulla. In \", he appears as a disembodied voice alongside other past Jedi, empowering Rey to face a rejuvenated Darth Sidious.\nEzra Bridger.\nEzra Bridger is a human Jedi Padawan who was born on the planet Lothal on the same day the Galactic Empire was established. He witnessed many injustices of the Imperial occupation of his homeworld for much of his childhood and was separated from his parents from a very early age. He was able to survive alone using street smarts and skills but was discovered by Kanan Jarrus to have potential Force sensitivity after he encounters the Spectres for the first time. After discovering how much of a team player he could be during a rescue operation, they recruited Bridger, who began training him in the ways of the Jedi under Jarrus, himself still a Jedi Padawan. Bridger took a long time learning how to wield a lightsaber and use it to deflect blaster bolts, modifying his first one to fire stun blasts in the interim. He was not well skilled in lightsaber duels against Inquisitors and Darth Vader, but later discovered his unique ability to use the Force to control and command animals, a skill that proved more useful several times during his service in the Rebellion. Bridger later went missing in action during the battle to liberate Lothal from Imperial occupation, where he successfully defeated Grand Admiral Thrawn, regarded by many as the Empire's best tactician.\nLuke Skywalker.\nLuke Skywalker was a human Jedi Knight (later Master) and the protagonist of the original trilogy. As the last Padawan of Obi-Wan Kenobi, he became an important figure in the Rebel Alliance's struggle against the Galactic Empire. Luke was heir to a family deeply rooted in the Force, being the twin brother of Rebellion leader Princess Leia Organa of the planet Alderaan, the son of former Queen of Naboo and Republic Senator Padm\u00e9 Amidala and Jedi turned Sith Lord Darth Vader (Anakin Skywalker), and the maternal uncle of Ben Solo. After redeeming his father from the dark side of the Force, who died killing his master and the last Sith, Darth Sidious, in order to save Luke, he set out to train a new generation of Jedi to rebuild the Order, only to have them wiped out by Supreme Leader Snoke, a puppet created by a revived Sidious, who also turned Ben to the dark side, adopting the Kylo Ren persona. Skywalker then spent the rest of his life in exile on Ahch-To, the original headquarters of the Jedi Order, blaming himself for Ben's turn and the destruction of his Order, until he was found by Rey, the Last Jedi and the secret granddaughter of Sidious, whom he reluctantly trained in the Jedi arts. Shortly after, he gave his life to distract Kylo Ren, now Supreme Leader of the First Order, on the planet Crait via a Force Projection, allowing the Resistance to escape. When Rey learned of her lineage and exiled herself on Ahch-To out of fear of turning to the dark side, Luke appeared before her as a Force spirit and encouraged her to face the Emperor. Along with the spirits of other past Jedi, he then empowered Rey during her final confrontation with Sidious, which marked the definitive defeat of the Sith. Later, he and Leia gave Rey their blessings to adopt the Skywalker surname and continue their family's legacy.\nLeia Organa.\nLeia Organa was the daughter of Anakin Skywalker and Padm\u00e9 Amidala, the twin sister of Luke Skywalker, and one of the main characters of the original and sequel trilogies. While Force-sensitive, she didn't become aware of her connection to the Force or her lineage until much later in life, instead focusing on a career as a senator and, secretly, a leader of the Rebel Alliance. As seen in \", Leia began training as a Jedi under her brother shortly after \"Return of the Jedi\", but quit her training when she had a vision that it would result in the death of her yet to be born son. Decades later, while leading the Resistance against the First Order, Leia also briefly mentored Rey in the ways of the Force, despite her limited knowledge about it. Ultimately, Leia gave her life to redeem her son, Ben Solo, who had turned to the dark side, and became one with the Force. Later, she and Luke gave Rey their blessings to adopt the Skywalker surname and continue their family's legacy.\nGrogu.\nGrogu was a Jedi Initiate of the same species as Yoda who first appeared in \"The Mandalorian\". Raised at the Jedi Temple on Coruscant during the Clone Wars, he was rescued by Jedi Master Kelleran Beq during the Great Jedi Purge and hidden for his own safety. Decades later, the 50-year-old but still toddler Grogu was sought by a remnant of the Galactic Empire due to his connection to the Force, but was found and adopted by the Mandalorian bounty hunter Din Djarin, who sought to reunite him with the Jedi. When Grogu was eventually captured by Moff Gideon's Imperial remnant, Djarin mounted a rescue, which would have been unsuccessful if not for the arrival of Luke Skywalker (whom Grogu had previously contacted through the Force). With Djarin's approval, Luke took Grogu with him so that the child could be trained as a Jedi. Though Grogu briefly trained with Luke, he showed signs of not being fully committed to the Jedi path and wishing to be with Djarin instead, causing Luke to doubt his abilities as a teacher, as seen in \"The Book of Boba Fett\". After speaking with Ahsoka Tano, Luke decided to let Grogu choose his own destiny, and the youngling ultimately returned to Djarin as his Mandalorian foundling.\nBen Solo.\nBen Solo was a human Jedi Padawan and the central antagonist of the sequel trilogy. He was the son of smuggler and Rebel Alliance General Han Solo and Rebellion leader Princess Leia Organa, and the nephew of Jedi Master Luke Skywalker, having been born shortly after the Galactic Empire's defeat. As part of his uncle's new generation of Jedi, Ben trained under him, but was eventually seduced to the dark side by Supreme Leader Snoke, a puppet created by a revived Darth Sidious, the last Sith, and sought to become a Sith Lord, as powerful as his late maternal grandfather, Darth Vader (Anakin Skywalker). Following the destruction of Luke's New Jedi Order, Ben adopted the Kylo Ren persona and became a warlord of the First Order, as well as the leader of the Knights of Ren, an organization of fellow Force-wielders. He later killed his father when he unsuccessfully tried to redeem him and formed a unique connection with Rey, the last Jedi and Sidious' secret granddaughter, called a \"dyad in the Force\". After killing Snoke, Kylo took over as Supreme Leader of the First Order, until ultimately being redeemed by his mother and Rey, and helping Rey face Sidious, giving his own life to save hers.\nRey Skywalker.\nRey was a human Jedi Padawan and the protagonist of the sequel trilogy. She is the paternal granddaughter of Sheev Palpatine (Darth Sidious), the last surviving Sith Lord, and was born in the years following the Galactic Empire's defeat. Abandoned on the desert planet of Jakku at a young age by her parents in order to keep her safe, she became involved in the conflict between the Resistance and the First Order, and formed a unique connection with Kylo Ren, called a \"dyad in the Force\". She was briefly trained by Luke Skywalker and, following his death, continued her Jedi training under the guidance of his sister and Resistance leader Leia Organa, as well as the ancient Jedi texts. Rey eventually learned of her lineage and, with the help of a redeemed Kylo Ren and the spirits of past Jedi, faced a revived Sidious, finally killing him and ending the Sith once and for all, thus bringing balance back to the Force.\nForce-sensitive organizations.\nNot every \"dark side\"-user is a Sith; nor is every \"light side\"-user a Jedi. Within the \"Star Wars\" Expanded Universe, people of all species have demonstrated varying \"force-sensitive\" powers and abilities. These \"force-wielders\" are often depicted with little to no formal Jedi training in the Force, originating from primitive planets.\nThe Sith Organization.\nDark side adept.\nA dark side adept is someone with the power to use the dark side of the Force outside of the traditions of the Jedi or the Sith. They were often steeped in the lore of the dark side and opposed to those who used the light side, such as Jedi. While all Sith were technically dark side adepts, non-Sith individuals such as Asajj Ventress, Kylo Ren, and the Grand Inquisitor were also considered dark side adepts. Dark side adepts were referenced in passing in James Luceno's canon novel \"Tarkin\".\nForce-wielders without affiliation.\nThe Bendu, introduced in the \"Star Wars Rebels\" Season 3 episode \"Steps into Shadow\", is a Force-sensitive individual who resided on the remote planet of Atollon and represents the \"center\" of the Force, between the light side and the dark side. When he is first met by Kanan Jarrus, he states that \"Jedi and Sith wield the \"Ashla\" and \"Bogan\". The light and the dark. I'm the one in the middle. The Bendu...\". He is depicted as one who seeks balance, and has been likened to Tom Bombadil of \"The Lord of the Rings.\" The term \"Bendu\" first appeared in the original script for \"Star Wars\" as the name of the Jedi Knights, the \"Jedi-Bendu\".\nDescription.\nThe Jedi Code.\nThe Jedi Code was a set of rules that governed the behavior of the Jedi Order. It taught its followers to not give in to feelings of anger toward other lifeforms, which would help them resist fear and prevent them from falling to the dark side of the Force.&lt;br&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Code:&lt;br&gt;\nThere is no emotion, there is peace.&lt;br&gt;There is no ignorance, there is knowledge.&lt;br&gt;There is no passion, there is serenity.&lt;br&gt;There is no chaos, there is harmony.&lt;br&gt;There is no death, there is the Force.\u2014\u200a\nThe Four Councils.\nThe Four Branches of the Jedi Council are fictional institutions from the \"Star Wars\" universe. They serve the Jedi Order as an organized administrative body that provides the necessary auxiliary and support services that sustain and governed the Order's academies, temples, interests and organizations.\nJedi High Council.\nThe Jedi High Council is the main ecclesiastical leadership of the Jedi Order with both legislative and executive powers. The Jedi High Council is made up of some of the strongest, wisest and most experienced members of the Jedi Order. They are elected to lead the Jedi. The Jedi High Council has twelve members at any given time: five members who serve for life, four members who serve long-term, and three limited-term members. Sifo-Dyas had a seat on the council until his extremist views on a war that he foresaw caused his removal. Other older members include Jor Aerith, Tera Sinuba, and Yula Braylon.\nIn \"Jedi: Fallen Order - Dark Temple\" (which is set an unknown amount of time before \"\"), the Jedi Council includes Yoda, Mace Windu, Eeth Koth, Yarael Poof, Poli Dapatian, and Jocasta Nu. In \"Master &amp; Apprentice\", set seven years before \"The Phantom Menace\", the council includes Yoda, Mace Windu, Depa Billaba, Poli Dapatian (who is in the process of retiring), Eeth Koth, and Saesee Tiin.\nIn the final days before the end of the Clone Wars and the extermination of the Jedi Order, the Council consisted of the following members:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCouncil of First Knowledge.\nThe Council of First Knowledge administered the Temple-based academy and its curriculum and funded scholars' scientific research. To this end, the Council guarded and maintained the Temple Archives and its Holocron vaults, as well as the \"Shadow program\" at the Jedi Temple: Jedi Sentinels tasked with hunting down Sith artifacts.\nCouncil of Reconciliation.\nThe Council of Reconciliation dealt with the Galactic Senate and the Republic Diplomatic Corps in order to help bring diplomatic resolutions to conflicts and end political standoffs. The \"first face\" of the Republic presented to worlds interested in joining the Republic, this council would dispatch Jedi diplomats and ambassadors to moderate debate and hammer out treaties\nCouncil of Reassignment.\nThe Council of Reassignment administered the Jedi Service Corps and each of its branch councils. Organizing work for those Initiates who failed out of the academy and Knights with special talents, the Reassignment Council oversaw this branch's missions and assignments.\nRanks of authority and educational progress.\nEvery Jedi, regardless of species or homeworld, is trained for their career at Jedi Academy. Entrance is determined by rigorous examination and psychological tests. When Jedi Sentinels, known as \"Seekers\", discover or test a suitable \"force-sensitive\" candidate, they are taken to the Jedi Academy at the age of 5 (for humans; varies depending on the species and arbitrary calendar years) with the parent's permission. Jedi scholarship educations are considered prestigious, as most parents are portrayed as either happy or proud of the opportunity presented to their child, who could never afford an education. However, most parents also are generally sad since they know they are unlikely to see their child again before adulthood.\nJedi members could technically leave the Order whenever they want, but most of these children were essentially orphaned. Because they were removed from their family at such a young age, they were detached, being indoctrinated into the Jedi way of life through a structured system. The Jedi Archives holds records of every known force sensitive child; Yoda destroyed these records during the Jedi Purge, before Darth Vader assaulted the Jedi Temple, to protect these children from being exploited by the Sith.\nMembers of the Order progress through four educational stages, at times referred to as levels:\nInitiate.\nInitiation is the first part of Jedi training; they are mentored by Jedi Masters in rudimentary control over the Force and basic self-defense techniques.\nMost Initiates were typically Younglings (a child Jedi-in-training), receiving an early and first-class education. The first ten years of a youngling's training demands segregation from outside distractions and is deliberately designed to reinforce detachment from earthly emotions, including loyalty or love for their parents. Initiates are taught to abandon ego, and that discipline, selflessness and truthfulness will lead to harmony with The Force. This is why Yoda initially denied both Anakin and Luke Skywalker for being \"too old for training\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Abandon ego. Release all your earthly attachments; let go of all you've grown to love... Surrender yourself.\u2014\u200aYoda, in \nYounglings were portrayed training under Jedi Master Yoda in a scene on \"Attack of the Clones\" and hiding during the assault on the Jedi Temple in \"Revenge of the Sith\" before being murdered off-screen by Anakin Skywalker (as the then-newly christened Darth Vader).\nThe \"Young Jedi\" story arc and the episode \"Path of the Jedi\" explored the Jedi tradition called \"The Gathering,\" where initiates traveled to the \"Crystal Caves\" of Ilum to harvest kyber crystals, which they would use to build their first lightsabers. Crystals were attuned to individual Jedi and lacked color. The Force spoke to each of the younglings through their crystals. To find their crystal, each initiate had to learn a lesson: courage, hope, patience, trust, confidence, and selflessness.\nPadawan.\nAn Initiate who successfully completes \"fundamental training\" is given a second-class education and then undergoes Padawan training under the tutelage of a Mentor (usually a Jedi Knight or Jedi Master). They are also called \"Apprentices\" and \"Padawan learners\". In the Old Republic, Padawans usually wore a hair braid or a bead string (for species without hair) on the right side of their head which was severed with a lightsaber by the Jedi Grand Master upon attaining knighthood. They also served as Commanders in the Clone Wars.\nKnight.\nDisciplined and experienced, Jedi Knights become so only when they have completed \"the trials\" (final tests), they officially graduate, being eligible for specialized advance courses, and may continue to pursue a third-class education (see below) to obtain the equivalent of a habilitation or post-doctoral degree. As the most common and numerous rank, Knights are youthful journeyman eager to travel the galaxy, obtain new experiences and serve the Republic; thus Knights are frequently \"the face\" of the Order, with all Jedi erroneously referred to by the general public as Knights, and the rank is interchangeably referred to as \"Jedi\", \"Jedi Knight\" and \"Master Jedi\" (although the latter are honorifics used only by Younglings and Padawans when addressing Jedi Knights or above). \nThe five tests are usually known as \"Trial of Skill\", the \"Trial of Courage\", the \"Trial of the Flesh\", the \"Trial of Spirit\", and the \"Trial of Insight (or Knowledge)\". In \"Return of the Jedi\", Master Yoda gives his apprentice, Luke Skywalker, the trial of confronting Darth Vader for a second time so he might become a full-fledged Knight. Occasionally, performing an extraordinary (usually heroic) act can earn a Padawan learner Jedi status, such as when Obi-Wan Kenobi defeats the Sith Lord, Darth Maul. By the time of the Skywalker Saga films, distinct \"battle classes\" were not necessary as the Republic had not seen war in over a thousand years, and the title of Knight was simply a rank once again.\nMaster.\nThe title of Jedi Master is bestowed upon the most powerful members of the Jedi Order. Masters are regarded as among the most accomplished and recognized polymaths in the \"Star Wars\" galaxy; generally, they have resigned from wanderlust ways of knighthood and instead apply their acquired years of wisdom and experience to meditative, administrative and educational pursuits. Upon completion of vocational or postgraduate education, a Jedi Knight becomes a Jedi Master after successfully training several Padawan learners to Knight status, such as when Obi-Wan Kenobi became a Jedi Master after he successfully trained Anakin Skywalker to the point where he was able to complete the trials and become a Jedi Knight. Though this is the most common manner, there are other ways of attaining the rank. Some Jedi masters include Obi-Wan Kenobi, Qui-Gon Jinn, and Yoda.\nSpecializations and occupations.\nVarious careers, occupations, ranks and titles were available to all Jedi. Upon a Padawan's ascension to \"\"Knighthood\"-status\", a Jedi pursued higher education or vocational education and training in a field of expertise; choose a career based on preference, personal talents and skills. Before the Great Jedi Purge, numerous divisions existed across the whole of the order, but most personnel are represented within the three order divisions: the Order of the Guardian, the Order of the Consular, or Order of the Sentinel. In addition to their specialization, in times of war, the High Council could demand that the members of the Order assume military ranks in order to defend the Republic.\nResources and technology.\nIn the \"Star Wars\" universe, the Jedi are usually portrayed wearing simple robes and carrying specialized field gear for their missions. Their philosophical lifestyles mirror those of real-world religious vows and evangelical counsels, as their personal possessions are provided exclusively by the Jedi Order, and are only meant to allow self-sufficiency.\nWeapons.\nThe most notable instrument wielded by a Jedi is the lightsaber. Both Jedi and Sith use lightsabers, though the former regard them as a tool, the latter, a weapon. The Jedi's lightsabers emit cool colors, usually blue or green blades (sometimes yellow, or purple, as seen in the case of Mace Windu), while the Sith emit warm colors (red). Lightsabers can be of many different colors depending on the crystal fixture and reflective of the wielders' psychological profile. Most Jedi use naturally formed crystals, frequently ranging between blue, green and yellow; whereas Sith tend to use corrupted or synthetic crystals, which are usually red in color.\nAlthough rare, spear-like, whip-like and multi-bladed lightsabers can exist, especially among Sith such as Darth Maul's double-bladed lightsaber, the Inquisitors' double-bladed/rotating ones, or Kylo Ren's crossguard-bladed one (due to a cracked kyber crystal).\nVehicles.\nEta-2 Actis Jedi interceptors first appeared in \"Revenge of the Sith\". Delta-7B Aethersprite Jedi starfighters appear in \"Star Wars: Episode II \u2013 Attack of the Clones\" and \"Star Wars: Episode III \u2013 Revenge of the Sith\". In \"Attack of the Clones\", Obi-Wan Kenobi travels via Jedi starfighter to Kamino to investigate the attempted assassination of Padm\u00e9 Amidala; he also flies a Jedi starfighter to Geonosis in an attempt to track down the bounty hunter Jango Fett. Lacking a hyperdrive, the starfighter relies on an external sled to propel it through hyperspace. Kenobi and Anakin Skywalker (Hayden Christensen) fly updated Jedi starfighters (called Jedi interceptors) in the opening sequence of \"Revenge of the Sith\". Later, Plo Koon (Matt Sloan) flies a \"Revenge of the Sith\"-era starfighter when he is shot down by clone troopers carrying out Darth Sidious' (Ian McDiarmid) Order 66.\nThe Jedi starfighter's triangular shape in \"Attack of the Clones\" stems from the shape of Imperial Star Destroyers in the original \"Star Wars\" trilogy. Industrial Light &amp; Magic designer Doug Chiang identified the Jedi starfighter as one of the first designs that bridges the aesthetic between the prequel and original trilogies. Chiang noted that viewers' familiarity with the Star Destroyer's appearance and Imperial affiliation gives added symbolism to the Jedi craft's appearance and foreshadows the Empire's rise to power. The starfighter seen in \"Revenge of the Sith\" is a cross between the previous film's vessel and the Empire's TIE fighters from the original trilogy. Hasbro's expanding wings in the \"Attack of the Clones\" Jedi starfighter toy inspired the opening wings in the \"Revenge of the Sith\" vessel. The starfighter in the \"Revenge of the Sith\" is called a Jedi interceptor.\nJedi Archives.\nThe Jedi Archives, known as The Great Library of Ossus or The Great Library of the Jedi, contained the galaxy's most priceless and ancient of texts sacred to Jedi scholars and archaeologists. Among these were Sith artifacts, considered by the Jedi Order to be the most dangerous artifacts in the galaxy, that were accessible only to those able to control the Dark Side of the Force.\nThe Jedi archives of the Jedi Temple in the movie \"Star Wars: Episode II \u2013 Attack of the Clones\" bear a startling resemblance to the Long Room of the Trinity College Library in Dublin. This resemblance resulted in controversy as permission had not been sought to use the building's likeness in the film. However, Lucasfilm denied that the Long Room was the basis for the Jedi archives, and officials from Trinity College Library decided not to take any legal action.\nJedi Academy.\nThe Jedi academies were established to train Force-sensitive beings accepted into the Jedi Order in the ways of the Force. Overseen by the Council of First Knowledge, each academy was governed by an advisory Council appointed by their superiors on Coruscant. Mainstreaming the majority of teachings at the Temple, certain practices were permitted to vary from world to world. However, at all sanctioned academies, a group of Jedi Masters would instruct Initiates to the Order in the ways of the Force. The size of the school varied from world to world; the smallest consisted of a single clan of younglings, and the largest was the main academy housed within the Jedi Temple of Coruscant. Most academies had been established during the Old Sith Wars and were located in the Galactic Rim. Some were located on or near Force-wellsprings or places significant to the Order like crystal caves or nexuses of dark side energies that needed constant monitoring.\nIn addition to the traditional academies established by the Order, the Exploration Corps maintained several spacefaring mobile academies such as the \"Chu'unthor\" so that roaming the galaxy and exploring new worlds could be achieved while still teaching traditional doctrine.\nBy the fall of the Galactic Republic in 19 BBY, many of the ancient academies had been shut down for decades, with the Council of First Knowledge preferring the central teachings of the Coruscant Temple. After the dissolution of the Order during the Great Jedi Purge, all orthodox Temples and academies were routed and burned in order to prevent any more Jedi from learning the secrets of the Force. However, the Galactic Empire's chokehold on Force-education did not last and the Order was reformed following the conclusion of the Galactic Civil War. After Grand Master Luke Skywalker's New Order became a single class of twelve students including his nephew Ben Solo, it was reduced to only himself when his nephew turned to the dark side and became Kylo Ren.\nJedi Temple.\nIn the prequel trilogy, the primary Jedi Temple is located on the Republic's capital planet of Coruscant. As the chief administrative headquarters, the Temple served the Order in three capacities: a monastery and library for the Jedi seeking enlightenment and to reflect on the will of the Force; an academy and training center for Jedi younglings and Padawans who endeavored to join the ranks of the Jedi Knights; and government, in which the Masters of the Jedi High Council guided the Order's direction. It was originally built atop an old \"dark-side nexus\" shrine during the birth of the Republic, so as to be symbolic to the Coruscant people that the tyrannical rule of the Sith was over.\nIn \"Revenge of the Sith\", the Jedi Temple is attacked by clone troopers of the 501st Legion, led by the newly christened Darth Vader, who butchered the Jedi within and set the Temple alight. After the fall of the Jedi Order and the Galactic Republic, the Temple became the Palace of the Emperor and a location for his dark side artifacts. It would serve as Sidious' residence for over two decades until his death at the battle of Endor. The Temple is visible in the celebrations on Coruscant at the end of \"Return of the Jedi\". After the destruction of the Sith, Luke Skywalker\u2014the last of the Jedi\u2014recovered fragments of a Force-sensitive tree that was once located at the heart of the Jedi Temple.\n\"Architects' Journal\" rated the temple third on its top-ten architecture of \"Star Wars\" list behind the second Death Star and Jabba the Hutt's palace on Tatooine, and ahead of Coruscant, the capital city of the Old Republic. The temple is described in the article as adapting \"the robust typology of Mayan temples, with durasteel cladding specified for the external stone walls for improved defensive strength\" and said to be a ziggurat that \"is built above a Force-nexus and has ample room for training facilities, accommodation and the Jedi Archive\". The temple has five towers, the tallest being Tranquility Spire, that are stylistically similar to the minarets surrounding the Hagia Sophia in Istanbul. \"Star Wars Insider\" listed it as the one hundredth greatest thing about \"Star Wars\" in its one hundredth issue special.\n\"Legends\" depiction of the Jedi.\nWith the 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company, most of the licensed \"Star Wars\" novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film \"Star Wars\" were rebranded as \"Star Wars Legends\" and declared non-canon to the franchise in April 2014.\nIn novels and reference books now considered \"Legends\", the interpretation of the Jedi teaching on not forming attachments was alternating between being in line with George Lucas' vision and using \"attachment\" in the sense of affection, fondness and loving commitment, stating that the Jedi Code prohibited these emotional bonds. Furthermore, the Jedi were depicted as a quasi-militaristic organization with strict political alignment to the Galactic Republic.\nJe'daii.\nPrecursors to modern Jedi, the Je'daii Order studied both light and dark sides of the mysterious Force, striving to balance them equally. The preview \"Dawn of the Jedi\" issue dates the Je'daii origins to 36,453 years BBY. Before lightsabers and hyperspace travel, the Je'daii journeyed across the planet Tython, training at the Order's nine temples and mastering the lessons of each.\nThe New Jedi Order.\nIn novels set after the events of the film series, Luke Skywalker re-established the Jedi High Council as part of his New Jedi Order. The most notable difference between the format of the new council and the old is that only half of the council are made up of Jedi, while the other half consisted of politicians. Following the war with the Yuuzhan Vong, the Jedi withdrew their support from any one political entity and relocated to Ossus, where Luke had a full Jedi Council re-established.\nThe New Jedi Order was the restored and reformed Jedi organization, in the wake of the Great Jedi Purge and the subsequent fall of the Galactic Empire. The Jedi Knights, reduced in number to only a handful, were slowly restored, primarily under the leadership of Grandmaster Luke Skywalker. Skywalker abolished the traditional Master/Padawan system. He believed all Jedi should be both teachers and students; that they should both learn from and mentor each other, and not just from one Master.\nWithin the Expanded Universe, \"The New Jedi Order\" indicates that the Jedi Temple on Coruscant is no longer standing but it is rebuilt as a gift to Jedi for their services and achievements during the Yuuzhan Vong invasion. The new temple is in the form of a massive pyramid made from stone and transparisteel that is designed to fit into the new look of Coruscant, though internally it is identical to the design seen in \"Revenge of the Sith\".\nCultural impact and critical response.\nThe United States Army had a group of officers in the early 1980s who promoted maneuver warfare tactics, and who were derisively referred to as Jedi by more conventional officers who were satisfied with attrition warfare tactics and methods.\nAnalysis.\nIn \"Star Wars and Philosophy\", William Stephens compares the Jedi to Stoicism:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;To recap, the virtues the Jedi shares with the Stoic sage are patience, timeliness, deep commitment, seriousness (as opposed to frivolity), calmness (as opposed to anger or euphoria), peacefulness (as opposed to aggression), caution (as opposed to recklessness), benevolence (as opposed to hatred), joy (as opposed to sullenness), passivity (as opposed to agitation), and wisdom. Given all these virtues, Yoda certainly resembles what the ancient Stoics described as the sage\u2014the ideal person who has perfected his reason and achieved complete wisdom.\nFunctionally, the Jedi order resembles a Praetorian Guard.\nMedia.\nJedi have made their way into certain areas of pop culture, such as \"Weird Al\" Yankovic's song \"The Saga Begins\", a parody of \"American Pie\". In the film \"The Men Who Stare at Goats\" (2009), a reporter follows a former soldier who claimed to be a \"Jedi warrior\", a nickname for psychic spies in the US military.\nReligion.\nOne of the enduring influences the \"Star Wars\" saga has had in popular culture is the idea of the fictional Jedi values being interpreted as a modern philosophical path or religion, spawning various movements such as the Jediism (religious) and the Jedi census phenomenon.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16380", "revid": "313197", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16380", "title": "James Tobin", "text": "American economist and Nobel Laureate (1918\u20132002)\nJames Tobin (March 5, 1918 \u2013 March 11, 2002) was an American economist who served on the Council of Economic Advisers and consulted with the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and taught at Yale University. He contributed to the development of key ideas in the Keynesian economics of his generation and advocated government intervention in particular to stabilize output and avoid recessions. His academic work included pioneering contributions to the study of investment, monetary and fiscal policy and financial markets. He also proposed an econometric model for censored dependent variables, the well-known tobit model.\nAlong with fellow neo-Keynesian economist James Meade in 1977, Tobin proposed nominal GDP targeting as a monetary policy rule in 1980. Tobin received the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences in 1981 for \"creative and extensive work on the analysis of financial markets and their relations to expenditure decisions, employment, production and prices.\"\nOutside academia, Tobin was widely known for his suggestion of a tax on foreign exchange transactions, now known as the \"Tobin tax.\" This was designed to reduce speculation in the international currency markets, which he saw as dangerous and unproductive.\nLife and career.\nEarly life.\nTobin was born on March 5, 1918, in Champaign, Illinois. His father was Louis Michael Tobin (b. 1879), a journalist working at the University of Illinois at Urbana\u2013Champaign and was credited as the inventor of \"Homecoming.\" His mother, Margaret Edgerton Tobin (b. 1893), was a social worker. Tobin attended the University Laboratory High School of Urbana, Illinois, a laboratory school on the university's campus.\nIn 1935, he was admitted to Harvard College with a national scholarship. During his studies he first read Keynes' \"The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money\", published in 1936. Tobin graduated \"summa cum laude\" in 1939 with a thesis centered on a critical analysis of Keynes' mechanism for introducing equilibrium involuntary unemployment. His first published article, in 1941, was based on this senior thesis.\nTobin earned his master degree at Harvard in 1940. In 1941, he worked for the Office of Price Administration and Civilian Supply and the War Production Board. In 1942 he enlisted in the US Navy, spending the war as an officer on destroyers including (among possibly others) the . After the war he returned to Harvard, receiving his Ph.D. in 1947 with a thesis on the consumption function written under the supervision of Joseph Schumpeter. In 1947 Tobin was elected a Junior Fellow of Harvard's Society of Fellows, which allowed him the freedom and funding to spend the next three years studying and doing research.\nAcademic activity and consultancy.\nIn 1950 Tobin moved to Yale University, where he remained for the rest of his career. He joined the Cowles Foundation, which moved to Yale in 1955, also serving as its president between 1955\u20131961 and 1964\u20131965. His main research interest was to provide microfoundations to Keynesian economics, with a special focus on monetary economics. One of his frequent collaborators was his Yale colleague William Brainard. In 1957 Tobin was appointed Sterling Professor of Economics at Yale.\nBesides teaching and research, Tobin was also strongly involved in the public life, writing on current economic issues and serving as an economic expert and policy consultant. During 1961\u201362, he served as a member of John F. Kennedy's Council of Economic Advisers, under the chairman Walter Heller, then acted as a consultant between 1962 and 1968. Here, in close collaboration with Arthur Okun, Robert Solow and Kenneth Arrow, he helped design the Keynesian economic policy implemented by the Kennedy administration. Tobin also served for several terms as a member of the Board of Governors of Federal Reserve System Academic Consultants and as a consultant of the US Treasury Department.\nTobin was awarded the John Bates Clark Medal in 1955 and, in 1981, the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economics. He was a fellow of several professional associations, holding the position of president of the American Economic Association in 1971. He was an elected member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, the American Philosophical Society, and the United States National Academy of Sciences.\nIn 1972 Tobin, along with fellow Yale economics professor William Nordhaus, published \"Is Growth Obsolete?\", an article that introduced the Measure of Economic Welfare as the first model for economic sustainability assessment, and economic sustainability measurement.\nIn 1982\u20131983, Tobin was Ford Visiting Research Professor of economics at the University of California, Berkeley. In 1988 he formally retired from Yale, but continued to deliver some lectures as Professor Emeritus and continued to write. He died on March 11, 2002, in New Haven, Connecticut.\nTobin was a trustee of Economists for Peace and Security.\nPersonal life.\nJames Tobin married Elizabeth Fay Ringo, a former M.I.T. student of Paul Samuelson, on September 14, 1946. They had four children.\nLegacy.\nIn August 2009 in a roundtable interview in Prospect \"magazine\", Adair Turner supported the idea of new global taxes on financial transactions, warning that the \"swollen\" financial sector paying excessive salaries had grown too big for society. Lord Turner's suggestion that a \"Tobin tax\" \u2013 named after James Tobin \u2013 should be considered for financial transactions made headlines around the world.\nTobin's Tobit model of regression with censored endogenous variables (Tobin 1958a) is a standard econometric technique. His \"q\" theory of investment (Tobin 1969), the Baumol\u2013Tobin model of the transactions demand for money (Tobin 1956), and his model of liquidity preference as behavior toward risk (the asset demand for money) (Tobin 1958b) are all staples of economics textbooks.\nIn his 1958 article Tobin also led the way in showing how to deal with utility maximization under uncertainty with an infinite number of possible states. As Palda explains \"One way to get out of the mess of figuring out asset prices using a model of maximizing the expected utility of investing in stocks is to make assumptions about either preferences or the probabilities of the different possible states of the world. Nobellist James Tobin (1958) took this line and discovered that in some cases you do not need to worry about the utility of income in thousands of states, and the attached probabilities, to solve the consumer's choice on how to spread income among states. When preferences contain only a linear and a squared term (a case of diminishing returns) or the probabilities of different stock returns follow a normal distribution (an equation that contains a linear and squared terms as parameters), a simple formulation of a person's investment choices becomes possible. Under Tobin's assumptions we can reformulate the person's decision problem as being one of trading off risk and expected return. Risk, or more precisely the variance of your investment portfolio creates spread in the returns you expect. People are willing to assume more risk only if compensated by a higher level of expected return. One can thus think of a tradeoff people are willing to make between risk and expected return. They invest in risky assets to the point at which their willingness to trade off risk and return is equal to the rate at which they able to trade them off. It is difficult to exaggerate how brilliant is the simplification of the investment problem that flows from these assumptions. Instead of worrying about the investor's optimization problem in potentially millions of possible states of the world, one need only worry about how the investor can trade off risk and return in the stock market.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
