{"id": "11504", "revid": "44721228", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11504", "title": "Fandom", "text": "Subculture composed of fans sharing a common interest\nA fandom is a subculture composed of fans characterized by a feeling of camaraderie with others who share a common interest. Fans typically are interested in even minor details of the objects of their fandom and spend a significant portion of their time and energy involved with their interest, often as a part of a social network with particular practices, differentiating fandom-affiliated people from those with only a casual interest.\nA fandom can grow around any area of human interest or activity. The subject of fan interest can be narrowly defined, focused on something like a franchise or an individual celebrity, or encompassing entire hobbies, genres or fashions. While it is now used to apply to groups of people fascinated with any subject, the term has its roots in those with an enthusiastic appreciation for sports. Merriam-Webster's dictionary traces the usage of the term back as far as 1903.\nMany fandoms are overlapped. There are a number of large conventions that cater to fandom such as film, comics, anime, television shows, cosplay, and the opportunity to buy and sell related merchandise. Annual conventions such as San Diego Comic-Con, Wondercon, Dragon Con, and New York Comic Con are some of the more well-known and highly attended events that cater to overlapping fandoms.\nOrigins of fandom.\nFeminist scholar Adrianne Wadewitz cited Janeites, the devotees of 19th century author Jane Austen, as the earliest example of fandom subculture, beginning around 1870. Another early example was fans of the literary detective Sherlock Holmes, holding public demonstrations of mourning after Holmes was \"killed off\" in 1893, and creating some of the first fan fiction as early as about 1897 to 1902. Outside the scope of media, railway enthusiasts are another early fandom with its roots in the late 19th century that began to gain in popularity and increasingly organize in the first decades of the early 20th century.\nA wide variety of modern organized Western fan subcultures originated with science fiction fandom, the community of fans of the science fiction and fantasy genres. Science fiction fandom dates back to the 1930s and maintains organized clubs and associations in many cities around the world. Fans have held the annual World Science Fiction Convention since 1939, along with many other events each year, and has created its own jargon, sometimes called \"fanspeak\". In addition, the Society for Creative Anachronism, a medievalist re-creation group, has its roots in science fiction fandom and was founded by members thereof. Many science fiction and fantasy authors such as Marion Zimmer Bradley, Poul Anderson, Randall Garrett, David D. Friedman, and Robert Asprin have been members of the organization.\nMedia fandom split from science fiction fandom in the early 1970s with a focus on relationships between characters within TV and movie media franchises, such as \"Star Trek\" and \"The Man from U.N.C.L.E.\". Fans of these franchises generated creative products like fan art and fan fiction at a time when typical science fiction fandom was focused on critical discussions. The MediaWest convention provided a video room and was instrumental in the emergence of fan vids, or analytic music videos based on a source, in the late 1970s. By the mid-1970s, it was possible to meet fans at science fiction conventions who did not read science fiction, but only viewed it on film or TV.\nAnime and manga fandom began in the 1970s in Japan. In America, the fandom also began as an offshoot of science fiction fandom, with fans bringing imported copies of Japanese manga to conventions. Before anime began to be licensed in the U.S., fans who wanted to get a hold of anime would leak copies of anime movies and subtitle them to exchange with friends in the community, thus marking the start of fansubs.\nWhile the science fiction and anime fandoms grew in media, the Grateful Dead subculture that emerged in the late 1960s to the early 1970s created a global fandom around hippie culture that would have lasting impacts on society and technology.\nMusic fandom in the 20th century coincided with the rise of popular music culture, and revolves around the collective enthusiasm and dedication of fans towards specific musical artists, bands, or genres. Common forms of engagement for music fandoms include attending concerts, creating fan art, participating in online communities, and consuming media related to their preferred artist. These communities play an important role in promoting and supporting the careers of artists, as well as shaping cultural trends within the music industry. Some popular examples of music fandom include Beatlemania, Swifties, Deadheads, and Barbz.\nThe furry fandom refers to the fandom for fictional anthropomorphic animal characters with human personalities and characteristics. The concept of the \"furry\" originated at a science fiction convention in 1980, when a drawing of a character from Steve Gallacci's \"Albedo Anthropomorphics\" initiated a discussion of anthropomorphic characters in science fiction novels, which in turn initiated a discussion group that met at science fiction and comics conventions. Many furries create fursonas as personalized animal characters representing themselves. According to a 2020 survey in \"The New Science of Narcissism\", 95% of furries have a fursona.\nThe brony fandom refers to the fanbase of the animated television series \"\", which emerged in late 2010 and early 2011 on the imageboard 4chan before spreading to other . The fandom adopted the name \"brony\", a portmanteau of \"bro\" and \"pony\". Bronies have developed their , organize numerous fan conventions, and engage in a . They commonly create personalized pony characters representing themselves called ponysonas (similar to furries and their fursonas), produce , , and inspired by the show. The brony fandom notably includes military personnel who have incorporated pony imagery into their units, and has attracted both media attention and academic study for challenging traditional gender norms around entertainment consumption.\nAdditional subjects with significant fandoms include comics, animated cartoons, video games, sports, music, films, television shows, pulp magazines, soap operas, celebrities, and game shows.\nParticipating in fandom.\nMembers of a fandom associate with one another, often attending fan conventions and publishing and exchanging fanzines and newsletters. Amateur press associations are another form of fan publication and networking. Originally using print-based media, these subcultures have migrated much of their communications and interaction onto the Internet, which is also used for the purpose of archiving detailed information pertinent to their given fanbase. Often, fans congregate on forums and discussion boards to share their love for and criticism of a specific work. This congregation can lead to a high level of organization and community within the fandom, as well as infighting. Although there is some level of hierarchy among most of the discussion boards, and certain contributors may be valued more highly than others, newcomers are most often welcomed into the fold. Most importantly, these sorts of discussion boards can have an effect on the media itself, as was the case in the television show \"Glee\". Trends on discussion boards have been known to influence the writers and producers of shows. The media fandom for the TV series \"Firefly\" was able to generate enough corporate interest to create a movie after the series was canceled.\nSome fans write fan fiction (\"fanfic\"), stories based on the universe and characters of their chosen fandom. This fiction can take the form of video-making as well as writing. Fan fiction may or may not tie in with the story's canon; sometimes fans use the story's characters in different situations that do not relate to the plot line at all.\nEspecially at events, fans may also partake in \"cosplay\", the creation and wearing of costumes designed in the likeness of characters from a source work, which can also be combined with role-playing, reenacting scenes, or inventing likely behavior inspired by their chosen sources.\nOthers create fan vids, or analytical music videos focusing on the source fandom, and yet others create fan art. Such activities are sometimes known as \"fan labor\" or \"fanac\" (an abbreviation for \"fan activity\"). The advent of the Internet has significantly facilitated fan association and activities. Activities that have been aided by the Internet include the creation of fan \"shrines\" dedicated to favorite characters, computer screen wallpapers, and avatars. The rise of the Internet has furthermore resulted in the creation of online fan networks who help facilitate the exchange of fanworks.\nSome fans create pictures known as \"edits\", which consist of pictures or photos with their chosen fandom characters in different scenarios. These edits are often shared on social media networks such as Instagram, TikTok, Tumblr or Pinterest. In edits, one may see content relating to several different fandoms. Fans in communities online often make gifs or gif sets about their fandoms. Gifs or gif sets can be used to create non-canon scenarios mixing actual content or adding in related content. Gif sets can also capture minute expressions or moments. Fans use gifs to show how they feel about characters or events in their fandom; these are called reaction gifs.\nThe Temple of the Jedi Order, or Jediism, a self-proclaimed \"real living, breathing religion,\" views itself as separate from the Jedi as portrayed in the \"Star Wars\" franchise. Despite this, sociologists view the conflation of religion and fandom in Jediism as legitimate in some sense, classifying both as participatory phenomena.\nSome fans engage in \"fan activism\", in which fans use market logic to apply political pressure and merge consumption behavior with political or civic goals.39 There are also fan organizations that participate in philanthropy and create a positive social impact. For example, the Harry Potter Alliance is a civic organization with a strong online component which runs campaigns around human rights issues, often in partnership with other advocacy and nonprofit groups; its membership skews college age and above. Nerdfighters, another fandom formed around Vlogbrothers, a YouTube vlog channel, are mainly high school students united by a common goal of \"decreasing world suck\". K-pop fans have been involved in various online fan activism campaigns related to Donald Trump's presidential campaign and the Black Lives Matter movement.\nIn film.\nNotable feature-length documentaries about fandom include \"Trekkies\" and \"A Brony Tale\". \"Slash\" is a movie released in 2016 about a young boy who writes slash fan fiction. The SiriusXM-produced audio documentary \"Comic-Con Begins\" was launched as a six-part series starting June 22, 2021. It presents the history of both San Diego Comic-Con and the modern fandom scene it helped to spawn, as told by nearly 50 surviving foundational SDCC members, fandom experts, and special guests such as: Kevin Smith, Neil Gaiman, Frank Miller, Felicia Day, Trina Robbins, Maggie Thompson, the Russo brothers, and Bruce Campbell. Cosplay pioneer, scream queen, and foundational SDCC member Brinke Stevens hosts the series. \"Comic-Con Begins\" was expanded into the book \"See You at San Diego: An Oral History of Comic-Con, Fandom, and the Triumph of Geek Culture\" by creator Mathew Klickstein and published by Fantagraphics on September 6, 2022. The book includes forewords by cartoonists Stan Sakai and Jeff Smith, and an afterword by Wu-Tang Clan's RZA.\nIn books.\n\"Fangirl\" is a novel written by Rainbow Rowell about a college student who is a fan of a book series called Simon Snow, which is written by a fictional author named Gemma T. Leslie. On October 6, 2015, Rowell published a follow-up novel to \"Fangirl\". \"Carry On\" is a stand-alone novel set in the fictional world that Cath, the main character of \"Fangirl\" writes fan fiction in.\nRelationship with the media industry.\nThe film and television entertainment industry refers to the totality of fans devoted to a particular area of interest, organized or not, as the \"fanbase\".\nMedia fans, have, on occasion, organized on behalf of canceled television series, with notable success in cases such as ' in 1968, \"Cagney &amp; Lacey\" in 1983, ' in 1995, \"Roswell\" in 2000 and 2001 (was canceled with finality at the end of the 2002 season), \"Farscape\" in 2002, \"Firefly\" in 2002, and \"Jericho\" in 2007. (In the case of \"Firefly\" the result was the movie \"Serenity\", not another season.) It was likewise the fans who facilitated the push to create a \"Veronica Mars\" film through a Kickstarter campaign. Fans of the show \"Chuck\" launched a campaign to save the show from being canceled using a Twitter hashtag and buying products from sponsors of the show. Fans of \"Arrested Development\" fought for the character Steve Holt to be included in the fourth season. The Save Steve Holt! campaign included a Twitter and Facebook account, a hashtag, and a website.\nIn the music industry, fandoms have played vital roles in shaping the music of their favorite artists. In 2023, Lana Del Rey was featured in Taylor Swift's song \"Snow on the Beach\", a track off of her popular album \"Midnights.\" Both Swifties, Taylor Swift's loyal fan base, and Del Rey fans were disappointed with the feature, as they felt her contribution was not long enough or sufficiently prominent in the mix. In response, Swift released an updated version of the track titled \"Snow on the Beach (Feat. More Lana Del Rey)\", where she sings the entire second verse.\nSuch outcries, even when unsuccessful, suggest a growing self-awareness on the part of entertainment consumers, who appear increasingly likely to attempt to assert their power as a bloc. Fan activism in support of the 2007 Writers Guild of America strike through Fans4Writers appears to be an extension of this trend.\nScience fiction writers, editors and publishers have participated in science fiction fandom themselves, from Ray Bradbury and Harlan Ellison to Patrick Nielsen Hayden and Toni Weisskopf. Ed Brubaker was a fan of the \"Captain America\" comics as a child and was deeply upset by the death of Bucky Barnes. Brubaker's first work as a writer at Marvel Comics was the fifth volume of \"Captain America\", which brought Barnes back from the dead as the Winter Soldier, a brainwashed assassin. Many authors write fan fiction under pseudonyms. Lev Grossman has written stories in the \"Harry Potter\", \"Adventure Time\", and \"How to Train Your Dragon\" universes. S.E. Hinton has written about both \"Supernatural\" and her own books, \"The Outsiders\". Movie actors often cosplay as other characters to enjoy being a regular fan at cons; for example, Daniel Radcliffe cosplayed as Spider-Man at the 2014 San Diego Comic-Con. Before the release of \"The Amazing Spider-Man\", Andrew Garfield dressed up as Spider-Man and gave an emotional speech about what Spider-Man meant to him and thanking fans for their support.\nThe relationship between fans and professionals has changed because of access to social media platforms like Twitter and Facebook. By giving their follows a glimpse into their everyday life, public figures have a new way of expressing themselves and engaging with their fanbases on a deeper level. Online platforms also give fans more ways to connect and participate in fandoms.\nSome fans have made their work in fandom into careers. The book \"Fifty Shades of Grey\" by E.L. James was originally a fan fiction of the \"Twilight\" series published on FanFiction.Net. The story was taken down for mature content that violated the site's terms of service. James rewrote the story to take out any references to \"Twilight\" and self-published on The Writer's Coffee Shop in May 2011. The book was published by Random House in 2012 and was very popular, selling over 100\u00a0million copies. However, many fans were not happy about James using fan fiction to make money and felt it was not in the spirit of the community.\nThere is contention over fans not being paid for their time or work. Gaming companies use fans to alpha and beta test their games in exchange for early access or promotional merchandise. The TV show \"Glee\" used fans to create promotional materials, though they did not compensate them.\nThe entertainment industry has promoted its work directly to members of the fandom community by sponsoring and presenting at events and conventions dedicated to fandom. Studios frequently create elaborate exhibits, organize panels that feature celebrities and writers of film and television (to promote both existing work and works yet to be released), and engage fans directly with providing Q&amp;A sessions, screening sneak previews, and supplying branded giveaway merchandise. The interest, reception, and reaction of the fandom community to the works being promoted have a marked influence on how film studios and others proceed with the projects and products they exhibit and promote.\nFandoms, for example at Comic Con, can sometimes lead to toxic behavior, including harassing other fans or media creators.\nFandom and technology.\nThe rise of the Internet created new and powerful outlets for fandom. While the principles of fandom largely remain the same, internet users now have the ability to engage in discourse on a global scale, creating an even stronger sense of community among fans. Mark Duffet touches on this point in \"Popular Music Fandom: Identities, Roles and Practices\": \"Online social media platforms... have operated as a forthright challenge to the idea that electronic mediation is an alienating and impersonal process\".\nFandoms engaging with technology began with early engineers trading Grateful Dead set lists and discussing the setup of the band's concert speaker system, called the \"Wall of Sound,\" on ARPANET, a precursor to the Internet. This led to tape trading over FTP, and the Internet Archive began to add Grateful Dead shows in 1995. Online tape trading communities such as etree evolved into P2P networks trading shows through torrents. After the birth of the World Wide Web, many communities adopted the practices of Deadhead fandom online.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11506", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11506", "title": "Ft. Collins, Colorado", "text": ""}
{"id": "11507", "revid": "48035214", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11507", "title": "Fort Collins, Colorado", "text": "City in Colorado, United States\nFort Collins is a home rule municipality in Larimer County, Colorado, United States, and its county seat. It is the fourth-most populous city in Colorado with a population of 169,810 at the 2020 census, while the Fort Collins metropolitan statistical area has an estimated 375,000 residents.\nSituated on the Cache La Poudre River along the Colorado Front Range, Fort Collins is located north of the Colorado State Capitol in Denver and is a major city of the Front Range Urban Corridor. It is a prominent college town, home to Colorado State University, a public research university and the second-largest university by enrollment in Colorado.\nHistory.\nThe Northern Arapaho were centered in the Cache la Poudre River Valley near present-day Fort Collins. Friday, who attended school in St. Louis, Missouri in his youth, was a leader of the band of Arapahos as well as an interpreter, negotiator, and peacemaker. He made friends of white settlers who moved into the area, but was pushed out of Colorado in the 1860s.\nFort Collins was founded as a military outpost of the United States Army in 1864. It succeeded a previous encampment, known as Camp Collins, on the Cache la Poudre River, near what is known today as Laporte. Camp Collins was erected during the Indian wars of the mid-1860s to protect the Overland mail route that had been recently relocated through the region. Travelers crossing the county on the Overland Trail would camp there, but a flood destroyed the camp in June 1864. Afterward, the commander of the fort wrote to the commandant of Fort Laramie in southeast Wyoming, Colonel William O. Collins, suggesting that a site several miles farther down the river would make a good location for the fort. The post was manned originally by two companies of the 11th Ohio Volunteer Cavalry and never had walls.\nSettlers began arriving in the vicinity of the fort nearly immediately. The fort was decommissioned in 1867. The original fort site is now adjacent to the present historic \"Old Town\" portion of the city. The first school and church opened in 1866, and the town was platted in 1867. The civilian population of Fort Collins, led by local businessman Joseph Mason, led an effort to relocate the county seat to Fort Collins from LaPorte, and they were successful in 1868.\nThe city's first population boom came in 1872, with the establishment of an agricultural colony. Hundreds of settlers arrived, developing lots just south of the original Old Town. Tension between new settlers and earlier inhabitants led to political divisions in the new town, which was incorporated in 1873. Although the Colorado Agricultural College was founded in 1870, the first classes were held in 1879.\nThe 1880s saw the construction of a number of elegant homes and commercial buildings and the growth of a distinctive identity for Fort Collins. Stone quarrying, sugar-beet farming, chestnut farming and the slaughter of sheep were among the area's earliest industries. During this the early 1800's many early settlers planted new plants such as beets, chestnuts; specifically horse-chestnuts (Aesculus hippocastanum), an ornamental species from the Balkans. These planted crops, served as an essential stepping stone in the change of the unique agricultural landscape that emerged in the Front Range. Beet tops, an industry supported by the college and its associated agricultural experiment station, proved to be an excellent and abundant food for local sheep, and by the early 1900s the area was being referred to as the \"Lamb feeding capital of the world\". In 1901 the Great Western sugar processing plant was built in the neighboring city of Loveland.\nAlthough the city was affected by the Great Depression and simultaneous drought, it nevertheless experienced slow and steady growth throughout the early part of the twentieth century. During the decade following World War II, the population doubled and an era of economic prosperity occurred. Old buildings were razed to make way for new, modern structures. Along with revitalization came many changes, including the closing of the Great Western sugar factory in 1955, and a new city charter, adopting a council-manager form of government in 1954. Similarly, Colorado State University's enrollment doubled during the 1960s, making it the city's primary economic force by the end of the century.\nFort Collins gained a reputation as a very conservative city in the twentieth century, with a prohibition of alcoholic beverages, a contentious political issue in the town's early decades, being retained from the late 1890s until student activism helped bring it to an end in 1969. During that same period, civil rights activism and anti-war disturbances heightened tensions in the city, including the burning of several buildings on the CSU campus.\nDuring the late 20th century, Fort Collins expanded rapidly to the south, adding new development, including several regional malls. Management of city growth patterns became a political priority during the 1980s, as well as the revitalization of Fort Collins' Old Town with the creation of a Downtown Development Authority. In late July 1997, the city experienced after and during a 31-hour period when of rain fell. The rainfall was the heaviest on record for an urban area of Colorado. Five people were killed and $5 million in damages were dealt to the city. The waters flooded Colorado State University's library and brought about $140 million in damages to the institution.\nGeography.\nFort Collins is situated at the base of the Rocky Mountain foothills of the northern Front Range, approximately north of Denver, Colorado, and south of Cheyenne, Wyoming. Elevation is above sea level. Geographic landmarks include Horsetooth Reservoir and Horsetooth Mountain\u2014so named because of a tooth-shaped granite rock that dominates the city's western skyline. Longs Peak can also clearly be seen on a clear day to the southwest of the city.\nThe Cache La Poudre River and Spring Creek run through Fort Collins.\nAt the 2020 United States census, the town had a total area of including of water.\nClimate.\nFort Collins has a cold semi-arid climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification 'BSk'). Its climate is characterized by warm to hot summers and long and moderately cold winters (with frequent warm spells due to downslope winds, and somewhat less common intervals of severe cold). The average temperature in December, the coldest month, is . Annual snowfall averages , and can occur from early September through the end of May. Average precipitation overall is .\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFort Collins is the fourth most populous city in Colorado and the 156th most populous city in the United States. The Census Bureau estimates that the city's population was 161,175 in 2015, the population of the Fort Collins-Loveland Metropolitan Statistical Area was 310,487 (151st most populous MSA), and the population of the Front Range Urban Corridor was 4,495,181.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 118,652 people, 45,882 households, and 25,785 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 47,755 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 82.4% White, 3.01% Black or African American, 0.6% Native American, 2.48% Asian, 0.12% Pacific Islander, 3.61% from other races, and 2.53% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino residents of any race were 10.79% of the population.\nThere were 45,882 households, out of which 29% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 44.9% were married couples living together, 7.9% had a female householder with no husband present, and 43.8% were non-families. 26% of all households were made up of individuals, and 5.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.45 and the average family size was 3.01.\nIn the city, the population was spread out, with 21.5% under the age of 18, 22.1% from 18 to 24, 31.5% from 25 to 44, 17% from 45 to 64, and 7.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 28 years. For every 100 females, there were 100.9 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 99.7 males.\nThe median income for a household in the city was $64,459, and the median income for a family was $110,332. Males had a median income of $60,856 versus $48,385 for females. The per capita income for the city was $32,133. About 5.5% of families and 14% of the population were below the poverty line, including 8.3% of those under age 18 and 5.8% of those age 65 or over.\nEconomy.\nEmployment.\nAs of July 2025, Fort Collins had nearly 200,000 employed persons.\nFort Collins hosts federal government employees including some USDA offices. As of 2025, federal agencies based in Fort Collins employed over 5000 people across Colorado, with over 10 federal buildings used as offices.\nAccording to the city's 2020 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report, the top employers are:\nRegional economic development partners include the City of Fort Collins Economic Health Office, Northern Colorado Economic Development Corporation, Small Business Development Center, and Rocky Mountain Innovation Initiative (RMI2).\nMajor industries and commercial activity.\nFort Collins' economy has a mix of manufacturing and service-related businesses. Fort Collins manufacturing includes Woodward Governor, Anheuser-Busch, Walker Mowers, and Otterbox. Many high-tech companies have relocated to Fort Collins because of the resources of Colorado State University and its research facilities. Hewlett-Packard, Intel, AMD, Broadcom, Beckman Coulter, Microsoft, Rubicon Water and Pelco all have offices in Fort Collins. Other industries include clean energy, bioscience, and agri-tech businesses.\nRetail.\nThe city's major shopping mall is The Shops at Foothills.\nSustainability programs.\nFortZED was a zero energy district encompassing the Downtown area of Fort Collins and the main campus of Colorado State University. The district's public-private partnerships employed smart grid and renewable energy technologies to manage the local use and supply of energy. FortZED relied upon energy demand management techniques to encourage use of energy at the most efficient times.\nFederal, state, and local funding made the project a reality. The U.S. Department of Energy contributed $6.3 million and the Colorado Department of Local Affairs provided $778,000. Locally, private companies and foundations committed nearly $8 million.\nThe program ended in 2017 after a majority of its projects had been completed.\nBrewing.\nFort Collins has over 20 breweries. Notable breweries in the city include Anheuser-Busch, New Belgium Brewing Company, Intersect Brewing and Odell Brewing Company. The local chamber of commerce estimates that in 2010, the industry generated $309.9 million in output, 2,488 jobs and $141.9 million of local payrolls in Larimer County.\nArts and culture.\nMuch of Fort Collins's culture is centered around the students of Colorado State University. The city provides school year residences for its large college-age population; there is a local music circuit which is influenced by the college town atmosphere and is home to a number of well known microbreweries. The Downtown Business Association hosts a number of small and large festivals each year in the historic Downtown district, including Bohemian Nights at NewWestFest in late summer (permanently discontinued in 2021) which featured local cuisine, music, and businesses. The Fort Collins Lincoln Center is home to the Fort Collins Symphony Orchestra and regularly attracts national touring companies of Broadway plays.\nBrewing and cycling figure in local culture. The Colorado Brewer's Festival is held in late June annually in Fort Collins. The festival features beers from as many as 45 brewers from the state of Colorado and averages around 30,000 attendees. New Belgium Brewing Company hosts the Tour de Fat which draws over 20,000 people riding bikes and dressing in costume.\nThe Colorado Marathon is a yearly event running down the Poudre Canyon and finishing in downtown Fort Collins. The FORTitude 10K run, a partner running event of the Bolder Boulder, is held on Labor Day each year. The Horsetooth Half Marathon has been a fixture of the local running scene since 1973. \nThe Fort Collins Museum, established in 1941, is a regional center focusing on the culture and history of Fort Collins and the surrounding area. The Fort Collins Museum houses over 30,000 artifacts and features temporary and permanent exhibits, on-going educational programs and events, and is home to four historic structures located in the outdoor Heritage Courtyard.\nThe arts are represented by The Center for Fine Art Photography, University Center for the Arts, Fort Collins Museum of Art (FCMOA), and the Bas Bleu Theatre Company. The Arts Incubator of the Rockies (AIR), founded in Fort Collins in 2012, was acquired in 2016 by Berea College in Kentucky, where it became part of the College Crafts Program.\nParks and recreation.\nThe city contains of developed park areas, which include tennis courts, frisbee golf courses, golf courses, dog parks, baseball diamonds, basketball courts and picnic shelters. There are six community parks: City Park, Edora Park, Fossil Creek Park, Lee Martinez Park, Rolland Moore Park, and Spring Canyon Park. Whitewater Park, and Spring Creek trail, are located alongside the Poudre River. The Gardens on Spring Creek is an botanical garden that features themed gardens. Soapstone Prairie Natural Area features the Lindenmeier site, a stratified multi-component archaeological site notable for its Folsom component.\nGovernment.\nThe mayor is Jennifer Arndt. Fort Collins has a council-manager form of government. The mayor, who serves a two-year term and stands for election in municipal elections held in April of odd-numbered years, presides over a seven-member City Council. The current mayor of Fort Collins is Jeni Arndt, who was elected to a first term in April 2021. The six remaining council members are elected from districts for staggered four-year terms; even-numbered districts in April 2023, and odd-numbered districts are up for election in April 2025.\nFort Collins is the largest city in Colorado's 2nd Congressional district, and is represented in Congress by Representative Joe Neguse (Democrat). On the state level, the city lies in the 14th district of the Colorado Senate, represented by Cathy Kipp and is split between the 52nd and 53rd districts of the Colorado House of Representatives, represented by Yara Zokaie and Andrew Boesenecker, respectively. All three of Fort Collins' state legislators are Democrats. Fort Collins is additionally the county seat of Larimer County, and houses county offices and courts.\nEducation.\nK\u201312 public education is provided through Poudre School District (PSD). The district operates and manages the public schools in the city of Fort Collins, as well as in the surrounding towns of Wellington, Timnath, Windsor, Laporte and Livermore. The district is one of the fastest growing in Northern Colorado, adding 400\u2013500 students \u2014 about the size of an elementary school \u2014 each year. To accommodate growth, the district plans to build three new schools in the next few years.\nPoudre School District includes four comprehensive high schools that serve neighborhoods around Fort Collins, including Fort Collins High School, Rocky Mountain High School, Poudre High School, Fossil Ridge High School. The district also operates four alternative high schools: Centennial High School, Polaris School for Expeditionary Learning, Poudre Community Academy and Poudre School District Global Academy, a dual in-person/online school. Additionally, four public charter schools are chartered through PSD, including Ridgeview Classical Schools, and Liberty Common High School, Mountain Sage Community School and Fort Collins Montessori School.\nThe Poudre School District is also home to ten middle schools (Lesher Middle IB World School, Blevins Middle School, Boltz Middle School, Cache La Poudre Middle School, Kinard Core Knowledge Middle School, Lincoln IB World Middle School, Polaris Expeditionary Learning School, Preston Middle School, Webber Middle School, and Wellington Middle School) and 32 elementary schools.\nIn addition to PSD schools, several state charter schools serve Fort Collins, including Academy of Arts and Knowledge, Colorado Early Colleges, and Global Village Academy. Private schools include Heritage Christian Academy, Rivendell School, and St. Joseph's Catholic School.\nPublic libraries.\nThe Poudre River Public Library District operates three branch locations in the city of Fort Collins\u2014Old Town, Harmony, and Council Tree. The Library District was established in 2006 by voter approval, and aims to serve the more than 207,000 people in northern Larimer County, Colorado. The district is governed by a board of volunteer trustees, jointly appointed by the city of Fort Collins and Larimer County.\nThe library participates in cooperative projects with the local Poudre School District and Colorado State University.\nFacilities.\nThe Old Town Library (formerly, the Main Library) is a 43,000 square foot facility that has served the Fort Collins Community since 1976.\u00a0It is located in the Fort Collins Old Town Historic District at 201 Peterson Street.\nThe Harmony Library is a 30,000 square foot joint-use facility located on the Front Range Community College campus, at 4616 South Shield Street in Fort Collins. Since its opening in 1998, the facility has served both the Community College (students, faculty, and staff) and the general public.\nThe Council Tree Library is a nearly 18,000 square foot facility that opened in 2009 in the Front Range Village (a retail commons) and is located at 2733 Council Tree Avenue in Fort Collins. The facility has a unique neighborhood atmosphere with an emphasis on families with young children.\nThe Webster House Administration Center opened in 2011 and houses the administration, collections, systems administration, maintenance, communications, and outreach staff.\u00a0The center's opening freed up 3,000 square feet in the Old Town Library, space that is now used for library materials and services.\nHistory.\nThe library as an institution in Fort Collins dates back to the late 19th century, where reading rooms were established in churches or other rented locations. In 1882, for example, a reading room was established in the back of a Presbyterian Church on Whitton Block. The Fort Collins Public Library was officially established in 1900, the sixth public library in the state. The city received $12,500 from philanthropist Andrew Carnegie to build the library, with the condition that it would be maintained as a free public library. It was completed in 1904 at a total cost of approximately $15,000. When the Library opened, there were 2,770 books on hand. In 1937, the Library was awarded a grant from the Work Projects Administration for an annex to the building that would double its space, allowing for the construction of an auditorium/community room that opened in 1939.\nAs the Fort Collins community grew, so too did the need for more library space. In 1973, the City Council adopted a seven-year master plan which included a new library building. Voters approved a one percent tax increase to fund the plan.\u00a0The new library building, named the Fort Collins Public Library (now, the Old Town Library), opened in 1976 and remains to this day in Library Park at 201 Peterson Street in Fort Collins.\nIn 2006, with ongoing city budget cuts impacting library services, residents voted to create and fund a library district with a 62% majority.\u00a0This initiated a transition period in 2007 of separating the library from the city, for example, transferring finances, staff, and property to the Library District.\u00a0The library was also given a temporary name, the Fort Collins Regional Library District. An intergovernmental agreement was finally signed in December 2007, that detailed each party's responsibilities during the transfer. In 2009, after asking for ideas from the public, the Poudre River Public Library District was approved as the library's permanent name.\nHigher education.\nColorado State University heads up the choices in higher education. Front Range Community College also maintains a campus in the city, and grants associate's degrees in arts, science, general studies, and applied science. The college offers 17 high school vocational programs and more than 90 continuing education classes.\nThe Institute of Business &amp; Medical Careers provides professional training in the business and medical professions. The institute's first campus was established in the city in 1987.\nFort Collins has a range of research institutes. Facilities are maintained by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's Division of Vector-Borne Diseases, the Center for Advanced Technology and the Colorado Water Resource Research Institute. Other facilities include the Cooperative Institute for Research in the Atmosphere, the Institute for Scientific Computing, the U.S. Forest Service Experimental Station, the National Center for Genetic Resources Preservation (NCGRP), and the U.S.D.A. Crops Research Laboratory.\nInfrastructure.\nTransportation.\nAir travel.\nFrom nearby Northern Colorado Regional Airport, Avelo Airlines served both Burbank (BUR) and Las Vegas (LAS) from October 2021 until June 24, 2022, and June 16, 2022, respectively. Elite Airways resumed commercial air service at the airport on August 27, 2015, providing non-stop flights to the Chicago Rockford International Airport in Illinois. The airline ended service to the airport in 2017. Denver International Airport, which is to the south, is served by twenty-three airlines.\nThe city's former general aviation airport, known as Fort Collins Downtown Airport (3V5), opened in 1966 and closed in 2006.\nStreets.\nFort Collins' downtown streets form a grid with Interstate 25 running north and south on the east side of the city. Many of the streets are named after the town's founders. U.S. Highway 287 becomes College Avenue inside the city and is the busiest street; It runs north and south, effectively bisecting the city, and serving as the east\u2013west meridian, while Mountain Avenue is the north\u2013south. SH 14 runs concurrent with US 287 at the northern city limit to Jefferson Street, running southeast along Jefferson (later turning into Riverside Avenue), then turning east onto Mulberry Street where it goes east out of the city after an interchange with Interstate 25.\nTransit and taxi.\nFort Collins also once had a municipally owned trolley service with three branches from the intersection of Mountain and College avenues. The trolley was begun in 1907 by the Denver and Interurban Railroad, which had the intention of connecting the Front Range of Colorado. It was closed in 1951 after ceasing to be profitable. In 1983\u201384, a portion of the Mountain Avenue line and one of the original trolley cars, Car 21, were restored as a heritage trolley service, under the same name used by the original system, the Fort Collins Municipal Railway. This has been in operation since the end of 1984 on weekends and holidays in the spring and summer, as a tourist and cultural/educational attraction. A second car, number 25, was returned to service on July 4, 2020. A small fee applies to ride.\nThe city bus system, known as Transfort, operates more than a dozen routes throughout Fort Collins Monday through Saturday, except major holidays.\nThe MAX Bus Rapid Transit is a bus rapid transit that provides service on the Mason Corridor Transitway parallel to College Avenue from Downtown Fort Collins to a transit center just south of Harmony Road. The trip takes approximately 15 minutes from end to end with various stops between. The service began in May 2014. The Mason Corridor and the Mason Express are intended to be the center of future transit-oriented development.\nFort Collins is connected to Loveland, Berthoud, Longmont, and Boulder via the FLEX regional bus route. Greeley-Evans Transit operates a service called the Poudre Express connecting Fort Collins with Windsor and Greeley.\nBustang provides additional intercity transportation for the city. Fort Collins is the northernmost stop on the North Line, which connects southward to Denver. Planning for restoration of regional passenger rail recommenced in earnest in 2017. Fort Collins would be an intermediate stop for the proposed north\u2013south Front Range Passenger Rail corridor between Pueblo and Cheyenne, Wyoming, though it would be the northern terminus of most trips.\nTaxi service is provided by Northern Colorado Yellow Cab. Pedicabs are also available from HopON LLC and Dream team Pedicabs.\nRailroads.\nFreight service is provided by Union Pacific and BNSF.\nCurrently there is no intercity passenger service; the last remaining services connecting the Front Range cities ceased with the formation of Amtrak in 1971. Front Range Passenger Rail is a current proposal to link the cities from Pueblo in the south, north to Fort Collins and possibly to Cheyenne, Wyoming.\nThe Fort Collins Municipal Railway was a streetcar system from 1919 to 1951, and from 1984 has been partially reinstated as a seasonal Heritage Streetcar service, under the same name.\nCycling.\nBicycling is a popular and viable means of transportation in Fort Collins. There are more than of designated bikeways in Fort Collins, including on-street designated bike lanes, and the Spring Creek and Poudre River Trails, both paved. There is also a dirt trail, the Foothills Trail, parallel to Horsetooth Reservoir from Dixon Reservoir north to Campeau Open Space and Michaud Lane.\nThe Fort Collins Bicycle Library lends bicycles to visitors, students, and residents looking to explore the city of Fort Collins. There are self-guided tours from the \"Bike the Sites\" collection, including a Brewery Tour, Environmental Learning Tour, and the Historic Tour. The Bike Library is centrally located in the heart of downtown Fort Collins in Old Town Square. The City of Fort Collins also encourages use of alternative transportation, like cycling and using public transit, through FC Moves.\nIn 2009, the Fort Collins-Loveland metropolitan statistical area (MSA) ranked as the third highest in the United States for percentage of commuters who biked to work (5.6 percent).\nIn 2013, the League of American Bicyclists designated Fort Collins a Platinum-level Bicycle Friendly Community \u2013 one of four in the United States. In 2018, the PeopleForBikes foundation named Fort Collins the no. 1 city in the United States for cycling.\nElectric scooters.\nIn early 2019, the City of Fort Collins and Colorado State University (CSU) were preparing regulations for the eventual arrival of electric scooters, in order to avoid the problems other cities have had with these. After a City Council session on Feb 19, the City Government approved scooter regulations, such as specific areas in which scooters must be parked and the observation of dismount zones. in October 2019, The City of Fort Collins and CSU announced a 12-month e-scooter share pilot program partnering with Bird company.\nPolice.\nThe Fort Collins Police Services is headed by Chief Jeffrey Swoboda. As of 2018[ [update]] it had 214 sworn individuals and 115 civilian personnel.\nIn popular culture.\nAlong with Marceline, Missouri, Fort Collins is known as one of the towns that inspired the design of Main Street, U.S.A. inside the main entrance of many theme parks run by The Walt Disney Company around the world.\nFort Collins was the setting of the infamous balloon boy hoax of October 15, 2009.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11508", "revid": "49679309", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11508", "title": "Francis Drake", "text": "English sailor and privateer (c. 1540 \u2013 1596)\nSir Francis Drake (c. 1540 \u2013 28 January 1596) was an English explorer and privateer best known for making the second circumnavigation of the world in a single expedition between 1577 and 1580 (being the first English expedition to accomplish this). He is also known for participating in the early English slaving voyages of his cousin, John Hawkins, and John Lovell. Having started as a simple seaman, in 1588 he was part of the fight against the Spanish Armada as a vice admiral. \nAt an early age, Drake was placed into the household of a relative, William Hawkins, a prominent sea captain in Plymouth. In 1572, he set sail on his first independent mission, privateering along the Spanish Main. Drake's circumnavigation began on 15 December 1577. He crossed the Pacific Ocean, until then an area of exclusive Spanish interest, and laid claim to New Albion, plundering coastal towns and ships for treasure and supplies as he went. He arrived back in England on 26 September 1580. Elizabeth I awarded Drake a knighthood in 1581 which he received aboard his galleon the \"Golden Hind\".\nDrake's circumnavigation inaugurated an era of conflict with the Spanish and in 1585, the Anglo-Spanish War began. Drake was in command of an expedition to the Americas that attacked Spanish shipping and ports. When Philip II sent the Spanish Armada to England in 1588 as a precursor to its invasion, Drake was second-in-command of the English fleet that fought against and repulsed the Spanish fleet. A year later he led the English Armada in a failed attempt to destroy the remaining Spanish fleet.\nDrake was a Member of Parliament (MP) for three constituencies: Camelford in 1581, Bossiney in 1584, and Plymouth in 1593. Drake's exploits made him a hero to the English, but his privateering led the Spanish to brand him a pirate, known to them as El Draque (\"The Dragon\" in old Spanish). He died of dysentery after his failed assault on Panama in January 1596.\nBirth and early years.\nFrancis Drake was born at Crowndale Farm in Tavistock, Devon, England. His birth date is not formally recorded \u2013 such writers as E. F. Benson have claimed that he was born while the Six Articles of 1539 were in force, but British naval historian Julian Corbett, writing of William Camden's account, on which this information is based, writes that \"As a slip of memory, too, we must put down his difficult assertion that Edmund Drake was driven from Devonshire during a persecution under the Six Articles Act of 1539.\" His birth date is estimated from the wording of texts in contemporary sources such as: \"Drake was two and twenty when he obtained the command of the \"Judith\"\" (1566). This would date his birth to 1544. A date of c. 1540 is suggested from two portraits: one a miniature, painted by Nicholas Hilliard in 1581, when he was allegedly 42, which would place his birth c. 1539, while the other, painted in 1594 when he was said to be 52, would give a birth year of c. 1541.\nHe was the eldest of the twelve sons of Edmund Drake (1518\u20131585), a Protestant farmer, and his wife, Mary Mylwaye. The first son was said to have been named after his godfather, Francis Russell, 2nd Earl of Bedford.\nDue to religious persecution during the Prayer Book Rebellion in 1549, the Drake family fled from Devon to Kent. There Drake's father obtained an appointment to minister to the men in the King's Navy. He was ordained deacon and was made vicar of Upchurch Church on the Medway.\nEarly career at sea.\nAt an early age, Drake was placed into the household of a relative, sea-captain William Hawkins of Plymouth, and began his seagoing training as an apprentice on Hawkins' boats. By 18, he was a purser, according to the English chronicler Edmund Howes, and in the 1550s, Drake's father found the young man a position with the owner and master of a small barque, one of the small traders plying between the Medway River and the Dutch coast. Drake likely engaged in commerce along the coast of England, the Low Countries and France. The ship's master was so satisfied with the young Drake's conduct that, being unmarried and childless at his death, he bequeathed the barque to Drake.\nSlave trade.\nIn 1562, the West African slave trade was a duopoly dominated by the Portuguese and the Spanish. Sir John Hawkins devised a plan to break into that trade, and enlisted the aid of colleagues and family to finance his first slave voyage. Drake was not part of that group of financiers, though his presence as one of hundreds of seamen on Hawkins's first two slaving voyages has been assumed. There is some anecdotal evidence to support Drake serving as a common seaman on the first two voyages, and good evidence of his presence for the last two of four slaving voyages made by Hawkins' ships between 1562 and 1569.\nIn 1562, Hawkins sailed to the coast of the Sierra Leone, seized Portuguese slave ships, and sold the Africans in the Spanish Indies. It was highly profitable, so for his second slave voyage in 1564, Hawkins gained Queen Elizabeth I's support. She lent him one of her ships, \"Jesus of L\u00fcbeck\", which served as his flagship. Hawkins attacked an African native town and sold many of its inhabitants in Spanish ports on the Caribbean mainland, making another large profit for himself, the Queen and the consortium of investors from her court. Sources vary on the dates and the age of Drake at the time; Harry Kelsey says he was twenty years old, \"[a]ccording to Howes\" (in reference to the English chronicler Edmund Howes writing in 1615). Drake was not a member of that consortium, but the crew would have received a small share of the profits. Based on this association, scholar Kris Lane lists Drake as one of the first English slave traders.\nThe Spanish and Portuguese were aggrieved that the English had entered into the slave trade and were selling slaves to their colonies despite being forbidden from doing so. Queen Elizabeth I, under pressure to avoid an armed conflict, forbade Hawkins from going to sea for a third slave voyage. In response, he set up a slave voyage with a relative, John Lovell, in command in 1566. Drake accompanied Lovell on this voyage. The voyage was unsuccessful, as more than 90 enslaved Africans were released without payment.\nIn 1567, Drake accompanied Hawkins on their next and last joint voyage. The crew attempted to capture slaves around Cape Verde, but failed. Hawkins allied himself with two local kings in Sierra Leone who asked for help against their enemies in exchange for half of any captives they took. Attacking from both sides, they took several hundred prisoners, though Kelsey says the kings kept \"the larger share of slaves and dared Hawkins to do anything about it\".\nEvents worsened for the fleet as it faced storms, Spanish hostility, armed conflict, and finally a hurricane that separated one ship from the rest, and it had to find its own way home. The remaining ships were forced into the port of San Juan de Ul\u00faa near Vera Cruz so they could make repairs. Soon afterward the newly appointed viceroy of New Spain, Mart\u00edn Enr\u00edquez de Almanza, arrived with a fleet of ships. While still negotiating to resupply and repair, Hawkins' ships were attacked by the Spanish ships in what became known as the Battle of San Juan de Ul\u00faa. The battle ended in an English defeat with all but two of the English ships lost. The Spanish launched a fireship against Hawkins' flagship \"Jesus of L\u00fcbeck\", and the crew of \"Minion\" in panic and fear cut the lines securing them to \"Jesus\". Hawkins was among those who jumped from the flagship's bulwarks to \"Minion\"'s decks. Drake, by this time the captain of \"Judith\", fled leaving Hawkins behind. Hawkins escaped on \"Minion\" and limped back to England with dozens of his men dying along the way, and arriving with a crew of just 15. Hundreds of English seamen were abandoned.\nAfter arriving back in England, Hawkins accused Drake of desertion and of stealing the treasure they had accumulated. Drake denied both accusations, asserting he had distributed all profits among the crew and that he had believed Hawkins was lost when he left. The bitter end of the fourth voyage turned Drake's life in a different direction: thereafter he would not pursue trading and slaving but would, instead, dedicate himself to attacking Spanish possessions wherever he found them. Drake's hostility towards the Spanish is said to have started with the battle and its aftermath.\nThe voyage of 1567\u20131569 was Drake's last association with slaving. In total, approximately 1,200 Africans were enslaved on these four voyages, and an estimated three times as many Africans were killed (based on the contemporaneous accounts of slavers). On the issue of slaving, scholar John Sugden writes that \"Drake was in his twenties and did not question what his elders accepted\", but must share some culpability for his participation.\nExpedition of 1572\u20131573.\nIn 1572, Drake embarked on his first major independent enterprise. He planned an attack on the Isthmus of Panama, known to the Spanish as part of Tierra Firme and to the English as part of the Spanish Main. This was the point at which the silver and gold treasure of Peru had to be brought ashore and transported overland to the Caribbean Sea, where galleons from Spain would take it aboard at the town of Nombre de Dios. Drake left Plymouth on 24 May 1572, with a crew of 73 men in two small vessels, \"Pascha\" (70 tons) and \"Swan\" (25 tons), to capture Nombre de Dios.\nDrake's first raid was late in July 1572. Drake captured Nombre de Dios, but he was badly wounded when the Spanish arrived from Panama, and his forces had to retreat without the gold, silver, pearls and jewels stored in the royal treasury. Rather than sacking Nombre de Dios again, Drake raided Spanish galleons along the coast and with his Cimarr\u00f3n (African slaves who had escaped from their Spanish owners) allies looted the mule trains that transported gold, silver and trade goods from Panama City. One of these men was Diego, who later became a free man after years of service under Drake.\nAmong Drake's adventures along the Spanish Main, his capture of the Spanish silver train at Nombre de Dios on 1 April 1573 made him rich and famous. Near Cabo de Cativas he encountered a French privateer, Guillaume Le Testu, who was in command of the 80-ton warship \"Havre\", and joined forces with him in a combined fleet. Drake had determined to intercept the mule train at the Campos River, two leagues from Nombre de Dios, and instructed the captains of his pinnaces to meet them at the Francisca River on 3 April to carry them off after the raid. The combined English and French raiding parties marched through the forest towards the trail, to within a mile of the city while the Cimarr\u00f3ns performed reconnaissance. The next morning, 1 April, they surprised the mule convoy and seized more than 200,000 pesos' worth of treasure.\nAfter their attack on the richly laden mule train, Drake and his party found that they had captured around 20 tons of silver and gold. They buried much of the treasure, as it was too much for their party to carry, and made off with a fortune in gold. (An account of this may have given rise to subsequent stories of pirates and buried treasure). Badly wounded, Le Testu was captured and beheaded. The small band of adventurers dragged as much gold and silver as they could carry back across some of jungle-covered mountains to where they had left the raiding boats. When they got to the coast, the boats were gone. Drake and his men, downhearted, exhausted and hungry, had nowhere to go and the Spanish were not far behind.\nAt this point, Drake rallied his men, buried the treasure on the beach, and built a raft to sail in a heavy swell with four men twelve miles along the coast to where they had left two pinnaces. When Drake finally reached them, his men were alarmed at his bedraggled appearance. Fearing the worst, they asked him how the raid had gone. Drake could not resist a joke and teased them by looking downhearted. Then he laughed, pulled a quoit of Spanish gold from his clothes and said, \"Our voyage is made.\" By the second week of August 1573, he had returned to Plymouth.\nIt was during this expedition that on 11 February Drake and his lieutenant John Oxenham climbed a high tree in the central mountains of the Isthmus of Panama and thus became the first Englishmen to see the Pacific Ocean, mirroring the achievement of the Spaniard Vasco N\u00fa\u00f1ez de Balboa in 1513. The Cimarr\u00f3ns had cut steps into its trunk, on which Drake and the Cimarr\u00f3n leader Pedro ascended to a platform at the top of the giant tree, where they were joined by Oxenham. The Englishmen vowed when they saw the Pacific Ocean that one day they would sail its waters \u2013 which Drake would do years later as part of his circumnavigation of the world.\nWhen Drake returned to Plymouth after the raids, the government signed a temporary truce with King Philip II of Spain and so was unable to acknowledge Drake's accomplishment officially. Drake was considered a hero in England and a pirate in Spain for his raids.\nRathlin Island massacre.\nDrake was present at the 1575 Rathlin Island massacre in Ireland. Sir John Norris (or \"Norreys\") and Drake, acting on the instructions of Sir Henry Sidney and the Earl of Essex, Robert Devereux, laid siege to Rathlin Castle. Despite its surrender, Norris' troops killed all the 200 defenders and several hundred more men, women and children of Clan MacDonnell. Meanwhile, Drake was given the task of preventing any Gaelic Irish or Scottish reinforcements reaching the island. Therefore, the remaining leader of the Gaelic defence against English power, Sorley Boy MacDonnell, was forced to stay on the mainland. Essex wrote in his letter to Queen Elizabeth's secretary that following the attack, Sorley Boy \"was likely to have run mad for sorrow, tearing and tormenting himself and saying that he there lost all that he ever had.\"\nCircumnavigation (1577\u20131580).\nFollowing the success of the Panama isthmus raid, Drake's so-called \"Famous Voyage\" \u2013 an expedition against the Spanish along the Pacific coast of the Americas \u2013 was organized and financed by a private syndicate that included Francis Walsingham, Robert Dudley, 1st Earl of Leicester, John Hawkins, Christopher Hatton, and Drake himself. Drake acted on the plan authored by Sir Richard Grenville, who in 1574 had received a royal patent for that purpose; just a year later this patent had been rescinded after Elizabeth I learned of Grenville's intentions against the Spanish. Elizabeth likely invested in Drake's voyage to South America in 1577, but never issued him a formal commission. This would be the first circumnavigation in 58 years.\nDiego was once again employed under Drake; his fluency in Spanish and English would make him a useful interpreter when Spaniards or Spanish-speaking Portuguese were captured. He was employed as Drake's servant and was paid wages like the rest of the crew. Drake and the fleet set out from Plymouth on 15 November 1577, but bad weather threatened him and his fleet. They were forced to take refuge in Falmouth, Cornwall, from where they returned to Plymouth for repair.\nAfter this major setback, Drake set sail again on 13 December aboard \"Pelican\" with four other ships and 164 men. He soon added a sixth ship, \"Mary\" (formerly \"Santa Mar\u00eda\"), a Portuguese merchant ship that had been captured off the coast of Africa near the Cape Verde Islands. He also kidnapped its captain, , a man with considerable experience navigating in South American waters.\nDrake's fleet suffered great attrition; he scuttled both \"Christopher\" and the flyboat \"Swan\" due to loss of men on the Atlantic crossing. He made landfall at the gloomy bay of Puerto San Juli\u00e1n, in what is now Argentina. Ferdinand Magellan had called there half a century earlier, where he put to death some mutineers. Drake's men saw weathered and bleached skeletons on the Spanish gibbets. Following Magellan's example, Drake tried and executed his own \"mutineer\" Thomas Doughty. The crew discovered that \"Mary\" had rotting timbers, so they put the vessel ashore, stripped it, and abandoned it. Drake decided to remain the winter in San Juli\u00e1n before attempting the Strait of Magellan.\nExecution of Thomas Doughty.\nOn his voyage to interfere with Spanish treasure fleets, Drake had several quarrels with his co-commander Thomas Doughty and on 3 June 1578, accused him of witchcraft and charged him with mutiny and treason in a shipboard trial. Drake claimed to have a (never presented) commission from the Queen to carry out such acts and denied Doughty a trial in England. The main pieces of evidence against Doughty were the testimony of the ship's carpenter, Edward Bright, who after the trial was promoted to master of the ship \"Marigold\", and Doughty's admission of telling Lord Burghley, a vocal opponent of agitating the Spanish, of the intent of the voyage. Drake consented to his request of Communion and dined with him, of which Francis Fletcher had this account:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDrake had Thomas Doughty beheaded on 2 July 1578. In January 1580, when Drake became stranded upon a reef off the Celebes Sea, the ship's chaplain, Francis Fletcher, in a sermon suggested that the woes of the voyage were connected to the unjust demise of Doughty, Drake chained the clergyman to a hatch cover and pronounced him excommunicated.\nEntering the Pacific (1578).\nThe three remaining ships of his convoy departed for the Magellan Strait at the southern tip of South America. A few weeks later in September 1578 Drake made it to the Pacific, but violent storms destroyed one of the three ships, \"Marigold\" (captained by John Thomas) in the strait and caused another, \"Elizabeth\", captained by John Wynter, to return to England, leaving only \"Pelican\". After this passage, \"Pelican\" was pushed south and discovered an island that Drake called Elizabeth Island. Drake, like navigators before him, probably reached a latitude of 55\u00b0S (according to astronomical data quoted in Richard Hakluyt's \"The Principall Navigations, Voiages and Discoveries of the English Nation\" of 1589) along the Chilean coast. \nIn the Magellan Strait Drake and his men engaged in skirmishes with local indigenous people, becoming the first Europeans to kill indigenous peoples in southern Patagonia. During their stay in the strait, crew members discovered that an infusion made of the bark of \"Drimys winteri\" could be used as remedy against scurvy. Captain Wynter ordered the collection of great amounts of bark \u2013 hence the scientific name.\nHistorian Mateo Martinic, who examined records of Drake's travels, credits him with the discovery of the \"southern end of the Americas and the oceanic space south of it\". The first report of his discovery of an open channel south of Tierra del Fuego was written after the 1618 publication of the voyage of Willem Schouten and Jacob le Maire around Cape Horn in 1616.\nRaids on Spanish American west coast.\nDrake pushed onwards in his lone flagship, now renamed \"Golden Hind\" in honour of Sir Christopher Hatton (after his coat of arms). \"Golden Hind\" sailed north along the Pacific coast of South America, attacking Spanish ports and pillaging towns. Some Spanish ships were captured, and Drake used their more accurate charts to inform his navigation. Before reaching the coast of Peru, Drake visited Mocha Island off the coast of what is now Chile, where he and his manservant Diego were seriously injured by hostile Mapuche who shot them with arrows. Later he sacked the port of Valpara\u00edso further north in Chile, where he also captured a ship full of Chilean wine.\nNear Lima, Drake captured a Spanish ship with 25,000\u00a0pesos of Peruvian gold, amounting in value to 37,000\u00a0ducats of Spanish money (about \u00a37m by modern standards). Drake also discovered news of another ship, \"Nuestra Se\u00f1ora de la Concepci\u00f3n\", which was sailing west towards Manila. It would come to be called \"Cacafuego\". Drake gave chase and eventually captured the treasure ship, which proved his most profitable capture.\nAboard \"Nuestra Se\u00f1ora de la Concepci\u00f3n\", Drake found of gold, a golden crucifix, jewels, 13\u00a0chests of silver reals and of silver. Drake was naturally pleased at his good luck in capturing the galleon, and he showed it by dining with the captured ship's officers and gentleman passengers. He offloaded his captives a short time later, and gave each one gifts appropriate to their rank, as well as a letter of safe conduct.\nDrake continued north, raiding more Spanish settlements and ships as he went. His last stop in this phase of the voyage was in the town of Guatulco, where he and his crew stayed from 13 to 16 April, looting provisions and other materials. From here, Drake began to consider how best to return to England. One possibility was to sail back south, along the Spanish coast, and return to the Atlantic Ocean via the Strait of Magellan (or possibly Cape Horn); this route was ruled out, however, to avoid the dangerous weather near the strait and presumed Spanish resistance all along the coast. This left two possible routes \u2013 continue north up the American coast, and return to the Atlantic by the rumored Strait of Ani\u00e1n; or, sail across the Pacific, making for the East Indies, and from there return to England by completing a circumnavigation of the world.\nCoast of California: Nova Albion (1579).\nIn May, Drake's two ships passed the Baja California peninsula and continued north. Prior to Drake's voyage, the western coast of North America had only been partially explored in 1542 by Juan Rodr\u00edguez Cabrillo who sailed for Spain. So, intending to avoid further conflict with Spain, Drake navigated north-west of Spanish presence and sought a discreet site at which the crew could prepare for the journey back to England. The northernmost extent of this leg of the expedition has been the subject of much scholarly debate, but most sources agree that Drake reached a latitude of at least 48\u00b0 north before turning back and heading south.\nOn 5 June 1579, the ship briefly made first landfall at what is now South Cove, Cape Arago, just south of Coos Bay, Oregon, and then sailed southward. On 17 June, Drake and his crew found a protected cove when they landed on the Pacific coast of what is now Northern California. While ashore, he claimed the area for Queen Elizabeth I as Nova Albion or New Albion. To document and assert his claim, Drake posted an engraved plate of brass to claim sovereignty for Elizabeth and every successive English monarch. After erecting a fort and tents ashore, the crew laboured for several weeks as they prepared for the circumnavigating voyage ahead by careening their ship, \"Golden Hind\", to effectively clean and repair the hull. Drake had friendly interactions with the Coast Miwok and explored the surrounding land by foot. When his ship was ready for the return voyage, Drake and the crew left New Albion on 23 July and paused the journey the next day when anchoring the ship at the Farallon Islands where they hunted sea lions or seals.\nAcross the Pacific and around Africa.\nDrake left the Pacific coast, heading south-west to catch the winds that would carry his ship across the Pacific, and a few months later reached the Moluccas, a group of islands in the western Pacific, in eastern modern-day Indonesia. Harry Kelsey maintains, against scholarly consensus, that because of the contrary prevailing winds and currents, it is much more probable that Drake careened his ship on the shore of Magdalena Bay in Lower California, and sailed to the Moluccas and Spice Islands from there. At this time Diego died from wounds he had sustained earlier in the voyage; \"Golden Hind\" later became caught on a reef and was almost lost. Afterwards, the sailors waited three days for convenient tides and had dumped cargo. Befriending Sultan Babullah of Ternate in the Moluccas, Drake and his men became involved in some intrigues with the Portuguese there. He made multiple stops on his way toward the tip of Africa, eventually rounded the Cape of Good Hope, and reached Sierra Leone by 22 July 1580.\nReturn to Plymouth (1580).\nOn 26 September 1580, \"Golden Hind\" sailed into Plymouth with Drake and 59\u00a0remaining crew aboard, along with a rich cargo of spices and captured Spanish treasures. The queen's half-share of the cargo surpassed the rest of the crown's income for that entire year. Drake was hailed as the first Englishman to circumnavigate the Earth, and his was the second such voyage arriving with at least one ship intact, after Elcano's in 1520.\nQueen Elizabeth declared that all written accounts of Drake's voyages were to become the queen's secrets of the Realm, and Drake and the other participants of his voyages on the pain of death sworn to their secrecy; she intended to keep Drake's activities hidden from the eyes of rival Spain.\nDrake presented the queen with a jewel token commemorating the circumnavigation. Taken as a prize off the Pacific coast of Mexico, it was made of enamelled gold and bore an African diamond and a ship with an ebony hull.\nTo show her gratitude the queen gave him the Drake Jewel, a valuable pendant surrounded by diamonds, rubies and pearls. It was an unusual gift to bestow upon a commoner, and one that Drake wore in a 1591 portrait by Marcus Gheeraerts. On one side of the pendant is a state portrait of Elizabeth by the miniaturist Nicholas Hilliard, on the other a sardonyx cameo of double portrait busts of African and European figures standing side by side. The Drake Jewel is a rare documented survivor among sixteenth-century jewels; it is conserved at the Victoria and Albert Museum, London.\nKnighthood and arms.\nQueen Elizabeth awarded Drake a knighthood aboard \"Golden Hind\" in Deptford on 4 April 1581; the dubbing being performed by a French diplomat, Monsieur de Marchaumont, who was negotiating for Elizabeth to marry the King of France's brother, Francis, Duke of Anjou. By getting the French diplomat involved in the knighting, Elizabeth was gaining the implicit political support of the French for Drake's actions. During the Victorian era, in a spirit of nationalism, the story was promoted that Elizabeth I had done the knighting.\nAfter receiving his knighthood Drake unilaterally adopted the coat of arms of the ancient Devon family of Drake of Ash, to whom he claimed a distant but unspecified kinship. The right to use the arms was disputed in court so Queen Elizabeth awarded Drake his own coat of arms.\nDrake's heraldic achievement and coat of arms contains the motto, \"Sic Parvis Magna\", which means: \"Great achievements from small beginnings\". A hand coming out of the clouds is labelled \"Auxilio Divino\", which means \"By divine aid\".\nPolitical career.\nDrake first became a member of parliament for the last session of the 4th Parliament of Elizabeth I, on 16 January 1581, for the constituency of Camelford. He did not actively participate at this point, and on 17 February 1581 he was granted leave of absence \"for certain his necessary business in the service of Her Majesty\".\nDrake became the Mayor of Plymouth in September 1581. During his tenure, he installed a compass in the town's Hoe, and passed a law regulating the local pilchard trade. During his term as lord mayor, Drake contracted to construct a leat, or canal, to bring water from the River Meavy, and to build six new gristmills on it from which he derived a substantial profit.\nDrake became a member of parliament again in 1584 for Bossiney, on the forming of the 5th Parliament of Elizabeth I. He served the duration of the parliament and was active in issues regarding the navy, fishing, early American colonisation, and issues related chiefly to Devon. He spent the time covered by the next two parliamentary terms engaged in other duties and an expedition to Portugal.\nHe became a member of parliament for Plymouth in 1593. He was active in issues of interest to Plymouth as a whole, but also to emphasise defence against the Spanish.\nGreat Expedition to America.\nWar broke out between England and Spain in 1585, after the signing of the Treaty of Nonsuch. Queen Elizabeth I, through her principal secretary Francis Walsingham, ordered Sir Francis Drake to lead an expedition to attack the Spanish colonies in a kind of pre-emptive strike. An expedition left Plymouth in September 1585 with Drake in command of twenty-one ships with 1,800 soldiers under Christopher Carleill. He first attacked Vigo in Spain and held the place for two weeks ransoming supplies. He then plundered Santiago in the Cape Verde islands after which the fleet then sailed across the Atlantic, sacked the port of Santo Domingo, and captured the city of Cartagena de Indias in present-day Colombia. At Cartagena, Drake released one hundred Turkish slaves. On 6 June 1586, during the return leg of the voyage, he attacked the wooden Spanish fort at San Agust\u00edn in Spanish Florida and burnt the town to the ground.\nAfter the raids he then went on to find Sir Walter Raleigh's settlement much further north at Roanoke which he replenished and also took back with him all of the original colonists before Sir Richard Grenville arrived with supplies and more colonists. He finally reached England on 22 July, when he sailed into Portsmouth, England to a hero's welcome.\nConflict with the Spanish Armada.\nIn part to prevent future such attacks by English and Dutch privateers against Spanish interests in the Americas, Philip II ordered a planned invasion of England.\nC\u00e1diz raid.\nOn 15 March 1587, Drake accepted a new commission with several purposes: to disrupt the shipping routes in order to slow supplies from Italy and Andalucia to Lisbon, to trouble enemy fleets that were in their home ports, and to capture Spanish ships laden with treasure. Drake was also to confront and attack the Spanish Armada had it already sailed for England. When arriving at C\u00e1diz on 19 April, Drake found the harbour packed with ships and supplies as the Armada was readying and waiting for a fair wind to launch the fleet to attack. In the early hours of the next day, Drake pressed his attack into the inner harbour and inflicted heavy damage. Claims of the exact Spanish ship losses vary: Drake claimed he had sunk 39 ships, while the Spanish admitted the loss of only 24. The attack became known as the \"singeing of the King's beard\" and delayed the Spanish invasion by a year.\nOver the next month, Drake patrolled the Iberian coasts between Lisbon and Cape St. Vincent, intercepting and destroying ships on the Spanish supply lines. Drake estimated that he had captured around 1,600 to 1,700 tons of barrel staves, enough to make for containing provisions. The expedition resulted in a total profit for England of around \u00a3140,000, \u00a318,235 of which went to Drake.\nDefeat of the Spanish Armada.\nThe Spanish Armada set sail for England in May 1588, and arrived on the English coast on 29 July, near Cornwall. An English fleet consisting of 55 ships set out from Plymouth to confront the Armada, under the command of Lord Howard of Effingham, with Sir Francis Drake serving as vice admiral, commanding from the galleon \"Revenge\". As the English fleet pursued the Armada up the English Channel in closing darkness, Drake broke off and captured the disabled Spanish galleon \"Nuestra Se\u00f1ora del Rosario\", along with Admiral Pedro de Vald\u00e9s and most of his crew. The Spanish ship was known to be carrying substantial funds to pay the Spanish Armada. Drake's ship had been leading the English pursuit of the Armada by means of a lantern. By extinguishing this for the capture, Drake put the English fleet into disarray overnight. \nThe Duke of Medina Sidonia, whom Philip had appointed to command the Armada despite his complete lack of military experience on land or at sea, made his way up the Channel towards the French shore in his flagship \"San Mart\u00edn\" with the English in pursuit, thinking that if he anchored in the roadstead of Calais they would not dare molest the Spanish ships in French waters.\nA council of war was held aboard Howard's flagship \"Ark\", where Howard, Drake, Seymour, Hawkins, Martin Frobisher, and two or three others, decided to launch fire ships. That night the English launched eight fire ships into the midst of the Armada at its moorings, forcing its captains to cut their anchors and sail out of Calais into the open sea. The decisive action was fought the next day on the shoals off Gravelines, where Frobisher, Drake, and Hawkins pounded the Spanish ships with their guns. Drake's squadron gave Medina Sidonia's flagship \"San Martin\" a single broadside and moved on; Frobisher, directly behind him in the English line, stayed with the \"San Martin\" at close range and poured cannon shot into her oaken flanks, but failed to take her. Five Spanish ships were lost.\nDrake wrote as follows to Admiral Henry Seymour after coming upon part of the Spanish Armada, whilst aboard \"Revenge\" on 31 July 1588 (21 July 1588 OS):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Armada, having failed in their aim, were unable to sail back via the English channel. The English ships, including \"Revenge\", pursued them to prevent any landing on English soil, although by this time most of Howard's ships were almost out of shot. Nevertheless, the battered Spanish fleet were forced to sail instead around the British isles and encountered heavy storms off the coast of Ireland. The fleet eventually limped back to Spanish ports having lost overall some 63 ships and vessels.\nThe most famous (but probably apocryphal) anecdote about Drake relates that, prior to the battle, he was playing a game of bowls on Plymouth Hoe. On being warned of the approach of the Spanish fleet, Drake is said to have remarked that there was plenty of time to finish the game and still beat the Spaniards, perhaps because he was waiting for high tide. There is no known eyewitness account of this incident and the earliest retelling of it was printed 37 years later. Adverse winds and currents caused some delay in the launching of the English fleet as the Spanish drew nearer, perhaps prompting a popular myth of Drake's cavalier attitude to the Spanish threat.\nEnglish Armada.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe people of quality dislike him for having risen so high from such a lowly family; the rest say he is the main cause of wars.\nIn 1589, the year after the failure of the Spanish Armada, the English sent their own armada to attack Spain. Drake and Norris were given three tasks. First, to destroy the battered Spanish Atlantic fleet, which was being repaired in ports of northern Spain. Second, to make a landing at Lisbon, Portugal and raise a revolt there against King Philip II (Philip I of Portugal) installing the pretender Dom Ant\u00f3nio, Prior of Crato to the Portuguese throne. And, third, to take the Azores if possible so as to establish a permanent base.\nIn the siege of Coru\u00f1a, Drake and Norris destroyed a few ships in the harbour of A Coru\u00f1a in Spain but were repelled. This defeat in all fronts delayed Drake for two weeks, and he was forced to forgo hunting the rest of the surviving ships and head on to Lisbon.\nNorris led his army on a difficult march over the rocky coast to Lisbon, while Drake sailed around the peninsula to join Essex with his heavy artillery. Norris's troops were sick and exhausted by the time they reached the western limits of the city, consequently he demanded that Dom Ant\u00f3nio raise provisions and men to fight for his cause from amongst the local populace, or the army would retreat. Drake, against their agreed plans, had anchored his fleet in the mouth of the Tagus estuary, rather than running the risk of sailing past the well-defended stretches of the Tagus to bring the desperately needed heavy cannon and ordnance. The anticipated rebellion never materialised and the ground campaign was a total failure, so Norris, with his army and Ant\u00f3nio, re-embarked to make an attempt at capturing the treasure fleet. The weather was not in their favour so they eventually sailed for home.\nHowever, Drake wanted to atone for such a bitter setback and, in order not to return empty-handed and with the morale of his troops sunk, he made a fleeting stop in the Galician \"r\u00edas\", or coastal inlets, pillaging the defenceless town of Vigo for two days and razing it to the ground. This abusive demonstration did not leave the corsair unharmed, as he lost hundreds more men on land, in addition to as many as two hundred wounded. The growing defences of the inhabitants, and the arrivals of militias from Portugal, put the ships in retreat again. Two of the vessels sailing back to Plymouth were captured in the Bay of Biscay by a squadron of zabras led by Captain Diego de Aramburu.\nThe failure cost the lives of 11,000 English soldiers and sailors, according to Bucholz and Key; Robert Hutchinson says between 8,000 and 11,000 died; while Gorrochategui Santos calculates the number at over 20,000. Upon his return, Drake's behaviour in the expedition was increasingly called into question, culminating in his being charged by England's Privy Council of deliberate failings and a mishandling of his command. Despite never being publicly admonished on these charges, he nevertheless fell out of favour, and was not given command of another naval expedition until 1595.\nDefeats and death.\nDrake's seafaring career continued into his mid-fifties. In 1595, he failed to conquer the port of Las Palmas, and following a disastrous campaign against Spanish America, where he suffered a number of defeats, he unsuccessfully attacked San Juan de Puerto Rico, and lost the Battle of San Juan. The Spanish gunners from El Morro Castle shot a cannonball through his stateroom on the expedition's flagship, but he survived.\nHe and his second-in-command, Thomas Baskerville, captured and burned Nombre de Dios, and started an overland crossing of the isthmus to attack the city of Panama, but were repulsed by the well-entrenched Spaniards who had barricaded the road; suffering heavy casualties, they gave up the attempt. A few weeks later, on 28 January 1596, Drake died (aged about 56) of dysentery, a common disease at the time, while anchored off the coast of Portobelo where some Spanish treasure ships had sought shelter. Following his death, the English fleet withdrew defeated.\nBefore dying, he asked to be dressed in his full armour. He was buried at sea in a sealed lead-lined coffin, near Portobelo, a few miles off the coastline. It is supposed that his final resting place is near the wrecks of two British ships, \"Elizabeth\" and \"Delight\", scuttled in Portobelo Bay. Efforts by researchers and treasure hunters to discover the location of his remains are ongoing, while divers continue to search the seabed for the coffin.\nFamily and heritage.\nFrancis Drake married Mary Newman at St Budeaux church near Plymouth, on 4 July 1569. She died about 24 January 1583. In 1585, Drake married Elizabeth Sydenham, born around 1562, the only child of Sir George Sydenham, of Combe Sydenham, who was the High Sheriff of Somerset.\nIn 1580, Drake purchased Buckland Abbey, a large manor house near Yelverton, Devon, via intermediaries from Sir Richard Grenville. He lived there for fifteen years, until his final voyage, and it remained in his family until 1946. Buckland Abbey is now in the care of the National Trust and a number of mementos of his life are displayed there. His coat of arms and full achievement is depicted in the form of a large, coloured plaster overmantel in the Lifetimes Gallery at Buckland Abbey.\nDrake was one of twelve children. His brother Thomas accompanied him on voyages, and named his son after him. That nephew eventually became Sir Francis Drake, 1st Baronet.\nLegacy and honours.\nHistorical sources on Drake's early life are scarce, and tend to be obscure. Two common scholarly traditions concerning his life and contributions have resulted. The older tradition can be found in Julian Corbett's biography, \"Drake and the Tudor Navy\" (1898) which identifies Drake as the single most important figure in the founding and triumph of the British navy. The alternative approach locates Drake squarely within privateering. The first has tended to laud only his successes, while Sugden writes that the second approach, which emphasises his flaws and failures, has sometimes been less than just. Drake left behind no words of his own, only his actions and their interpretation which, as Peter Whitfield says, \"is open to deep disagreement\". According to Whitfield, scholarship on Drake has moved \"from the hero worship of the Victorians to the cold iconoclasm\" of the twenty-first century.\nDrake's will was the focus of an extensive confidence scam which Oscar Hartzell perpetrated in the 1920s and 1930s.\nDrake's Drum has become an icon of English folklore with its variation of the classic king asleep in mountain story motif. It inspired a poem by Henry Newbolt.\nDrake was a major focus in the video game series \"Uncharted\", specifically its first and third instalments, ' and ', respectively. The series follows Nathan Drake, a self-proclaimed descendant of Drake who retraces his ancestor's voyages.\nDrake was the subject of a TV series, \"Sir Francis Drake\" (1961\u20131962). Terence Morgan played Drake in the 26-episode adventure drama.\nIn Valpara\u00edso, Chile, folklore associates a cave known as Cueva del Pirata (lit.\u2009'Cave of the Pirate') with Francis Drake. A legend says that when Drake ransacked the port, he was disappointed with the scant plunder, and proceeded to enter the churches in fury to sack them and urinate on the chalices. Supposedly he still found the plunder to be not worth enough to take on board his galleon, and hid it in the cave.\nGeographical names.\nDrake Passage, a strait connecting the southern Atlantic Ocean and the Pacific Ocean, is named after him.\nThere are various places in the United Kingdom named after him, especially in Plymouth, Devon. Places there carrying his name include Drake's Island, Drake Circus Shopping Centre, and the Royal Navy base HMNB Devonport (also known as \"HMS Drake\"). Plymouth Hoe is also home to a statue of Drake. The Sir Francis Drake Channel is located in the British Virgin Islands.\nVarious mountains in British Columbia were named in the 1930s for Drake, or in connection with Elizabeth I or other figures of that era, including Mount Sir Francis Drake, Mount Queen Bess, and the Golden Hinde, the highest mountain on Vancouver Island. Fringe theorists suggest he may also have landed to the north of the usual site considered to be Nova Albion \u2013 among them Canadian Samuel Bawlf, who claims that its true location was on Vancouver Island at latitude 50 degrees north.\nSeveral landmarks in northern California were named after Drake, beginning in the late 19th century and continuing into the 20th century. American historian Richard White posits that these commemorations have origins in 19th-century Anglo-Saxonism. Public scrutiny of these memorials intensified in 2020 after the George Floyd protests drew critical attention to place names and monuments perceived to be connected to white supremacy, colonialism, or racial injustice. Several California landmarks that commemorated Drake were removed or renamed. Citing Drake's associations with the transatlantic slave trade, colonialism and piracy, Sir Francis Drake High School, in San Anselmo, California, changed its name to Archie Williams High School, after former teacher and Olympic athlete Archie Williams. A statue of Drake in Larkspur, California was also removed by the city authorities. Multiple jurisdictions in Marin County considered renaming Sir Francis Drake Boulevard, one of its major thoroughfares, but left the name intact when they failed to reach a consensus. In San Francisco, the Sir Francis Drake Hotel was renamed the Beacon Grand Hotel.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11512", "revid": "9203265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11512", "title": "Fast Fourier transform", "text": "Discrete Fourier transform algorithm\nA fast Fourier transform (FFT) is an algorithm that computes the discrete Fourier transform (DFT) of a sequence, or its inverse (IDFT). A Fourier transform converts a signal from its original domain (often time or space) to a representation in the frequency domain and vice versa.\nThe DFT is obtained by decomposing a sequence of values into components of different frequencies. This operation is useful in many fields, but computing it directly from the definition is often too slow to be practical. An FFT rapidly computes such transformations by factorizing the DFT matrix into a product of sparse (mostly zero) factors. As a result, it manages to reduce the complexity of computing the DFT from formula_1, which arises if one simply applies the definition of DFT, to formula_2, where n is the data size. The difference in speed can be enormous, especially for long data sets where n may be in the thousands or millions.\nAs the FFT is merely an algebraic refactoring of terms within the DFT, the DFT and the FFT both perform mathematically equivalent and interchangeable operations, assuming that all terms are computed with infinite precision. However, in the presence of round-off error, many FFT algorithms are much more accurate than evaluating the DFT definition directly or indirectly. There are many different FFT algorithms based on a wide range of published theories, from simple complex-number arithmetic to group theory and number theory. The best-known FFT algorithms depend upon the factorization of n, but there are FFTs with formula_3 complexity for all, even prime, n. Many FFT algorithms depend only on the fact that formula_4 is an nth primitive root of unity, and thus can be applied to analogous transforms over any finite field, such as number-theoretic transforms. Since the inverse DFT is the same as the DFT, but with the opposite sign in the exponent and a 1/\"n\" factor, any FFT algorithm can easily be adapted for it.\nFast Fourier transforms are widely used for applications in engineering, music, science, and mathematics. The basic ideas were popularized in 1965, but some algorithms had been derived as early as 1805. In 1994, Gilbert Strang described the FFT as \"the most important numerical algorithm of our lifetime\", and it was included in Top 10 Algorithms of 20th Century by the IEEE magazine \"Computing in Science &amp; Engineering\".\nHistory.\nThe development of fast algorithms for DFT was prefigured in Carl Friedrich Gauss's unpublished 1805 work on the orbits of asteroids Pallas and Juno. Gauss wanted to interpolate the orbits from sample observations; his method was very similar to the one that would be published in 1965 by James Cooley and John Tukey, who are generally credited for the invention of the modern generic FFT algorithm. While Gauss's work predated even Joseph Fourier's 1822 results, he did not analyze the method's complexity, and eventually used other methods to achieve the same end.\nBetween 1805 and 1965, some versions of FFT were published by other authors. Frank Yates in 1932 published his version called \"interaction algorithm\", which provided efficient computation of Hadamard and Walsh transforms. Yates' algorithm is still used in the field of statistical design and analysis of experiments. In 1942, G. C. Danielson and Cornelius Lanczos published their version to compute DFT for x-ray crystallography, a field where calculation of Fourier transforms presented a formidable bottleneck. While many methods in the past had focused on reducing the constant factor for formula_1 computation by taking advantage of symmetries, Danielson and Lanczos realized that one could use the periodicity and apply a doubling trick to \"double [n] with only slightly more than double the labor\", though like Gauss they did not do the analysis to discover that this led to formula_2 scaling. In 1958, I. J. Good published a paper establishing the prime-factor FFT algorithm that applies to discrete Fourier transforms of size formula_7, where formula_8 and formula_9 are coprime.\nJames Cooley and John Tukey independently rediscovered these earlier algorithms and published a more general FFT in 1965 that is applicable when n is composite and not necessarily a power of 2, as well as analyzing the formula_2 scaling. Tukey came up with the idea during a meeting of President Kennedy's Science Advisory Committee where a discussion topic involved detecting nuclear tests by the Soviet Union by setting up sensors to surround the country from outside. To analyze the output of these sensors, an FFT algorithm would be needed. In discussion with Tukey, Richard Garwin recognized the general applicability of the algorithm not just to national security problems, but also to a wide range of problems including one of immediate interest to him, determining the periodicities of the spin orientations in a 3-D crystal of Helium-3. Garwin gave Tukey's idea to Cooley (both worked at IBM's Watson labs) for implementation. Cooley and Tukey published the paper in a relatively short time of six months. As Tukey did not work at IBM, the patentability of the idea was doubted and the algorithm went into the public domain, which, through the computing revolution of the next decade, made FFT one of the indispensable algorithms in digital signal processing.\nDefinition.\nLet formula_11 be complex numbers. The DFT is defined by the formula\nformula_12\nwhere formula_13 is a primitive nth root of 1.\nEvaluating this definition directly requires formula_1 operations: there are n outputs Xk\u200a, and each output requires a sum of n terms. An FFT is any method to compute the same results in formula_2 operations. All known FFT algorithms require formula_2 operations, although there is no known proof that lower complexity is impossible.\nTo illustrate the savings of an FFT, consider the count of complex multiplications and additions for formula_17 data points. Evaluating the DFT's sums directly involves formula_18 complex multiplications and formula_19 complex additions, of which formula_20 operations can be saved by eliminating trivial operations such as multiplications by 1, leaving about 30 million operations. In contrast, the radix-2 Cooley\u2013Tukey algorithm, for n a power of 2, can compute the same result with only formula_21 complex multiplications (again, ignoring simplifications of multiplications by 1 and similar) and formula_22 complex additions, in total about 70,000 operations \u2014 more than four-hundred times less than with direct evaluation. In practice, actual performance on modern computers is usually dominated by factors other than the speed of arithmetic operations and the analysis is a complicated subject (for example, see Frigo &amp; Johnson, 2005), but the overall improvement from formula_1 to formula_2 remains.\nAlgorithms.\nCooley\u2013Tukey algorithm.\nBy far the most commonly used FFT is the Cooley\u2013Tukey algorithm. This is a divide-and-conquer algorithm that recursively breaks down a DFT of any composite size formula_25 into formula_26 smaller DFTs of size formula_27, along with formula_28 multiplications by complex roots of unity traditionally called twiddle factors (after Gentleman and Sande, 1966).\nThis method (and the general idea of an FFT) was popularized by a publication of Cooley and Tukey in 1965, but it was later discovered that those two authors had together independently re-invented an algorithm known to Carl Friedrich Gauss around 1805 (and subsequently rediscovered several times in limited forms).\nThe best known use of the Cooley\u2013Tukey algorithm is to divide the transform into two pieces of size \"n\"/2 at each step, and is therefore limited to power-of-two sizes, but any factorization can be used in general (as was known to both Gauss and Cooley/Tukey). These are called the \"radix-2\" and \"mixed-radix\" cases, respectively (and other variants such as the split-radix FFT have their own names as well). Although the basic idea is recursive, most traditional implementations rearrange the algorithm to avoid explicit recursion. Also, because the Cooley\u2013Tukey algorithm breaks the DFT into smaller DFTs, it can be combined arbitrarily with any other algorithm for the DFT, such as those described below.\nOther FFT algorithms.\nFor formula_25 with coprime formula_26 and formula_27, one can use the prime-factor (Good\u2013Thomas) algorithm (PFA), based on the Chinese remainder theorem, to factorize the DFT similarly to Cooley\u2013Tukey but without the twiddle factors. The Rader\u2013Brenner algorithm (1976) is a Cooley\u2013Tukey-like factorization but with purely imaginary twiddle factors, reducing multiplications at the cost of increased additions and reduced numerical stability; it was later superseded by the split-radix variant of Cooley\u2013Tukey (which achieves the same multiplication count but with fewer additions and without sacrificing accuracy). Algorithms that recursively factorize the DFT into smaller operations other than DFTs include the Bruun and QFT algorithms. (The Rader\u2013Brenner and QFT algorithms were proposed for power-of-two sizes, but it is possible that they could be adapted to general composite n. Bruun's algorithm applies to arbitrary even composite sizes.) Bruun's algorithm, in particular, is based on interpreting the FFT as a recursive factorization of the polynomial formula_32, here into real-coefficient polynomials of the form formula_33 and formula_34.\nAnother polynomial viewpoint is exploited by the Winograd FFT algorithm, which factorizes formula_32 into cyclotomic polynomials\u2014these often have coefficients of 1,\u00a00,\u00a0or\u00a0\u22121, and therefore require few (if any) multiplications, so Winograd can be used to obtain minimal-multiplication FFTs and is often used to find efficient algorithms for small factors. Indeed, Winograd showed that the DFT can be computed with only formula_28 irrational multiplications, leading to a proven achievable lower bound on the number of multiplications for power-of-two sizes; this comes at the cost of many more additions, a tradeoff no longer favorable on modern processors with hardware multipliers. In particular, Winograd also makes use of the PFA as well as an algorithm by Rader for FFTs of \"prime\" sizes.\nRader's algorithm, exploiting the existence of a generator for the multiplicative group modulo prime n, expresses a DFT of prime size n as a cyclic convolution of (composite) size \"n\" \u2013 1, which can then be computed by a pair of ordinary FFTs via the convolution theorem (although Winograd uses other convolution methods). Another prime-size FFT is due to L. I. Bluestein, and is sometimes called the chirp-z algorithm; it also re-expresses a DFT as a convolution, but this time of the \"same\" size (which can be zero-padded to a power of two and evaluated by radix-2 Cooley\u2013Tukey FFTs, for example), via the identity\n formula_37\nHexagonal fast Fourier transform (HFFT) aims at computing an efficient FFT for the hexagonally-sampled data by using a new addressing scheme for hexagonal grids, called Array Set Addressing (ASA).\nFFT algorithms specialized for real or symmetric data.\nIn many applications, the input data for the DFT are purely real, in which case the outputs satisfy the symmetry\nformula_38\nand efficient FFT algorithms have been designed for this situation (see e.g., Sorensen, 1987). One approach consists of taking an ordinary algorithm (e.g. Cooley\u2013Tukey) and removing the redundant parts of the computation, saving roughly a factor of two in time and memory. Alternatively, it is possible to express an \"even\"-length real-input DFT as a complex DFT of half the length (whose real and imaginary parts are the even/odd elements of the original real data), followed by formula_28 post-processing operations.\nIt was once believed that real-input DFTs could be more efficiently computed by means of the discrete Hartley transform (DHT), but it was subsequently argued that a specialized real-input DFT algorithm (FFT) can typically be found that requires fewer operations than the corresponding DHT algorithm (FHT) for the same number of inputs. Bruun's algorithm (above) is another method that was initially proposed to take advantage of real inputs, but it has not proved popular.\nThere are further FFT specializations for the cases of real data that have even/odd symmetry, in which case one can gain another factor of roughly two in time and memory and the DFT becomes the discrete cosine/sine transform(s) (DCT/DST). Instead of directly modifying an FFT algorithm for these cases, DCTs/DSTs can also be computed via FFTs of real data combined with formula_28 pre- and post-processing.\nComputational issues.\nBounds on complexity and operation counts.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Unsolved/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUnsolved problem in computer science\nWhat is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? Can they be faster than formula_41?\nMore unsolved problems in computer science\nA fundamental question of longstanding theoretical interest is to prove lower bounds on the complexity and exact operation counts of fast Fourier transforms, and many open problems remain. It is not rigorously proved whether DFTs truly require formula_42 (i.e., order \"formula_43\" or greater) operations, even for the simple case of power of two sizes, although no algorithms with lower complexity are known. In particular, the count of arithmetic operations is usually the focus of such questions, although actual performance on modern-day computers is determined by many other factors such as cache or CPU pipeline optimization.\nFollowing work by Shmuel Winograd (1978), a tight formula_44 lower bound is known for the number of real multiplications required by an FFT. It can be shown that only formula_45 irrational real multiplications are required to compute a DFT of power-of-two length formula_46. Moreover, explicit algorithms that achieve this count are known (Heideman &amp; Burrus, 1986; Duhamel, 1990). However, these algorithms require too many additions to be practical, at least on modern computers with hardware multipliers (Duhamel, 1990; Frigo &amp; Johnson, 2005).\nA tight lower bound is not known on the number of required additions, although lower bounds have been proved under some restrictive assumptions on the algorithms. In 1973, Morgenstern proved an formula_47 lower bound on the addition count for algorithms where the multiplicative constants have bounded magnitudes (which is true for most but not all FFT algorithms). Pan (1986) proved an formula_47 lower bound assuming a bound on a measure of the FFT algorithm's \"asynchronicity\", but the generality of this assumption is unclear. For the case of power-of-two n, Papadimitriou (1979) argued that the number formula_49 of complex-number additions achieved by Cooley\u2013Tukey algorithms is \"optimal\" under certain assumptions on the graph of the algorithm (his assumptions imply, among other things, that no additive identities in the roots of unity are exploited). (This argument would imply that at least formula_50 real additions are required, although this is not a tight bound because extra additions are required as part of complex-number multiplications.) Thus far, no published FFT algorithm has achieved fewer than formula_49 complex-number additions (or their equivalent) for power-of-two n.\nA third problem is to minimize the \"total\" number of real multiplications and additions, sometimes called the \"arithmetic complexity\" (although in this context it is the exact count and not the asymptotic complexity that is being considered). Again, no tight lower bound has been proven. Since 1968, however, the lowest published count for power-of-two n was long achieved by the split-radix FFT algorithm, which requires formula_52 real multiplications and additions for \"n\" &gt; 1. This was recently reduced to formula_53 (Johnson and Frigo, 2007; Lundy and Van Buskirk, 2007). A slightly larger count (but still better than split radix for \"n\" \u2265 256) was shown to be provably optimal for \"n\" \u2264 512 under additional restrictions on the possible algorithms (split-radix-like flowgraphs with unit-modulus multiplicative factors), by reduction to a satisfiability modulo theories problem solvable by brute force (Haynal &amp; Haynal, 2011).\nMost of the attempts to lower or prove the complexity of FFT algorithms have focused on the ordinary complex-data case, because it is the simplest. However, complex-data FFTs are so closely related to algorithms for related problems such as real-data FFTs, discrete cosine transforms, discrete Hartley transforms, and so on, that any improvement in one of these would immediately lead to improvements in the others (Duhamel &amp; Vetterli, 1990).\nApproximations.\nAll of the FFT algorithms discussed above compute the DFT exactly (i.e., neglecting floating-point errors). A few FFT algorithms have been proposed, however, that compute the DFT \"approximately\", with an error that can be made arbitrarily small at the expense of increased computations. Such algorithms trade the approximation error for increased speed or other properties. For example, an approximate FFT algorithm by Edelman et al. (1999) achieves lower communication requirements for parallel computing with the help of a fast multipole method. A wavelet-based approximate FFT by Guo and Burrus (1996) takes sparse inputs/outputs (time/frequency localization) into account more efficiently than is possible with an exact FFT. Another algorithm for approximate computation of a subset of the DFT outputs is due to Shentov et al. (1995). The Edelman algorithm works equally well for sparse and non-sparse data, since it is based on the compressibility (rank deficiency) of the Fourier matrix itself rather than the compressibility (sparsity) of the data. Conversely, if the data are sparse\u2014that is, if only k out of n Fourier coefficients are nonzero\u2014then the complexity can be reduced to formula_54, and this has been demonstrated to lead to practical speedups compared to an ordinary FFT for \"n\"/\"k\" &gt; 32 in a large-n example (\"n\" \n 222) using a probabilistic approximate algorithm (which estimates the largest k coefficients to several decimal places).\nAccuracy.\nFFT algorithms have errors when finite-precision floating-point arithmetic is used, but these errors are typically quite small; most FFT algorithms, e.g. Cooley\u2013Tukey, have excellent numerical properties as a consequence of the pairwise summation structure of the algorithms. The upper bound on the relative error for the Cooley\u2013Tukey algorithm is formula_55, compared to formula_56 for the na\u00efve DFT formula, where \ud835\udf00 is the machine floating-point relative precision. In fact, the root mean square (rms) errors are much better than these upper bounds, being only formula_57 for Cooley\u2013Tukey and formula_58 for the na\u00efve DFT (Schatzman, 1996). These results, however, are very sensitive to the accuracy of the twiddle factors used in the FFT (i.e. the trigonometric function values), and it is not unusual for incautious FFT implementations to have much worse accuracy, e.g. if they use inaccurate trigonometric recurrence formulas. Some FFTs other than Cooley\u2013Tukey, such as the Rader\u2013Brenner algorithm, are intrinsically less stable.\nIn fixed-point arithmetic, the finite-precision errors accumulated by FFT algorithms are worse, with rms errors growing as formula_59 for the Cooley\u2013Tukey algorithm (Welch, 1969). Achieving this accuracy requires careful attention to scaling to minimize loss of precision, and fixed-point FFT algorithms involve rescaling at each intermediate stage of decompositions like Cooley\u2013Tukey.\nTo verify the correctness of an FFT implementation, rigorous guarantees can be obtained in formula_2 time by a simple procedure checking the linearity, impulse-response, and time-shift properties of the transform on random inputs (Erg\u00fcn, 1995).\nThe values for intermediate frequencies may be obtained by various averaging methods.\nMultidimensional FFTs.\nAs defined in the multidimensional DFT article, the multidimensional DFT\nformula_61\ntransforms an array \"x\"n with a d-dimensional vector of indices formula_62 by a set of d nested summations (over formula_63 for each j), where the division formula_64 is performed element-wise. Equivalently, it is the composition of a sequence of \"d\" sets of one-dimensional DFTs, performed along one dimension at a time (in any order).\nThis compositional viewpoint immediately provides the simplest and most common multidimensional DFT algorithm, known as the row-column algorithm (after the two-dimensional case, below). That is, one simply performs a sequence of d one-dimensional FFTs (by any of the above algorithms): first you transform along the \"n\"1 dimension, then along the \"n\"2 dimension, and so on (actually, any ordering works). This method is easily shown to have the usual formula_2 complexity, where formula_66 is the total number of data points transformed. In particular, there are \"n\"/\"n\"1 transforms of size \"n\"1, etc., so the complexity of the sequence of FFTs is:\nformula_67\nIn two dimensions, the \"x\"k can be viewed as an formula_68 matrix, and this algorithm corresponds to first performing the FFT of all the rows (resp. columns), grouping the resulting transformed rows (resp. columns) together as another formula_68 matrix, and then performing the FFT on each of the columns (resp. rows) of this second matrix, and similarly grouping the results into the final result matrix.\nIn more than two dimensions, it is often advantageous for cache locality to group the dimensions recursively. For example, a three-dimensional FFT might first perform two-dimensional FFTs of each planar slice for each fixed \"n\"1, and then perform the one-dimensional FFTs along the \"n\"1 direction. More generally, an asymptotically optimal cache-oblivious algorithm consists of recursively dividing the dimensions into two groups formula_70 and formula_71 that are transformed recursively (rounding if d is not even) (see Frigo and Johnson, 2005). Still, this remains a straightforward variation of the row-column algorithm that ultimately requires only a one-dimensional FFT algorithm as the base case, and still has formula_3 complexity. Yet another variation is to perform matrix transpositions in between transforming subsequent dimensions, so that the transforms operate on contiguous data; this is especially important for out-of-core and distributed memory situations where accessing non-contiguous data is extremely time-consuming.\nThere are other multidimensional FFT algorithms that are distinct from the row-column algorithm, although all of them have formula_2 complexity. Perhaps the simplest non-row-column FFT is the vector-radix FFT algorithm, which is a generalization of the ordinary Cooley\u2013Tukey algorithm where one divides the transform dimensions by a vector formula_74 of radices at each step. (This may also have cache benefits.) The simplest case of vector-radix is where all of the radices are equal (e.g., vector-radix-2 divides \"all\" of the dimensions by two), but this is not necessary. Vector radix with only a single non-unit radix at a time, i.e. formula_75, is essentially a row-column algorithm. Other, more complicated, methods include polynomial transform algorithms due to Nussbaumer (1977), which view the transform in terms of convolutions and polynomial products. See Duhamel and Vetterli (1990) for more information and references.\nOther generalizations.\nAn formula_76 generalization to spherical harmonics on the sphere \"S\"2 with \"n\"2 nodes was described by Mohlenkamp, along with an algorithm conjectured (but not proven) to have formula_77 complexity; Mohlenkamp also provides an implementation in the libftsh library. A spherical-harmonic algorithm with formula_78 complexity is described by Rokhlin and Tygert.\nThe fast folding algorithm is analogous to the FFT, except that it operates on a series of binned waveforms rather than a series of real or complex scalar values. Rotation (which in the FFT is multiplication by a complex phasor) is a circular shift of the component waveform.\nVarious groups have also published FFT algorithms for non-equispaced data, as reviewed in Potts \"et al.\" (2001). Such algorithms do not strictly compute the DFT (which is only defined for equispaced data), but rather some approximation thereof (a non-uniform discrete Fourier transform, or NDFT, which itself is often computed only approximately). More generally, there are various other methods of spectral estimation.\nApplications.\nThe FFT is used in digital recording, sampling, additive synthesis and pitch correction software.\nThe FFT's importance derives from the fact that it has made working in the frequency domain equally computationally feasible as working in the temporal or spatial domain. Some of the important applications of the FFT include:\nAlternatives.\nThe FFT can be a poor choice for analyzing signals with non-stationary frequency content\u2014where the frequency characteristics change over time. DFTs provide a global frequency estimate, assuming that all frequency components are present throughout the entire signal, which makes it challenging to detect short-lived or transient features within signals.\nFor cases where frequency information appears briefly in the signal or generally varies over time, alternatives like the short-time Fourier transform, discrete wavelet transforms, or discrete Hilbert transform can be more suitable. These transforms allow for localized frequency analysis by capturing both frequency and time-based information.\nSee also.\nFFT-related algorithms:\nFFT implementations:\nOther links:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11513", "revid": "1318279599", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11513", "title": "Fort William, Scotland", "text": "Town in the Highlands of Scotland\nFort William is a town in the Lochaber region of the Scottish Highlands, located on the eastern shore of Loch Linnhe in the Highland Council of Scotland.\nAt the 2011 census, Fort William had a population of 15,757, making it the second-largest settlement both in the Highland council area and in the whole of the Scottish Highlands; only the city of Inverness has a larger population.\nFort William is a major tourist centre with Glen Coe just to the south, to the east, and Glenfinnan to the west. It is the start and end of the Road to the Isles. It is a huge centre for hillwalking and climbing due to its proximity to Ben Nevis, the largest mountain in Scotland and the United Kingdom, and many other Munros. It is also known for its nearby downhill mountain bike track. \nIt is the start/end of both the West Highland Way (a walk/cycleway, Milngavie \u2013 Fort William) and the Great Glen Way (a walk/cycleway, Fort William \u2013 Inverness).\nAround 726 people (7.33% of the population) can speak Scottish Gaelic.\nOrigins.\nThe earliest recorded settlement on the site is a Cromwellian wooden fort, known as the Garrison of Inverlochy, built in 1654 as a base for the New Model Army to \"pacify\" Clan Cameron after the Wars of the Three Kingdoms. The post-1688 revolution fort was named Fort William after William of Orange, who ordered that it be built to control some of the Scottish clans. The settlement that grew around it was called Maryburgh, after his wife Mary II of England. This settlement was later renamed Gordonsburgh, and then Duncansburgh before being renamed Fort William, this time after Prince William, Duke of Cumberland. \nThere have been various suggestions over the years to rename the town (for example, to Invernevis).\nThe origin of the Gaelic name for Fort William, \"\", is not recorded but could be a loanword from the English \"garrison\", having entered common usage some time after the royal garrison was established during the reign of William of Orange, or perhaps after the earlier Cromwellian fort.\nHistory.\nHistorically, the Fort William area of Lochaber was old Clan Chattan and then Clan Cameron country, and there were a number of mainly Cameron settlements in the area (such as Blarmacfoldach). Before the building of the fort, Inverlochy was the main local settlement and was also the site of two battles\u2014the first Battle of Inverlochy in 1431 and the second Battle of Inverlochy in 1645.\nThe town grew in size as a settlement when the fort was constructed to control the population after Oliver Cromwell's invasion during the Wars of the Three Kingdoms, and then to suppress the Jacobite risings after the 1688 overthrow of the House of Stuart.\nDuring the 1745 Jacobite Rising, known as the Forty-Five, Fort William was besieged for two weeks by the Jacobite forces, from 20 March to 3 April 1746. However, although the Jacobites had captured both of the other forts in the chain of three Great Glen fortifications (Fort Augustus and the original Fort George), they failed to take Fort William. Fort William Sheriff Court held its first hearing in 1794.\nIn 1934, the Laggan Dam on the River Spean was completed as part of the Lochaber hydroelectric scheme by Balfour Beatty for the British Aluminium Company. The supervising engineers were the firm of C. S. Meik and William Halcrow, now known as the Halcrow Group. The dam was built to power the aluminium smelter.\nDuring the Second World War, Fort William was the home of , which was a training base for Royal Navy Coastal Forces.\nFort William Town Hall, which started life as an 18th-century church, was converted for municipal use in 1881. It was burnt down in 1975.\nProposed development.\nA \"waterfront\" development was proposed by the council in 2007, but failed due to lack of public support. The development would have included a hotel, shops, and housing. The proposed development was slated to take 7 years by the local council, but opponents of the project said that it was unlikely to be completed before 2020. It was announced in April 2010 that the project had been abandoned.\nGeography.\nThe town lies at the southern end of the Great Glen. Fort William lies near the head of Loch Linnhe, one of Scotland's longest sea lochs, beside the mouth of the rivers Nevis and Lochy. They join in the intertidal zone and briefly become one river before discharging to the sea. The town and its suburbs are surrounded by mountains. Its suburbs of Lochyside, Caol and Corpach are on the shore of Loch Eil. It is close to Ben Nevis, the highest mountain in the British Isles, Glen Nevis, and the settlement of Achnaphubuil, which is on the opposite shore of the loch. The original railway station, which was at the south end of the town, was opened on 7 August 1894.\nThe town is centred on the High Street, which was pedestrianised in the 1990s. Off this, there are several squares: Monzie Square (named after the Cameron Campbells of Monzie, Perthshire, former landowners in the town); Station Square, where the long-since demolished railway station used to be; Gordon Square (named after the Gordons, who in the late 18th century owned land where the town now stands, when the town was named Gordonsburgh); and Cameron Square\u2014formerly known as Town Hall Square. There is also Fraser Square, which is not so square-like, since it now opens out into Middle Street, but which still houses the Imperial Hotel.\nThe main residential areas of the town are unseen from the High Street and the A82 main road. Upper Achintore and the Plantation spread steeply uphill from above the high street.\nInverlochy, Claggan, An-Aird, Lochyside, Caol, Banavie and Corpach outwith (i.e. outside) the town are the other main residential areas. These areas are built on much flatter land than the town.\nFort William is the northern end of the West Highland Way, a long-distance route which runs through the Scottish Highlands to Milngavie, on the outskirts of Glasgow, and the start/end point of the Great Glen Way, which runs between Fort William and Inverness.\nGlenfinnan, away, is home of the Glenfinnan Monument (Jacobite era) and the famous Glenfinnan Viaduct (as seen on a Bank Of Scotland \u00a310 note). The viaduct has become known to millions in recent years as the \"Harry Potter Bridge\" after it featured in the films of the books by J.K. Rowling, specifically \"Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets\". Glenfinnan has also been used in \"Charlotte Gray\" and \"Highlander\".\nClimate.\nFort William has an oceanic climate (\"Cfb\") with moderate, but generally cool, temperatures and abundant precipitation. In the towns immediate vicinity, there are significant variations in elevation, which leads to some uninhabited areas near the town having a subpolar oceanic climate (), or, at the absolute highest elevations such as Ben Nevis, a tundra climate (). Fort William does not have an official Met Office weather station; as such, the values in the table below are simulated, and the record high and low temperatures are not available.\nEconomy.\nJust outside the town is a large aluminium plant once operated by Alcan and powered by the Lochaber hydroelectric scheme, in its day the biggest tunnelling project in the world. This was formerly served by the Lochaber Narrow Gauge Railway better known locally as the Puggy Line.\nIn November 2016, Sanjeev Gupta's Liberty Steel Group purchased the Lochaber aluminium plant from Rio Tinto.\nOn 3 April 2021, it came to light during Gupta's financial troubles involving Greensill Capital that the Jahama Highland Estates (formerly the \"Alcan Estate\") had been purchased in 2016 as part of the Rio Tinto deal for the Lochaber aluminium plant, because the furnace requires so much power that the smelter is located near a hydroelectric plant, which drains the basin of the Estate.\nThe Estate includes the north face of Ben Nevis. According to reports, the Scottish National Party mandated that the Estate never be split from the hydro plant and aluminium smelter, but Gupta ignored them and placed ownership of the Estate in a company that is domiciled on the Isle of Man. The 2016 deal was worth \u00a3330 million and was guaranteed by the UK Chancellor of the Exchequer. Conservative finance spokesperson Murdo Fraser was critical of the alleged breach of the SNP agreement and urged the SNP to \"take whatever steps are necessary to protect public funds\".\nTransport.\nTrains: The West Highland Line passes through Fort William. Owing to the difficult terrain in the area, the line from Glasgow to the south enters from the north-east. Trains from Glasgow to Mallaig, the terminus of the line, have to reverse at Fort William railway station. An overnight train between Fort William and London is also ran by the Caledonian Sleeper, this service is known colloquially as \"The Deerstalker\". \nBus and coach connections: There are Scottish Citylink busses linking Fort William Bus Station with Glasgow, Oban, the Isle of Skye and Inverness as well as various smaller connections to nearby places such as Mallaig and Glen Nevis. The stands for buses and express coaches are on MacFarlane Way adjacent to the railway station.\nThe Caledonian Canal connects the Scottish east coast at Inverness with the west coast at Corpach, near Fort William.\nThe Corran Ferry crosses Loch Linnhe, connecting the A82 road to the A861 road.\nFort William is located on the A82. The closest motorway access is the junction after Erskine bridge (just off the A82) of the M898 near Erskine in Renfrewshire, 98 miles to the south west, joining onto the M8 motorway and the south.\nHealth.\nThe main hospital in Lochaber is Belford Hospital in Fort William.\nIn 2023 exploratory work began to replace the hospital, with construction expected to begin in the Blar Mhor area near Caol in 2025, with an estimated completion date of 2028. In 2024 funding issues resulted in a potential delay to the construction of the new hospital with protests taking place in Fort William.\nEducation.\nLochaber High School is the local high school and serves a large catchment area which includes the surrounding villages.\nWest Highland College is part of the University of the Highlands and Islands. It hosts the School of Adventure Studies (SOAS) offering both further education courses and higher education honours degrees.\nSport.\nMountain biking.\nJust outside the town, parallel to the Nevis Range Gondola, there is a large downhill mountain bike track which attracts thousands of visitors every year, including international competitors and fans.\nEach year since 2002, Fort William has hosted a round of UCI Mountain Bike World Cup and, in 2007, it hosted the UCI Mountain Bike &amp; Trials World Championships ('The Worlds'). A trials competition is held at the various courses at the bottom.\nFort William has hosted the World Endurance Mountain Bike Organisation (WEMBO) solo 24-hour championship in 2014 and again in 2018. The event consists of riders racing for a full 24 hours and is won by the rider who has completed the greater number of laps.\nMotorcycle trials.\nFort William is the home of the Scottish Six Day Motorcycle Trial (SSDT), which is held annually in the first full week of May. It attracts many competitors from all across the globe and, in 2011, the event celebrated its centenary year.\nOthers.\nFort William has two major shinty teams: Fort William Shinty Club and Kilmallie Shinty Club. It also has a football team, Fort William F.C., that competes in the Scottish North Caledonian League and plays home games at Claggan Park.\nIn addition, the town is home to Lochaber Rugby Club and to the Lochaber Yacht Club, a Community Amateur Sports Club that was founded in 1954. The town also has one golf club, called Fort William Golf Club, which has eighteen holes and is open year-round; it also hosts weekly competitions.\nFestivals.\nIn a celebration of mountains and the culture that surrounds them, and in recognition of the importance of climbing and walking tourism to the town, the Fort William Mountain Festival is held there each year. For a number of years, this volunteer-led festival has concentrated mostly around film but, starting in the Year of Highland Culture \u2013 Highland 2007, its scope was widened, and it dropped the word 'film' from its title.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11515", "revid": "50931263", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11515", "title": "Glossary of French words and expressions in English", "text": " \nMany words in the English vocabulary are of French origin, most coming from the Anglo-Norman spoken by the upper classes in England for several hundred years after the Norman Conquest, before the language settled into what became Modern English. English words of French origin, such as \"art\", \"competition\", \"force\", \"money\", and \"table\" are pronounced according to English rules of phonology, rather than French, and English speakers commonly use them without any awareness of their French origin.\nThis article covers French words and phrases that have entered the English lexicon without ever losing their character as Gallicisms: they remain unmistakably \"French\" to an English speaker. They are most common in written English, where they retain French diacritics and are usually printed in italics. In spoken English, at least some attempt is generally made to pronounce them as they would sound in French. An entirely English pronunciation is regarded as a solecism.\nSome of the entries were never \"good French\", in the sense of being grammatical, idiomatic French usage. Others were once normal French but have either become very old-fashioned or have acquired different meanings and connotations in the original language, to the extent that a native French speaker would not understand them, either at all or in the intended sense.\nUsed in English and French.\nC.\nc'est la guerre: \"That's war!\", or...\nc'est la vie: \"That's life!\" or \"Such is life!\"\n Though either foreign expression can be used to say that life is harsh but that one must accept it, the former may imply a more deliberate cause and the latter more accidental.\nMake yourself at home.\nfalse, ersatz, fake.\n Lack of sophistication, experience, judgement, or worldliness; artlessness; gullibility; credulity.\n lit. \"born\": a man's/woman's birth name (maiden name for a woman), e.g., \"Martha Washington, \"n\u00e9e\" Dandridge.\"\n asked rhetorically after a statement, as in \"Right?\".\n those granted a higher station in life have a duty to extend (possibly token) favours/courtesies to those in lower stations.\n pseudonym to disguise the identity of a leader of a militant group, literally \"war name\", used in France for \"pseudonym\".\n Although now used in French as well, the term was coined in English by analogy with \"nom de guerre\".\n the modern French equivalent of this expression is \"sans pareil\" (literally \"without equal\").\n used to refer particularly to those living a garish lifestyle with their newfound wealth; see also arriviste and parvenu.\n Used for stating a new way or a new trend of something. Originally marked a new style of French filmmaking in the late 1950s and early 1960s, reacting against films seen as too literary.\nP.\npenchantinclination; decided taste; bias. \"a penchant for art\".\n small peas, often sold in the frozen food aisle.\n French orthography is \"sacrebleu\" in one word.\nNot used as such in French.\nThrough the evolution of the language, many words and phrases are no longer used in modern French. Also there are expressions that, even though grammatically correct, do not have the same meaning in French as the English words derived from them. Some older word usages still appear in Quebec French.\n According to Merriam Webster Dictionary, \"In \"forte\" we have a word derived from French that in its \"strong point\" sense has no entirely satisfactory pronunciation. Usage writers have denigrated \\'for-\"tA\\ and \\'for-tE\\ because they reflect the influence of the Italian-derived \"forte\". Their recommended pronunciation \\'fort\\, however, does not exactly reflect French either: the French would write the word \"le fort\" and would rhyme it with English \"for\" [French doesn't pronounce the final \"t\"]. All are standard, however. In British English \\'fo-\"tA\\ and \\'fot\\ predominate; \\'for-\"tA\\ and \\for-'tA\\ are probably the most frequent pronunciations in American English.\"\n The New Oxford Dictionary of English derives it from fencing. In French, \"le fort d'une \u00e9p\u00e9e\" is the third of a blade nearer the hilt, the strongest part of the sword used for parrying.\nFrench phrases in international air-sea rescue.\nInternational authorities have adopted a number of words and phrases from French for use by speakers of all languages in voice communications during air-sea rescues. Note that the \"phonetic\" versions of spelling are presented as shown and not the .\nIt is a serious breach in most countries, and in international zones, to use any of these phrases without justification.\n\"See Mayday (distress signal) for a more detailed explanation.\"\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11516", "revid": "46877236", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11516", "title": "Financial rand", "text": "The South African financial rand was the most visible part of a system of capital controls. Although the financial rand was abolished in March 1995, some capital controls remain in place. These capital controls are locally referred to as \"exchange controls\", although the system has since 1995 moved towards surveillance \u2014 recording and reporting to the authorities of foreign currency transactions \u2014 rather than control.\nCapital controls have been in place in South Africa in various guises on an uninterrupted basis since the outbreak of World War II, when Great Britain and its dominions implemented the Sterling area.\nFollowing the 1960 Sharpeville massacre, South Africa experienced significant outflows of foreign exchange on the capital account of the balance of payments and instituted an additional level of capital controls, known as the Blocked Rand system. This had the principal effect of blocking outflows of capital to the other countries in the Sterling Area, notably Britain.\nTo some extent the Blocked Rand system mirrored Germany's Reichsbank system introduced under Hjalmar Schacht in 1937, called \"aski\" accounts \u2014 short for \"Ausl\u00e4nder Sonderkonten f\u00fcr Inlandszahlungen\" (\"foreigners' special accounts for inland payments\"). In other words, creating a closed loop system that did not create a claim on the foreign exchange reserves of the Third Reich, or in this case South Africa.\nThe report of the De Kock Commission on Exchange Controls tabled in November 1978, proposed a gradual easing of exchange controls. This saw the replacement of the Blocked Rand by the Financial Rand in early 1979. In line with this policy, the Financial Rand itself was abolished in 1983 and non-residents could repatriate the majority of their South African investments via the Commercial Rand.\nThis easing was, however, short-lived and the Financial Rand system was re-introduced on 1 September 1985. The outflows during 1984\u20131985 were largely the result of economic sanctions in response to apartheid. At the same time, the government enacted the exchange controls. Investments in South Africa by foreigners could only be sold for financial rand.\nThe financial rand system provided for two exchange rates for the rand \u2014 one for current account transactions and one for capital account transactions for non-residents. Investments made in South Africa by non-residents could only be sold for financial rand, and limitations were placed on the convertibility of financial rand into foreign currencies. Financial rand had the ISO 4217 currency code ZAL. Financial rand had a previous life, from January 1979 to February 1983. The 1985 crisis coincided with a default (then called a \"standstill\") on foreign debt by the apartheid government.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11517", "revid": "1317969353", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11517", "title": "List of FIPS country codes", "text": "Withdrawn Federal Information Processing Standard\nThis is a list of FIPS 10-4 country codes for \"Countries, Dependencies, Areas of Special Sovereignty, and Their Principal Administrative Divisions\".\nThe two-letter country codes were used by the US government for geographical data processing in many publications, such as the CIA World Factbook. The standard is also known as DAFIF 0413 ed 7 Amdt. No. 3 (Nov 2003) and as DIA 65-18 (Defense Intelligence Agency, 1994, \"Geopolitical Data Elements and Related Features\").\nThe FIPS standard includes both the codes for independent countries (similar but often incompatible with the ISO 3166-1 alpha-2 standard) and the codes for top-level subdivision of the countries (similar to but usually incompatible with the ISO 3166-2 standard). The ISO 3166 codes are used by the United Nations and for Internet top-level country code domains.\nNon-sovereign entities are in italics.\nOn September 2, 2008, FIPS 10-4 was one of ten standards withdrawn by NIST as a Federal Information Processing Standard. It was replaced in the U.S. Government by the Geopolitical Entities, Names, and Codes (GENC), which is based on ISO 3166.\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Nonumtoc/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Horizontal TOC/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nResources.\nThe complete standard can be found at:\nUpdates to previous version of the standard (before FIPS-10 was withdrawn in September 2008) are at:\nUpdates to the standard since September 2008 are at:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11519", "revid": "50940226", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11519", "title": "Fair Isle", "text": "Southernmost Shetland Island, Scotland\nFair Isle ( ; ) is the southernmost of the Shetland Islands, Scotland. It is situated at the approximate midpoint between the southern tip of Mainland, Shetland; and North Ronaldsay, the northernmost of the Orkney Islands; in an area bordering the North Sea and the Atlantic Ocean known as the Fair Isle Gap.\nAs the most remote inhabited island in the United Kingdom, Fair Isle is known for its wild bird observatory, historic shipwrecks, Scottish and Shetland-style traditional music, and its traditional style of knitting, also called \"Fair Isle\". The island has been owned by the National Trust for Scotland since 1954.\nHistory.\nFair Isle has been occupied since Neolithic times, which is remarkable given the lack of raw materials on the island, although it is surrounded by rich fishing waters. There are two known Iron Age sites: a promontory fort at Landberg and the foundations of a house underlying an early Christian settlement at Kirkigeo.\nMost of the place names date from after the 9th-century Norse settlement of the Northern Isles. By that time the croft lands had clearly been in use for centuries.\nBetween the 9th and 15th centuries, Fair Isle was a Norwegian possession. In 1469, Shetland, along with Orkney, was part of the dowry of the King of Denmark's daughter, Margaret, on her marriage to James III of Scotland.\nOn 27 September 1588 the flagship of the Spanish Armada, \"El Gran Grif\u00f3n\", was shipwrecked in the cove of Stroms Hellier, forcing its 300 sailors to spend six weeks living with the islanders. The wreck was discovered in 1970. A first hand account of the Spanish on Fair Isle comes from a diary of an unknown Spaniard from the \"El Gran Grif\u00f3n\" (translation by Mike Shepherd). We settled in a shelter we found on the day we ran into this great danger, which was 27 September 1588. We found it populated by up to seventeen neighbours in small houses that were more like huts than anything else; a savage people. They eat mostly fish and they do not have bread, or very little, and cakes baked from barley. They cook these over fires fed with fuel taken from the earth, which they call \"turba\" [peat]. They have cattle, quite a lot for them because they seldom eat meat. They herd cows, sheep, and pigs; the cows sustain them and they make more money from the milk and butter. They get wool from the sheep for their clothes. They are very dirty people. They are not Christian but not quite heretics either. Their minister comes from an island to preach to them once a year. They do not like this but cannot do anything about it. It is a shame. Three hundred men landed on this island without any food. From September 28th to November 14th fifty men have died. Most of them from hunger. It is the biggest sorrow in the world\".\" We decided to send messengers to the neighbouring island to get boats to Scotland. However, because the weather was so bad, this was not possible until October 27th, which was a pleasant day. They have not returned yet because the seas have been so rough. [The diary ends here.] \nThe large Canadian sailing ship \"Black Watch\" was wrecked on Fair Isle in 1877.\nIn 1862 around 40% of the population migrated to New Brunswick.\nMilitary role.\nDuring the Second World War, the Royal Navy built two radar stations on top of Ward Hill (), which operated from February and March 1940 and played an important role in detecting German bombers approaching Scapa Flow on 8 and 10 April 1940. The ruined buildings and Nissen huts are still present. A cable-operated narrow-gauge railway lies disused; it was once used to send supplies up to the summit of Ward Hill.\nOn 17 January 1941, a German Heinkel He 111 bomber, modified as a meteorological aircraft, crashed on the island; wreckage remains on the crash-site. The aircraft had been flying on a routine weather reconnaissance flight from its base at Oldenburg in Germany. It was intercepted by RAF Hawker Hurricane fighters from 3 Squadron, based at RAF Sumburgh; both of the aircraft's engines were damaged and several of the five crew were wounded. The pilot managed to make a crash-landing on Fair Isle to avoid ditching his crippled aircraft in the sea. Two crew died and three survived. The dead crew were buried in the island's churchyard; the survivors were detained by the islanders and remained for several days until weather conditions allowed them to be taken off the island by means of the Lerwick Lifeboat. Before the Lerwick boat reached the island, two separate boats from Orkney ran aground while making their way to collect the prisoners of war.\nThe South Light was a target. During raids, the wife of an assistant keeper was killed in 1941 and their daughter was injured; in 1942, the wife of another keeper and their daughter also died in a raid.\nOn 22 July 1941, Spitfire X5401 piloted by Flying Officer M. D. S. Hood crash-landed on Fair Isle returning from a reconnaissance mission over \u00c5lesund, Norway. The pilot recalled the crash site to be adjacent to the track which crossed the airstrip. The cause of the crash proved to be a leak of coolant, which resulted in the engine overheating. The aircraft was recovered and flew again, and the pilot survived the war.\nModern times.\nThe population was 223 individuals living in 34 houses at the end of the 19th century. Fair Isle was bought by the National Trust for Scotland in 1954 from George Waterston, the founder of the bird observatory. In that decade, electricity was not yet available to residents and only some homes had running water; the population was declining at a rate that created concern. The population was 69 in 2001 and had declined further to 44 permanent residents by the time of the 2022 census. The island became the first place in the UK all of whose adult inhabitants had been vaccinated against COVID-19. \nFair Isle has 14 scheduled monuments, ranging from the earliest signs of human activity to the remains of a Second World War radar station. The two automated lighthouses are protected as listed buildings. The island houses a series of high-technology relay stations carrying vital TV, radio, telephone and military communication links between Shetland, Orkney and the Scottish mainland. In this respect it continues its historic role as a signal station, linking the mainland and the more remote island groups. In 1976, when television relay equipment was updated to permit colour broadcasts to Shetland, the new equipment was housed in former Second World War radar station buildings on Fair Isle. Many television signals are relayed from Orkney to Shetland (rather than from the Scottish mainland) via Orkney's Keelylang Hill transmitter station.\nGeography.\nFair Isle is administratively part of the parish of Dunrossness, Shetland, and is roughly equidistant from Sumburgh Head, some to the northeast on the Mainland of Shetland and North Ronaldsay, Orkney, some to the southwest. Fair Isle is long and wide. It has an area of , making it the tenth-largest of the Shetland Islands. It gives its name to one of the British Sea Areas.\nMost of the islanders live in the crofts on the southern half of the island, the northern half consisting of rocky moorland. The western coast consists of cliffs of up to in height, Ward Hill at being the highest point of the island and its only Marilyn. On the eastern coast the almost detached headland of Sheep Rock rises to .\nClimate.\nFair Isle experiences an oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Cfb\"), bordering on a subpolar oceanic climate (\"Cfc\"), with cool summers and mild winters. This is especially pronounced because of its location far from any sizeable landmass; Fair Isle has the smallest overall temperature range (least continental) of any weather station in the British Isles: a maximum of and a minimum of since 1951. This 60+ year temperature span is actually smaller than many places in inland southern England will record within a given three-month period. To further illustrate how extreme the maritime moderation at Fair Isle is, a rural location near the coastline in Northern Stockholm County on a similar latitude in Sweden broke Fair Isle's then all-time records in both directions within a 48-hour period between 26 and 28 April 2014. \nOn 19 July 2022, a maximum temperature of was registered in Fair Isle.\nThe lowest temperature recorded in recent years was in February 2010. Rainfall, at under , is lower than one might expect for a location that is often in the main path of Atlantic depressions. This is explained by a lack of heavy convective rainfall during spring and summer months due to the absence of warm surface conditions.\nFair Isle's ocean moderation is so strong that areas on the same latitudes in the Scandinavian inland less than to the east have average summer highs higher than Fair Isle's all-time record temperature, for example the Norwegian capital of Oslo and the Swedish capital of Stockholm. The all-time low is uniquely mild for European locations on the 59th parallel north. The winter daily means are comparable to many areas as far south in the British Isles as south-central England, because of the extreme maritime moderation. It is in hardiness zone 9b or 10a (compared to 8b for the Faroes, 7b or 8a for Stockholm, and 1b for parts of Canada, all on or near the 60th parallel north. Central Florida (at 27\u201328 degrees north) has this hardiness zone.\nEconomy.\nOver the centuries the island has changed hands many times. Trading links with Northern Europe are reflected in Fair Isle Haa, a traditional Hanseatic trading booth located not far from the South Harbour, traditionally used by residents of the southern part of the island. Rent was usually paid to absentee landlords (who rarely visited) in butter, cloth and fish oil.\nFishing has always been an important industry for the island. In 1702, the Dutch, who were interested in Shetland's herring fisheries, fought a naval battle against French warships just off the island.\nFair Isle is noted for its woollen jumpers, with knitting forming an important source of income for the women of the islands. The principal activity for the male islanders is crofting.\nIn January 2004, Fair Isle was granted Fairtrade Island status.\nBird life.\nMany rare species of bird have been found on the island, with at least 27 species found on the island that were the first British records, and is probably the best place in Western Europe to see skulking Siberian passerines such as Pechora pipit, lanceolated warbler and Pallas's grasshopper warbler. For example, in 2015, rare birds discovered on the island included pallid harrier, arctic warbler, Moltoni's warbler, booted warbler, paddyfield warbler, Siberian thrush, and thrush nightingale. It is also home to an endemic subspecies of Eurasian wren, the Fair Isle wren \"Troglodytes troglodytes fridariensis\". Fair Isle has been designated an Important Bird Area (IBA) by BirdLife International because it supports large colonies of seabirds and waterbirds, as well as being a stop-over site for migrating land birds.\nBird observatory.\nIn 1948, George Waterston founded a permanent bird observatory on the island. Because of its importance as a bird migration watchpoint, it provided most of the accommodation on the island. The first director of the observatory was Kenneth Williamson. It was unusual among bird observatories in providing catered, rather than hostel-style, accommodation.\nIn 2010, a new observatory was built: a wooden lodge of two storeys, which cost \u00a34 million and accommodated around 30 guests. The 2010 observatory building was destroyed by fire on 10 March 2019; the observatory's records had been digitised and were not affected. The cost of rebuilding was estimated at \u00a37.4m.\nInfrastructure.\nOther than the restaurant of the bird observatory, and its small evening-only bar, there are no pubs or restaurants on the island. There is one shop, one school and a community hall used for meetings and social events. There is no police station on the island; the main station is Lerwick and a section station is located in the village of Brae.\nPassenger service to the island is provided by SIC Ferries on the vessel \"Good Shepherd IV\" or by a nine-seat passenger aeroplane from Tingwall Airport near Lerwick, operated by regional carrier Directflight.\nElectricity supply.\nFair Isle is not connected to the National Grid; electricity is provided by the Fair Isle Electricity Company. From the 1980s, power was generated by two diesel generators and two wind turbines. Diesel generators were automatically switched off if wind turbines provided sufficient power. Excess capacity was distributed through a separate network for home heating, with remote frequency-sensitive programmable relays controlling water heaters and storage heaters in the buildings of the community. Following the installation of three wind turbines, combined with solar panels and batteries, in a \u00a33.5\u00a0million scheme completed in October 2018, the island has had a 24-hour electricity supply.\nCommunication.\nFair Isle is home to two GSM 900\u00a0MHz base stations operated by Vodafone and O2. On 16 April 2019, an EE 4G antenna was turned on by Openreach. In 2023, the island became connected by a fibre submarine cable, as a spur off a cable linking Shetland and Orkney. This supplements and upgrades the long-distance microwave link opened in 1979. Full fibre services then became available to all properties on the island.\nEmergency services.\nFair Isle has a fire station equipped with a single fire appliance, and staffed by a retained fire crew of local volunteers. It was originally part of the Highlands and Islands Fire and Rescue Service, which was absorbed into the national Scottish Fire and Rescue Service on 1 April 2013. A locally organised volunteer fire brigade was formed in 1996 by island residents. This was later absorbed into the statutory fire service, with professional training provided, and the local service designated a retained fire crew. The first purpose-built fire engine was stationed to the island in 2002.\nIn October 2011, a contract for the construction of a \u00a3140,000 purpose-built fire station was awarded to Shetland company Ness Engineering, who completed the construction and equipping of the fire station, including its connection to the island power and water supplies, and the installation of a rainwater harvesting system within the building. The new fire station was officially opened on 14 March 2013.\nThere is a small Coastguard cliff-rescue team on the island. Like the fire service, the Coastguard is a retained (volunteer) emergency service. The Fair Isle Coastguard cliff rescue team were the first British Coastguard unit to be equipped with a quad ATV. The quad is painted in HM Coastguard livery, with reflective Battenburg markings and has an optional equipment trailer.\nThere are no emergency medical services on Fair Isle. Routine medical care is provided by a community nurse. In the event of accident and emergency the community nurse provides first aid until casualties can be removed to Shetland Mainland, usually by helicopter air ambulance. In severe weather conditions or life-threatening emergencies, the Coastguard helicopter can undertake the patient evacuation.\nTransport.\nAir.\nFair Isle Airport serves the island with flights to Tingwall Airport near Lerwick, and weekly to Sumburgh Airport, both on Shetland Mainland. Flights to Kirkwall on Orkney were scheduled to begin in September 2017, provided by Loganair. Private aircraft use the facility and scheduled flights arrive twice daily, three days a week. There is a small terminal building providing limited services. Fire cover is provided by the island fire service.\nThere are two helipads on the island; one at the South Fair Isle lighthouse and used by Northern Lighthouse Board and HM Coastguard helicopters, and the other at the North Fair Isle lighthouse.\nSea.\nThere are two main harbours, north harbour and south harbour; both formed naturally, being sheltered by the headland of Bu Ness. They are separated by a narrow isthmus of gravel. The north harbour is the main route for goods, provisions, and Royal Mail postal services arriving at and departing from the island. The ferry \"Good Shepherd IV\" plies between Fair Isle north harbour and Grutness on Shetland Mainland. In summer only, the ferry also runs from Lerwick once every two weeks.\nRoad.\nA road connects the populated areas of the island, along its full length.\nEducation.\nFair Isle has one primary school, with two classrooms. There is a full-time head teacher, and a part-time assistant teacher. The number of pupils varies over time, but has generally been between five and ten, with three pupils as of 2021. Islanders of secondary school age are generally educated off-island, on Shetland Mainland, where they board in halls of residence, returning to Fair Isle during holiday periods.\nReligion.\nChristianity is the only formally organised religion on Fair Isle. There are two churches, one Methodist, and one Church of Scotland (Presbyterian). The Methodist church has a resident non-stipendiary minister, who reports to a full-time minister on Shetland Mainland.\nThe Methodist church was constructed in 1886.\nThe Church of Scotland church was built in 1892. The Church of Scotland parish which contains Fair Isle is Dunrossness, which is linked with Sandwick, Cunningsburgh and Quarff parishes. The congregation's minister is Reverend Charles H. Greig.\nConservation designations.\nMost of the island is designated by NatureScot as both a Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) and a Special Area of Conservation (SCA). The island and its surrounding seas are also designated by NatureScot as a Special Protection Area (SPA) due to the important bird species present.\nIn 2016 the seas around Fair Isle were designated as a Marine Protected Area (MPA). As of 2019 it is the only MPA in Scotland to be designated specifically as a \"Demonstration and Research\" MPA. The aims of this MPA designation are defined as being:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11520", "revid": "48891075", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11520", "title": "Four Feather Falls", "text": "1960 British children's TV series\nFour Feather Falls is a British children's western television series, the third puppet TV show produced by AP Films (APF) in association with Granada Television. It was based on an idea by Barry Gray, who also wrote the show's music. The series was the first to use an early version of APF's Supermarionation puppetry. Thirty-nine 13-minute episodes were produced between April 1959 and April 1960, and the series was first broadcast on the ITV network from February to November 1960.\nThe setting is the late 19th-century fictional Kansas town of Four Feather Falls, where the hero of the series, Tex Tucker, is a sheriff. The four feathers of the title refers to four magical feathers given to Tex by the Indian chief Kalamakooya as a reward for saving his grandson. One of the feathers allowed Tex's guns to swivel and fire without being touched whenever he was in danger, two conferred the power of speech on Tex's horse and dog, and the fourth feather could summon Kalamakooya.\nTex's speaking voice was provided by Nicholas Parsons, and his singing voice by Michael Holliday. The series was sporadically repeated on British television until 1968, and was released on DVD in 2005.\nPlot.\nThe series is set in the fictitious late 19th-century Western town of Four Feather Falls, Kansas, and features the adventures of its sheriff, Tex Tucker.\nIn the first episode, Grandpa Twink relates the story of how it all began to his grandson, Little Jake. Tex is riding up from the valley and comes across a lost and hungry Indian boy, Makooya, and saves him. Tex is given four magic feathers by the boy's grandfather, Chief Kalamakooya, as a reward for saving his grandson. Two of the feathers allow his guns to swivel and fire automatically (often while Tex's hands are raised), and the other two allow his horse, Rocky, and his dog, Dusty, to speak. As Tex, his horse, and dog are very thirsty, Kalamakooya also makes a waterfall where there had been no water before, and so when the town was built it was named after Tex's feathers and the waterfall.\nThe characters of the town are Grandpa Twink, who does little but rest in a chair; his grandson Little Jake, the only child in town; Ma Jones, who runs the town store; Doc Haggerty; Slim Jim, the bartender of the Denison saloon; Marvin Jackson, the bank manager; and Dan Morse, the telegraphist. Other characters appeared from time to time for only one episode, often just visiting town.\nThe villains included Pedro, who was introduced in the first show and Fernando, who first appeared in the second episode as a sidekick and someone Pedro could blame when things went wrong, as they always did. Big Ben was another villain who appeared from time to time, as did Red Scalp, a renegade Indian. Other villains only appeared in single episodes.\nCast.\nDenise Bryer had worked with Anderson on \"The Adventures of Twizzle\", and he wanted her to play some of the voices in \"Four Feather Falls\". Anderson visited Bryer at her home with some scripts and asked her husband, Nicholas Parsons, to help by reading some of the other parts, including the sheriff Tex Tucker. Anderson liked Parsons' interpretation and offered him the job of providing Tex's speaking voice.\nProduction.\nAmerican Western TV shows such as \"Gunsmoke\" and \"Wagon Train\" were popular with British audiences, so APF's Gerry Anderson and Arthur Provis decided to make a cowboy series based on a story concept pitched to them by Barry Gray. According to Anderson, \"Four Feather Falls\" \"was really me trying to make the sort of films I used to see in the cinema.\" APF offered Gray about \u00a3100 (\u00a3 in 2023) to buy his idea, which was originally titled \"Two Gun Tex Tucker\". This was changed to \"Two Gun Tex of Texas\", then \"The Sheriff of Four Feather Falls\" before the final title was chosen. \nDevelopment began in late 1958 while the first 26 episodes of \"Torchy the Battery Boy\" were still in production, and without the knowledge of APF's employer Roberta Leigh, with whom Anderson planned to sever ties in the aim of becoming an independent producer. The pilot episode, \"How It Began\", was produced in April 1959 on a budget of \u00a36,000 (about \u00a3 in 2023). A full series of 39 episodes was commissioned by Granada after APF's intended distributor, Anglo-Amalgamated, turned it down. Except for the pilot, which was made in APF's studios at Islet Park House in Maidenhead, all episodes were made in a converted warehouse on the Slough Trading Estate. Previously owned by special effects artist Les Bowie, this provided quadruple the floor space of Islet Park House, where the crew had been filming in a re-purposed ballroom. After moving to the Slough estate in June 1959, APF upgraded its new facilities with the installation of a director's control booth and video assist TV monitors to guide the puppeteers, who operated the marionettes from a Dexion bridge built several feet over the set. The model set representing the town of Four Feather Falls measured . Filming in Slough ended in April 1960. \nAnderson considered the puppets with static heads, made by Christine Glanville for his earlier productions, to be unacceptable because the viewer could not tell which character was talking unless its puppet moved up or down. For \"Four Feather Falls\", the papier-m\u00e2ch\u00e9 heads were replaced by interchangeable hollow fibreglass heads with internal rods that could move the eyes from side to side. The heads also contained sound-activated solenoids, which allowed the puppets' lips to move automatically in synchronisation with the dialogue. The electronics of the day required more space than would be available in a human-scale head, therefore all the puppets in \"Four Feather Falls\" had oversized heads, though the bodies as a whole were one-third life size. Anderson's aim was to make the puppets look as realistic as possible, the beginning of the Supermarionation puppetry process, although that term was not coined until his next series, \"Supercar\".\nThe wires used to control the puppets were eight feet long and made of tungsten steel, an improvement on the curtain wire used in Anderson's two earlier puppet series (\"The Adventures of Twizzle\" and \"Torchy\"), and were only 1/200 of an inch thick. Being shiny, the wires had to be blackened. The horses moved by being pulled along on a trolley, which meant the viewer never saw their feet when they were moving.\nThe voice cast assembled to record each script without seeing the puppets, much like recording a radio series; synchronisation of each character's speech with the movement of its puppet's mouth was performed later. The tight budget precluded the use of sophisticated special effects, and less costly alternatives were used. For example, to achieve the effect of muzzle flashes, small specks of black paint were carefully applied to the 35 mm negatives so they would appear as white flashes on the finished prints. The production design and puppet costuming were more detailed than those of \"Twizzle\" and \"Torchy\".\nContinuity for the series was provided by Sylvia Thamm, who later married Gerry Anderson. Provis, who left APF mid-production due to disagreements over the direction of the company, was given a five per cent share of the profits from the series.\nMusic.\nThe show's music and song lyrics were composed by Barry Gray. Michael Holliday provided Tex's singing voice, and Tommy Reilly performed the harmonica pieces. The best known song to come out of the series was \"Four Feather Falls\", sung in some episodes by Michael Holliday in the style of Bing Crosby and sometimes incorrectly described as the theme song to the series. The closing theme song was \"Two Gun Tex of Texas.\" Holliday was paid \u00a32,000 (about \u00a3 in 2023) for his singing work on the pilot episode\u00a0\u2013 a significant part of the pilot's \u00a36,000 budget. In all, Holliday recorded six songs for the series: \"Four Feather Falls\", \"The Phantom Rider\", \"The Rick-Rick-A-Rackety Train\", \"Happy Hearts and Friendly Faces\", \"My Home Town\", and \"Two Gun Tex of Texas\". The recording was conducted at Gate Studios in Borehamwood.\nSyndication.\n\"Four Feather Falls\" was the first APF series to be fully networked on ITV, that is shown by all regional franchises of the network simultaneously. The series was repeated in some British TV regions on a sporadic basis up until 1968. In December 2004, it was announced that the rights had been acquired by Network, and it was released on three Region 2 DVDs in May 2005. It is the only Supermarionation series not yet released to DVD in North America as of January 2006. Sylvia Anderson wrote two British children's annuals based on the show, published by Collins in 1960 and 1961. The first book featured a short text story based on the pilot episode of the TV series.\nOther media.\nThe show was adapted into comics form and published as an ongoing strip in Polystyle Publications' \"TV Comic\". The \"Four Feathers Falls\" strip was drawn by Neville Main, and appeared from issue No. 439 (14 May 1960) until issue No. 564 (6 October 1962). Sylvia Anderson wrote a \"Four Feather Falls\" annual. A tie-in board game was also released.\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11522", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11522", "title": "Fly-by-wire", "text": "Electronic flight control system\nFly-by-wire (FBW) is a system that replaces the conventional manual flight controls of an aircraft with an electronic interface. The movements of flight controls are converted to electronic signals, and flight control computers determine how to move the actuators at each control surface to provide the ordered response. Implementations either use mechanical flight control backup systems or else are fully electronic.\nImproved fully fly-by-wire systems interpret the pilot's control inputs as a desired outcome and calculate the control surface positions required to achieve that outcome; this results in various combinations of rudder, elevator, aileron, flaps and engine controls in different situations using a closed feedback loop. The pilot may not be fully aware of all the control outputs acting to affect the outcome, only that the aircraft is reacting as expected. The fly-by-wire computers act to stabilize the aircraft and adjust the flying characteristics without the pilot's involvement, and to prevent the pilot from operating outside of the aircraft's safe performance envelope.\nRationale.\nMechanical and hydro-mechanical flight control systems are relatively heavy and require careful routing of flight control cables through the aircraft by systems of pulleys, cranks, tension cables and hydraulic pipes. Both systems often require redundant backup to deal with failures, which increases weight. Both have limited ability to compensate for changing aerodynamic conditions. Dangerous characteristics such as stalling, spinning and pilot-induced oscillation (PIO), which depend mainly on the stability and structure of the aircraft rather than the control system itself, are dependent on the pilot's actions.\nThe term \"fly-by-wire\" implies a purely electrically signaled control system. It is used in the general sense of computer-configured controls, where a computer system is interposed between the operator and the final control actuators or surfaces. This modifies the manual inputs of the pilot in accordance with control parameters.\nSide-sticks or conventional flight control yokes can be used to fly fly-by-wire aircraft.\nWeight saving.\nA fly-by-wire aircraft can be lighter than a similar design with conventional controls. This is partly due to the lower overall weight of the system components and partly because the natural stability of the aircraft can be relaxed (slightly for a transport aircraft; more for a maneuverable fighter), which means that the stability surfaces that are part of the aircraft structure can therefore be made smaller. These include the vertical and horizontal stabilizers (fin and tailplane) that are (normally) at the rear of the fuselage. If these structures can be reduced in size, airframe weight is reduced. The advantages of fly-by-wire controls were first exploited by the military and then in the commercial airline market. The Airbus series of airliners used full-authority fly-by-wire controls beginning with their A320 series, see A320 flight control (though some limited fly-by-wire functions existed on A310 aircraft). Boeing followed with their 777 and later designs.\nBasic operation.\nClosed-loop feedback control.\nA pilot commands the flight control computer to make the aircraft perform a certain action, such as pitch the aircraft up, or roll to one side, by moving the control column or sidestick. The flight control computer then calculates what control surface movements will cause the plane to perform that action and issues those commands to the electronic controllers for each surface. The controllers at each surface receive these commands and then move actuators attached to the control surface until it has moved to where the flight control computer commanded it to. The controllers measure the position of the flight control surface with sensors such as LVDTs.\nAutomatic stability systems.\nFly-by-wire control systems allow aircraft computers to perform tasks without pilot input. Automatic stability systems operate in this way. Gyroscopes and sensors such as accelerometers are mounted in an aircraft to sense rotation on the pitch, roll and yaw axes. Any movement (from straight and level flight for example) results in signals to the computer, which can automatically move control actuators to stabilize the aircraft.\nSafety and redundancy.\nWhile traditional mechanical or hydraulic control systems usually fail gradually, the loss of all flight control computers immediately renders the aircraft uncontrollable. For this reason, most fly-by-wire systems incorporate either redundant computers (triplex, quadruplex etc.), some kind of mechanical or hydraulic backup or a combination of both. A \"mixed\" control system with mechanical backup feedbacks any rudder elevation directly to the pilot and therefore makes closed loop (feedback) systems senseless.\nAircraft systems may be quadruplexed (four independent channels) to prevent loss of signals in the case of failure of one or even two channels. High performance aircraft that have fly-by-wire controls (also called CCVs or Control-Configured Vehicles) may be deliberately designed to have low or even negative stability in some flight regimes \u2013 rapid-reacting CCV controls can electronically stabilize the lack of natural stability.\nPre-flight safety checks of a fly-by-wire system are often performed using built-in test equipment (BITE). A number of control movement steps can be automatically performed, reducing workload of the pilot or groundcrew and speeding up flight-checks.\nSome aircraft, the Panavia Tornado for example, retain a very basic hydro-mechanical backup system for limited flight control capability on losing electrical power; in the case of the Tornado this allows rudimentary control of the stabilators only for pitch and roll axis movements.\nHistory.\nServo-electrically operated control surfaces were first tested in the 1930s on the Soviet Tupolev ANT-20. Long runs of mechanical and hydraulic connections were replaced with wires and electric servos.\nIn 1934, Karl Otto Altvater filed a patent about the automatic-electronic system, which flared the aircraft, when it was close to the ground. In 1941, while being an engineer at Siemens, developed and tested the first fly-by-wire system for the Heinkel He 111, in which the aircraft was fully controlled by electronic impulses.\nThe first non-experimental aircraft that was designed and flown (in 1958) with a fly-by-wire flight control system was the Avro Canada CF-105 Arrow, the North American A-5 Vigilante which flew later the same year would be the first aircraft to reach operational service with a fly by wire system. This system also included solid-state components and system redundancy, was designed to be integrated with a computerised navigation and automatic search and track radar, was flyable from ground control with data uplink and downlink, and provided artificial feel (feedback) to the pilot.\nThe first electronic fly-by-wire testbed operated by the U.S. Air Force was a Boeing B-47E Stratojet (Ser. No. 53-2280)\nThe first pure electronic fly-by-wire aircraft with no mechanical or hydraulic backup was the Apollo Lunar Landing Training Vehicle (LLTV), first flown in 1968. This was preceded in 1964 by the Lunar Landing Research Vehicle (LLRV) which pioneered fly-by-wire flight with no mechanical backup. Control was through a digital computer with three analog redundant channels. In the USSR, the Sukhoi T-4 also flew. At about the same time in the United Kingdom a trainer variant of the British Hawker Hunter fighter was modified at the British Royal Aircraft Establishment with fly-by-wire flight controls for the right-seat pilot.\nIn the UK the two seater Avro 707C was flown with a Fairey system with mechanical backup in the early to mid-60s. The program was curtailed when the air-frame ran out of flight time.\nIn 1972, the first digital fly-by-wire fixed-wing aircraft without a mechanical backup to take to the air was an F-8 Crusader, which had been modified electronically by NASA of the United States as a test aircraft; the F-8 used the Apollo guidance, navigation and control hardware.\nThe Airbus A320 began service in 1988 as the first mass-produced airliner with digital fly-by-wire controls. As of June 2024, over 11,000 A320 family aircraft, variants included, are operational around the world, making it one of the best-selling commercial jets.\nBoeing chose fly-by-wire flight controls for the 777 in 1994, departing from traditional cable and pulley systems. In addition to overseeing the aircraft's flight control, the FBW offered \"envelope protection\", which guaranteed that the system would step in to avoid accidental mishandling, stalls, or excessive structural stress on the aircraft. The 777 used ARINC 629 buses to connect primary flight computers (PFCs) with actuator-control electronics units (ACEs). Every PFC housed three 32-bit microprocessors, including a Motorola 68040, an Intel 80486, and an AMD 29050, all programmed in Ada programming language.\nAnalog systems.\nAll fly-by-wire flight control systems eliminate the complexity, fragility and weight of the mechanical circuit of the hydromechanical or electromechanical flight control systems \u2013 each being replaced with electronic circuits. The control mechanisms in the cockpit now operate signal transducers, which in turn generate the appropriate commands. These are next processed by an electronic controller\u2014either an analog one, or (more modernly) a digital one. Aircraft and spacecraft autopilots are now part of the electronic controller.\nThe hydraulic circuits are similar except that mechanical servo valves are replaced with electrically controlled servo valves, operated by the electronic controller. This is the simplest and earliest configuration of an analog fly-by-wire flight control system. In this configuration, the flight control systems must simulate \"feel\". The electronic controller controls electrical devices that provide the appropriate \"feel\" forces on the manual controls. This was used in Concorde, the first production fly-by-wire airliner.\nDigital systems.\nA digital fly-by-wire flight control system can be extended from its analog counterpart. Digital signal processing can receive and interpret input from multiple sensors simultaneously (such as the altimeters and the pitot tubes) and adjust the controls in real time. The computers sense position and force inputs from pilot controls and aircraft sensors. They then solve differential equations related to the aircraft's equations of motion to determine the appropriate command signals for the flight controls to execute the intentions of the pilot.\nThe programming of the digital computers enable flight envelope protection. These protections are tailored to an aircraft's handling characteristics to stay within aerodynamic and structural limitations of the aircraft. For example, the computer in flight envelope protection mode can try to prevent the aircraft from being handled dangerously by preventing pilots from exceeding preset limits on the aircraft's flight-control envelope, such as those that prevent stalls and spins, and which limit airspeeds and g forces on the airplane. Software can also be included that stabilize the flight-control inputs to avoid pilot-induced oscillations.\nSince the flight-control computers continuously feedback the environment, pilot's workloads can be reduced. This also enables military aircraft with relaxed stability. The primary benefit for such aircraft is more maneuverability during combat and training flights, and the so-called \"carefree handling\" because stalling, spinning and other undesirable performances are prevented automatically by the computers. Digital flight control systems (DFCS) enable inherently unstable combat aircraft, such as the Lockheed F-117 Nighthawk and the Northrop Grumman B-2 Spirit flying wing to fly in usable and safe manners.\nLegislation.\nThe United States Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) has adopted the RTCA/DO-178C, titled \"Software Considerations in Airborne Systems and Equipment Certification\", as the certification standard for aviation software. Any safety-critical component in a digital fly-by-wire system including applications of the laws of aeronautics and computer operating systems will need to be certified to DO-178C Level A or B, depending on the class of aircraft, which is applicable for preventing potential catastrophic failures.\nNevertheless, the top concern for computerized, digital, fly-by-wire systems is reliability, even more so than for analog electronic control systems. This is because the digital computers that are running software are often the only control path between the pilot and aircraft's flight control surfaces. If the computer software crashes for any reason, the pilot may be unable to control an aircraft. Hence virtually all fly-by-wire flight control systems are either triply or quadruply redundant in their computers and electronics. These have three or four flight-control computers operating in parallel and three or four separate data buses connecting them with each control surface.\nRedundancy.\nThe multiple redundant flight control computers continuously monitor each other's output. If one computer begins to give aberrant results for any reason, potentially including software or hardware failures or flawed input data, then the combined system is designed to exclude the results from that computer in deciding the appropriate actions for the flight controls. Depending on specific system details there may be the potential to reboot an aberrant flight control computer, or to reincorporate its inputs if they return to agreement. Complex logic exists to deal with multiple failures, which may prompt the system to revert to simpler back-up modes.\nIn addition, most of the early digital fly-by-wire aircraft also had an analog electrical, mechanical, or hydraulic back-up flight control system. The Space Shuttle had, in addition to its redundant set of four digital computers running its primary flight-control software, a fifth backup computer running a separately developed, reduced-function, software flight-control system \u2013 one that could be commanded to take over in the event that a fault ever affected all of the other four computers. This backup system served to reduce the risk of total flight control system failure ever happening because of a general-purpose flight software fault that had escaped notice in the other four computers.\nEfficiency of flight.\nFor airliners, flight-control redundancy improves their safety, but fly-by-wire control systems, which are physically lighter and have lower maintenance demands than conventional controls also improve economy, both in terms of cost of ownership and for in-flight economy. In certain designs with limited relaxed stability in the pitch axis, for example the Boeing 777, the flight control system may allow the aircraft to fly at a more aerodynamically efficient angle of attack than a conventionally stable design. Modern airliners also commonly feature computerized Full-Authority Digital Engine Control systems (FADECs) that control their engines, air inlets, fuel storage and distribution system, in a similar fashion to the way that FBW controls the flight control surfaces. This allows the engine output to be continually varied for the most efficient usage possible.\nThe second generation Embraer E-Jet family gained a 1.5% efficiency improvement over the first generation from the fly-by-wire system, which enabled a reduction from 280\u00a0ft.\u00b2 to 250\u00a0ft.\u00b2 for the horizontal stabilizer on the E190/195 variants.\nAirbus/Boeing.\nAirbus and Boeing differ in their approaches to implementing fly-by-wire systems in commercial aircraft. Since the Airbus A320, Airbus flight-envelope control systems always retain ultimate flight control when flying under normal law and will not permit pilots to violate aircraft performance limits unless they choose to fly under alternate law. This strategy has been continued on subsequent Airbus airliners. However, in the event of multiple failures of redundant computers, the A320 does have a mechanical back-up system for its pitch trim and its rudder, the Airbus A340 has a purely electrical (not electronic) back-up rudder control system and beginning with the A380, all flight-control systems have back-up systems that are purely electrical through the use of a \"three-axis Backup Control Module\" (BCM).\nBoeing airliners, such as the Boeing 777, allow the pilots to completely override the computerized flight control system, permitting the aircraft to be flown outside of its usual flight control envelope.\nEngine digital control.\nThe advent of FADEC (Full Authority Digital Engine Control) engines permits operation of the flight control systems and autothrottles for the engines to be fully integrated. On modern military aircraft other systems such as autostabilization, navigation, radar and weapons system are all integrated with the flight control systems. FADEC allows maximum performance to be extracted from the aircraft without fear of engine misoperation, aircraft damage or high pilot workloads.\nIn the civil field, the integration increases flight safety and economy. Airbus fly-by-wire aircraft are protected from dangerous situations such as low-speed stall or overstressing by flight envelope protection. As a result, in such conditions, the flight control systems commands the engines to increase thrust without pilot intervention. In economy cruise modes, the flight control systems adjust the throttles and fuel tank selections precisely. FADEC reduces rudder drag needed to compensate for sideways flight from unbalanced engine thrust. On the A330/A340 family, fuel is transferred between the main (wing and center fuselage) tanks and a fuel tank in the horizontal stabilizer, to optimize the aircraft's center of gravity during cruise flight. The fuel management controls keep the aircraft's center of gravity accurately trimmed with fuel weight, rather than drag-inducing aerodynamic trims in the elevators.\nFurther developments.\nFly-by-optics.\nFly-by-optics is sometimes used instead of fly-by-wire because it offers a higher data transfer rate, immunity to electromagnetic interference and lighter weight. In most cases, the cables are just changed from electrical to optical fiber cables. Sometimes it is referred to as \"fly-by-light\" due to its use of fiber optics. The data generated by the software and interpreted by the controller remain the same. Fly-by-light has the effect of decreasing electro-magnetic disturbances to sensors in comparison to more common fly-by-wire control systems. The Kawasaki P-1 is the first production aircraft in the world to be equipped with such a flight control system.\nPower-by-wire.\nHaving eliminated the mechanical transmission circuits in fly-by-wire flight control systems, the next step is to eliminate the bulky and heavy hydraulic circuits. The hydraulic circuit is replaced by an electrical power circuit. The power circuits power electrical or self-contained electrohydraulic actuators that are controlled by the digital flight control computers. All benefits of digital fly-by-wire are retained since the power-by-wire components are strictly complementary to the fly-by-wire components.\nThe biggest benefits are weight savings, the possibility of redundant power circuits and tighter integration between the aircraft flight control systems and its avionics systems. The absence of hydraulics greatly reduces maintenance costs. This system is used in the Lockheed Martin F-35 Lightning II and in Airbus A380 backup flight controls. The Boeing 787 and Airbus A350 also incorporate electrically powered backup flight controls which remain operational even in the event of a total loss of hydraulic power.\nFly-by-wireless.\nWiring adds a considerable amount of weight to an aircraft; therefore, researchers are exploring implementing fly-by-wireless solutions. Fly-by-wireless systems are very similar to fly-by-wire systems, however, instead of using a wired protocol for the physical layer a wireless protocol is employed.\nIn addition to reducing weight, implementing a wireless solution has the potential to reduce costs throughout an aircraft's life cycle. For example, many key failure points associated with wire and connectors will be eliminated thus hours spent troubleshooting wires and connectors will be reduced. Furthermore, engineering costs could potentially decrease because less time would be spent on designing wiring installations, late changes in an aircraft's design would be easier to manage, etc.\nIntelligent flight control system.\nA newer flight control system, called intelligent flight control system (IFCS), is an extension of modern digital fly-by-wire flight control systems. The aim is to intelligently compensate for aircraft damage and failure during flight, such as automatically using engine thrust and other avionics to compensate for severe failures such as loss of hydraulics, loss of rudder, loss of ailerons, loss of an engine, etc. Several demonstrations were made on a flight simulator where a Cessna-trained small-aircraft pilot successfully landed a heavily damaged full-size concept jet, without prior experience with large-body jet aircraft. This development is being spearheaded by NASA Dryden Flight Research Center. It is reported that enhancements are mostly software upgrades to existing fully computerized digital fly-by-wire flight control systems. The Dassault Falcon 7X and Embraer Legacy 500 business jets have flight computers that can partially compensate for engine-out scenarios by adjusting thrust levels and control inputs, but still require pilots to respond appropriately.\nNote.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11523", "revid": "15602814", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11523", "title": "Falklands War", "text": "1982 undeclared Argentina\u2013United Kingdom war\nThe Falklands War () was a ten-week undeclared war between Argentina and the United Kingdom in 1982 over two British Overseas Territories in the South Atlantic: the Falkland Islands and its territorial dependency, South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands. The conflict began on 2\u00a0April 1982, when Argentina invaded and occupied the Falkland Islands, followed by the invasion of South Georgia the next day. On 5\u00a0April the British government dispatched a naval task force to engage the Argentine Navy and Air Force before making an amphibious assault on the islands. The conflict lasted 74\u00a0days and ended with an Argentine surrender on 14\u00a0June, returning the islands to British control. In total, 649\u00a0Argentine military personnel, 255\u00a0British military personnel and three Falkland Islanders were killed during the hostilities.\nThe conflict was a major episode in the protracted dispute over the territories' sovereignty. Argentina claimed (and maintains) that the islands are Argentine territory, and the Argentine government thus described its military action as the reclamation of its own territory. The British government regarded the action as an invasion of a territory that had been a Crown colony since 1841. Falkland Islanders, who have inhabited the islands since the early 19th\u00a0century, are predominantly descendants of British settlers, and strongly favour British sovereignty. Neither state officially declared war, although both governments declared the islands a war zone.\nThe conflict had a strong effect in both countries and has been the subject of various books, articles, films and songs. Patriotic sentiment ran high in Argentina, but the unfavourable outcome prompted large protests against the ruling military government, hastening its downfall and the democratisation of the country. In the United Kingdom the Conservative government, bolstered by the successful outcome, was re-elected with an increased majority the following year. The cultural and political effect of the conflict has been less in the UK than in Argentina, where it has remained a common topic for discussion.\nDiplomatic relations between the United Kingdom and Argentina were restored in 1989 following a meeting in Madrid, at which the two governments issued a joint statement. No change in either country's position regarding the sovereignty of the Falkland Islands was made explicit. In 1994 Argentina adopted a new constitution, which declared the Falkland Islands as part of one of its provinces by law. However, the islands continue to operate as a self-governing British Overseas Territory.\nPrelude.\nFailed diplomacy.\nIn 1965 the United Nations called upon Argentina and the United Kingdom to reach a settlement of the sovereignty dispute. The UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) regarded the islands as a nuisance and barrier to UK trade in South America. Therefore, while confident of British sovereignty, the FCO was prepared to cede the islands to Argentina. When news of a proposed transfer broke in 1968, elements sympathetic with the plight of the islanders were able to organise an effective parliamentary lobby to frustrate the FCO plans. Negotiations continued, but in general failed to make meaningful progress; the islanders steadfastly refused to consider Argentine sovereignty on one side, whilst Argentina would not compromise over sovereignty on the other. The FCO then sought to make the islands dependent on Argentina, hoping this would make the islanders more amenable to Argentine sovereignty. A Communications Agreement signed in 1971 created an airlink and later YPF, the Argentine oil company, was given a monopoly in the islands.\nIn 1977 the British prime minister, James Callaghan, in response to heightened tensions in the region and the Argentine occupation of Southern Thule, secretly sent a force of two frigates and a nuclear-powered submarine, , to the South Atlantic, codenamed Operation Journeyman. It is unclear whether the Argentines were aware of their presence, but British sources state that they were advised of it through informal channels. Nevertheless, talks with Argentina on Falklands sovereignty and economic cooperation opened in December of that year, though they proved inconclusive.\nIn 1980 a new UK Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, Nicholas Ridley, went to the Falklands trying to sell the islanders the benefits of a leaseback scheme, which met with strong opposition from the islanders. On his return to London in December 1980, he reported to Parliament, but was viciously attacked over what was seen as a sellout. (It was unlikely that leaseback idea would have progressed further anyway since the British had sought a long-term lease of 99 years, whereas Argentina was pressing for a much shorter period of only thirty years.) At a private committee meeting that evening, it was reported that Ridley said: \"If we don't do something, they will invade. And there is nothing we could do.\"\nThe Argentine \"junta\".\nIn the period leading up to the war\u2014and, in particular following the transfer of power between the military dictators General Jorge Rafael Videla and General Roberto Eduardo Viola late in March 1981\u2014Argentina had been in the midst of devastating economic stagnation and large-scale civil unrest against the National Reorganisation Process, the military \"junta\" that had been governing the country since 1976.\nIn December 1981 there was a further change in the Argentine military regime, bringing to office a new \"junta\" headed by General Leopoldo Galtieri (acting president), Air Brigadier Basilio Lami Dozo and Admiral Jorge Anaya. Anaya was the main architect and supporter of a military solution for the long-standing claim over the islands, expecting that the United Kingdom would never respond militarily.\nBy opting for military action, the Galtieri government hoped to mobilise the long-standing patriotic feelings of Argentines towards the islands, diverting public attention from the chronic economic problems and the ongoing human rights violations of its Dirty War, bolstering the junta's dwindling legitimacy. The newspaper \"La Prensa\" speculated on a step-by-step plan beginning with cutting off supplies to the islands, ending in direct actions late in 1982, if the UN talks were fruitless.\nThe ongoing tension between the two countries over the islands increased on 19 March, when a group of Argentine scrap metal merchants (which had been infiltrated by Argentine Marines) raised the Argentine flag at South Georgia Island, an act that would later be seen as the first offensive action in the war. The Royal Navy ice patrol vessel was dispatched from Stanley to South Georgia on the 25th in response. The Argentine military junta, suspecting that the UK would reinforce its South Atlantic Forces, ordered the invasion of the Falkland Islands to be brought forward to 2 April.\nThe UK was taken by surprise by the Argentine attack on the South Atlantic islands, despite repeated warnings by Captain Nicholas Barker (Commanding Officer of the \"Endurance\") and others. Barker believed that Defence Secretary John Nott's 1981 Defence White Paper (in which Nott described plans to withdraw the \"Endurance\", the UK's only naval presence in the South Atlantic) had sent a signal to the Argentines that the UK was unwilling, and would soon be unable, to defend its territories and subjects in the Falklands.\nArgentine invasion.\nOn 2 April 1982 Argentine forces mounted amphibious landings, known as Operation Rosario, on the Falkland Islands. The invasion was met with a fierce but brief defence organised by the Falkland Islands' Governor, Sir Rex Hunt, giving command to Major Mike Norman of the Royal Marines. The garrison consisted of 68 marines and eleven naval hydrographers, assisted by 23 volunteers of the Falkland Islands Defence Force (FIDF), who had few weapons and were used as lookouts. The invasion started with the landing of Lieutenant Commander Guillermo Sanchez-Sabarots' Amphibious Commandos Group, who attacked the empty Moody Brook barracks and then moved on Government House in Stanley. When the 2nd Marine Infantry Battalion with Assault Amphibious Vehicles arrived, the governor ordered a ceasefire and surrendered. The governor, his family and the British military personnel were flown to Montevideo, Uruguay, that afternoon and later repatriated to the United Kingdom.\nInitial British response.\nThe British had already taken action prior to the 2 April invasion. In response to events on South Georgia, on 29 March ministers decided to send the Royal Fleet Auxiliary (RFA) \"Fort Austin\" south from the Mediterranean to support HMS \"Endurance\", and the nuclear-powered fleet submarine from Gibraltar, with ordered south from Scotland the following day. Lord Carrington had wished to send a third submarine, but the decision was deferred due to concerns about the impact on operational commitments. Coincidentally, on 26 March, the submarine left Gibraltar and it was assumed in the press she was heading south. There has since been speculation that the effect of those reports was to panic the Argentine junta into invading the Falklands before submarines could be deployed; however, post-war research has established that the final decision to proceed was made at a junta meeting in Buenos Aires on 23 March.\nThe following day, during a crisis meeting headed by Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, the First Sea Lord and Chief of the Naval Staff, Admiral Sir Henry Leach, advised that \"Britain could and should send a task force if the islands are invaded\". On 1 April, Leach sent orders to a Royal Navy force carrying out exercises in the Mediterranean to prepare to sail south. Following the invasion on 2 April, after an emergency meeting of the cabinet, approval was given to form a task force to retake the islands. This was backed in an emergency sitting of the House of Commons the next day.\nWord of the invasion first reached the UK from Argentine sources. A Ministry of Defence operative in London had a short telex conversation with Governor Hunt's telex operator, who confirmed that Argentines were on the island and in control. Later that day, the BBC journalist Laurie Margolis spoke with an islander at Goose Green via amateur radio, who confirmed the presence of a large Argentine fleet and that Argentine forces had taken control of the island. British military operations in the Falklands War were given the codename \"Operation Corporate\", and the commander of the task force was Admiral Sir John Fieldhouse. Operations lasted from 1 April 1982 to 20 June 1982.\nOn 6 April the British government set up a War Cabinet to provide day-to-day political oversight of the campaign. This was the critical instrument of crisis management for the British with its remit being to \"keep under review political and military developments relating to the South Atlantic, and to report as necessary to the Defence and Overseas Policy Committee\". The War Cabinet met at least daily until it was dissolved on 12 August. Although Margaret Thatcher is described as dominating the War Cabinet, Lawrence Freedman notes in the \"Official History of the Falklands Campaign\" that she did not ignore opposition or fail to consult others. However, once a decision was reached, she \"did not look back\".\nUnited Nations Security Council Resolution 502.\nOn 31 March 1982 the Argentine ambassador to the UN, Eduardo Roca, began attempting to garner support against a British military build-up designed to thwart earlier UN resolutions calling for both countries to resolve the Falklands dispute through discussion. On 2 April, the night of the invasion, a banquet was held at Roca's official residence for the US ambassador to the UN, Jeane Kirkpatrick, and several high-ranking officials of the United States Department of State and the United States Department of Defense. This led British diplomats to view Kirkpatrick, who had earlier called for closer relationships with South American dictatorships, with considerable suspicion.\nOn 1 April London told the UK ambassador to the UN, Sir Anthony Parsons, that an invasion was imminent and he should call an urgent meeting of the Security Council to get a favourable resolution against Argentina. Parsons had to get nine affirmative votes from the 15 Council members (not a simple majority) and to avoid a blocking vote from any of the other four permanent members. The meeting took place at 11:00am on 3 April, New York time (4:00pm in London). United Nations Security Council Resolution 502 was adopted by 10 to 1 (with Panama voting against) and 4 abstentions. Significantly, the Soviet Union and China both abstained. The resolution stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis was a significant win for the UK, giving it the upper hand diplomatically. The draft resolution Parsons submitted had avoided any reference to the sovereignty dispute (which might have worked against the UK): instead it focused on Argentina's breach of Chapter VII of the UN Charter, which forbids the threat or use of force to settle disputes. The resolution called for the removal only of Argentine forces: this freed Britain to retake the islands militarily, if Argentina did not leave, by exercising its right to self-defence allowed under the UN Charter.\nArgentine occupation.\nThe Argentine Army unit designated for the occupation was the 25th Infantry Regiment (Argentina), a force of about 681 men specially trained and drawn from various regions of Argentina; it was flown into Port Stanley Airport as soon as the runway had been cleared. Once it became clear that the British were sending an amphibious task force, there was a general recall of reservists and two brigades with eight infantry regiments and support units were dispatched to the islands. By early May, the total Argentine garrison numbered around 13,000 troops. Conscripts from the 1963 intake had only recently been called up, so the previous year's intake was also recalled. Brigadier General Mario Benjam\u00edn Men\u00e9ndez was appointed Military Governor of the Falklands.\nArgentine military police arrived with detailed files on many islanders, allowing intelligence officer Major Patricio Dowling to arrest and interrogate those suspected of opposing the occupation. Initially, some islanders deemed anti-Argentine were expelled, including the Luxton family and David Colville, editor of the \"Falklands Times\". This move backfired, as those expelled gave interviews to the press. Later, 14 other community leaders, including the senior medical officer, were interned at Fox Bay on West Falkland. Concerned by Dowling\u2019s conduct, senior Argentine officers removed him from the islands. For nearly a month, the civilian population of Goose Green was confined in the village hall under unpleasant conditions. Similar detentions were reported in other settlements.\nAs part of the Argentine occupation, a medical and demographic survey was carried out, including the island's first-ever population census and analysis of blood types, including the Rh factor. This study, never before conducted by the British administration, posed serious risks when performing blood transfusions.\nDue to food shortages and poor logistical support, some Argentine conscripts resorted to slaughtering sheep belonging to islanders in the Goose Green area as a means of survival.\nArgentine officers and NCOs were accused of imposing harsh field punishments on conscripts. According to accounts like that of Private Alan Craig, food rations often arrived opened or with missing items. Troops garrisoning Port Howard reported severe food deprivation, and according to Max Hastings and Simon Jenkins in \"The Battle for the Falklands\" (1984), attempts to go absent without leave were punished by beatings or being forced to sit for hours with bare feet in freezing water. Private Rito Portillo and Private Remigio Fern\u00e1ndez were reportedly executed or died as a result of abuse by their own officers. Upon returning to the mainland, many soldiers were allegedly forced to sign non-disclosure agreements.\nShuttle diplomacy.\nOn 8 April Alexander Haig, the United States Secretary of State, arrived in London on a shuttle diplomacy mission from US President Ronald Reagan to broker a peace deal based on an interim authority taking control of the islands pending negotiations. After hearing from Thatcher that the task force would not be withdrawn unless the Argentines evacuated their troops, Haig headed for Buenos Aires. There he met the junta and Nicanor Costa M\u00e9ndez, the foreign minister. Haig was treated coolly and told that Argentine sovereignty must be a pre-condition of any talks. Returning to London on 11 April, he found the British cabinet in no mood for compromise. Haig flew back to Washington before returning to Buenos Aires for a final protracted round of talks. These made little progress, but just as Haig and his mission were leaving, they were told that Galtieri would meet them at the airport VIP lounge to make an important concession; however, this was cancelled at the last minute. On 30 April the Reagan administration announced that they would be publicly supporting the United Kingdom.\nBritish task force.\nThe nuclear-powered submarine set sail from Faslane, Scotland on 4 April. The two aircraft carriers and and their escort vessels left Portsmouth, England only a day later. On its return to Southampton from a world cruise on 7 April, the ocean liner was requisitioned and set sail two days later with the 3 Commando Brigade aboard. The ocean liner \"Queen Elizabeth 2\" was also requisitioned, and left Southampton on 12 May, with the 5th Infantry Brigade on board. The whole task force eventually comprised 127 ships: 43 Royal Navy vessels, 22 Royal Fleet Auxiliary ships, and 62 merchant ships.\nThe retaking of the Falkland Islands was considered extremely difficult. The chances of a British counter-invasion succeeding were assessed by the US Navy, according to the historian Arthur L. Herman, as \"a military impossibility\". Firstly, the British were significantly constrained by the disparity in deployable air cover. The British had 42 aircraft (28 Sea Harriers and 6 Harrier GR.3s available for air combat operations, against approximately 122 serviceable jet fighters, of which about 50 were used as air superiority fighters and the remainder as strike aircraft, in Argentina's air forces during the war. Crucially, the British lacked airborne early warning and control (AEW) aircraft. Planning also considered the Argentine surface fleet and the threat posed by Exocet-equipped vessels or the two Type 209 submarines.\nBy mid-April the Royal Air Force had set up an airbase on RAF Ascension Island, co-located with Wideawake Airfield, on the mid-Atlantic British overseas territory of Ascension Island. They included a sizeable force of Avro Vulcan B Mk 2 bombers, Handley Page Victor K Mk 2 refuelling aircraft, and McDonnell Douglas Phantom FGR Mk 2 fighters to protect them. Meanwhile, the main British naval task force arrived at Ascension to prepare for active service. A small force had already been sent south to recapture South Georgia.\nEncounters began in April; the British Task Force was shadowed by a Boeing 707 aircraft of the Argentine Air Force during their travel to the south. Several of these flights were intercepted by Sea Harriers outside the British-imposed Total Exclusion Zone; the unarmed 707s were not attacked because diplomatic moves were still in progress and the UK had not yet decided to commit itself to armed force. On 23 April, a Brazilian commercial Douglas DC-10 from VARIG Airlines en route to South Africa was intercepted by British Harriers who visually identified the civilian plane.\nRecapture of South Georgia and the attack on \"Santa Fe\".\nThe South Georgia force, Operation Paraquet, under the command of Major Guy Sheridan RM, consisted of Marines from 42 Commando, a troop of the Special Air Service (SAS) and Special Boat Service (SBS) troops who were intended to land as reconnaissance forces for an invasion by the Royal Marines, a total of 240 men. All were embarked on . First to arrive was the HMS \"Conqueror\" on 19 April, and the island was over-flown by a Handley Page Victor aircraft with radar-mapping equipment on 20 April, to establish that no Argentine ships were in the vicinity.\nThe first landings of SAS and SBS troops took place on 21 April, but an ill-advised mission to establish an SAS observation post on the Fortuna Glacier had to be withdrawn after two helicopters crashed in fog and high winds. On 23 April a submarine alert was sounded and operations were halted, with \"Tidespring\" being withdrawn to deeper water to avoid interception. On 24 April British forces regrouped and headed in to attack.\nOn 25 April, after resupplying the Argentine garrison in South Georgia, the submarine was spotted on the surface by a Westland Wessex HAS Mk 3 helicopter from , which attacked the Argentine submarine with depth charges. launched a Westland Wasp HAS.Mk.1 helicopter, and launched a Westland Lynx HAS Mk 2. The Lynx launched a torpedo, and strafed the submarine with its pintle-mounted general purpose machine gun; the Wessex also fired on \"Santa Fe\" with its GPMG. The Wasp from as well as two other Wasps launched from fired AS-12 ASM antiship missiles at the submarine, scoring hits. \"Santa Fe\" was damaged badly enough to prevent her from diving. The crew abandoned the submarine at the jetty at King Edward Point on South Georgia.\nWith \"Tidespring\" now far out to sea and the Argentine forces augmented by the submarine's crew, Major Sheridan decided to gather the 76 men he had and make a direct assault that day. After a short forced march by the British troops and a naval bombardment demonstration by two Royal Navy vessels (\"Antrim\" and \"Plymouth\"), the Argentine forces, a total of 190 men, surrendered without resistance to the Royal Marines. The message sent from the naval force at South Georgia to London was, \"Be pleased to inform Her Majesty that the White Ensign flies alongside the Union Jack in South Georgia. God Save the Queen.\" The Prime Minister, Margaret Thatcher, broke the news to the media, telling them to \"Just rejoice at that news, and congratulate our forces and the Marines!\"\nBlack Buck raids.\nOn 1 May, British operations on the Falklands opened with the \"Black Buck 1\" attack (of a series of five) on the airfield at Stanley. A Vulcan bomber from Ascension flew an round trip, dropping conventional bombs across the runway at Stanley. The mission required repeated aerial refuelling using several Victor K2 tanker aircraft operating in concert, including tanker-to-tanker refuelling.\nThe overall effect of the raids on the war is difficult to determine; historian Lawrence Freedman, who was given access to official sources, comments that the significance of the Vulcan raids remains a subject of controversy. Although they took pressure off the small Sea Harrier force, the raids were costly and used a great deal of resources. The runway was cratered by only one of the twenty one bombs, with the single hit to the edge of the runway probably the best that could have been expected. Contrary to some reports, this reduced the capability of the runway to operate Mirage III fast jets but not other, smaller jet fighters, the Pucara, and the Hercules C-130, nor did it cause the Argentine air force to deploy Mirage IIIs to defend the capital. Some sources have claimed that, as a result of the raid, the Argentines realised that their mainland was vulnerable and fighter aircraft were redeployed from the theatre to bases further north, but later Argentine sources confirm that the Vulcan raids did not influence Argentina's decision to move some of its Mirage IIIs from southern Argentina to the Buenos Aires Defence Zone. This dissuasive effect was watered down when British officials made clear that there would not be strikes on air bases in Argentina. The raids were later dismissed as propaganda by Falklands veteran Commander Nigel Ward.\nOf the five Black Buck raids, three were against Stanley Airfield, with the other two being anti-radar missions using Shrike anti-radiation missiles.\nEscalation of the air war.\nThe Falklands had only three airfields. The longest and only paved runway was at the capital, Stanley, and even that was too short to support fast jets. Therefore, the Argentines were forced to launch their major strikes from the mainland, severely hampering their efforts at forward staging, combat air patrols, and close air support over the islands. The effective loiter time of incoming Argentine aircraft was low, limiting the ability of fighters to protect attack aircraft, which were often compelled to attack the first target of opportunity, rather than selecting the most lucrative target.\nThe first major Argentine strike force comprised 36 aircraft (A-4 Skyhawks, IAI Daggers, English Electric Canberras, and Mirage III escorts), and was sent on 1 May, in the belief that the British Liberation was imminent or landings had already taken place. Only a section of Grupo 6 (flying IAI Dagger aircraft) found ships, which were firing at Argentine defences near the islands. The Daggers managed to attack the ships and return safely. This greatly boosted the morale of the Argentine pilots, who now knew they could survive an attack against modern warships, protected by radar ground clutter from the islands and by using a late pop up profile. Meanwhile, other Argentine aircraft were intercepted by BAE Sea Harriers operating from . A Dagger and a Canberra were shot down.\nCombat broke out between Sea Harrier FRS Mk 1 fighters of No. 801 Naval Air Squadron and Mirage III fighters of Grupo 8. Both sides refused to fight at the other's best altitude, until two Mirages finally descended to engage. One was shot down by an AIM-9L Sidewinder air-to-air missile (AAM), while the other escaped but was damaged and without enough fuel to return to its mainland airbase. The plane made for Stanley, where it fell victim to friendly fire from the Argentine defenders.\nAs a result of this experience, Argentine Air Force staff decided to employ A-4 Skyhawks and Daggers only as strike units, the Canberras only during the night, and Mirage IIIs (without air refuelling capability or any capable AAM) as decoys to lure away the British Sea Harriers. The decoying would be later extended with the formation of the Escuadr\u00f3n F\u00e9nix, a squadron of civilian jets flying 24 hours a day, simulating strike aircraft preparing to attack the fleet. On one of these flights on 7 June, an Air Force Learjet 35A was shot down by HMS \"Exeter\", killing the squadron commander, Vice Commodore Rodolfo de la Colina, the highest-ranking Argentine officer to die in the war. British command was concerned about the high attrition of Harriers brought down by anti-air, and committed to use them predominately for air superiority. The Harriers were observed to be far more effective than ship-launched missiles to destroy attacking Argentine aircraft, however at times the operations of Harriers in the air would interfere with a vessel's anti-air systems.\nStanley was used as an Argentine strongpoint throughout the conflict. Despite the Black Buck and Harrier raids on Stanley airfield (no fast jets were stationed there for air defence) and overnight shelling by detached ships, it was never out of action entirely. Stanley was defended by a mixture of surface-to-air missile (SAM) systems (Franco-German Roland and British Tigercat) and light anti-aircraft guns, including Swiss-built Oerlikon 35 mm twin cannons and 30\u00a0mm Hispano-Suiza cannon and German Rheinmetall 20 mm twin anti-aircraft cannons. More of the anti-aircraft guns were deployed to the airstrip at Goose Green. Lockheed Hercules transport night flights brought supplies, weapons, vehicles, and fuel, and airlifted out the wounded up until the end of the conflict.\nThe only Argentine Hercules shot down by the British was lost on 1 June when TC-63 was intercepted by a Sea Harrier in daylight as it was searching for the British fleet north-east of the islands, after the Argentine Navy retired its last SP-2H Neptune due to unreliability.\nVarious options to attack the home base of the five Argentine \u00c9tendards at R\u00edo Grande were examined and discounted (Operation Mikado); subsequently five Royal Navy submarines were lined up, submerged, on the edge of Argentina's territorial limit to provide early warning of bombing raids on the British task force.\nOperation Folklore was a plan to deploy two Canberra PR.9 aircraft of No. 39 Squadron RAF, disguised in Chilean Air Force markings, to the Chilean air base at Punta Arenas, with the intention of undertaking high-level photo-reconnaissance flights over the Falklands; however the Canberras had reached Belize when the operation was abandoned after part of the plan had been reported in the British press. Operation Acme was the deployment of a single Nimrod R.1 surveillance aircraft of No. 51 Squadron RAF to the Chilean base at Isla San F\u00e9lix to gather signals intelligence from Argentinian forces in the Falklands; three sorties were conducted, the last on 17 May narrowly avoided being shot down by the Chileans, leading to the cancellation of the operation. More successful was Operation Fingent, the placement of a Marconi S259 radar on high ground in Tierra del Fuego from where it could monitor movements at southern Argentinian air bases; the RAF crew wore civilian clothes in the guise of a sales team. Information was passed to Northwood and the Task Force by means of Operation Shutter, a US supplied SATCOM system installed at the Chilean Air Force headquarters in Santiago and operated by two soldiers of the Royal Corps of Signals.\nSinking of ARA \"General Belgrano\".\nOn 30 April the British government had brought into force a Total Exclusion Zone (TEZ) to replace the previous Maritime Exclusion Zone; aircraft as well as ships of any nation were liable to be attacked inside it, if they were aiding the Argentine occupation. Admiral Sandy Woodward's carrier battle group of twelve warships and three supply ships entered the TEZ on 1 May, shortly before the first Black Buck raid, intending to degrade Argentine air and sea forces before the arrival of the amphibious group two weeks later. In anticipation, Admiral Anaya had deployed all his available warships into three task groups. The first was centred around the aircraft carrier with two old but missile-armed destroyers, and a second comprised three modern frigates. Both these groups were intended to approach the TEZ from the north. A third group approaching from the south was led by the Second World War-vintage Argentine light cruiser ; although old, her large guns and heavy armour made her a serious threat.\nOn 1 May the British nuclear-powered submarine (one of three patrolling the TEZ) located the \"General Belgrano\" group and followed it until the following day, when it was about 12 hours away from the Task Force and just outside the Total Exclusion Zone. Admiral Woodward was aware of the Argentine carrier group approaching from the other direction and ordered the cruiser to be attacked to avoid being caught in a pincer movement; he was unaware that \"Veinticinco de Mayo\" had failed to gain enough headwind to launch her aircraft. The order to sink the cruiser was confirmed by the War Cabinet in London and \"General Belgrano\" was hit by two torpedoes at 4 pm local time on 2 May, sinking an hour later. 321 members of \"General Belgrano\"'s crew, along with two civilians on board the ship, died in the incident. More than 700 men were eventually rescued from the open ocean despite cold seas and stormy weather, enduring up to 30 hours in overcrowded life rafts. The loss of \"General Belgrano\" drew heavy criticism from Latin American countries and from opponents of the war in Britain; support for the British cause wavered amongst some European allies, but the United States remained supportive.\nThe sinking had a crucial strategic effect: the elimination of the Argentine naval threat. After her loss, the entire Argentine fleet, with the exception of the diesel-powered submarine , returned to port and did not leave again during the fighting. This had the secondary effect of allowing the British to redeploy their nuclear submarines to the coast of Argentina, where they were able to provide early warning of outgoing air attacks leaving mainland bases.\nThe sinking generated significant controversy, including disagreement about the exact nature of the exclusion zone and whether \"General Belgrano\" had been returning to port at the time of the sinking. However, in 2003 the ship's captain, Hector Bonzo, stated to a documentary crew that \"General Belgrano\" had been manoeuvring, not sailing away from the exclusion zone, and that he had orders to sink any British ship he could find.\nIn a separate incident later that night, British forces engaged an Argentine patrol gunboat, the , that was searching for the crew of an Argentine Air Force Canberra light bomber shot down on 1 May. Two Royal Navy Lynx helicopters, from and , fired four Sea Skua missiles at her. Badly damaged and with eight crew dead, \"Alferez Sobral\" managed to return to Puerto Deseado two days later. The Canberra's crew were never found.\nSinking of HMS \"Sheffield\".\nOn 4 May, two days after the sinking of \"General Belgrano\", the British lost the Type 42 destroyer to fire following an Exocet missile strike from the Argentine 2nd Naval Air Fighter/Attack Squadron.\n\"Sheffield\" had been ordered forward with two other Type 42s to provide a long-range radar and medium-high altitude missile picket far from the British carriers. She was struck amidships, with devastating effect, ultimately killing 20 crew members and severely injuring 24 others. The ship was abandoned several hours later, gutted and deformed by fires. For four days she was kept afloat for inspections and the hope that she might attract Argentine submarines which could be hunted by helicopter. The decision was then taken to tow her to Ascension, but while under tow by , she finally sank east of the Falklands on 10 May.\nThe incident is described in detail by Admiral Woodward in his book \"One Hundred Days\", in Chapter One. Woodward was a former commanding officer of \"Sheffield\". The destruction of \"Sheffield\", the first Royal Navy ship sunk in action since the Second World War, had a profound impact on the War Cabinet and the British public as a whole, bringing home the fact that the conflict was now an actual shooting war.\nDiplomatic activity.\nThe tempo of operations increased throughout the first half of May as the United Nations' attempts to mediate a peace were rejected by the Argentines. The final British negotiating position was presented to Argentina by UN Secretary-General Javier P\u00e9rez de Cu\u00e9llar on 18 May 1982. In it, the British abandoned their previous \"red-line\" that British administration of the islands should be restored on the withdrawal of Argentine forces, as supported by United Nations Security Council Resolution 502.\nInstead, it proposed a UN administrator should supervise the mutual withdrawal of both Argentine and British forces, then govern the islands in consultation with the representative institutions of the islands, including Argentines, although no Argentines lived there. Reference to \"self-determination\" of the islanders was dropped and the British proposed that future negotiations over the sovereignty of the islands should be conducted by the UN. However, the proposals were rejected by the Argentines on the same day.\nSpecial forces operations.\nGiven the threat to the British fleet posed by the \u00c9tendard-Exocet combination, plans were made to use C-130s to fly in SAS troops to attack the home base of the five \u00c9tendards at R\u00edo Grande, Tierra del Fuego. The operation was codenamed \"Mikado\". The operation was later scrapped, after acknowledging that its chances of success were limited, and replaced with a plan to use the submarine to drop SBS marines several miles offshore at night for them to make their way to the coast aboard rubber inflatables and proceed to destroy Argentina's remaining Exocet stockpile \u2013 which did not exist at their objective.\nAn SAS reconnaissance team was dispatched to carry out preparations for a seaborne infiltration. A Westland Sea King helicopter carrying the assigned team took off from HMS \"Invincible\" on the night of 17 May, but bad weather forced it to land from its target and the mission was aborted. The pilot flew to Chile, landed south of Punta Arenas, and dropped off the SAS team. The helicopter's crew of three then destroyed the aircraft, surrendered to Chilean police on 25 May, and were repatriated to the UK after interrogation. The discovery of the burnt-out helicopter attracted considerable international attention. Meanwhile, the SAS team crossed the border and penetrated into Argentina, but cancelled their mission after the Argentines suspected an SAS operation and deployed some troops to search for them. The SAS men were able to return to Chile and took a civilian flight back to the UK.\nOn 14 May the SAS carried out a raid on Pebble Island on the Falklands, where the Argentine Navy had taken over a grass airstrip https:// for FMA IA 58 Pucar\u00e1 light ground-attack aircraft and Beechcraft T-34 Mentors, which resulted in the destruction of several aircraft.\nOn 15 May SBS teams were inserted by HMS \"Brilliant\" at Grantham Sound to reconnoitre and observe the landing beaches at San Carlos Bay. On the evening of 20 May, the day before the main landings, an SBS troop and artillery observers were landed by Wessex helicopters for an assault on an Argentine observation post at Fanning Head which overlooked the entrance of the bay; meanwhile, the SAS conducted a diversionary raid at Darwin.\nAir attacks.\nIn the landing zone, the limitations of the British ships' anti-aircraft defences were demonstrated in the sinking of on 21 May which was hit by nine bombs, and on 24 May when attempts to defuse unexploded bombs failed. Out at sea with the carrier battle group, was struck by an air-launched Exocet on 25 May, which caused the loss of three out of four Chinook and five Wessex helicopters as well as their maintenance equipment and facilities, together with runway-building equipment and tents. This was a severe blow from a logistical perspective. Twelve of her crew members were killed.\nAlso lost on 25 May was , a sister to , whilst in company with after being ordered to act as a decoy to draw away Argentine aircraft from other ships at San Carlos Bay. and were moderately damaged.\nMany British ships escaped being sunk because of limitations imposed by circumstances on Argentine pilots. To avoid the highest concentration of British air defences, Argentine pilots released bombs at very low altitude, and hence those bomb fuzes did not have sufficient time to arm before impact. The low release of the retarded bombs (some of which the British had sold to the Argentines years earlier) meant that many never exploded, as there was insufficient time in the air for them to arm themselves. The pilots would have been aware of this\u2014but due to the high concentration required to avoid surface-to-air missiles, anti-Aircraft Artillery (AAA), and British Sea Harriers, many failed to climb to the necessary release point. The Argentine forces solved the problem by fitting improvised retarding devices, allowing the pilots to effectively employ low-level bombing attacks on 8 June.\nThirteen bombs hit British ships without detonating. Lord Craig, the retired Marshal of the Royal Air Force, is said to have remarked: \"Six better fuses and we would have lost\" although \"Ardent\" and \"Antelope\" were both lost despite the failure of bombs to explode, and \"Argonaut\" was put out of action. The fuzes were functioning correctly, and the bombs were simply released from too low an altitude. The Argentines lost 22 aircraft in the attacks.\nIn his autobiographical account of the Falklands War, Admiral Woodward blamed the BBC World Service for disclosing information that led the Argentines to change the retarding devices on the bombs. The World Service reported the lack of detonations after receiving a briefing on the matter from a Ministry of Defence official. He describes the BBC as being more concerned with being \"fearless seekers after truth\" than with the lives of British servicemen. Colonel 'H'. Jones levelled similar accusations against the BBC after they disclosed the impending British attack on Goose Green by 2 PARA.\nOn 30 May two Super \u00c9tendards, one carrying Argentina's last remaining Exocet, escorted by four A-4C Skyhawks each with two 500\u00a0lb bombs, took off to attack \"Invincible\". Argentine intelligence had sought to determine the position of the carriers from analysis of aircraft flight routes from the task force to the islands. However, the British had a standing order that all aircraft conduct a low level transit when leaving or returning to the carriers to disguise their position. This tactic compromised the Argentine attack, which focused on a group of escorts south of the carrier group. Two of the attacking Skyhawks were shot down by Sea Dart missiles fired by HMS \"Exeter\", with HMS \"Avenger\" claiming to have shot down the Exocet missile with her 4.5\" gun (although this claim is disputed). No damage was caused to any British vessels. During the war, Argentina claimed to have damaged \"Invincible\" and continues to do so, although no evidence of any such damage has been produced or uncovered.\nLand battles.\nSan Carlos \u2013 \"Bomb Alley\".\nDuring the night of 21 May, the British Amphibious Task Group under the command of Commodore Michael Clapp (Commodore, Amphibious Warfare \u2013 COMAW) mounted Operation Sutton, the amphibious landing on beaches around San Carlos Water, on the northwestern coast of East Falkland facing onto Falkland Sound. The bay, known as \"Bomb Alley\" by British forces, was the scene of repeated air attacks by low-flying Argentine jets.\nThe men of 3 Commando Brigade were put ashore as follows: 2nd Battalion, Parachute Regiment (2 PARA) from the RORO ferry \"Norland\" and 40 Commando Royal Marines from the amphibious ship were landed at San Carlos (Blue Beach), 3rd Battalion, Parachute Regiment (3 PARA) from the amphibious ship was landed at Port San Carlos (Green Beach) and 45 Commando from RFA \"Stromness\" was landed at Ajax Bay (Red Beach). Notably, the waves of eight LCUs and eight LCVPs were led by Major Ewen Southby-Tailyour, who had commanded the Falklands detachment NP8901 from March 1978 to 1979. 42 Commando on the ocean liner was a tactical reserve. Units from the Royal Artillery, Royal Engineers, etc. and armoured reconnaissance vehicles were also put ashore with the landing craft, the Round Table-class LSL and mexeflote barges. Rapier missile launchers were carried as underslung loads of Sea Kings for rapid deployment.\nBy dawn the next day, they had established a secure beachhead from which to conduct offensive operations. Brigadier Julian Thompson established his brigade headquarters in dugouts near San Carlos Settlement.\nGoose Green.\nFrom early on 27 May until 28 May, 2 PARA advanced towards and attacked Goose Green and Darwin, which were held by the Argentine 12th Infantry Regiment. The 700 men of 2 PARA had naval gunfire support from HMS \"Arrow\" and artillery support from 8 Commando Battery, Royal Artillery. After a prolonged and intense battle that lasted through the night and into the following day, the British secured victory. In total, 18 British and approximately 50 Argentine soldiers were killed. A further 961 Argentine personnel, including 202 members of the Argentine Air Force stationed at Condor airfield, were taken prisoner.\nDuring the fighting, Lieutenant Colonel H. Jones, the commanding officer of 2 PARA, was killed while leading an assault on Argentine positions. He was posthumously awarded the Victoria Cross for his actions.\nWith the Argentine force at Goose Green neutralised, British forces were able to break out of the San Carlos beachhead and elements of 45 Commando and 3 PARA began a loaded march across East Falkland.\nSpecial forces on Mount Kent.\nMeanwhile, 42 Commando prepared to move by helicopter to Mount Kent. Unbeknownst to senior British officers, the Argentine generals were determined to tie down the British troops in the Mount Kent area, and on 27 and 28 May they sent transport aircraft loaded with Blowpipe surface-to-air missiles and commandos (602nd Commando Company and 601st National Gendarmerie Special Forces Squadron) to Stanley. This operation was known as \"Autoimpuesta\" (\"Self-imposed\").\nFor the next week, the SAS and the Mountain and Arctic Warfare Cadre (M&amp;AWC) of 3 Commando Brigade waged intense patrol battles with patrols of the volunteers' 602nd Commando Company under Major Aldo Rico, normally second in Command of the 22nd Mountain Infantry Regiment. Throughout 30 May, Royal Air Force Harriers were active over Mount Kent. One of them, Harrier \"XZ963\", flown by Squadron Leader Jerry Pook\u2014responding to a call for help from D Squadron\u2014attacked Mount Kent's eastern lower slopes, which led to its loss through small-arms fire. Pook was subsequently awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross. On 31 May the M&amp;AWC defeated Argentine Special Forces at the skirmish at Top Malo House. A 13-strong Argentine Army Commando detachment (Captain Jos\u00e9 Vercesi's 1st Assault Section, 602nd Commando Company) found itself trapped in a small shepherd's house at Top Malo. The Argentine commandos fired from windows and doorways and then took refuge in a stream bed from the burning house. Completely surrounded, they fought 19 M&amp;AWC marines under Captain Rod Boswell for 45 minutes until, with their ammunition almost exhausted, they elected to surrender.\nThree Cadre members were badly wounded. On the Argentine side, there were two dead, including Lieutenant Ernesto Espinoza and Sergeant Mateo Sbert (who were posthumously decorated for their bravery). Only five Argentines were left unscathed. As the British secured Top Malo House, Lieutenant Fraser Haddow's M&amp;AWC patrol came down from Malo Hill, brandishing a large Union Flag. One wounded Argentine soldier, Lieutenant Horacio Losito, commented that their escape route would have taken them through Haddows position.\n601st Commando tried to move forward to rescue 602nd Commando Company on Estancia Mountain. Spotted by 42 Commando, they were engaged with L16 81\u00a0mm mortars and forced to withdraw to Two Sisters mountain. The leader of 602nd Commando Company on Estancia Mountain realised his position had become untenable and after conferring with fellow officers ordered a withdrawal.\nThe Argentine operation also saw the extensive use of helicopter support to position and extract patrols; the 601st Combat Aviation Battalion also suffered casualties. At about 11:00\u00a0am on 30 May, an A\u00e9rospatiale SA 330 Puma helicopter was brought down by a shoulder-launched FIM-92 Stinger surface-to-air missile (SAM) fired by the SAS in the vicinity of Mount Kent. Six Argentine National Gendarmerie Special Forces were killed and eight more wounded in the crash.\nAs Brigadier Thompson commented: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBluff Cove and Fitzroy.\nBy 1 June, with the arrival of a further British troops of the 5th Infantry Brigade, the new British divisional commander, Major General Jeremy Moore RM, had sufficient force to start planning an offensive against Stanley. During this build-up, the Argentine air assaults on the British naval forces continued, killing 56. Of the dead, 32 were from the Welsh Guards on RFA \"Sir Galahad\" and RFA \"Sir Tristram\" on 8 June. According to Surgeon-Commander Rick Jolly of the Falklands Field Hospital, more than 150 men suffered burns and injuries of some kind in the attack, including Simon Weston.\nThe Guards were sent to support an advance along the southern approach to Stanley. On 2 June a small advance party of 2 PARA moved to Swan Inlet house in a number of Army Westland Scout helicopters. Telephoning ahead to Fitzroy, they discovered that the area was clear of Argentines and (exceeding their authority) commandeered the one remaining RAF Chinook helicopter to frantically ferry another contingent of 2 Para ahead to Fitzroy (a settlement on Port Pleasant) and Bluff Cove (a settlement on Port Fitzroy).\nThis uncoordinated advance caused great difficulties in planning for the commanders of the combined operation, as they now found themselves with of indefensible positions, strung along their southern flank. Support could not be sent by air as the single remaining Chinook was already heavily oversubscribed. The soldiers could march, but their equipment and heavy supplies would need to be ferried by sea.\nPlans were drawn up for half the Welsh Guards to march light on the night of 2 June, whilst the Scots Guards and the second half of the Welsh Guards were to be ferried from San Carlos Water in the Landing Ship Logistics (LSL) \"Sir Tristram\" and the landing platform dock (LPD) \"Intrepid\" on the night of 5 June. \"Intrepid\" was planned to stay one day and unload itself and as much of \"Sir Tristram\" as possible, leaving the next evening for the relative safety of San Carlos. Escorts would be provided for this day, after which \"Sir Tristram\" would be left to unload using a Mexeflote (a powered raft) for as long as it took to finish.\nPolitical pressure from above to not risk the LPD forced Commodore Michael Clapp to alter this plan. Two lower-value LSLs would be sent, but with no suitable beaches to land on, \"Intrepid\"'s landing craft would need to accompany them to unload. A complicated operation across several nights with \"Intrepid\" and her sister ship sailing half-way to dispatch their craft was devised.\nThe attempted overland march by half the Welsh Guards failed, possibly as they refused to march light and attempted to carry their equipment. They returned to San Carlos and landed directly at Bluff Cove when \"Fearless\" dispatched her landing craft. \"Sir Tristram\" sailed on the night of 6 June and was joined by \"Sir Galahad\" at dawn on 7 June. Anchored apart in Port Pleasant, the landing ships were near Fitzroy, the designated landing point. The landing craft should have been able to unload the ships to that point relatively quickly, but confusion over the ordered disembarkation point (the first half of the Guards going direct to Bluff Cove) resulted in the senior Welsh Guards infantry officer aboard insisting that his troops should be ferried the far longer distance directly to Port Fitzroy/Bluff Cove. The alternative was for the infantrymen to march via the recently repaired Bluff Cove bridge (destroyed by retreating Argentine combat engineers) to their destination, a journey of around .\nThere are conflicting accounts of the causes for the delay in disembarking the Welsh Guards contingent. One narrative posits that on \"Sir Galahad\"'s stern ramp there was an argument about what to do. The officers on board were told that they could not sail to Bluff Cove in daylight. They were told that they had to get their men off ship and onto the beach as soon as possible as the ships were vulnerable to enemy aircraft. It would take 20 minutes to transport the men to shore using the LCU and Mexeflote. They would then have the choice of walking the seven miles to Bluff Cove or wait until dark to sail there. The officers on board said that they would remain on board until dark and then sail. They refused to take their men off the ship. They possibly doubted that the bridge had been repaired due to the presence on board \"Sir Galahad\" of the Royal Engineer Troop whose job it was to repair the bridge. The Welsh Guards were keen to rejoin the rest of their Battalion, who were potentially facing the enemy without their support. They had also not seen any enemy aircraft since landing at San Carlos and may have been overconfident in the air defences. Royal Marines Major Ewen Southby-Tailyour gave a direct order for the men to leave the ship and go to the beach; the order was ignored.\nHowever, a contemporary Royal Navy report, partially declassified in 2024, throws into question the validity of this account. The investigative report states that \"At no time was a direct order to disembark given to...[the officer commanding the Welsh Guards]...by a superior officer\". Additionally, it is claimed that \"Sir Tristram\", although receiving signals advising of \"Sir Galahad\"'s arrival, failed to pass these onto the officers responsible for her unloading, who \"...had not been warned of the arrival of the ship, nor of the nature of her cargo...no preparation had been made for the timely off-load of the new arrival.\"\nThe longer journey time of the landing craft taking the troops directly to Bluff Cove and the ambiguity over orders being issued to this effect caused an enormous delay in unloading. This had disastrous consequences, since the ships were visible to Argentine troops on Mount Harriet, some distant. Without escorts, having not yet established their air defence, and still almost fully laden, the two LSLs in Port Pleasant were sitting targets for eight Argentine A-4 Skyhawks. A coordinated sortie by six Daggers attacked HMS \"Plymouth\", which had the effect of drawing off the patrolling Sea Harriers. At 17.00, the Skyhawks attacked from seaward, hitting \"Sir Galahad\" with three bombs; although none exploded, they caused fierce fires which quickly grew out of control. Two bombs hit \"Sir Tristram\", also starting fires and causing the ship to be abandoned, but the damage was not as serious. Three Sea King and a Wessex helicopter ferried the wounded to an advanced dressing station which was set up on the shore.\nBritish casualties were 48 killed and 115 wounded. Three Argentine pilots were also killed. The air strike delayed the scheduled British ground attack on Stanley by two days. The British casualties amounted to two infantry companies, but it was decided not to release detailed casualty figures because intelligence indicated that Argentine commanders believed that a much more severe reverse had been inflicted. However, the disaster at Port Pleasant (although often known as Bluff Cove) would provide the world with some of the most sobering images of the war as ITV News video showed helicopters hovering in thick smoke to winch survivors from the burning landing ships.\nFall of Stanley.\nOn the night of 11 June, after several days of painstaking reconnaissance and logistic build-up, British forces launched a brigade-sized night attack against the heavily defended ring of high ground surrounding Stanley. Units of 3 Commando Brigade, supported by naval gunfire from several Royal Navy ships, simultaneously attacked in the Battle of Mount Harriet, Battle of Two Sisters, and Battle of Mount Longdon. Mount Harriet was taken at a cost of 2 British and 18 Argentine soldiers. At Two Sisters, the British faced both enemy resistance and friendly fire but managed to capture their objectives. The toughest battle was at Mount Longdon. British forces were bogged down by rifle, mortar, machine gun, artillery and sniper fire, and ambushes. Despite this, the British continued their advance.\nDuring this battle, 14 were killed when , straying too close to shore while returning from the gun line, was struck by an improvised trailer-based Exocet MM38 launcher taken from the destroyer by Argentine Navy technicians. On the same day, Sergeant Ian McKay of 4 Platoon, B Company, 3 PARA died in a grenade attack on an Argentine bunker; he received a posthumous Victoria Cross for his actions. After a night of fierce fighting, all objectives were secured. Both sides suffered heavy losses.\nThe second phase of attacks began on the night of 13 June, and the momentum of the initial assault was maintained. 2 PARA, with light armour support from the Blues and Royals, captured Wireless Ridge, with the loss of 3 British and 25 Argentine lives, and the 2nd Battalion, Scots Guards captured Mount Tumbledown at the Battle of Mount Tumbledown, which cost 10 British and 30 Argentine lives. A simultaneous special forces raid by the SAS and SBS in fast boats to attack the oil tanks in Stanley Harbour was beaten off by anti-aircraft guns.\nWith the last natural defence line at Mount Tumbledown breached, the Argentine town defences of Stanley began to falter. In the morning gloom, one company commander got lost and his junior officers became despondent. Private Santiago Carrizo of the 3rd Regiment described how a platoon commander ordered them to take up positions in the houses and \"if a Kelper resists, shoot him\", but the entire company did nothing of the kind. A daylight attack on Mount William by the Gurkhas, delayed from the previous night by the fighting at Tumbledown, ended in anticlimax when the Argentine positions were found to be deserted.\nA ceasefire was declared on 14 June and Thatcher announced the commencement of surrender negotiations. The commander of the Argentine garrison in Stanley, Brigade General Mario Men\u00e9ndez, surrendered to Major General Jeremy Moore the same day.\nSubjugation of South Sandwich Islands.\nOn 20 June the British retook the South Sandwich Islands, which involved accepting the surrender of the Southern Thule Garrison at the Corbeta Uruguay base and declared hostilities over. Argentina had established Corbeta Uruguay in 1976, but prior to 1982 the United Kingdom had contested the existence of the Argentine base only through diplomatic channels.\nForeign involvement.\nCommonwealth.\nThe UK received political support from member countries of the Commonwealth of Nations. Australia, Canada, and New Zealand withdrew their diplomats from Buenos Aires.\nNew Zealand.\nThe New Zealand government expelled the Argentine ambassador following the invasion. The Prime Minister, Robert Muldoon, was in London when the war broke out and in an opinion piece published in \"The Times\" he said: \"The military rulers of Argentina must not be appeased ... New Zealand will back Britain all the way.\" Broadcasting on the BBC World Service, he told the Falkland Islanders: \"This is Rob Muldoon. We are thinking of you and we are giving our full and total support to the British Government in its endeavours to rectify this situation and get rid of the people who have invaded your country.\" On 20 May 1982, he announced that New Zealand would make , a , available for use where the British thought fit to release a Royal Navy vessel for the Falklands. In the House of Commons afterwards, Margaret Thatcher said: \"...the New Zealand Government and people have been absolutely magnificent in their support for this country [and] the Falkland Islanders, for the rule of liberty and of law\".\nAustralia.\nEncouraged by the generous response of New Zealand, the Australian prime minister, Malcolm Fraser, was rushed into offering to cancel the intended purchase of HMS \"Invincible\" which was quickly accepted by the British. However, this left the Royal Australian Navy without a replacement for their only aircraft carrier, , which was in the process of decommissioning.\nFrance.\nThe French president, Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand, declared an embargo on French arms sales and assistance to Argentina. In addition, France allowed UK aircraft and warships use of its port and airfield facilities at Dakar in Senegal and France provided dissimilar aircraft training so that Harrier pilots could train against the French aircraft used by Argentina. French intelligence also cooperated with Britain to prevent Argentina from obtaining more Exocet missiles on the international market. In a 2002 interview, and in reference to this support, John Nott, the then British Defence Secretary, had described France as Britain's 'greatest ally'. In 2012, it came to light that while this support was taking place, a French technical team, employed by Dassault and already in Argentina, remained there throughout the war despite the presidential decree. The team had provided material support to the Argentines, identifying and fixing faults in Exocet missile launchers. John Nott said he had known the French team was there but said its work was thought not to be of any importance. An adviser to the then French government denied any knowledge at the time that the technical team was there. The French DGSE did know the team was there as they had an informant in the team but decried any assistance the team gave: \"It's bordering on an act of treason, or disobedience to an embargo\". John Nott, when asked whether he felt let down by the French, said, \"If you're asking me: 'Are the French duplicitous people?' the answer is: 'Of course they are, and they always have been\". Four Exocet missiles that had been ordered by Peru were prevented by the French government from being delivered by air and, after pressure from Britain who suspected that they would be passed on to Argentina, delayed their release to a Peruvian ship until the conflict was over.\nUnited States.\nDeclassified cables show the United States both felt that Thatcher had not considered diplomatic options and feared that a protracted conflict could draw the Soviet Union on Argentina's side. The US initially tried to mediate an end to the conflict through shuttle diplomacy, but when Argentina refused the American peace overtures, US Secretary of State Alexander Haig announced that the United States would prohibit arms sales to Argentina and provide material support for British operations. Both houses of the US Congress passed resolutions supporting the American action siding with the United Kingdom.\nThe US provided Britain with 200 Sidewinder missiles for use by the Harrier jets, eight Stinger surface-to-air missile systems, Harpoon anti-ship missiles and mortar bombs. On Ascension Island, the underground fuel tanks were empty when the British Task Force arrived in mid-April 1982 and the leading assault ship, , did not have enough fuel to dock when it arrived off the island. The United States diverted a supertanker to replenish both the fuel tanks of ships at anchor there and the storage tanks on the island with approximately of fuel. The Pentagon further committed to providing additional support in the event that the war dragged on into the Southern Hemisphere's winter. In that scenario, the US committed tanker aircraft to support Royal Air Force missions in Europe, releasing RAF aircraft to support operations over the Falklands.\nThe United States allowed the United Kingdom to use American communication satellites for secure communications between submarines in the Southern Ocean and Naval HQ in Britain. The US also passed on satellite imagery (which it publicly denied) and weather forecast data to the British Fleet.\nUS President Ronald Reagan approved the Royal Navy's request to borrow a Sea Harrier-capable (the US Navy had earmarked for this) in the event a British aircraft carrier was lost. The US Navy developed a plan to help the British man the ship with American military contractors, who would likely be retired sailors with knowledge of the ship's systems.\nOther Organization of American States members.\nBrazil.\nAt the end of May, Brazilian authorities allowed FAA Boeing 707s to refuel at Recife International Airport carrying arms shipments from Libya. When the British Embassy in Bras\u00edlia became aware of this, the British Secret Intelligence Service devised a plan to sabotage the next flight on the ground, but diplomatic pressure on the Brazilian government to observe their legal duties as a neutral country resulted in no further flights being accepted. On 3 June, an RAF Vulcan on returning from a Black Buck raid on the Falklands, was forced to make an emergency landing at Rio de Janeiro International Airport after damage to its refuelling probe prevented it returning to Ascension Island. The Vulcan and her crew were interned and released seven days later, although an unused Shrike missile that the aircraft had been carrying was retained.\nChile.\nAt the outbreak of the war, Chile was in negotiations with Argentina for control over the Beagle Channel and feared Argentina would use similar tactics to secure the channel. During this conflict, Argentina had already rejected two attempts at international mediation and tried to exert military pressure on Chile with an operation to occupy the disputed territory. Considering the situation, Chile refused to support the Argentine position during the war and gave support to the UK in the form of intelligence about the Argentine military and early warning intelligence on Argentine air movements. Throughout the war, Argentina was afraid of a Chilean military intervention in Patagonia and kept some of its best mountain regiments away from the Falklands near the Chilean border as a precaution. The Chilean government also allowed the United Kingdom to requisition the refuelling vessel , which Chile had recently purchased and which had arrived at Arica in Chile on 4 April. The ship left port soon afterwards, bound for Ascension Island through the Panama Canal and stopping at Cura\u00e7ao en route.\nCuba.\nArgentina itself was politically backed by a number of countries in Latin America (though, notably, not Chile). Several members of the Non-Aligned Movement also backed Argentina's position; notably, Cuba and Nicaragua led a diplomatic effort to rally non-aligned countries from Africa and Asia to Argentina's position. This initiative came as a surprise to Western observers, as Cuba had no diplomatic relations with Argentina's right-leaning military junta. British diplomats complained that Cuba had \"cynically exploited\" the crisis to pursue its normalisation of relations with Latin American countries; Argentina eventually resumed relations with Cuba in 1983; Brazil did so in 1986. According to Leycester Coltman, Cuban president Fidel Castro offered to send troops to reinforce the Argentine garrison in the Falklands and to deploy the Cuban submarine fleet to attack British warships en route to the South Atlantic.\nPeru.\nPeru attempted to purchase 12 Exocet missiles from France, to be delivered to Argentina in a failed secret operation. Peru also openly sent \"Mirages, pilots and missiles\" to Argentina during the war. The nation also supplied the Argentine forces with 40 Strela-2M shoulder-launched surface-to-air missile launchers and three experienced operators to help train in the use of those weapons. Peru had earlier transferred ten Hercules transport planes to Argentina soon after the British Task Force had set sail in April 1982. Nick van der Bijl records that, after the Argentine defeat at Goose Green, Venezuela and Guatemala offered to send paratroopers to the Falklands.\nSoviet Union.\nThe Soviet Union described the Falklands as \"a disputed territory\", recognising Argentina's ambitions over the islands, and called for restraint on all sides. Soviet media frequently criticised the UK and US during the war. Significantly, however, the Soviet Union refrained from vetoing and thus made possible UN Security Council Resolution 502 demanding the immediate withdrawal of all Argentine troops from the Falklands. However, the Soviet Union mounted some clandestine logistics operations to assist the Argentines. Days after the invasion by the Argentine forces, the Soviets launched additional intelligence satellites into low Earth orbit covering the southern Atlantic Ocean. Conflicting reports exist on whether Soviet ocean surveillance data might have played a role in the sinking of and .\nSpain.\nSpain's position was one of ambiguity, underpinning the basic dilemma of the Spanish foreign policy regarding the articulation of relationships with Latin America and European communities. On 2 April 1982, the Council of Ministers issued an official note defending principles of decolonisation and against the use of force. Spain abstained in the vote of UN Security Council Resolution 502, a position that Spanish UN representative Jaime de Pini\u00e9s justified by pointing out that the resolution did not mention the underlying problem of decolonisation. The Spanish stance throughout the conflict contrasted with those of the countries in its immediate vicinity (EEC members and Portugal).\nSpanish authorities also foiled a covert attack by the Argentine Naval Intelligence Service on a British warship at Gibraltar, code named Operation Algeciras. Three frogmen, recruited from a former anti-government insurgent group, were to plant mines on a ship's hull. The divers travelled to Spain through France, where French security services noted their military diving equipment and alerted their Spanish counterparts. They were covertly monitored as they moved from the Argentine embassy in Madrid to Algeciras, where they were arrested on 17 May by the \"Guardia Civil\" and deported.\nPortugal.\nPortugal supported its long-standing ally Britain and the facilities of the Azores were offered to the Royal Navy.\nEEC.\nThe European Economic Community provided economic support by imposing economic sanctions on Argentina. In a meeting on Good Friday, 9 April, at the Egmont Palace, the EEC Political Committee proposed a total import ban from Argentina. Belgium, Denmark, Greece, Luxembourg and Ireland agreed immediately; France, Germany and the Netherlands were persuaded before the meeting ended. Italy, which had close cultural ties with Argentina, consented on the next day.\nOther countries.\nIreland.\nIreland's position altered during the war. As a rotating member of the United Nations Security Council, it supported Resolution 502. However, on 4 May, the Fianna F\u00e1il government led by Charles Haughey decided to oppose EEC sanctions and called for a ceasefire. Haughey justified this as complying with Irish neutrality. Historians have suggested it was an opportunistic appeal to anti-British sentiment and reaction to Haughey's being sidelined during the 1981 republican hunger strike. The strain on British\u2013Irish relations eased when Haughey's government fell in November 1982.\nIsrael.\nAccording to the book \"Operation Israel\", advisers from Israel Aerospace Industries were already in Argentina and continued their work during the conflict. The book also claims that Israel sold weapons, drop tanks and aircraft to Argentina in a secret operation via Peru.\nSierra Leone.\nThe Government of Sierra Leone allowed British task force ships to refuel at Freetown.\nThe Gambia.\nVC10 transport aircraft landed at Banjul in The Gambia while flying between the UK and Ascension Island.\nLibya.\nThrough Libya, under Muammar Gaddafi, Argentina received 20 launchers and 60 SA-7 missiles (which Argentina later described as \"not effective\"), as well as machine guns, mortars and mines. To retrieve the weapons, four trips were made using two Argentine Air Force Boeing 707s which refuelled in Recife with the consent of the Brazilian government.\nCasualties.\nIn total, 907 people were killed during the 74 days of the conflict. Additionally, there were Argentine and 777 British injured or wounded.\nArgentina.\nA total of 649 Argentine servicemen were killed:\nUnited Kingdom.\nA total of 255 British servicemen were killed:\nOf the 86 Royal Navy personnel, 22 were lost in , 19 + 1 lost in , 19 + 1 lost in and 13 lost in . Fourteen naval cooks were among the dead, the largest number from any one branch in the Royal Navy.\nThirty-three of the British Army's dead came from the Welsh Guards (32 of whom died on the RFA \"Sir Galahad\" in the Bluff Cove Air Attacks), 21 from the 3rd Battalion, the Parachute Regiment, 18 from the 2nd Battalion, the Parachute Regiment, 19 from the Special Air Service, 3 each from Royal Signals and Royal Army Medical Corps and 8 from each of the Scots Guards and Royal Engineers. The 1st battalion/7th Duke of Edinburgh's Own Gurkha Rifles lost one man.\nCivilians.\nTwo civilians, Doreen Bonner and Susan Whitley, were accidentally killed by British shelling during the night of 12 June. A third civilian, Mary Goodwin, was severely injured and died on 14 June. It was also reported that HMS \"Brilliant\", on an anti-submarine patrol, detected and torpedoed three whales by accident.\nRed Cross Box.\nBefore British offensive operations began, the British and Argentine governments agreed to establish an area on the high seas where both sides could station hospital ships without fear of attack by the other side. This area, a circle 20 nautical miles in diameter, was referred to as the Red Cross Box () and located about north of Falkland Sound. Ultimately, the British stationed four ships (, and and the primary hospital ship SS \"Uganda\") within the box, while the Argentines stationed three (, and ).\nThe hospital ships were non-warships converted to serve as hospital ships. The three British naval vessels were survey vessels and \"Uganda\" was a passenger liner. \"Almirante Irizar\" was an icebreaker, \"Bahia Paraiso\" was an Antarctic supply transport and \"Puerto Deseado\" was a survey ship. British and Argentine vessels operating within the Box were in radio contact and there was some transfer of patients between hospital ships. For example, the \"Uganda\" transferred patients to an Argentine hospital ship on four occasions. \"Hydra\" worked with \"Hecla\" and \"Herald\" to take casualties from \"Uganda\" to Montevideo, Uruguay, where a fleet of Uruguayan ambulances met them. RAF VC10 aircraft then flew the casualties to the UK for transfer to the Princess Alexandra Hospital at RAF Wroughton, near Swindon.\nThroughout the conflict, officials of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) conducted inspections to verify that all concerned were abiding by the rules of the Geneva Conventions. Argentine naval officers also inspected the British casualty ferries in the estuary of the River Plate.\nAftermath.\nThis brief war brought many consequences for all the parties involved, besides the considerable casualty rate and large materiel loss, especially of shipping and aircraft, relative to the deployed military strengths of the opposing sides.\nIn the United Kingdom, Margaret Thatcher's popularity increased. The success of the Falklands campaign was widely regarded as a factor in the turnaround in fortunes for the Conservative government, who had been trailing behind the SDP\u2013Liberal Alliance in the opinion polls for months before the conflict began. Following the success in the Falklands, the Conservatives returned to the top of the opinion polls by a wide margin and went on to win the following year's general election by a landslide. Subsequently, Defence Secretary Nott's proposed cuts to the Royal Navy were abandoned.\nThe islanders had full British citizenship restored in 1983; their quality of life improved through investments made by the UK after the war and by economic liberalisation that had been stalled for fear of angering Argentina. In 1985, a new constitution was enacted, promoting self-government which has continued to devolve power to the islanders. The result of the 2013 Falkland Islands sovereignty referendum was 99.8% of the electorate voting for the islands to remain a British territory, with a voter turnout of 92%. \nIn Argentina, defeat in the Falklands War meant that a possible war with Chile was avoided. Further, Argentina returned to a democratic government in the 1983 general election, the first free general election since 1973. It also had a major social impact, destroying the military's image as the \"moral reserve of the nation\" that they had maintained through most of the 20th century.\nA detailed study of British veterans of the war commissioned by the UK Ministry of Defence found that between 1982 and 2012, 95 had died from \"intentional self-harm and events of undetermined intent (suicides and open verdict deaths)\", a proportion lower than would be expected within the general population over the same period. However, a study of British combat veterans conducted five years after the conflict found that half of the sample group had suffered some symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), while 22% were assessed to have the complete syndrome.\n\"Fortress Falklands\".\nIn the immediate aftermath of the conflict, the British government embarked on a long-term policy of providing the islands with a viable military garrison, known informally as \"Fortress Falklands\". Initially, an aircraft carrier was kept in the area until the runway at Stanley Airport could be improved to take conventional RAF fighters. A permanent military complex with a runway designed to take long-haul airliners was constructed in the south of East Falkland, RAF Mount Pleasant, which opened in 1985; an associated deep-water port at Mare Harbour was also constructed. A small military outpost was established at King Edward Point on South Georgia, but it was closed in 2001.\nMilitary analysis.\nMilitarily, the Falklands conflict remains one of the largest air-naval combat operations between modern forces since the end of the Second World War. As such, it has been the subject of intense study by military analysts and historians. Significant takeaways include the vulnerability of surface ships to anti-ship missiles and submarines, the challenges of co-ordinating logistical support for long-distance projections of power, and reconfirmation of the importance of tactical air power, including helicopters.\nIn 1986 the BBC broadcast the \"Horizon\" programme \"In the Wake of HMS Sheffield\", which discussed lessons learned from the conflict, and measures taken to implement them, such as incorporating greater stealth capabilities and providing better close-in weapon systems for the fleet. The principal British military responses to the Falklands War were the measures adopted in the .\nMemorials.\nThere are several memorials on the Falkland Islands themselves, the most notable of which is the 1982 Liberation Memorial, unveiled in 1984 on the second anniversary of the end of the war. It lists the names of the 255 British military personnel who died during the war and is located in front of the Secretariat Building in Stanley, overlooking Stanley Harbour. The Memorial was funded entirely by the Islanders and is inscribed with the words \"In Memory of Those Who Liberated Us\".\nDuring the war, British dead were put into plastic body bags and buried in mass graves. After the war, the bodies were recovered; 14 were reburied at Blue Beach Military Cemetery and 64 were returned to the United Kingdom. Many of the Argentine dead are buried in the Argentine Military Cemetery two\u00a0kilometers northeast of the small settlement of Darwin, approximately 82\u00a0kilometers west of Stanley. The Argentine government declined an offer by the UK to have the bodies repatriated to Argentina.\nIn addition to memorials on the islands, there is a memorial in the crypt of St Paul's Cathedral, London to the British war dead. At the National Memorial Arboretum in Staffordshire, a Falklands War memorial was unveiled in May 2012 in a service attended by 600 veterans and their families; the names of the fallen were also inscribed on the Armed Forces Memorial at the arboretum, which commemorates all British servicemen killed in action since the end of the Second World War. A memorial to the seamen of the Merchant Navy who died in the war stands at the Tower Hill Memorial in Trinity Square Gardens, London. A memorial to the Royal Marines, known as \"the Yomper\", was unveiled by Margaret Thatcher in 1992 outside the former Eastney Barracks near Portsmouth. The Falkland Islands Memorial Chapel at Pangbourne College was opened in March 2000 as a commemoration of the lives and sacrifice of all those who served and died in the South Atlantic in 1982.\nIn Argentina there are many memorials, museums and murals all over the country. The most important are a cenotaph at Plaza San Mart\u00edn in Buenos Aires, and in Ushuaia, declared National Monument.\nMinefields.\nIn 2011 there were 113 uncleared minefields plus unexploded ordnance (UXOs) covering an area of on the Falkland Islands. Of this area, on the Murrell Peninsula were classified as being \"suspected minefields\"\u2014the area had been heavily pastured for 25 years without incident. It was estimated that these minefields had anti-personnel mines and anti-tank mines.\nThe UK reported six military personnel injured by mines or UXO in 1982, then two more in 1983. Most military accidents took place in the immediate aftermath of the conflict, while clearing minefields or trying to establish the extent of minefield perimeters, particularly where no detailed records existed. No civilian mine casualties have ever occurred on the islands, and no human casualties from mines or UXO have been reported since 1984.\nOn 9 May 2008 the Falkland Islands Government asserted that the minefields, which represent 0.1% of the available farmland on the islands \"present no long term social or economic difficulties for the Falklands\", and that the impact of clearing the mines would cause more problems than containing them. However, the British Government, in accordance with its commitments under the Mine Ban Treaty had a commitment to clear the mines by the end of 2019.\nIn May 2012 it was announced that of Stanley Common (which lies between the Stanley \u2013 Mount Pleasant road and the shoreline) was made safe and had been opened to the public, opening up a stretch of coastline and a further two kilometres of shoreline along Mullet Creek.\nIn November 2020, after a final clearance campaign by contractors from Zimbabwe, it was declared that the Falkland Islands were now free of all landmines. A celebration of the event took place on the weekend of 14 November where the final landmine was detonated.\nPress and publicity.\nArgentina.\nSelected war correspondents were regularly flown to Port Stanley in military aircraft to report on the war. Back in Buenos Aires, newspapers and magazines reported on \"the heroic actions of the largely conscript army and its successes\".\nOfficers from the intelligence services were attached to the newspapers and 'leaked' information corroborating the official communiqu\u00e9s from the government. The glossy magazines \"Gente\" and \"Siete D\u00edas\" swelled to 60 pages with colour photographs of British warships in flames\u2014many of them faked\u2014and bogus eyewitness reports of the Argentine commandos' guerrilla war on South Georgia (6 May) and an already dead Pucar\u00e1 pilot's attack on HMS \"Hermes\" (Lt. Daniel Antonio Jukic had been killed at Goose Green during a British air strike on 1 May). Most of the faked photos actually came from the tabloid press. One of the best remembered headlines was \"Estamos ganando\" (\"We're winning\") from the magazine \"Gente\", that would later use variations of it.\nThe Argentine troops on the Falkland Islands could read \"Gaceta Argentina\"\u2014a newspaper intended to boost morale among the servicemen. Some of its untruths could easily be unveiled by the soldiers who recovered corpses.\nThe \"Malvinas cause\" united the Argentines in a patriotic atmosphere that protected the junta from critics, and even opponents of the military government supported Galtieri; Ernesto Sabato said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In Argentina, it is not a military dictatorship that is fighting. It is the whole people, her women, her children, her old people, regardless of their political persuasion. Opponents to the regime like myself are fighting for our dignity, fighting to extricate the last vestiges of colonialism. Don't be mistaken, Europe, it is not a dictatorship that is fighting for the Malvinas; it is the whole nation.\nIn the Argentine press, false reports that HMS \"Hermes\" was sunk and HMS \"Invincible\" had been damaged were circulated after the weekly magazines \"Gente\" and \"La Semana\" had received information of naval action from an air force officer in the president's office. On 30 April 1982 the Argentine magazine \"Tal Cual\" showed Prime Minister Thatcher with an eyepatch and the text: \"Pirate, witch and assassin. Guilty!\" Three British reporters sent to Argentina to cover the war from the Argentine perspective were jailed until the end of the war. The \"Madres de Plaza de Mayo\" were even exposed to death threats from ordinary people.\nUnited Kingdom.\nSeventeen newspaper reporters, two photographers, two radio reporters and three television reporters with five technicians sailed with the Task Force to the war. The Newspaper Publishers' Association selected them from among 160 applicants, excluding foreign media. The hasty selection resulted in the inclusion of two journalists among the war reporters who were interested only in Queen Elizabeth II's son Prince Andrew, who was serving in the conflict. The prince flew a helicopter on multiple missions, including Exocet missile decoy and casualty evacuation.\nMerchant vessels had the civilian Inmarsat uplink, which enabled written telex and voice report transmissions via satellite. had a facsimile machine that was used to upload 202 pictures from the South Atlantic over the course of the war. The Royal Navy leased bandwidth on the US Defense Satellite Communications System for worldwide communications. Television demands a thousand times the data rate of telephone, but the Ministry of Defence was unsuccessful in convincing the US to allocate more bandwidth.\nTV producers suspected that the enquiry was half-hearted, since the Vietnam War television pictures of casualties and traumatised soldiers were recognised as having negative propaganda value. However, the technology only allowed uploading a single frame per 20 minutes\u2014and only if the military satellites were allocated 100% to television transmissions. Videotapes were shipped to Ascension Island, where a broadband satellite uplink was available, resulting in TV coverage being delayed by three weeks.\nThe press was very dependent on the Royal Navy and was censored on site. Many reporters in the UK knew more about the war than those with the Task Force. Ministry of Defence press briefings in London were characterised by the restrained dictation-speed delivery of its spokesman, Ian McDonald.\nThe Royal Navy expected the British press to conduct a Second World War-style positive news campaign but the majority of the British media, especially the BBC, reported the war in a neutral fashion. These reporters referred to \"the British troops\" and \"the Argentinian troops\" instead of \"our lads\" and the \"Argies\". The two main tabloid papers presented opposing viewpoints: The \"Daily Mirror\" was decidedly anti-war, whilst \"The Sun\" became well known for headlines such as \"Stick It Up Your Junta!\", which, along with the reporting in other tabloids, led to accusations by \"The Guardian\" of xenophobia and jingoism. \"The Sun\" was criticised for its \"Gotcha\" headline following the sinking of the .\nThe British Ministry of Defence operated a psychological warfare operation under the codename \"Moonshine\", which took the form of a spurious radio station purporting to be from a neutral South American country, but was actually in London, broadcasting to the Falklands and Argentina via a transmitter on Ascension which had been requisitioned from the BBC. Under the name of Radio Atl\u00e1ntico del Sur (\"Radio South Atlantic\"), the station was operated by a small team of civilians and Spanish-speaking military officers. The first three-hour broadcast was on 19 May and a total of 47 had been made by 15 June when the operation was cancelled. There is some evidence that the Argentines attempted to jam the broadcasts and that some civilian radio receivers were confiscated from soldiers, but the results overall were difficult to assess.\nCultural impact.\nThere were wide-ranging influences on popular culture in both the UK and Argentina, from the immediate postwar period to the present. The Argentine writer Jorge Luis Borges described the war as \"a fight between two bald men over a comb.\" The words \"yomp\" and \"Exocet\" entered the British vernacular as a result of the war. The Falklands War also provided material for theatre, film and TV drama and influenced the output of musicians. In Argentina, the military government banned the broadcast of English-language music, giving way to the rise of local rock musicians, like the famous as well as solo musicians such as Charly Garc\u00eda, Luis Alberto Spinetta, Fito Paez and Gustavo Santaolalla.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11524", "revid": "199747", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11524", "title": "Fahrenheit", "text": "Temperature scale\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nThe Fahrenheit scale () is a temperature scale based on one proposed in 1724 by the physicist Daniel Gabriel Fahrenheit (1686\u20131736). It uses the degree Fahrenheit (symbol: \u00b0F) as the unit. Several accounts of how he originally defined his scale exist, but the original paper suggests the lower defining point, 0\u00a0\u00b0F, was established as the freezing temperature of a solution of brine made from a mixture of water, ice, and ammonium chloride (a salt). The other limit established was his best estimate of the average human body temperature, originally set at 90\u00a0\u00b0F, then 96\u00a0\u00b0F (about 2.6\u00a0\u00b0F less than the modern value due to a later redefinition of the scale).\nFor much of the 20th century, the Fahrenheit scale was defined by two fixed points with a 180\u00a0\u00b0F separation: the temperature at which pure water freezes was defined as 32\u00a0\u00b0F and the boiling point of water was defined to be 212\u00a0\u00b0F, both at sea level and under standard atmospheric pressure. It is now formally defined using the Kelvin scale.\nIt continues to be used in the United States (including its unincorporated territories), its freely associated states in the Western Pacific (Palau, the Federated States of Micronesia and the Marshall Islands), which all use the United States National Weather Service, and one British Overseas Territory the Cayman Islands.\nFahrenheit is commonly still used alongside the Celsius scale in other countries that use the U.S. meteorological service, such as Antigua and Barbuda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, the Bahamas, and Belize. A handful of British Overseas Territories, including the Virgin Islands, Montserrat, Anguilla, and Bermuda, also still use both scales. All other countries now use Celsius (\"centigrade\" until 1948), which was developed over 18 years after the Fahrenheit scale.\nDefinition and conversion.\nHistorically, on the Fahrenheit scale the freezing point of water was 32\u00a0\u00b0F, and the boiling point was 212\u00a0\u00b0F (at standard atmospheric pressure). This put the boiling and freezing points of water 180\u00a0degrees apart. Therefore, a degree on the Fahrenheit scale was &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u2044180 of the interval between the freezing point and the boiling point. On the Celsius scale, the freezing and boiling points of water were originally defined to be 100\u00a0degrees apart. A temperature interval of 1\u00a0\u00b0F was equal to an interval of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;5\u20449\u00a0degrees Celsius. With the Fahrenheit and Celsius scales now both defined by the kelvin, this relationship was preserved, a temperature interval of 1\u00a0\u00b0F being equal to an interval of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;5\u20449\u00a0K and of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;5\u20449\u00a0\u00b0C. The Fahrenheit and Celsius scales intersect numerically at \u221240 in the respective unit (i.e., \u221240\u00a0\u00b0F corresponds to \u221240\u00a0\u00b0C).\nAbsolute zero is 0 K, \u2212273.15\u00a0\u00b0C, or \u2212459.67\u00a0\u00b0F. The Rankine temperature scale uses degree intervals of the same size as those of the Fahrenheit scale, except that absolute zero is 0\u00a0\u00b0R\u00a0\u2013 the same way that the Kelvin temperature scale matches the Celsius scale, except that absolute zero is 0\u00a0K.\nThe combination of degree symbol (\u00b0) followed by an uppercase letter F is the conventional symbol for the Fahrenheit temperature scale. A number followed by this symbol (and separated from it with a space) denotes a specific temperature point (e.g., \"Gallium melts at 85.5763\u00a0\u00b0F\"). A difference between temperatures or an uncertainty in temperature is also conventionally written the same way as well, e.g., \"The output of the heat exchanger experiences an increase of 72\u00a0\u00b0F\" or \"Our standard uncertainty is \u00b15\u00a0\u00b0F\". However, some authors instead use the notation \"An increase of 50\u00a0F\u00b0\" (reversing the symbol order) to indicate temperature differences. Similar conventions exist for the Celsius scale, see .\nConversion (specific temperature point).\nFor an exact conversion between degrees Fahrenheit and Celsius, and kelvins of \"a specific temperature point\", the following formulas can be applied. Here, \"f\" is the value in degrees Fahrenheit, \"c\" the value in degrees Celsius, and \"k\" the value in kelvins:\nThere is also an exact conversion between Celsius and Fahrenheit scales making use of the correspondence \u221240\u00a0\u00b0F \u2258 \u221240\u00a0\u00b0C. Again, \"f\" is the numeric value in degrees Fahrenheit, and \"c\" the numeric value in degrees Celsius:\nConversion (temperature difference or interval).\nWhen converting a \"temperature interval\" between the Fahrenheit and Celsius scales, only the ratio is used, without any constant (in this case, the interval has the same numeric value in kelvins as in degrees Celsius):\nHistory.\nFahrenheit proposed his temperature scale in 1724, basing it on two reference points of temperature. In his initial scale (which is not the final Fahrenheit scale), the zero point was determined by placing the thermometer in \"a mixture of ice, water, and \"salis Armoniaci\" [transl. ammonium chloride] or even sea salt\". This combination forms a eutectic system, which stabilizes its temperature automatically: 0\u00a0\u00b0F was defined to be that stable temperature. A second point, 96\u00a0degrees, was approximately the human body's temperature. A third point, 32\u00a0degrees, was marked as being the temperature of ice and water \"without the aforementioned salts\".\nAccording to a German story, Fahrenheit actually chose the lowest air temperature measured in his hometown Danzig (Gda\u0144sk, Poland) in winter 1708\u201309 as 0\u00a0\u00b0F, and only later had the need to be able to make this value reproducible using brine.\nAccording to a letter Fahrenheit wrote to his friend Herman Boerhaave, his scale was built on the work of Ole R\u00f8mer, whom he had met earlier. In R\u00f8mer scale, brine freezes at zero, water freezes and melts at 7.5\u00a0degrees, body temperature is 22.5, and water boils at 60\u00a0degrees. Fahrenheit multiplied each value by 4 in order to eliminate fractions and make the scale more fine-grained. He then re-calibrated his scale using the melting point of ice and normal human body temperature (which were at 30 and 90\u00a0degrees); he adjusted the scale so that the melting point of ice would be 32\u00a0degrees, and body temperature 96\u00a0degrees, so that 64 intervals would separate the two, allowing him to mark degree lines on his instruments by simply bisecting the interval 6 times (since 64 = 26).\nFahrenheit soon after observed that water boils at about 212\u00a0degrees using this scale. The use of the freezing and boiling points of water as thermometer fixed reference points became popular following the work of Anders Celsius, and these fixed points were adopted by a committee of the Royal Society led by Henry Cavendish in 1776\u201377. Under this system, the Fahrenheit scale is redefined slightly so that the freezing point of water was exactly 32\u00a0\u00b0F, and the boiling point was exactly 212\u00a0\u00b0F, or 180\u00a0degrees higher. It is for this reason that normal human body temperature is approximately 98.6\u00a0\u00b0F (oral temperature) on the revised scale (whereas it was 90\u00b0 on Fahrenheit's multiplication of R\u00f8mer, and 96\u00b0 on his original scale).\nIn the present-day Fahrenheit scale, 0\u00a0\u00b0F no longer corresponds to the eutectic temperature of ammonium chloride brine as described above. Instead, that eutectic is at approximately 4\u00a0\u00b0F on the final Fahrenheit scale.\nThe Rankine temperature scale was based upon the Fahrenheit temperature scale, with its zero representing absolute zero instead.\nUsage.\nGeneral.\nThe Fahrenheit scale was the primary temperature standard for climatic, industrial and medical purposes in Anglophone countries until the 1960s. In the late 1960s and 1970s, the Celsius scale replaced Fahrenheit in almost all of those countries\u2014with the notable exception of the United States.\nFahrenheit is used in the United States, its territories and associated states (all serviced by the U.S. National Weather Service), as well as the (British) Cayman Islands for everyday applications. The Fahrenheit scale is in use in U.S. for all temperature measurements including weather forecasts, cooking, and food freezing temperatures; however, for scientific research, the scale is Celsius and Kelvin.\nUnited States.\nEarly in the 20th century, Halsey and Dale suggested that reasons for resistance to the use of the centigrade (now Celsius) system in the U.S. included the larger size of each degree Celsius and the lower zero point in the Fahrenheit system; and claimed the Fahrenheit scale is more intuitive than Celsius for describing outdoor temperatures in temperate latitudes, with 100\u00a0\u00b0F being a hot summer day and 0\u00a0\u00b0F a cold winter day.\nCanada.\nCanada has passed legislation favoring the International System of Units, while also maintaining legal definitions for traditional Canadian imperial units. Canadian weather reports are conveyed using degrees Celsius with occasional reference to Fahrenheit especially for cross-border broadcasts. Fahrenheit is still used on virtually all Canadian ovens. Thermometers, both digital and analog, sold in Canada usually employ both the Celsius and Fahrenheit scales.\nEuropean Union.\nIn the European Union, it is mandatory to use Kelvins or degrees Celsius when quoting temperature for \"economic, public health, public safety and administrative\" purposes, though degrees Fahrenheit may be used alongside degrees Celsius as a supplementary unit.\nUnited Kingdom.\nMost British people use Celsius. However, the use of Fahrenheit still may appear at times alongside degrees Celsius in the print media with no standard convention for when the measurement is included.\nFor example, \"The Times\" has an all-metric daily weather page but includes a Celsius-to-Fahrenheit conversion table. Some UK tabloids have adopted a tendency of using Fahrenheit for mid to high temperatures. It has been suggested that the rationale to keep using Fahrenheit was one of emphasis for high temperatures: \"\u22126\u00a0\u00b0C\" sounds colder than \"21\u00a0\u00b0F\", and \"94\u00a0\u00b0F\" sounds more sensational than \"34\u00a0\u00b0C\".\nUnicode representation of symbol.\nUnicode provides the Fahrenheit symbol at code point . However, this is a compatibility character encoded for roundtrip compatibility with legacy encodings. The Unicode standard explicitly discourages the use of this character: \"The sequence + is preferred over , and those two sequences should be treated as identical for searching.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11525", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11525", "title": "Florence", "text": "Largest city in Tuscany, Italy\nFlorence ( ; ) is the capital city of the Italian region of Tuscany. It is also the most populated city in Tuscany, with 362,353 inhabitants, and 989,460 in its metropolitan province as of 2025.\nFlorence was a centre of medieval European trade and finance and one of the wealthiest cities of that era. It is considered by many academics to have been the birthplace of the Renaissance, becoming a major artistic, cultural, commercial, political, economic and financial center. During this time, Florence rose to a position of enormous influence in Italy, Europe, and beyond. Its turbulent political history includes periods of rule by the powerful Medici family and numerous religious and republican revolutions. From 1865 to 1871 the city served as the capital of the Kingdom of Italy. The Florentine dialect forms the base of standard Italian and it became the language of culture throughout Italy due to the prestige of the masterpieces by Dante Alighieri, Petrarch, Giovanni Boccaccio, Niccol\u00f2 Machiavelli and Francesco Guicciardini.\nLocated about northwest of Rome, Florence attracts millions of tourists each year, and UNESCO declared the Historic Centre of Florence a World Heritage Site in 1982. The city is noted for its culture, Renaissance art and architecture and monuments. The city also contains numerous museums and art galleries, such as the Uffizi Gallery and the Palazzo Pitti, and still exerts an influence in the fields of art, culture and politics. Due to Florence's artistic and architectural heritage, \"Forbes\" ranked it as one of the most beautiful cities in the world in 2010. Florence plays an important role in Italian fashion, and is ranked in the top 15 fashion capitals of the world by Global Language Monitor; furthermore, it is a major national economic centre, as well as a tourist and industrial hub.\nEtymology.\nFlorence was founded as a Roman garrison in 59 BC in an area previously inhabited by an Etruscan settlement whose name is unknown. Florence's Latin name was , meaning \"the Flourishing Town\", from . and the ethnic variant are mentioned in the \"Epitome of Roman History\" by Florus and \"Natural History\" by Pliny the Elder. The old Italian name and modern Italian name derived from these ancient names. 's protonic syllable shift from \"flo\" to \"fio\" via the intermediary dark l [\u026b], and 's protonic syllable reduction from \"fio\" to \"fi\",169 are features of Tuscan Italian. According to linguists such as Giovan Battista Pellegrini, the modern Italian name Firenze presupposes the locative form of , a view disputed by Gerhard Rohlfs.177\nHistory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTimeline of Florence\n\u00a0Roman Republic, 59\u201327 BC\n\u00a0Roman Empire, 27 BC\u2013AD 285\n\u00a0Western Roman Empire, 285\u2013476\n\u00a0Kingdom of Odoacer, 476\u2013493\n\u00a0Ostrogothic Kingdom, 493\u2013553\n\u00a0Eastern Roman Empire, 553\u2013568\n\u00a0Lombard Kingdom, 570\u2013773\n\u00a0Carolingian Empire, 774\u2013797\n\u00a0Regnum Italiae, 797\u20131001\n\u00a0March of Tuscany, 1002\u20131115\n Republic of Florence, 1115\u20131532\n Duchy of Florence, 1532\u20131569\n Grand Duchy of Tuscany, 1569\u20131801\n Kingdom of Etruria, 1801\u20131807\n First French Empire, 1807\u20131815\n Grand Duchy of Tuscany, 1815\u20131859\n United Provinces of Central Italy, 1859\u20131860\n Kingdom of Italy, 1861\u20131943\n Italian Social Republic, 1943\u20131945\n Italy, 1946\u2013present\nFlorence originated as a Roman city, and later, after a long period as a flourishing trading and banking medieval commune, it was the birthplace of the Italian Renaissance. It was politically, economically, and culturally one of the most important cities in Europe and the world from the 14th to 16th centuries.\nThe language spoken in the city during the 14th century came to be accepted as the model for what would become the Italian language. Thanks especially to the works of the Tuscans Dante, Petrarch and Boccaccio, the Florentine dialect, above all the local dialects, was adopted as the basis for a national literary language.\nStarting from the late Middle Ages, Florentine money\u2014in the form of the gold florin\u2014financed the development of industry all over Europe, from Britain to Bruges, to Lyon and Hungary. Florentine bankers financed the English kings during the Hundred Years' War. They similarly financed the papacy, including the construction of their provisional capital of Avignon and, after their return to Rome, the reconstruction and Renaissance embellishment of Rome.\nFlorence was home to the Medici, one of European history's most important noble families. Lorenzo de' Medici was considered a political and cultural mastermind of Italy in the late 15th century. Two members of the family were popes in the early 16th century: Leo X and Clement VII. Catherine de' Medici married King Henry II of France and, after his death in 1559, reigned as regent in France. Marie de' Medici married Henry IV of France and gave birth to the future King Louis XIII. The Medici reigned as Grand Dukes of Tuscany, starting with Cosimo I de' Medici in 1569 and ending with the death of Gian Gastone de' Medici in 1737.\nThe Kingdom of Italy, which was established in 1861, moved its capital from Turin to Florence in 1865, although the capital was moved to Rome in 1871.\nRoman origins.\nFlorence was established by the Romans in 59\u00a0BC as a colony for veteran soldiers and was built in the style of an army camp. Situated along the \"Via Cassia\", the main route between Rome and the north, and within the fertile valley of the Arno, the settlement quickly became an important commercial centre and in AD 285 became the capital of the Tuscia region.\nEarly Middle Ages.\nIn centuries to come, the city experienced turbulent alternate periods of Ostrogoth and Byzantine rule, during which the city was fought over, helping to cause the population to fall to as few as 1,000 people. Peace returned under Lombard rule in the 6th century and Florence was in turn conquered by Charlemagne in 774 becoming part of the March of Tuscany centred on Lucca. The population began to grow again and commerce prospered.\nSecond millennium.\nMargrave Hugo chose Florence as his residency instead of Lucca around 1000\u00a0AD. The Golden Age of Florentine art began around this time. In 1100, Florence was a \"commune\", meaning a city-state. The city's primary resource was the Arno river, providing power and access for the industry (mainly textile industry), and access to the Mediterranean sea for international trade, helping the growth of an industrious merchant community. The Florentine merchant banking skills became recognised in Europe after they brought decisive financial innovation (e.g. bills of exchange, double-entry bookkeeping system) to medieval fairs. This period also saw the eclipse of Florence's formerly powerful rival Pisa. The growing power of the merchant elite culminated in an anti-aristocratic uprising, led by Giano della Bella, resulting in the Ordinances of Justice which entrenched the power of the elite guilds until the end of the Republic.\nMiddle Ages and Renaissance.\nRise of the Medici.\nAt the height of demographic expansion around 1325, the urban population may have been as great as 120,000, and the rural population around the city was probably close to 300,000. The Black Death of 1348 reduced it by over half. About 25,000 are said to have been supported by the city's wool industry: in 1345 Florence was the scene of an attempted strike by wool combers (\"ciompi\"), who in 1378 rose up in a brief revolt against oligarchic rule in the Revolt of the Ciompi. After their suppression, Florence came under the sway (1382\u20131434) of the Albizzi family, who became bitter rivals of the Medici.\nIn the 15th century, Florence was among the largest cities in Europe, with a population of 60,000, and was considered rich and economically successful. Cosimo de' Medici was the first Medici family member to essentially control the city from behind the scenes. Although the city was technically a democracy of sorts, his power came from a vast patronage network along with his alliance to the new immigrants, the \"gente nuova\" (new people). The fact that the Medici were bankers to the pope also contributed to their ascendancy. Cosimo was succeeded by his son Piero, who was, soon after, succeeded by Cosimo's grandson, Lorenzo in 1469. Lorenzo was a great patron of the arts, commissioning works by Michelangelo, Leonardo da Vinci and Botticelli. Lorenzo was an accomplished poet and musician and brought composers and singers to Florence, including Alexander Agricola, Johannes Ghiselin, and Heinrich Isaac. By contemporary Florentines (and since), he was known as \"Lorenzo the Magnificent\" (Lorenzo il Magnifico).\nFollowing Lorenzo de' Medici's death in 1492, he was succeeded by his son Piero\u00a0II. When the French king Charles\u00a0VIII invaded northern Italy, Piero\u00a0II chose to resist his army. But when he realised the size of the French army at the gates of Pisa, he had to accept the humiliating conditions of the French king. These made the Florentines rebel, and they expelled Piero\u00a0II. With his exile in 1494, the first period of Medici rule ended with the restoration of a republican government.\nSavonarola, Machiavelli, and the Medici popes.\nDuring this period, the Dominican friar Girolamo Savonarola had become prior of the San Marco monastery in 1490. He was famed for his penitential sermons, lambasting what he viewed as widespread immorality and attachment to material riches. He praised the exile of the Medici as the work of God, punishing them for their decadence. He seized the opportunity to carry through political reforms leading to a more democratic rule. But when Savonarola publicly accused Pope Alexander VI of corruption, he was banned from speaking in public. When he broke this ban, he was excommunicated. The Florentines, tired of his teachings, turned against him and arrested him. He was convicted as a heretic, hanged and burned on the Piazza della Signoria on 23 May 1498. His ashes were dispersed in the Arno river.\nAnother Florentine of this period was Niccol\u00f2 Machiavelli, whose prescriptions for Florence's regeneration under strong leadership have often been seen as a legitimization of political expediency and even malpractice. Machiavelli was a political thinker, renowned for his political handbook \"The Prince\", which is about ruling and exercising power. Commissioned by the Medici, Machiavelli also wrote the \"Florentine Histories\", the history of the city.\nIn 1512, the Medici retook control of Florence with the help of Spanish and Papal troops. They were led by two cousins, Giovanni and Giulio de' Medici, both of whom would later become Popes of the Catholic Church, (Leo X and Clement VII, respectively). Both were generous patrons of the arts, commissioning works like Michelangelo's Laurentian Library and Medici Chapel in Florence, to name just two. Their reigns coincided with political upheaval in Italy, and thus in 1527, Florentines drove out the Medici for a second time and re-established a theocratic republic on 16 May 1527, (Jesus Christ was named King of Florence). The Medici returned to power in Florence in 1530, with the armies of Holy Roman Emperor Charles V and the blessings of Pope Clement VII (Giulio de' Medici).\nFlorence officially became a monarchy in 1531, when Emperor Charles and Pope Clement named Alessandro de' Medici as \"Duke of the Florentine Republic\". The Medici's monarchy would last over two centuries. Alessandro's successor, Cosimo I de' Medici, was named Grand Duke of Tuscany in 1569; in all Tuscany, only the Republic of Lucca (later a Duchy) and the Principality of Piombino were independent from Florence.\n18th and 19th centuries.\nThe extinction of the Medici dynasty and the accession in 1737 of Francis Stephen, duke of Lorraine and husband of Maria Theresa of Austria, led to Tuscany's temporary inclusion in the territories of the Austrian crown. It became a secundogeniture of the Habsburg-Lorraine dynasty, who were deposed for the House of Bourbon-Parma in 1801. From 1801 to 1807 Florence was the capital of the Napoleonic client state Kingdom of Etruria. The Bourbon-Parma were deposed in December 1807 when Tuscany was annexed by France. Florence was the prefecture of the French d\u00e9partement of Arno from 1808 to the fall of Napoleon in 1814. The Habsburg-Lorraine dynasty was restored on the throne of Tuscany at the Congress of Vienna but finally deposed in 1859. Tuscany became a region of the Kingdom of Italy in 1861.\nFlorence replaced Turin as Italy's capital in 1865 and, in an effort to modernise the city, the old market in the Piazza del Mercato Vecchio and many medieval houses were pulled down and replaced by a more formal street plan with newer houses. The Piazza (first renamed Piazza Vittorio Emanuele\u00a0II, then Piazza della Repubblica, the present name) was significantly widened and a large triumphal arch was constructed at the west end. A museum recording the destruction stands nearby today.\nThe country's second capital city was superseded by Rome six years later, after the withdrawal of the French troops allowed the capture of Rome.\n20th century.\nDuring World War II the city experienced a year-long German occupation (1943\u20131944) being part of the Italian Social Republic. The Germans operated a subcamp of the Stalag 337 prisoner-of-war camp in the city. Hitler declared it an open city on 3 July 1944 as troops of the British 8th Army closed in. Except for the Ponte Vecchio, in early August, the retreating Germans decided to demolish all the bridges along the Arno linking the district of Oltrarno to the rest of the city, making it difficult for troops of the 8th Army to cross.\nFlorence was liberated by New Zealand, South African and British troops on 4 August 1944 alongside partisans from the Tuscan Committee of National Liberation (CTLN). The Allied soldiers who died driving the Germans from Tuscany are buried in cemeteries outside the city (Americans about south of the city, British and Commonwealth soldiers a few kilometres east of the centre on the right bank of the Arno).\nAt the end of World War II in May 1945, the US Army's Information and Educational Branch was ordered to establish an overseas university campus for demobilised American service men and women in Florence. The first American university for service personnel was established in June 1945 at the School of Aeronautics. Some 7,500 soldier-students were to pass through the university during its four one-month sessions (see G. I. American Universities).\nIn November 1966, the Arno flooded parts of the centre, damaging many art treasures. Around the city there are tiny placards on the walls noting where the flood waters reached at their highest point.\nGeography.\nFlorence lies in a basin formed by the hills of Careggi, Fiesole, Settignano, Arcetri, Poggio Imperiale and Bellosguardo (Florence). The Arno river, three other minor rivers (Mugnone, Ema and Greve) and some streams flow through it.\nClimate.\nFlorence has a humid subtropical climate (\"Cfa\"), tending to Mediterranean (\"Csa\"). It has hot summers with moderate or light rainfall and cool, damp winters. As Florence lacks a prevailing wind, summer temperatures are higher than along the coast. Rainfall in summer is convectional, while relief rainfall dominates in the winter. Snow is rare. The highest officially recorded temperature was on 26 July 1983 and the lowest was on 12 January 1985.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn 1200 the city was home to 50,000 people. By 1300 the population of the city proper was 120,000, with an additional 300,000 living in the Contado. Between 1500 and 1650 the population was around 70,000.\nAs of 2025, the population of the city proper is 362,353, while Eurostat estimates that 696,767 people live in the urban area of Florence. The Metropolitan Area of Florence, Prato and Pistoia, constituted in 2000 over an area of roughly , is home to 1.5\u00a0million people. Within Florence proper, 46.8% of the population was male in 2007 and 53.2% were female. Minors (children aged 18 and less) totalled 14.10% of the population compared to pensioners, who numbered 25.95 percent. This compares with the Italian average of 18.06 percent (minors) and 19.94 percent (pensioners). The average age of Florence resident is 49 compared to the Italian average of 42. In the five years between 2002 and 2007, the population of Florence grew by 3.22 percent, while Italy as a whole grew by 3.56 percent. The birth rate of Florence is 7.66 births per 1,000 inhabitants compared to the Italian average of 9.45 births.\nAs of 2009[ [update]], 87.46% of the population was Italian. An estimated 6,000 Chinese live in the city. The largest immigrant group came from other European countries (mostly Romanians and Albanians): 3.52%, East Asia (mostly Chinese and Filipino): 2.17%, the Americas: 1.41%, and North Africa (mostly Moroccan): 0.9%.\nMuch like the rest of Italy most of the people in Florence are Roman Catholic, with more than 90% of the population belonging to the Archdiocese of Florence.\nAs of 2016, an estimated 30,000 people, or 8% of the population, identified as Muslim.\nForeign-born population (31 December 2019)\nEconomy.\nTourism is, by far, the most important of all industries, and most of the Florentine economy relies on the money generated by international arrivals and students studying in the city. The value of tourism to the city totalled some \u20ac2.5\u00a0billion in 2015 and the number of visitors had increased by 5.5% from the previous year.\nIn 2013, Florence was listed as the second best world city by \"Cond\u00e9 Nast Traveler\".\nManufacturing and commerce remain highly important. Florence is Italy's 17th richest city in terms of average workers' earnings, with the figure being \u20ac23,265 (the overall city's income is \u20ac6,531,204,473), coming after Mantua, yet surpassing Bolzano.\nIndustry, commerce and services.\nFlorence is a major production and commercial centre in Italy, where the Florentine industrial complexes in the suburbs produce all sorts of goods, from furniture, rubber goods, chemicals, and food. Traditional and local products, such as antiques, handicrafts, glassware, leatherwork, art reproductions, jewellery, souvenirs, elaborate metal and iron-work, shoes, accessories and high fashion clothes also occupy a fair sector of Florence's economy. The city's income relies partially on services and commercial and cultural interests, such as annual fairs, theatrical and lyrical productions, art exhibitions, festivals and fashion shows, such as the Calcio Fiorentino. Heavy industry and machinery also take their part in providing an income. In Nuovo Pignone, numerous factories are still present, and small-to medium industrial businesses are dominant. The Florence-Prato-Pistoia industrial districts and areas were known as the 'Third Italy' in the 1990s, due to the exports of high-quality goods and automobile (especially the Vespa) and the prosperity and productivity of the Florentine entrepreneurs. Some of these industries even rivalled the traditional industrial districts in Emilia-Romagna and Veneto due to high profits and productivity.\nIn the fourth quarter of 2015, manufacturing increased by 2.4% and exports increased by 7.2%. Leading sectors included mechanical engineering, fashion, pharmaceutics, food and wine. During 2015, permanent employment contracts increased by 48.8 percent, boosted by nationwide tax break.\nTourism.\nTourism is the most significant industry in central Florence. From April to October, tourists outnumber the local population. Tickets to the Uffizi and Accademia galleries are regularly sold out and large groups regularly fill the basilicas of Santa Croce and Santa Maria Novella, both of which charge for entry. Tickets for The Uffizi and Accademia can be purchased online prior to visiting. In 2010, readers of \"Travel + Leisure\" magazine ranked the city as their third favourite tourist destination. In 2015, Cond\u00e9 Nast Travel readers voted Florence as the best city in Europe.\nStudies by Euromonitor International have concluded that cultural and history-oriented tourism is generating significantly increased spending throughout Europe.\nFlorence is believed to have the greatest concentration of art (in proportion to its size) in the world. Thus, cultural tourism is particularly strong, with world-renowned museums such as the Uffizi selling over 1.93\u00a0million tickets in 2014. The city's convention centre facilities were restructured during the 1990s and host exhibitions, conferences, meetings, social forums, concerts and other events.\nIn 2016, Florence had 20,588 hotel rooms in 570 facilities. International visitors use 75% of the rooms; some 18% of those were from the U.S. In 2014, the city had 8.5\u00a0million overnight stays. A Euromonitor report indicates that in 2015 the city ranked as the world's 36th most visited in the world, with over 4.95\u00a0million arrivals for the year.\nTourism brings revenue to Florence, but also creates certain problems. The Ponte Vecchio, The San Lorenzo Market and Santa Maria Novella are plagued by pickpockets. The province of Florence receives roughly 13\u00a0million visitors per year and in peak seasons, popular locations may become overcrowded as a result. In 2015, Mayor Dario Nardella expressed concern over visitors who arrive on buses, stay only a few hours, spend little money but contribute significantly to overcrowding. \"No museum visit, just a photo from the square, the bus back and then on to Venice\u00a0... We don't want tourists like that\", he said.\nSome tourists are less than respectful of the city's cultural heritage, according to Nardella. In June 2017, he instituted a programme of spraying church steps with water to prevent tourists from using such areas as picnic spots. While he values the benefits of tourism, he claims that there has been \"an increase among those who sit down on church steps, eat their food and leave rubbish strewn on them\", he explained. To boost the sale of traditional foods, the mayor had introduced legislation (enacted in 2016) that requires restaurants to use typical Tuscan products and rejected McDonald's application to open a location in the Piazza del Duomo.\nIn October 2021, Florence was shortlisted for the European Commission's 2022 European Capital of Smart Tourism award along with Bordeaux, Copenhagen, Dublin, Ljubljana, Palma de Mallorca and Valencia.\nFood and wine production.\nFood and wine have long been an important staple of the economy. The Chianti region is just south of the city, and its Sangiovese grapes figure prominently not only in its Chianti Classico wines but also in many of the more recently developed Supertuscan blends. Within to the west is the Carmignano area, also home to flavourful sangiovese-based reds. The celebrated Chianti Rufina district, geographically and historically separated from the main Chianti region, is also few kilometres east of Florence. More recently, the Bolgheri region (about southwest of Florence) has become celebrated for its \"Super Tuscan\" reds such as Sassicaia and Ornellaia.\nGovernment.\nThe legislative body of the municipality is the City Council (\"Consiglio Comunale\"), which is composed of 36 councillors elected every five years with a proportional system, at the same time as the mayoral elections. The executive body is the City Committee (\"Giunta Comunale\"), composed of 7 assessors, nominated and presided over by a directly elected Mayor. The current mayor of Florence is Sara Funaro.\nThe municipality of Florence is subdivided into five administrative Boroughs (\"Quartieri\"). Each borough is governed by a Council (\"Consiglio\") and a President, elected at the same time as the city mayor. The urban organisation is governed by the Italian Constitution (art. 114). The boroughs have the power to advise the Mayor with nonbinding opinions on a large spectrum of topics (environment, construction, public health, local markets) and exercise the functions delegated to them by the City Council; in addition they are supplied with an autonomous funding in order to finance local activities. The boroughs are:\nAll of the five boroughs are governed by the Democratic Party.\nThe former Italian Prime Minister (2014\u20132016), Matteo Renzi, served as mayor from 2009 to 2014.\nCulture.\nArt.\nFlorence was the birthplace of High Renaissance art, which lasted from about 1500 to 1527. Renaissance art put a larger emphasis on naturalism and human emotion. Medieval art was often formulaic and symbolic; the surviving works are mostly religious, their subjects were chosen by clerics. By contrast, Renaissance art became more rational, mathematical, individualistic, and was produced by known artists such as Donatello, Michelangelo, and Raphael, who started to sign their works. Religion was important, but with this new age came the humanization of religious figures in art, such as in Masaccio's \"Expulsion from the Garden of Eden\" and Raphael's \"Madonna della Seggiola\"; people of this age began to understand themselves as human beings, which reflected in art. The Renaissance marked the rebirth of classical values in art and society as people studied the ancient masters of the Greco-Roman world; art became focused on realism as opposed to idealism.\nCimabue and Giotto, the fathers of Italian painting, lived in Florence, as did Arnolfo di Cambio and Andrea Pisano, renewers of architecture and sculpture; Filippo Brunelleschi, Donatello and Masaccio, forefathers of the Renaissance, Lorenzo Ghiberti and the Della Robbia family, Filippo Lippi and Fra Angelico; Sandro Botticelli, Paolo Uccello and the universal genius of Leonardo da Vinci and Michelangelo.\nTheir works, together with those of many other generations of artists, are gathered in the city's many museums: the Uffizi Gallery, the Galleria Palatina with the paintings of the \"Golden Ages\", the Bargello with the sculptures of the Renaissance, the museum of San Marco with Fra Angelico's works, the Galleria dell'Accademia, the Medici Chapels, the museum of Orsanmichele, the Casa Buonarroti with sculptures by Michelangelo, the Museo Bardini, the Museo Horne, the Museo Stibbert, the Palazzo Corsini, the Galleria d'Arte Moderna, the Museo dell'Opera del Duomo, the Tesoro dei Granduchi and the Museo dell'Opificio delle Pietre Dure. Several monuments are located in Florence: the Baptistery with its mosaics; the cathedral with its sculptures, the medieval churches with bands of frescoes; public as well as private palaces \u2013 the Palazzo Vecchio, the Palazzo Pitti, the Palazzo Medici Riccardi, the Palazzo Davanzati and the Casa Martelli; monasteries, cloisters, refectories; the Certosa. The Museo Archeologico Nazionale documents Etruscan civilization. The city is so rich in art that some visitors experience Stendhal syndrome as they encounter its art for the first time.\nFlorentine architects such as Filippo Brunelleschi (1377\u20131466) and Leon Battista Alberti (1404\u20131472) were among the fathers of Renaissance architecture. The cathedral, topped by Brunelleschi's dome, dominates the Florentine skyline. The Florentines decided to start building it late in the 13th century, without a design for the dome. The project proposed by Brunelleschi in the 14th century was the largest ever built at the time, and the first major dome built in Europe since the two great domes of Roman times \u2013 the Pantheon in Rome, and Hagia Sophia in Constantinople. The dome of Santa Maria del Fiore remains the largest brick construction of its kind in the world. In front of it is the medieval Baptistery. The two buildings incorporate in their decoration the transition from the Middle Ages to the Renaissance. In recent years, most of the important works of art from the two buildings \u2013 and from the nearby Giotto's Campanile, have been removed and replaced by copies. The originals are now housed in the Museo dell'Opera del Duomo, just to the east of the cathedral.\nFlorence has a large number of art-filled churches, such as San Miniato al Monte, San Lorenzo, Santa Maria Novella, Santa Trinita, Santa Maria del Carmine, Santa Croce, Santo Spirito, Santissima Annunziata, Ognissanti and numerous others.\nArtists associated with Florence range from Arnolfo di Cambio and Cimabue to Giotto, Nanni di Banco, and Paolo Uccello; through Lorenzo Ghiberti, and Donatello and Masaccio and the della Robbia family; through Fra Angelico and Sandro Botticelli and Piero della Francesca, and on to Leonardo da Vinci and Michelangelo. Others include Benvenuto Cellini, Andrea del Sarto, Benozzo Gozzoli, Domenico Ghirlandaio, Filippo Lippi, Bernardo Buontalenti, Orcagna, Antonio and Piero del Pollaiuolo, Filippino Lippi, Andrea del Verrocchio, Bronzino, Desiderio da Settignano, Michelozzo, Cosimo Rosselli, the Sangallos, and Pontormo. Artists from other regions who worked in Florence include Raphael, Andrea Pisano, Giambologna, Il Sodoma and Peter Paul Rubens.\nPicture galleries in Florence include the Uffizi and the Palazzo Pitti. Two superb collections of sculpture are in the Bargello and the Museo dell'Opera del Duomo. They are filled with the creations of Donatello, Verrocchio, Desiderio da Settignano, Michelangelo and others. The Galleria dell'Accademia has Michelangelo's \"David\", which was created between 1501 and 1504 and is perhaps the best-known work of art anywhere, plus the unfinished statues of slaves Michelangelo created for the tomb of Pope Julius II. Other sights include the medieval city hall, the Palazzo della Signoria (also known as the Palazzo Vecchio), the National Archeological Museum, the Museo Galileo, the Palazzo Davanzati, the Museo Stibbert, the Museo Nazionale di San Marco, the Medici Chapels, the Museo dell'Opera di Santa Croce, the Museum of the Cloister of Santa Maria Novella, the Zoological Museum (\"La Specola\"), the Museo Bardini, and the Museo Horne. There is also a collection of works by the modern sculptor, Marino Marini, in a museum named after him. The Palazzo Strozzi is the site of special exhibitions.\nLanguage.\nFlorentine (\"fiorentino\"), spoken by inhabitants of Florence and its environs, is a Tuscan dialect and the immediate parent language to modern Italian.\nAlthough its vocabulary and pronunciation are largely identical to standard Italian, differences do exist. The \"Vocabolario del fiorentino contemporaneo\" (Dictionary of Modern Florentine) reveals lexical distinctions from all walks of life.\nDante, Petrarch, and Boccaccio pioneered the use of the vernacular instead of the Latin used for most literary works at the time.\nLiterature.\nDespite Latin being the main language of the courts and the Church in the Middle Ages, writers such as Dante Alighieri and many others used their own language, the Florentine vernacular descended from Latin, in composing their greatest works. The oldest literary pieces written in Florentine go as far back as the 13th century. Florence's literature fully blossomed in the 14th century, when not only Dante with his \"Divine Comedy\" (1306\u20131321) and Petrarch, but also poets such as Guido Cavalcanti and Lapo Gianni composed their most important works. Dante's masterpiece is the \"Divine Comedy\", which mainly deals with the poet himself taking an allegoric and moral tour of Hell, Purgatory and finally Heaven, during which he meets numerous mythological or real characters of his age or before. He is first guided by the Roman poet Virgil, whose non-Christian beliefs damned him to Hell. Later on he is joined by Beatrice, who guides him through Heaven.\nIn the 14th century, Petrarch and Giovanni Boccaccio led the literary scene in Florence after Dante's death in 1321. Petrarch was an all-rounder writer, author and poet, but was particularly known for his \"Canzoniere\", or the Book of Songs, where he conveyed his unremitting love for Laura. His style of writing has since become known as \"Petrarchism\". Boccaccio was better known for his \"Decameron\", a slightly grim story of Florence during the 1350s bubonic plague, known as the Black Death, when some people fled the ravaged city to an isolated country mansion, and spent their time there recounting stories and novellas taken from the medieval and contemporary tradition. All of this is written in a series of 100 distinct novellas.\nIn the 16th century, during the Renaissance, Florence was the home town of political writer and philosopher Niccol\u00f2 Machiavelli, whose ideas on how rulers should govern the land, detailed in \"The Prince\", spread across European courts and enjoyed enduring popularity for centuries. These principles became known as \"Machiavellianism\".\nMusic.\nFlorence became a musical centre during the Middle Ages and music and the performing arts remain an important part of its culture. The growth of Northern Italian Cities in the 1500s likely contributed to its increased prominence. During the Renaissance, there were four kinds of musical patronage in the city with respect to both sacred and secular music: state, corporate, church, and private. It was here that the Florentine Camerata convened in the mid-16th century and experimented with setting tales of Greek mythology to music and staging the result\u2014in other words, the first operas, setting the wheels in motion not just for the further development of the operatic form, but for later developments of separate \"classical\" forms such as the symphony and concerto. After the year 1600, Italian trends prevailed across Europe, by 1750 it was the primary musical language. The genre of the Madrigal, born in Italy, gained popularity in Britain and elsewhere. Several Italian cities were \"larger on the musical map than their real-size for power suggested. Florence, was once such city which experienced a fantastic period in the early seventeenth Century of musico-theatrical innovation, including the beginning and flourishing of opera.\nOpera was invented in Florence in the late 16th century when Jacopo Peri's \"Dafne\" an opera in the style of monody, was premiered. Opera spread from Florence throughout Italy and eventually Europe. Vocal Music in the choir setting was also taking new identity at this time. At the beginning of the 17th century, two practices for writing music were devised, one the first practice or \"Stile Antico/Prima Prattica\" the other the \"Stile Moderno/Seconda Prattica\". The Stile Antico was more prevalent in Northern Europe and Stile Moderno was practiced more by the Italian Composers of the time. The piano was invented in Florence in 1709 by Bartolomeo Cristofori. Composers and musicians who have lived in Florence include Piero Strozzi (1550 \u2013 after 1608), Giulio Caccini (1551\u20131618) and Mike Francis (1961\u20132009). Giulio Caccini's book \"Le Nuove Musiche\" was significant in performance practice technique instruction at the time. The book specified a new term, in use by the 1630s, called monody which indicated the combination of voice and basso continuo and connoted a practice of stating text in a free, lyrical, yet speech-like manner. This would occur while an instrument, usually a keyboard type such as harpsichord, played and held chords while the singer sang/spoke the monodic line.\nCinema.\nFlorence has been a setting for numerous works of fiction and movies, including the novels and associated films, such as \"Light in the Piazza\", \"The Girl Who Couldn't Say No\", \"Calmi Cuori Appassionati\", \"Hannibal\", \"A Room with a View\", \"Tea with Mussolini\", \"Virgin Territory\" and \"Inferno\". The city is home to renowned Italian actors and actresses, such as Roberto Benigni, Leonardo Pieraccioni and Vittoria Puccini.\nVideo games.\nFlorence has appeared as a location in video games such as \"Assassin's Creed II\". The Republic of Florence also appears as a playable nation in Paradox Interactive's grand strategy game \"Europa Universalis IV\".\nOther media.\n16th-century Florence is the setting of the Japanese manga and anime series \"Arte\".\nCuisine.\nFlorentine food grows out of a tradition of peasant fare rather than rarefied high cuisine. The majority of dishes are based on meat. The whole animal was traditionally eaten; tripe (\"trippa\") and stomach (\"lampredotto\") were once regularly on the menu at restaurants and still are sold at the food carts stationed throughout the city. Antipasti include \"crostini toscani\", sliced bread rounds topped with a chicken liver-based p\u00e2t\u00e9, and sliced meats (mainly prosciutto and salame, often served with melon when in season). The typically saltless Tuscan bread, obtained with natural levain frequently features in Florentine courses, especially in its soups, \"ribollita\" and \"pappa al pomodoro\", or in the salad of bread and fresh vegetables called \"panzanella\" that is served in summer. The \"bistecca alla fiorentina\" is a large (the customary size should weigh around ) \u2013 the \"date\" steak \u2013 T-bone steak of Chianina beef cooked over hot charcoal and served very rare with its more recently derived version, the \"tagliata\", sliced rare beef served on a bed of arugula, often with slices of Parmesan cheese on top. Most of these courses are generally served with local olive oil, also a prime product enjoying a worldwide reputation.Among the desserts, \"schiacciata alla fiorentina\", a white flatbread cake, is one of the most popular; it is a very soft cake, prepared with extremely simple ingredients, typical of Florentine cuisine, and is especially eaten at Carnival.\nResearch activity.\nResearch institutes and university departments are located within the Florence area and within two campuses at Polo di Novoli and Polo Scientifico di Sesto Fiorentino as well as in the Research Area of Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche.\nScience and discovery.\nFlorence has been an important scientific centre for centuries, notably during the Renaissance with scientists such as Leonardo da Vinci.\nFlorentines were one of the driving forces behind the Age of Discovery. Florentine bankers financed Henry the Navigator and the Portuguese explorers who pioneered the route around Africa to India and the Far East. It was a map drawn by the Florentine Paolo dal Pozzo Toscanelli, a student of Brunelleschi, that Christopher Columbus used to sell his \"enterprise\" to the Spanish monarchs, and which he used on his first voyage. Mercator's \"Projection\" is a refined version of Toscanelli's, taking the Americas into account.\nGalileo and other scientists pioneered the study of optics, ballistics, astronomy, anatomy, and other scientific disciplines. Pico della Mirandola, Leonardo Bruni, Machiavelli, and many others laid the groundwork for modern scientific understanding.\nFashion.\nBy the year 1300 Florence had become a centre of textile production in Europe. Many of the rich families in Renaissance Florence were major purchasers of locally produced fine clothing, and the specialists of fashion in the economy and culture of Florence during that period is often underestimated. Florence is regarded by some as the birthplace and earliest centre of the modern (post World War Two) fashion industry in Italy. The Florentine \"soir\u00e9es\" of the early 1950s organised by Giovanni Battista Giorgini were events where several Italian designers participated in group shows and first garnered international attention. Florence has served as the home of the Italian fashion company Salvatore Ferragamo since 1928. Gucci, Roberto Cavalli, and Emilio Pucci are also headquartered in Florence. Other major players in the fashion industry such as Prada and Chanel have large offices and stores in Florence or its outskirts. Florence's main upscale shopping street is Via de' Tornabuoni, where major luxury fashion houses and jewellery labels, such as Armani and Bulgari, have boutiques. Via del Parione and Via Roma are other streets that are also well known for their high-end fashion stores.\nHistorical evocations.\n\"Scoppio del Carro\".\nThe \"Scoppio del Carro\" (\"Explosion of the Cart\") is a celebration of the First Crusade. During the day of Easter, a cart, which the Florentines call the \"Brindellone\" and which is led by four white oxen, is taken to the Piazza del Duomo between the Baptistery of St. John the Baptist (\"Battistero di San Giovanni\") and the Florence Cathedral (\"Santa Maria del Fiore\"). The cart is connected by a rope to the interior of the church. Near the cart there is a model of a dove, which, according to legend, is a symbol of good luck for the city: at the end of the Easter mass, the dove emerges from the nave of the Duomo and ignites the fireworks on the cart.\n\"Calcio Storico\".\n\"Calcio Storico Fiorentino\" (\"Historic Florentine Football\"), sometimes called \"Calcio in costume\", is a traditional sport, regarded as a forerunner of soccer, though the actual gameplay most closely resembles rugby. The event originates from the Middle Ages, when the most important Florentine nobles amused themselves playing while wearing bright costumes. The most important match was played on 17 February 1530, during the siege of Florence. That day Papal troops besieged the city while the Florentines, with contempt of the enemies, decided to play the game notwithstanding the situation. The game is played in the Piazza di Santa Croce. A temporary arena is constructed, with bleachers and a sand-covered playing field. A series of matches are held between four teams representing each (quarter) of Florence during late June and early July. There are four teams: Azzurri (light blue), Bianchi (white), Rossi (red) and Verdi (green). The Azzurri are from the quarter of Santa Croce, Bianchi from the quarter of Santo Spirito, Verdi are from San Giovanni and Rossi from Santa Maria Novella.\nMain sights.\nFlorence is known as the \"Cradle of the Renaissance\" (\"la culla del Rinascimento\") for its monuments, churches, and buildings. The best-known site of Florence is the domed cathedral of the city, Santa Maria del Fiore, known as \"The Duomo\", whose dome was built by Filippo Brunelleschi. The nearby Campanile (partly designed by Giotto) and the Baptistery buildings are also highlights. The dome, 600 years after its completion, is still the largest dome built in brick and mortar in the world. In 1982, the historic centre of Florence (Italian: \"centro storico di Firenze\") was declared a World Heritage Site by the UNESCO. The centre of the city is contained in medieval walls that were built in the 14th century to defend the city. At the heart of the city, in Piazza della Signoria, is Bartolomeo Ammannati's Fountain of Neptune (1563\u20131565), which is a masterpiece of marble sculpture at the terminus of a still functioning Roman aqueduct.\nThe layout and structure of Florence in many ways harkens back to the Roman era, where it was designed as a garrison settlement. Nevertheless, the majority of the city was built during the Renaissance. Despite the strong presence of Renaissance architecture within the city, traces of medieval, Baroque, Neoclassical and modern architecture can be found. The as well as the Duomo, or the city's Cathedral, are the two buildings which dominate Florence's skyline.\nThe river (Arno), which cuts through the old part of the city, is as much a character in Florentine history as many of the people who lived there. Historically, the locals have had a love-hate relationship with the Arno \u2013 which alternated between nourishing the city with commerce, and destroying it by flood.\nOne of the bridges in particular stands out \u2013 the Ponte Vecchio ('Old Bridge'), whose most striking feature is the multitude of shops built upon its edges, held up by stilts. The bridge also carries Vasari's elevated corridor linking the Uffizi to the Medici residence (Palazzo Pitti). Although the original bridge was constructed by the Etruscans, the current bridge was rebuilt in the 14th century. It is the only bridge in the city to have survived World War\u00a0II intact. It is the first example in the western world of a bridge built using segmental arches, that is, arches less than a semicircle, to reduce both span-to-rise ratio and the numbers of pillars to allow lesser encumbrance in the riverbed (being in this much more successful than the Roman Alcon\u00e9tar Bridge).\nThe church of San Lorenzo contains the Medici Chapels, a complex of burial chapels of the Medici family\u2014the most powerful family in Florence from the 15th to the 18th centuries.\nThe Uffizi Gallery, one of the finest art museums in the world, was founded on a large bequest from the last member of the Medici family. It is located at the corner of Piazza della Signoria, a site important for being the centre of Florence's civil life and government for centuries. The Palazzo della Signoria facing it is still home of the municipal government. Many significant episodes in the history of art and political changes were staged here, such as:\nThe Loggia dei Lanzi in Piazza della Signoria is the location of a number of statues by other sculptors such as Donatello, Giambologna, Bartolomeo Ammannati and Benvenuto Cellini, although some have been replaced with copies to preserve the originals.\nMonuments, museums and religious buildings.\nFlorence contains several palaces and buildings from various eras. The is the town hall of Florence and also an art museum. This large Romanesque crenellated fortress-palace overlooks the Piazza della Signoria with its copy of Michelangelo's David statue as well as the gallery of statues in the adjacent Loggia dei Lanzi. Originally called the \"Palazzo della Signoria\", after the Signoria of Florence, the ruling body of the Republic of Florence, it was also given several other names: \"Palazzo del Popolo\", \"Palazzo dei Priori\", and \"Palazzo Ducale\", in accordance with the varying use of the palace during its long history. The building acquired its current name when the Medici duke's residence was moved across the Arno to the Palazzo Pitti. It is linked to the Uffizi and the Palazzo Pitti through the Corridoio Vasariano.\nPalazzo Medici, now called Medici Riccardi, designed by Michelozzo di Bartolomeo for Cosimo il Vecchio, of the Medici family, is another major edifice, and was built between 1445 and 1460. It was well known for its stone masonry that includes rustication and ashlar. Today it is the head office of the Metropolitan City of Florence and hosts museums and the Riccardiana Library. The Palazzo Strozzi, an example of civil architecture with its rusticated stone, was inspired by the Medici palace, but with more harmonious proportions. Today the palace is used for international expositions like the annual antique show (founded as the Biennale dell'Antiquariato in 1959), fashion shows and other cultural and artistic events. Here also is the seat of the Istituto Nazionale del Rinascimento and the noted Gabinetto Vieusseux, with the library and reading room.\nThere are several other notable places, including the Palazzo Rucellai, designed by Leon Battista Alberti between 1446 and 1451 and executed, at least in part, by Bernardo Rossellino; the Palazzo Davanzati, which houses the museum of the Old Florentine House; the Palazzo Spini Feroni, on Piazza Santa Trinit\u00e0, a historic 13th-century private palace, owned since the 1920s by shoe-designer Salvatore Ferragamo; as well as various others, including the Palazzo Borghese, the Palazzo di Bianca Cappello, the Palazzo Antinori, and the Palazzo delle Assicurazioni Generali, designed in the Neo-Renaissance style in 1871.\nFlorence contains numerous museums and art galleries where some of the world's most important works of art are held. The city is one of the best preserved Renaissance centres of art and architecture in the world and has a high concentration of art, architecture and culture. In the ranking list of the 15 most visited Italian art museums, two-thirds are represented by Florentine museums. The Uffizi is one of these, having a very large collection of international and especially Florentine art. The gallery is articulated in many halls, catalogued by schools and chronological order. Engendered by the Medici family's artistic collections through the centuries, it houses works of art by various painters and artists. The Vasari Corridor is another gallery, built connecting the with the Pitti Palace passing by the Uffizi and over the Ponte Vecchio. The Galleria dell'Accademia houses a Michelangelo collection, including the original statue of \"David\". It has a collection of Russian icons and works by various artists and painters. Other museums and galleries include the Bargello, which concentrates on sculpture works by artists including Donatello, Giambologna and Michelangelo; the Palazzo Pitti, containing part of the Medici family's former private collection. In addition to the Medici collection, the palace's galleries contain many Renaissance works, including several by Raphael and Titian, large collections of costumes, ceremonial carriages, silver, porcelain and a gallery of modern art dating from the 18th century. Adjoining the palace are the Boboli Gardens, elaborately landscaped and with numerous sculptures.\nThere are several different churches and religious buildings in Florence. The cathedral is Santa Maria del Fiore. The San Giovanni Baptistery located in front of the cathedral, is decorated by numerous artists, notably by Lorenzo Ghiberti with the \"Gates of Paradise\". Other churches in Florence include the Basilica of Santa Maria Novella, located in Santa Maria Novella square (across from the Firenze Santa Maria Novella railway station) which contains works by Masaccio, Paolo Uccello, Filippino Lippi and Domenico Ghirlandaio; the Basilica of Santa Croce, the principal Franciscan church in the city, which is situated on the Piazza di Santa Croce, about southeast of the Duomo, and is the burial place of some of the most illustrious Italians, such as Michelangelo, Galileo, Machiavelli, Foscolo, Rossini, thus it is known also as the \"Temple of the Italian Glories\" (\"\"); the Basilica of San Lorenzo, which is one of the largest churches in the city, situated at the centre of Florence's main market district, and the burial place of all the principal members of the Medici family from Cosimo il Vecchio to Cosimo III; Santo Spirito, in the Oltrarno quarter, facing the square with the same name; Orsanmichele, whose building was constructed on the site of the kitchen garden of the monastery of San Michele, then demolished; Santissima Annunziata, a Roman Catholic basilica and the mother church of the Servite order; Ognissanti, which was founded by the lay order of the Umiliati, and is among the first examples of Baroque architecture built in the city; the Santa Maria del Carmine, in the Oltrarno district of Florence, which is the location of the Brancacci Chapel, housing outstanding Renaissance frescoes by Masaccio and Masolino da Panicale, later finished by Filippino Lippi; the Medici Chapel with statues by Michelangelo, in the San Lorenzo; as well as several others, including Santa Trinita, San Marco, Santa Felicita, Badia Fiorentina, San Gaetano, San Miniato al Monte, Florence Charterhouse, and Santa Maria del Carmine. The city additionally contains the Orthodox Russian church of Nativity, and the Great Synagogue of Florence, built in the 19th century.\nFlorence contains various theatres and cinemas. The Odeon Cinema of the Palazzo dello Strozzino is one of the oldest cinemas in the city. Established from 1920 to 1922 in a wing of the Palazzo dello Strozzino, it used to be called the \"Cinema Teatro Savoia\" (Savoy Cinema-Theatre), yet was later called \"Odeon\". The Teatro della Pergola, located in the centre of the city on the eponymous street, is an opera house built in the 17th century. Another theatre is the Teatro Comunale (or \"Teatro del Maggio Musicale Fiorentino\"), originally built as the open-air amphitheatre, the \"Politeama Fiorentino Vittorio Emanuele\", which was inaugurated on 17 May 1862 with a production of Donizetti's \"Lucia di Lammermoor\" and which seated 6,000 people. There are several other theatres, such as the Saloncino Castinelli, the Teatro Puccini, the Teatro Verdi, the Teatro Goldoni and the Teatro Niccolini.\nCathedral of Santa Maria del Fiore.\nFlorence Cathedral, formally the Cattedrale di Santa Maria del Fiore, is the cathedral of Florence, Italy. It was begun in 1296 in the Gothic style to a design of Arnolfo di Cambio and was structurally completed by 1436, with the dome designed by Filippo Brunelleschi.\nSquares, streets and parks.\nAside from such monuments, Florence contains numerous major squares (\"piazze\") and streets. The Piazza della Repubblica is a square in the city centre, location of the cultural caf\u00e9s and bourgeois palaces. Among the square's caf\u00e9s (like Caff\u00e8 Gilli, Paszkowski or the Hard Rock Caf\u00e8), the Giubbe Rosse caf\u00e9 has long been a meeting place for artists and writers, notably those of Futurism. The Piazza Santa Croce is another; dominated by the Basilica of Santa Croce, it is a rectangular square in the centre of the city where the Calcio Fiorentino is played every year. Furthermore, there is the Piazza Santa Trinita, a square near the Arno that mark the end of the Via de' Tornabuoni street.\nOther squares include the Piazza San Marco, the Piazza Santa Maria Novella, the Piazza Beccaria and the Piazza della Libert\u00e0. The centre additionally contains several streets. Such include the Via Camillo Cavour, one of the main roads of the northern area of the historic centre; the Via Ghibellina, one of central Florence's longest streets; the Via dei Calzaiuoli, one of the most central streets of the historic centre which links \"Piazza del Duomo\" to Piazza della Signoria, winding parallel to via Roma and \"Piazza della Repubblica\"; the Via de' Tornabuoni, a luxurious street in the city centre that goes from Antinori square to ponte Santa Trinita, across Piazza Santa Trinita, characterised by the presence of fashion boutiques; the Viali di Circonvallazione, 6-lane boulevards surrounding the northern part of the historic centre; as well as others, such as Via Roma, Via degli Speziali, Via de' Cerretani, and the Viale dei Colli.\nFlorence also contains various parks and gardens. Such include the Boboli Gardens, the Parco delle Cascine, the Giardino Bardini and the Giardino dei Semplici, amongst others.\nSport.\nIn association football, Florence is represented by ACF Fiorentina, which plays in Serie A, the top league of Italian league system. ACF Fiorentina has won two Italian Championships, in 1956 and 1969, and 6 Italian cups, since their formation in 1926. They play their games at the Stadio Artemio Franchi, which holds 47,282. The women's team, ACF Fiorentina Femminile, have won the women's association football Italian Championship of the 2016\u201317 season.\nThe city is home of the Centro Tecnico Federale di Coverciano, in Coverciano, Florence, the main training ground of the Italian national team, and the technical department of the Italian Football Federation.\nFlorence was one of the host cities for cycling's 2013 UCI Road World Championships. The city has also hosted stages of the Giro d'Italia, most recently in 2017.\nSince 2017 Florence is also represented in Eccellenza, the top tier of rugby union league system in Italy, by I Medicei, which is a club established in 2015 by the merging of the senior squads of I Cavalieri (of Prato) and Firenze Rugby 1931. I Medicei won the Serie A Championship in 2016\u201317 and were promoted to Eccellenza for the 2017\u201318 season.\nRari Nantes Florentia is a successful water polo club based in Florence; both its male and female squads have won several Italian championships and the female squad has also European titles in their palmar\u00e8s.\nTransportation.\nCars.\nThe centre of Florence is closed to through-traffic, although buses, taxis and residents with appropriate permits are allowed in. This area is commonly referred to as the ZTL (\"Zona Traffico Limitato\"), which is divided into several subsections. Residents of one section, therefore, will only be able to drive in their district and perhaps some surrounding ones. Cars without permits are allowed to enter after 7:30\u00a0pm, or before 7:30\u00a0am. The rules shift during the tourist-filled summers, putting more restrictions on where one can get in and out.\nBuses.\nATAF&amp;Li-nea was the bus company that ran the principal public transit network in the city; it was one of the companies of the consortium ONE Scarl to accomplish the contract stipulated with the Regione Toscana for the public transport in the 2018\u20132019 period. Individual tickets, or a pass called \"Carta Agile\" with multiple rides, are purchased in advance and must be validated once on board. These tickets may be used on ATAF&amp;Li-nea buses, Tramvia and second-class local trains only within city railway stations. The bus fleet consisted of 446 urban, 5 suburban, 20 intercity and 15 tourism buses.\nIntercity bus transit is run by the SITA, COPIT, and CAP Autolinee companies. The transit companies also accommodate travellers from the Amerigo Vespucci Airport, which is west of the city centre, and which has scheduled services run by major European carriers.\nSince 2021[ [update]], the public local transport is operated by Autolinee Toscane.\nTrams.\nIn an effort to reduce air pollution and car traffic in the city, a multi-line tram network called \"Tramvia\" is under construction. The first line began operation on 14 February 2010 and connects Florence's primary intercity railway station (Santa Maria Novella) with the southwestern suburb of Scandicci. This line is long and has 14 stops. The construction of a second line began on 5 November 2011, construction was stopped due to contractors' difficulties and restarted in 2014 with the new line opening on 11 February 2019. This second line connects Florence's airport with the city centre. A third line (from Santa Maria Novella to the Careggi area, where the most important hospitals of Florence are located) is also under construction.\nFlorence public transport statistics.\nThe average amount of time people spend commuting with public transit in Florence, for example to and from work, on a weekday is 59 min. 13% of public transit riders ride for more than 2 hours every day. The average amount of time people wait at a stop or station for public transit is 14 min, while 22% of riders wait for over 20 minutes on average every day. The average distance people usually ride in a single trip with public transit is , while 3% travel for over in a single direction.\nAirport.\nThe Florence Airport, Peretola, is one of two main international airports in the Tuscany region. The other international airport in the Tuscany region is the Galileo Galilei International Airport in Pisa.\nRailway station.\nFirenze Santa Maria Novella railway station is the main national and international railway station in Florence and is used by 59\u00a0million people every year. The building, designed by Giovanni Michelucci, was built in the \"Italian Rationalism\" style and it is one of the major rationalist buildings in Italy. It is located in \"Piazza della Stazione\", near the Fortezza da Basso, a masterpiece of the military Renaissance architecture, and the Viali di Circonvallazione, and in front of the Basilica of Santa Maria Novella's apse from which it takes its name. As well as numerous high speed trains to major Italian cities Florence is served by international overnight sleeper services to Munich and Vienna operated by Austrian railways \u00d6BB.\nTrain tickets must be validated before boarding. The main bus station is next to Santa Maria Novella railway station. Trenitalia runs trains between the railway stations within the city, and to other destinations around Italy and Europe. The central railway station, Santa Maria Novella, is about northwest of the Piazza del Duomo. There are two other important stations: Campo di Marte and Rifredi. Most bundled routes are Firenze\u2013Pisa, Firenze\u2013Viareggio and Firenze\u2013Arezzo (along the main line to Rome). Other local railways connect Florence with Borgo San Lorenzo in the Mugello area (Faentina railway) and Siena.\nThe high-speed train connecting Florence with Rome takes 90 minutes. Cities in Umbria are also connected to Florence and Rome. A new high-speed rail station in Florence, originally scheduled to open in 2015, is currently under construction and now expected to be completed by 2028. Known as Firenze Belfiore or Firenze Foster, the station is designed to serve high-speed trains and reduce congestion at Santa Maria Novella station. It is planned to be connected to the city centre, Santa Maria Novella, and Florence\u2019s Vespucci Airport via Line 2 of the Tramvia. The station was designed by Foster + Partners in collaboration with Lancietti Passaleva Giordo and Associates with Arup serving as the engineering partner.\nEducation.\nThe University of Florence was first founded in 1321, and was recognized by Pope Clement VI in 1349. In 2019, over 50,000 students were enrolled at the university. The European University Institute has been based in the suburb of Fiesole since 1976. Several American universities host a campus in Florence, including New York University, Marist College, Pepperdine, Stanford, Florida State, Kent State, and James Madison. The Harvard University Center for Italian Renaissance Studies is based in Villa I Tatti. The center for arts and humanities advanced research has been located on the border of Florence, Fiesole and Settignano since 1961. Over 8,000 American students are enrolled for study in Florence, although mostly while studying in US based degree programs.\nThe private school, Centro Machiavelli which teaches Italian language and culture to foreigners, is located in Piazza Santo Spirito in Florence.\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nFlorence is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther partnerships.\nFlorence has friendly relations with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11526", "revid": "50546771", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11526", "title": "Quotient group", "text": "Group obtained by aggregating similar elements of a larger group\nA quotient group or factor group is a mathematical group obtained by aggregating similar elements of a larger group using an equivalence relation that preserves some of the group structure (the rest of the structure is \"factored out\"). For example, the cyclic group of addition modulo \"n\" can be obtained from the group of integers under addition by identifying elements that differ by a multiple of formula_1 and defining a group structure that operates on each such class (known as a congruence class) as a single entity. It is part of the mathematical field known as group theory.\nFor a congruence relation on a group, the equivalence class of the identity element is always a normal subgroup of the original group, and the other equivalence classes are precisely the cosets of that normal subgroup. The resulting quotient is written &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, where formula_2 is the original group and formula_3 is the normal subgroup. This is read as '&amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;', where formula_4 is short for modulo. (The notation &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; should be interpreted with caution, as some authors (e.g., Vinberg) use it to represent the left cosets of formula_5 in formula_2 for \"any\" subgroup formula_5, even though these cosets do not form a group if formula_5 is not normal in &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Others (e.g., Dummit and Foote) use this notation to refer only to the quotient group, with the appearance of this notation implying that formula_5 is normal in &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.)\nMuch of the importance of quotient groups is derived from their relation to homomorphisms. The first isomorphism theorem states that the image of any group formula_2 under a homomorphism is always isomorphic to a quotient of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Specifically, the image of formula_2 under a homomorphism formula_12 is isomorphic to formula_13 where formula_14 denotes the kernel of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nThe dual notion of a quotient group is a subgroup, these being the two primary ways of forming a smaller group from a larger one. Any normal subgroup has a corresponding quotient group, formed from the larger group by eliminating the distinction between elements of the subgroup. In category theory, quotient groups are examples of quotient objects, which are dual to subobjects.\nDefinition and illustration.\nGiven a group formula_2 and a subgroup &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, and a fixed element formula_16, one can consider the corresponding left coset: &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;. Cosets are a natural class of subsets of a group; for example consider the abelian group formula_2 of integers, with operation defined by the usual addition, and the subgroup formula_5 of even integers. Then there are exactly two cosets: &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, which are the even integers, and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, which are the odd integers (here we are using additive notation for the binary operation instead of multiplicative notation).\nFor a general subgroup &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, it is desirable to define a compatible group operation on the set of all possible cosets, &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;. This is possible exactly when formula_5 is a normal subgroup, see below. A subgroup formula_3 of a group formula_2 is normal if and only if the coset equality formula_22 holds for all &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. A normal subgroup of formula_2 is denoted &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nDefinition.\nLet formula_3 be a normal subgroup of a group &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Define the set formula_25 to be the set of all left cosets of formula_3 in &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. That is, &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;. \nSince the identity element &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Define a binary operation on the set of cosets, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, as follows. For each formula_27 and formula_28 in &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, the product of formula_27 and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, is &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. This works only because formula_30 does not depend on the choice of the representatives, formula_31 and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, of each left coset, formula_27 and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. To prove this, suppose formula_33 and formula_34 for some &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Then\n formula_35\nThis depends on the fact that &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is a normal subgroup. It still remains to be shown that this condition is not only sufficient but necessary to define the operation on &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nTo show that it is necessary, consider that for a subgroup formula_3 of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, we have been given that the operation is well defined. That is, for all formula_33 and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; for &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nLet formula_38 and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Since &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, we have &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nNow, formula_39 and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nHence formula_3 is a normal subgroup of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nIt can also be checked that this operation on formula_25 is always associative, formula_25 has identity element &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, and the inverse of element formula_27 can always be represented by &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Therefore, the set formula_25 together with the operation defined by formula_45 forms a group, the quotient group of formula_2 by &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nDue to the normality of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, the left cosets and right cosets of formula_3 in formula_2 are the same, and so, formula_25 could have been defined to be the set of right cosets of formula_3 in &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nExample: Addition modulo 6.\nFor example, consider the group with addition modulo 6: &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;. Consider the subgroup &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;, which is normal because formula_2 is abelian. Then the set of (left) cosets is of size three:\n formula_52\nThe binary operation defined above makes this set into a group, known as the quotient group, which in this case is isomorphic to the cyclic group of order 3.\nMotivation for the name \"quotient\".\nThe quotient group formula_25 can be compared to division of integers. When dividing 12 by 3 one obtains the result 4 because one can regroup 12 objects into 4 subcollections of 3 objects. The quotient group is the same idea, although one ends up with a group for a final answer instead of a number. In general groups have more structure than an arbitrary collection of objects: in the quotient &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, therefore the group structure is used to form a natural \"regrouping\". These are the cosets of formula_3 in &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Because we started with a group and normal subgroup, the final quotient contains more information than just the number of cosets (which is what regular division yields), but instead has a group structure itself.\nExamples.\nEven and odd integers.\nConsider the group of integers formula_55 (under addition) and the subgroup formula_56 consisting of all even integers. This is a normal subgroup, because formula_55 is abelian. There are only two cosets: the set of even integers and the set of odd integers, and therefore the quotient group formula_58 is the cyclic group with two elements. This quotient group is isomorphic with the set formula_59 with addition modulo\u00a02; informally, it is sometimes said that formula_58 \"equals\" the set formula_59 with addition modulo 2.\nExample further explained...\n Let formula_62 be the remainders of formula_63 when dividing by &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Then, formula_64 when formula_65 is even and formula_66 when formula_65 is odd.\n By definition of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, the kernel of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;, is the set of all even integers.\n Let &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Then, formula_68 is a subgroup, because the identity in &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, which is &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, is in &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, the sum of two even integers is even and hence if formula_65 and formula_70 are in &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, formula_71 is in formula_68 (closure) and if formula_65 is even, formula_74 is also even and so formula_68 contains its inverses.\n Define formula_76 as formula_77 for formula_78 and formula_79 is the quotient group of left cosets; &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;.\n Note that we have defined &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, formula_80 is formula_81 if formula_82 is odd and formula_83 if formula_82 is even.\n Thus, formula_85 is an isomorphism from formula_79 to &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nRemainders of integer division.\nA slight generalization of the last example. Once again consider the group of integers formula_55 under addition. Let &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; be any positive integer. We will consider the subgroup formula_88 of formula_55 consisting of all multiples of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Once again formula_88 is normal in formula_55 because formula_55 is abelian. The cosets are the collection &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;. An integer formula_93 belongs to the coset &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, where formula_94 is the remainder when dividing formula_93 by &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. The quotient formula_96 can be thought of as the group of \"remainders\" modulo &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. This is a cyclic group of order &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nComplex integer roots of 1.\nThe twelfth roots of unity, which are points on the complex unit circle, form a multiplicative abelian group &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, shown on the picture on the right as colored balls with the number at each point giving its complex argument. Consider its subgroup formula_3 made of the fourth roots of unity, shown as red balls. This normal subgroup splits the group into three cosets, shown in red, green and blue. One can check that the cosets form a group of three elements (the product of a red element with a blue element is blue, the inverse of a blue element is green, etc.). Thus, the quotient group formula_25 is the group of three colors, which turns out to be the cyclic group with three elements.\nReal numbers modulo the integers.\nConsider the group of real numbers formula_99 under addition, and the subgroup formula_55 of integers. Each coset of formula_55 in formula_99 is a set of the form &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, where formula_31 is a real number. Since formula_104 and formula_105 are identical sets when the non-integer parts of formula_106 and formula_107 are equal, one may impose the restriction formula_108 without change of meaning. Adding such cosets is done by adding the corresponding real numbers, and subtracting 1 if the result is greater than or equal to 1. The quotient group formula_109 is isomorphic to the circle group, the group of complex numbers of absolute value 1 under multiplication, or correspondingly, the group of rotations in 2D about the origin, that is, the special orthogonal group &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. An isomorphism is given by formula_110 (see Euler's identity).\nMatrices of real numbers.\nIf formula_2 is the group of invertible formula_112 real matrices, and formula_3 is the subgroup of formula_112 real matrices with determinant 1, then formula_3 is normal in formula_2 (since it is the kernel of the determinant homomorphism). The cosets of formula_3 are the sets of matrices with a given determinant, and hence formula_25 is isomorphic to the multiplicative group of non-zero real numbers. The group formula_3 is known as the special linear group &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nInteger modular arithmetic.\nConsider the abelian group formula_120 (that is, the set formula_121 with addition modulo 4), and its subgroup &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;. The quotient group formula_122 is &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;. This is a group with identity element &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;, and group operations such as &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;. Both the subgroup formula_123 and the quotient group formula_124 are isomorphic with &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nInteger multiplication.\nConsider the multiplicative group &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;. The set formula_3 of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;th residues is a multiplicative subgroup isomorphic to &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;. Then formula_3 is normal in formula_2 and the factor group formula_25 has the cosets &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. The Paillier cryptosystem is based on the conjecture that it is difficult to determine the coset of a random element of formula_2 without knowing the factorization of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nProperties.\nThe quotient group formula_130 is isomorphic to the trivial group (the group with one element), and formula_131 is isomorphic to &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nThe order of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, by definition the number of elements, is equal to &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, the index of formula_3 in &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. If formula_2 is finite, the index is also equal to the order of formula_2 divided by the order of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. The set formula_25 may be finite, although both formula_2 and formula_3 are infinite (for example, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;).\nThere is a \"natural\" surjective group homomorphism &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, sending each element formula_138 of formula_2 to the coset of formula_3 to which formula_138 belongs, that is: &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. The mapping formula_142 is sometimes called the \"canonical projection of formula_2 onto &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;\". Its kernel is &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nThere is a bijective correspondence between the subgroups of formula_2 that contain formula_3 and the subgroups of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;; if formula_5 is a subgroup of formula_2 containing &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, then the corresponding subgroup of formula_25 is &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. This correspondence holds for normal subgroups of formula_2 and formula_25 as well, and is formalized in the lattice theorem.\nSeveral important properties of quotient groups are recorded in the fundamental theorem on homomorphisms and the isomorphism theorems.\nIf formula_2 is abelian, nilpotent, solvable, cyclic or finitely generated, then so is &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nIf formula_5 is a subgroup in a finite group &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, and the order of formula_5 is one half of the order of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, then formula_5 is guaranteed to be a normal subgroup, so formula_155 exists and is isomorphic to &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. This result can also be stated as \"any subgroup of index 2 is normal\", and in this form it applies also to infinite groups. Furthermore, if formula_156 is the smallest prime number dividing the order of a finite group, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, then if formula_155 has order &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, formula_5 must be a normal subgroup of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nGiven formula_2 and a normal subgroup &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, then formula_2 is a group extension of formula_25 by &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. One could ask whether this extension is trivial or split; in other words, one could ask whether formula_2 is a direct product or semidirect product of formula_3 and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. This is a special case of the extension problem. An example where the extension is not split is as follows: Let &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;, and &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;, which is isomorphic to &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Then formula_25 is also isomorphic to &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. But formula_165 has only the trivial automorphism, so the only semi-direct product of formula_3 and formula_25 is the direct product. Since formula_168 is different from &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, we conclude that formula_2 is not a semi-direct product of formula_3 and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nQuotients of Lie groups.\nIf formula_2 is a Lie group and formula_3 is a normal and closed (in the topological rather than the algebraic sense of the word) Lie subgroup of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, the quotient formula_25 is also a Lie group. In this case, the original group \"formula_2\" has the structure of a fiber bundle (specifically, a principal &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-bundle), with base space formula_25 and fiber &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. The dimension of formula_25 equals &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nNote that the condition that formula_3 is closed is necessary. Indeed, if formula_3 is not closed then the quotient space is not a T1-space (since there is a coset in the quotient which cannot be separated from the identity by an open set), and thus not a Hausdorff space.\nFor a non-normal Lie subgroup &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, the space formula_25 of left cosets is not a group, but simply a differentiable manifold on which formula_2 acts. The result is known as a homogeneous space.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11527", "revid": "38167511", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11527", "title": "Fundamental theorem on homomorphisms", "text": "Theorem relating a group with the image and kernel of a homomorphism\nIn abstract algebra, the fundamental theorem on homomorphisms, also known as the fundamental homomorphism theorem, the first isomorphism theorem, or just the homomorphism theorem, relates the structure of two objects between which a homomorphism is given, and of the kernel and image of the homomorphism.\nThe homomorphism theorem is used to prove the isomorphism theorems. Similar theorems are valid for vector spaces, modules, and rings. \nIt dates back to the work of Richard Dedekind, and was further formalized by Emmy Noether into the isomorphism theorems. \nGroup-theoretic version.\nGiven two groups formula_1 and formula_2 and a group homomorphism formula_3, let formula_4 be a normal subgroup in formula_1 and formula_6 the natural surjective homomorphism formula_7 (where formula_8 is the quotient group of formula_1 by formula_4). If formula_4 is a subset of formula_12 (where formula_13 represents a kernel) then there exists a unique homomorphism formula_14 such that formula_15.\nIn other words, the natural projection formula_6 is universal among homomorphisms on formula_1 that map formula_4 to the identity element.\nThe situation is described by the following commutative diagram:\nformula_19 is injective if and only if formula_20. Therefore, by setting formula_20, we immediately get the first isomorphism theorem.\nWe can write the statement of the fundamental theorem on homomorphisms of groups as \"every homomorphic image of a group is isomorphic to a quotient group\".\nProof.\nThe proof follows from two basic facts about homomorphisms, namely their preservation of the group operation, and their mapping of the identity element to the identity element. We need to show that if formula_22 is a homomorphism of groups, then: \nProof of 1.\nThe operation that is preserved by formula_25 is the group operation. If &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, then there exist elements formula_26 such that formula_27 and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. For these formula_28 and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, we have formula_29 (since formula_25 preserves the group operation), and thus, the closure property is satisfied in &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. The identity element formula_31 is also in formula_23 because formula_25 maps the identity element of formula_1 to it. Since every element formula_35 in formula_1 has an inverse formula_37 such that formula_38 (because formula_25 preserves the inverse property as well), we have an inverse for each element formula_40 in &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, therefore, formula_23 is a subgroup of\u00a0&amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. \nProof of 2.\nConstruct a map formula_42 by &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. This map is well-defined, as if &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, then formula_43 and so formula_44 which gives &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. This map is an isomorphism. formula_45 is surjective onto formula_23 by definition. To show injectivity, if formula_47, then &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, which implies formula_48 so &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. \nFinally,\nformula_49\nformula_50\nhence formula_45 preserves the group operation. Hence formula_45 is an isomorphism between formula_24 and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, which completes the proof.\nApplications.\nThe group theoretic version of the fundamental homomorphism theorem can be used to show that two selected groups are isomorphic. Two examples are shown below.\nIntegers modulo \"n\".\nFor each &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;, consider the groups formula_54 and formula_55 and a group homomorphism formula_56 defined by formula_57 (see modular arithmetic). Next, consider the kernel of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;, which is a normal subgroup in &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;. There exists a natural surjective homomorphism formula_58 defined by &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;. The theorem asserts that there exists an isomorphism formula_59 between formula_55 and &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;, or in other words &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;. The commutative diagram is illustrated below.\n\"N / C\" theorem.\nLet formula_1 be a group with subgroup &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Let &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, formula_62 and formula_63 be the centralizer, the normalizer and the automorphism group of formula_64 in &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, respectively. Then, the formula_65 theorem states that formula_66 is isomorphic to a subgroup of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nProof.\nWe are able to find a group homomorphism formula_67 defined by &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;, for all &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Clearly, the kernel of formula_68 is &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Hence, we have a natural surjective homomorphism formula_69 defined by &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. The fundamental homomorphism theorem then asserts that there exists an isomorphism between formula_70 and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, which is a subgroup of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11528", "revid": "1104064780", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11528", "title": "FCO", "text": "FCO may mean:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "11529", "revid": "1535071", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11529", "title": "Fermion", "text": "Type of subatomic particle\nIn particle physics, a fermion is a subatomic particle that follows Fermi\u2013Dirac statistics. Fermions have a half-integer spin (spin, spin, etc.) and obey the Pauli exclusion principle. These particles include all quarks and leptons and all composite particles made of an odd number of these, such as all baryons and many atoms and nuclei. Fermions differ from bosons, which obey Bose\u2013Einstein statistics.\nSome fermions are elementary particles (such as electrons), and some are composite particles (such as protons). For example, according to the spin-statistics theorem in relativistic quantum field theory, particles with integer spin are bosons. In contrast, particles with half-integer spin are fermions.\nIn addition to the spin characteristic, fermions have another specific property: they possess conserved baryon or lepton quantum numbers. Therefore, what is usually referred to as the spin-statistics relation is, in fact, a spin statistics-quantum number relation.\nAs a consequence of the Pauli exclusion principle, only one fermion can occupy a particular quantum state at a given time. Suppose multiple fermions have the same spatial probability distribution, then, at least one property of each fermion, such as its spin, must be different. Fermions are usually associated with matter, whereas bosons are generally force carrier particles. However, in the current state of particle physics, the distinction between the two concepts is unclear. Weakly interacting fermions can also display bosonic behavior under extreme conditions. For example, at low temperatures, fermions show superfluidity for uncharged particles and superconductivity for charged particles.\nComposite fermions, such as protons and neutrons, are the key building blocks of everyday matter.\nEnglish theoretical physicist Paul Dirac coined the name fermion from the surname of Italian physicist Enrico Fermi.\nElementary fermions.\nThe Standard Model recognizes two types of elementary fermions: quarks and leptons. In all, the model distinguishes 24\u00a0different fermions. There are six quarks (up, down, strange, charm, bottom and top), and six leptons (electron, electron neutrino, muon, muon neutrino, tau and tau neutrino), along with the corresponding antiparticle of each of these.\nMathematically, there are many varieties of fermions, with the three most common types being:\nMost Standard Model fermions are believed to be Dirac fermions, although it is unknown at this time whether the neutrinos are Dirac or Majorana fermions (or both). Dirac fermions can be treated as a combination of two Weyl fermions. In July 2015, Weyl fermions were experimentally realized in Weyl semimetals.\nComposite fermions.\nComposite particles (such as hadrons, nuclei, and atoms) can be bosons or fermions depending on their constituents. More precisely, because of the relation between spin and statistics, a particle containing an odd number of fermions is itself a fermion. It will have half-integer spin. The number of bosons within a composite particle made up of simple particles bound with a potential has no effect on whether it is a boson or a fermion.\nExamples include the following:\nThe fermionic or bosonic behaviour of a composite particle is only observed when the constituent particles remain far apart. When they are close together, the spatial structure becomes important and the composite particles behave according to their constituent makeup.\nFermions can exhibit bosonic behavior when they become bound in pairs. This is the origin of superconductivity and the superfluidity of helium-3. In superconducting materials, electrons interact through the exchange of phonons, forming Cooper pairs, while in helium-3, the atoms interact and pair via spin fluctuations.\nThe quasiparticles of the fractional quantum Hall effect are also known as composite fermions; they consist of electrons with an even number of quantized vortices attached to them.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11530", "revid": "4842600", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11530", "title": "Fred Savage", "text": "American actor and director (born 1976)\nFrederick Aaron Savage (born July 9, 1976) is an American actor and director. He is best known for his role as Kevin Arnold in the American television series \"The Wonder Years\" (1988\u20131993). He has earned several awards and nominations, such as People's Choice Awards and Young Artist Awards. He is also known for playing the Grandson in \"The Princess Bride\", and voiced the title protagonist in \"Oswald\". Savage has worked as a director, and in 2005 later starred in the television sitcom \"Crumbs\". Savage returned to acting in the television series \"The Grinder\", as well as the Netflix series \"Friends from College\".\nEarly life and education.\nSavage was born in Chicago, to Joanne and Lewis Savage, who was an industrial real estate broker and consultant. Savage grew up in Glencoe, Illinois, before moving to Southern California. His younger brother is actor Ben Savage and his younger sister is actress/musician Kala Savage. His grandparents were Jewish immigrants from Poland, Ukraine, Germany and Latvia. He was raised in Reform Judaism.\nSavage was educated at Brentwood School, a private co-educational day school in Brentwood, in the Westside area of Los Angeles. He graduated from Stanford University in 1999, with a bachelor's degree in English and as a member of Sigma Alpha Epsilon fraternity.\nCareer.\nActing.\nSavage's first screen performance was in the television show \"Morningstar/Eveningstar\", at the age of nine. He then appeared onscreen in \"The Boy Who Could Fly\", \"Dinosaurs!\", and several television shows, including \"The Twilight Zone\" and \"Crime Story\" before gaining national attention as the grandson in the 1987 film \"The Princess Bride\" opposite Peter Falk.\nIn 1988, Savage starred in his most well-known role as Kevin Arnold on the comedy-drama television series \"The Wonder Years\", which earned him two Golden Globe nominations for Best Actor \u2013 Television Series Musical or Comedy and two Primetime Emmy nominations for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Comedy Series. At the age of thirteen, he was the youngest actor ever to receive these honors. He remained on the show until it ended in 1993. During this period, he appeared in several films, most notably \"Vice Versa\" (1988), and also starred in \"Little Monsters\" and \"The Wizard\". After \"The Wonder Years\" ended, Savage returned to high school at age 17, and later attended Stanford. His first television role after high school was the NBC sitcom \"Working\", which Savage starred in for its two-season run. Savage also had a series of guest and supporting roles in the late 1990s and the 2000s such as on the show \"Boy Meets World\", (which starred his younger brother Ben Savage), \"\", \"The Legend of Prince Valiant\", and the film \"Austin Powers in Goldmember\" as The Mole.\nSavage has lent his voice to several animated projects, including \"Family Guy\", \"Kim Possible\", \"Justice League Unlimited\", \"Oswald\", and \"Holidaze: The Christmas That Almost Didn't Happen\". His two lead roles since \"The Wonder Years\" were on the short-lived sitcoms \"Working\" and \"Crumbs\". He ranked at #27 on VH1's \"100 Greatest Kid Stars\".\nIn July 2008, Savage guest-starred in the web series \"The Rascal\" on Crackle.\nIn 2015, Savage returned to acting with the Fox series \"The Grinder\". Producer Nick Stoller approached Savage about playing the role of Stewart on \"The Grinder\". Savage was uninterested at first, but agreed to meet with the producers of the series because his children attended school with Stoller's children. Savage eventually agreed to take on the role. \"The Grinder\" was canceled by Fox on May 16, 2016.\nIn 2017, he joined the cast of the Netflix series \"Friends from College\" as Max Adler, a gay literary agent.\nDirecting and producing.\nIn 1999, Savage began his directing career in which he helmed episodes of over a dozen television series. Savage's first directing credit was on the short-lived NBC sitcom \"Working\" which also starred Savage. Following \"Working\", Savage began observing production on the Disney Channel show \"Even Stevens\" to further learn the craft of directing. Savage also learned by shadowing Amy Sherman-Palladino, Todd Holland, and James Burrows.\nHis credits include \"Zoey 101\", \"Drake &amp; Josh\", \"Ned's Declassified School Survival Guide\" and \"Big Time Rush\" for Nickelodeon, as well as \"That's So Raven\", \"Hannah Montana\", and \"Wizards of Waverly Place\" for Disney Channel. Additionally, Savage has directed for prime-time network sitcoms including \"Modern Family\" and \"2 Broke Girls\".\nBesides directing several episodes, Savage co-produced the Disney Channel Original Series \"Phil of the Future\". In 2007, he was nominated for a Directors Guild award for the \"Phil\" episode \"Not-So-Great-Great Grandpa\".\nSavage has served as a producer for several episodes of \"It's Always Sunny in Philadelphia\", \"Friends with Benefits\", \"Party Down\", \"Phil of the Future\", \"The Crazy Ones\", and \"Happy Endings\".\nIn 2007, he made his feature film directorial debut with the children's comedy film \"Daddy Day Camp\", for which he was nominated for Worst Director at the 28th Golden Raspberry Awards.\nMisconduct allegations.\nIn 1993, Savage, then 16, and his \"Wonder Years\" co-star Jason Hervey were accused of sexual harassment in a lawsuit filed by the show's former costume designer. Monique Long alleged the young actors \"verbally and physically harassed her daily,\" with her complaints over their behavior ignored by the show's staff. The lawsuit was settled out of court.\nIn March 2018, a costume designer on \"The Grinder\" accused Savage of assault and intimidation and filed a complaint in Los Angeles Superior Court alleging crimes including assault, battery, and gender discrimination. Savage denied the allegations. Fox later stated that an investigation cleared the actor of any wrongdoing.\nOn May 6, 2022, Savage was fired as executive producer and director of \"The Wonder Years\" reboot after an investigation into alleged inappropriate conduct. While Savage stated that \"some of the claims were untrue\", he also stated that he was going to work on changing any perceived negative behavior.\nPersonal life.\nSavage married his childhood friend Jennifer Lynn Stone on August 7, 2004. They have three children.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11531", "revid": "47012757", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11531", "title": "Futurians", "text": "Group of science fiction fans and writers (1938\u20131945)\nThe Futurians were an influential group of science fiction fans, writers, and editors who helped shape the genre in the United States between 1938 and 1945. Based in New York City, the group included many individuals who would become major figures in science fiction, including Isaac Asimov, Frederik Pohl, Donald A. Wollheim, James Blish, Cyril M. Kornbluth, Damon Knight, and Judith Merril. Known for their left-wing political views and collective approach to professional development, the Futurians were, as Knight noted, \"brilliant, eccentric and poor,\" yet from this group of never more than twenty members came seven of the field's most prominent names.\nHistory.\nFormation.\nThe Futurians formed in September 1938 following ideological conflicts within New York science fiction fandom. The group emerged when Donald A. Wollheim broke away from the Greater New York Science Fiction Club (GNYCSFC), which was led by Sam Moskowitz.\nIsaac Asimov described the split in his autobiography \"In Memory Yet Green\" (1979), attributing it to political differences. Wollheim and his followers believed science fiction fans should incorporate Marxist political perspectives and work toward a \"scientific world-state,\" while Moskowitz preferred to keep fandom focused solely on science fiction as literature. Following the split, Moskowitz organized the competing faction into \"New Fandom,\" maintaining what Knight called \"an atmosphere of permanent crisis\" between the two groups.\nOrigins and predecessors.\nFrederik Pohl, in \"The Way the Future Was\" (1978), traced the Futurians' roots to earlier fan organizations. The group's core members\u2014Pohl, Wollheim, John B. Michel, and Robert A. W. Lowndes, who called themselves the \"Quadrumvirate\"\u2014had previously been members of the Brooklyn Science Fiction League, founded in 1934 as a chapter of Hugo Gernsback's Science Fiction League. \nAccording to Pohl, the group \"changed clubs the way Detroit changes tailfins,\" moving through several organizations including the East New York Science Fiction League (1935), the Independent League for Science Fiction (1936), and the International Scientific Association (ISA) (1937) before founding the Futurians. The name \"Futurian\" was taken from J. Michael Rosenblum's British fanzine \"The Futurian\", though the New York group did not acknowledge this borrowing until 1945.\nActivities and influence.\nThe Futurians met regularly in members' apartments, particularly in communal living arrangements they called \"Futurian Houses.\" These included the \"Futurian Embassy\" and later the \"Ivory Tower,\" where members shared living expenses and collaborated on writing projects. The group published numerous fanzines and helped launch the careers of its members through mutual support and criticism.\nDuring the early 1940s, Futurians edited approximately half of all science fiction pulp magazines in the United States. Frederik Pohl edited \"Astonishing Stories\" and \"Super Science Stories\" for Popular Publications; Robert Lowndes edited \"Science Fiction\" and \"Future Fiction\" for Columbia Publications; and Donald Wollheim briefly edited \"Cosmic Stories\" and \"Stirring Science Stories\" for Albing Publications.\nThe Great Exclusion Act.\nThe Futurians' political activism reached a climax at the First World Science Fiction Convention in New York in 1939. Convention chairman Sam Moskowitz barred six Futurians from entry after discovering they had prepared pamphlets criticizing the convention organizers as \"dictators\" serving commercial interests rather than fandom. This incident, known in fan history as the \"Great Exclusion Act,\" deepened the rift between the Futurians and New Fandom.\nDissolution.\nThe group began to dissolve in 1945 as members were drafted for World War II service or moved away from New York to pursue professional opportunities. According to Damon Knight, the formal end came when Wollheim sued other members for libel after they voted to expel him from the group over a personal dispute involving John Michel and Judith Merril.\nPolitical views.\nThe Futurians were known for their left-wing political stance, though individual members held diverse views. Donald Wollheim, the group's founder, believed that science fiction fans \"should actively work for the realization of the scientific world-state as the only genuine justification for their activities and existence.\" This led to the group being labeled \"Michelists\" after John B. Michel's controversial \"Mutation or Death\" speech at the 1937 Third Eastern Science Fiction Convention.\nSeveral members briefly investigated Technocracy, attending study sessions before dismissing movement leader Howard Scott as a \"crackpot.\" Individual political affiliations varied: Frederik Pohl joined the Communist Party USA in 1936 but left in 1939; Judith Merril supported Trotskyism; and despite the group's leftist reputation, Wollheim voted for Republican candidate Alfred Landon in the 1936 presidential election.\nMembers.\nCore members of the Futurians included:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAssociated members and frequent attendees included:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNote: Membership varied over the group's seven-year existence, with some individuals attending meetings without formal membership. The distinction between \"members\" and \"attendees\" was often fluid, as the group operated informally without dues or official membership rolls.\nLegacy.\nThe Futurians significantly influenced the development of science fiction as both a literary genre and a community. Seven core members became major figures in the field, collectively winning numerous Hugo and Nebula Awards. Their emphasis on literary quality and social relevance helped move science fiction beyond its pulp magazine origins.\nThe group pioneered many fannish traditions, including collaborative living arrangements for fans and the practice of mutual support among aspiring professionals. Their political engagement, while controversial at the time, presaged science fiction's later engagement with social and political themes.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11532", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11532", "title": "First Fandom", "text": "Organization for longstanding science fiction fans\nFirst Fandom is an informal association of early, active and well-known science fiction fans.\nIn 1958, a number of fans at Midwestcon realized amid table-talk that they all had been active in fandom for more than 20 years. This inspired the creation of an organization for longstanding fans under the initial chairmanship of Robert A. Madle, who \"in 1958 suggested the idea of forming an organization called First Fandom\". Originally, only those fans who were known to have been active in fandom before the cutoff date, January 1, 1938, were eligible. Such fannish activity (or \"fanac\") including writing to letter columns in science fiction magazines, having been published in fanzines, or having participated in science fiction oriented clubs, or just generally doing fannish things.\nThe term itself is an oblique reference to Olaf Stapledon's classic science fiction epic \"Last and First Men\". In this book the stages of mankind are enumerated. Thus early 1950s historian of fandom Jack Speer began to label successive generations of fans as First Fandom, Second Fandom, Third Fandom, and so forth... all the way to Seventh Fandom and beyond.\nThose applying to membership of the organization must prove they have had 30 years of continuous activity in science fiction fandom. If a person is not selected for membership, they may still become a Sustaining Patron. Patrons are not able to participate in the awards process.\nFirst Fandom annually presents its First Fandom Hall of Fame Award, posthumous award, and Sam Moskowitz Archive Award for excellence in science fiction collecting, at the beginning of the Hugo Awards Ceremony at Worldcon (World Science Fiction Convention).\nThere is an analogous informal society in Finnish fandom called the \"Dinosaur Club\"; the cutoff being the first major Finnish con Kingcon.\nAwards.\nFirst Fandom recognizes people for their work within the science-fiction community.\nFirst Fandom Hall of Fame Award.\nThis award \"is presented annually for contributions to the field of science fiction dating back more than 30 years. Contributions can be as a fan, writer, editor, artist, agent, or any combination of the five.\" It is usually presented at the Hugo Awards.\nPosthumous Hall of Fame Award.\nThis award \"is presented for contributions to the field of science fiction dating back more than 30 years. The Posthumous Hall of Fame award was established as a separate and equal award with unique criteria in 1994 at Rivercon XIX\" and is also usually presented at the Hugos.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n1990s.\n1994\n1995\n1996\n1997\n1998\n1999\n2000s.\n2000\n2001\n2002\n2003\n2004\n2007\n2008\n2009\n2010s.\n2010\n2011\n2012\n2013\n2014\n2016\n2017\n2018\n2019\n2020s.\n2020\n2021\n2022\n2023\n2024\nSam Moskowitz Award Winners.\nThis award, named after the American writer, critic, and historian of science fiction Sam Moskowitz, is \"for excellence in science fiction collecting\". Most years, the award is presented at the World Science Fiction Convention.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n1990s.\n1998\n1999\n2000s.\n2000\n2001\n2002\n2003\n2004\n2005\n2006\n2007\n2008\n2009\n2010s.\n2010\n2011\n2012\n2013\n2014\n2015\n2016\n2017\n2018\n2019\n2020s.\n2020\n2021\n2022\n2023\n2024\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11535", "revid": "8796", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11535", "title": "Four-poster", "text": ""}
{"id": "11536", "revid": "4770293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11536", "title": "Fianna F\u00e1il", "text": "Irish political party\nFianna F\u00e1il (; ; meaning \"Soldiers of Destiny\" or \"Warriors of F\u00e1l\"), officially Fianna F\u00e1il\u00a0\u2013 The Republican Party (), is a centre to centre-right political party in Ireland. \nFianna F\u00e1il was founded as a republican party in 1926 by \u00c9amon de Valera and his supporters after they split from Sinn F\u00e9in in order to take seats in the Oireachtas, which Sinn F\u00e9in refused to recognise. Since 1927, Fianna F\u00e1il has been one of Ireland's two major parties, along with Fine Gael since 1933; both are seen as centre-right parties, to the right of the Labour Party and Sinn F\u00e9in. The party dominated Irish political life for most of the 20th century, and, since its foundation, either it or Fine Gael has led every government. Between 1932 and 2011, it was the largest party in D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann, but latterly with a decline in its vote share; from 1989 onwards, its periods of government were in coalition with parties of either the left or the right.\nFianna F\u00e1il's vote collapsed in the 2011 general election; it ended in third place, in what was widely seen as a political realignment in the wake of the post-2008 Irish economic downturn. By 2016, it had recovered enough to become the largest opposition party, and it entered a confidence and supply arrangement with a Fine Gael\u2013led minority government. In 2020, after a number of months of political stalemate following the general election, Fianna F\u00e1il agreed with Fine Gael and the Green Party to enter into an unprecedented coalition, with the leaders of Fianna F\u00e1il and Fine Gael rotating between the roles of Taoiseach and T\u00e1naiste.\nFianna F\u00e1il is a member of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe, and of Liberal International. From 2019 to 2022, Fianna F\u00e1il was in partnership with the Social Democratic and Labour Party in Northern Ireland.\nHistory.\nFianna F\u00e1il was founded by \u00c9amon de Valera, a former leader of Sinn F\u00e9in. The previous year, de Valera proposed a motion calling for elected members to be allowed to take their seats in D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann if and when the controversial Oath of Allegiance was removed. It failed to pass at the Sinn F\u00e9in Ard Fheis, leading de Valera and a number of other members, including most of Sinn F\u00e9in's parliamentary talent, to split from Sinn F\u00e9in. His new party adopted its name on 2 April of the same year. While it was also opposed to the Treaty settlement, it rejected abstentionism, instead aiming to republicanise the Irish Free State from within. Fianna F\u00e1il's platform of economic autarky had appeal among the farmers, working-class people and the poor, while alienating more affluent classes. It largely pre-empted voters of the aforementioned groups from the Labour Party (with its almost identical economic and social policy) following its entry into the D\u00e1il in 1927. Fianna F\u00e1il would go on to style themselves for several decades as \"the real Labour Party\".\nThe split within Sinn F\u00e9in on the Anglo-Irish Treaty resulted in pro-Treaty and anti-Treaty Sinn F\u00e9in factions running in the 1922 general election. There was a clear victory for the pro-Treaty side, which went on to form Cumann na nGaedheal. Anti-Treaty Sinn F\u00e9in competed in the subsequent 1923 election as 'Republicans'. The split between what would become Fianna F\u00e1il and Fine Gael possibly has deeper roots than the Treaty, however, and reflects a deeper tension within Irish nationalism that was obvious throughout the 19th century. There was a difference between constitutional Irish nationalism and a more violent Gaelic nationalism, which in turn, according to genetic evidence, could be based on patterns of migration from as far back as the 12th century. \nCumann na nGaedheal sought to exploit the notion that Fianna F\u00e1il was a party in thrall to communists. During the 1932 general election campaign, Cumann na nGaedheal declared in a newspaper advert that \"the gunmen and Communists are voting for Fianna F\u00e1il today \u2013 vote for the Government party.\" However, Fianna F\u00e1il won the election, forming its first government on 9 March 1932. It was in power for 61 of the 79 years between then and the election of 2011. Its longest continuous period in office was its first, 15 years and 11 months (March 1932\u00a0\u2013 February 1948). Its longest single period out of office in the 20th century was four years and four months (March 1973\u00a0\u2013 July 1977). All of the party's leaders have served as Taoiseach.\nThe party's most dominant era was the 41-year period between 1932 and 1973, when party leaders \u00c9amon de Valera, Se\u00e1n Lemass and Jack Lynch served as Taoiseach in an almost unbroken chain save for two three-year stints by Fine Gael's John A. Costello. De Valera's reign is acknowledged for having successfully guided Ireland through World War II unscathed but is criticised for leaving Ireland in economic and cultural stagnation. His successors such as Lemass, however, were able to turn around Ireland's economic fortunes as well as prime the country for entry into the European Economic Community, later the European Union.\nFianna F\u00e1il's fortunes began to falter in the 1970s and 1980s. In 1970 the Arms Crisis threatened to split the entire party in two when Fianna F\u00e1il cabinet ministers Charles Haughey and Neil Blaney were dismissed by Jack Lynch after being accused of seeking to provide arms to the newly emergent Provisional Irish Republican Army. Factional infighting over Northern Ireland, economics and the \"moral issues\" such as the legalization of divorce, abortion, and contraception plagued the party in this era and grew particularly intense when Charles Haughey later became party leader. Under Haughey, Fianna F\u00e1il lost both the 1981 general election and November 1982 general election to Garret FitzGerald's Fine Gael during a particularly chaotic time in Ireland's political and economic history. Numerous failed internal attempts to oust Haughey as leader of the party culminated in the most significant split in the party's history when a large portion of the membership walked out to create the Progressive Democrats in 1985, under the leadership of Haughey archrival Desmond O'Malley. Haughey was forced to resign as Taoiseach and party leader in 1992 following revelations about his role in a phone tapping scandal.\nAlthough the two parties had seemed poised to be bitter enemies owing to the personal conflicts between the memberships, from 1989 onwards Fianna F\u00e1il and the Progressive Democrats served repeatedly in coalition governments together, helping to stabilise Fianna F\u00e1il. In 1994 Fianna F\u00e1il came under the new leadership of Haughey prot\u00e9g\u00e9 Bertie Ahern, who also became Taoiseach in 1997. Under Ahern, Fianna F\u00e1il was able to claim credit for helping to broker the Good Friday Agreement in 1998 which began the peace process in Northern Ireland, as well the economic upswing caused by the Celtic Tiger which saw Ireland's economy boom during the 2000s. However, this momentum came to a sharp and sudden halt following two events. Firstly, Ahern was forced to resign as Taoiseach and left the party in 2008 following revelations made in the Mahon Tribunal that Ahern had accepted money from property developers. Secondly, the party, which was still in government under a new leader and Taoiseach Brian Cowen, was held responsible for the effects of the post-2008 Irish economic downturn. The party's popularity crashed: an opinion poll on 27 February 2009 indicated that only 10% of voters were satisfied with the Government's performance.\nIn the 2011 general election, it suffered the worst defeat of a sitting government in the history of the Irish state. This loss was described as \"historic\" in its proportions and \"unthinkable\". The party sank from being the largest in the D\u00e1il to the third-largest, losing 58 of its 78 seats. This broke 79 consecutive years of Fianna F\u00e1il being the largest single party in the D\u00e1il. That election took place with Miche\u00e1l Martin as leader, as Cowen had resigned as party leader in January 2011, although retained his role as Taoiseach until the election. Cowen's premiership was sharply criticised in the media, with \"The Sunday Times\" describing Cowen's tenure as Taoiseach as \"a dismal failure\" and in 2011 the \"Irish Independent\" calling Cowen the \"worst Taoiseach in the history of the State.\"\nSince 2011.\nMartin continued to lead Fianna F\u00e1il past 2011; In the 2016 general election Martin's Fianna F\u00e1il made a moderate recovery while Fine Gael retained control of the government as a minority government, made possible by a confidence and supply agreement with Fianna F\u00e1\u00edl.\nIn 2018 the party was divided internally over how to handle that year's referendum on the Eighth Amendment, the provision in the Irish constitution which forbade abortion. A significant portion of both the parliamentary party and the ordinary membership favoured a No vote, which would keep abortion illegal for non\u2013life-threatening pregnancies. Leader Miche\u00e1l Martin signalled his own desire for a Yes vote, but was unable to bring the party under one stance, and ultimately more than half of Fianna F\u00e1il's TDs campaigned for a No vote. On polling day the Yes side won, 66% to 33%.\nAfter the 2020 general election, for the first time in history, Fianna F\u00e1il entered into a coalition government with its traditional rival Fine Gael, as well as the Green Party, ending its longest period out of government since its formation. Under the agreement, Fianna F\u00e1il leader Miche\u00e1l Martin served as Taoiseach for the first half of the parliamentary term. That same year a number of Fianna F\u00e1il members were involved in the \"Golfgate\" scandal, an event that ultimately led to the resignation of Fianna F\u00e1il deputy leader Dara Calleary. In July 2021 Fianna F\u00e1il suffered what a number of sources suggested might have been the single worst result in its history when the party polled extremely poorly in the 2021 Dublin Bay South by-election. The result prompted Jim O'Callaghan and Cathal Crowe to question whether Martin should lead the party into its next general election. In February 2023, former leader Bertie Ahern rejoined the party, having left in 2012. Over the course of 2024, several sitting Fianna F\u00e1il councillors and former party members left to join the right-wing Independent Ireland party.\nFollowing the 2024 Irish general election, Fianna F\u00e1il became the largest party in the D\u00e1il and led the creation of a government.\nOrganisation and structure.\nFianna F\u00e1il uses a structure called a cumann system. The basic unit was the \"cumann\" (branch); these were grouped into \"comhairl\u00ed ceantair\" (district branches) and a \"comhairle d\u00e1il ceantair\" (constituency branch) in every constituency. The party claimed that in 2005 they had 50,000 registered names, but only an estimated 10,000\u201315,000 members were considered active.\nHowever, from the early 1990s onward, the \"cumann\" structure was weakened. Every \"cumann\" was entitled to three votes to selection conventions irrespective of its size; hence, a large number of \"cumainn\" had become in effect \"paper \"cumainn\"\", the only use of which was to ensure an aspiring or sitting candidate got enough votes. Although this phenomenon was nothing new (the most famous example being Neil Blaney's \"Donegal Mafia\").\nSince the 2007 election, the party's structure has significantly weakened. This was in part exacerbated by significant infighting between candidates in the run-up to the 2011 general election. \"The Irish Times\" estimated that half of its 3,000 \"cumainn\" were effectively moribund. This fraction rose in Dublin with the exception of Dublin West, the former seat of both Brian Lenihan Snr and Brian Lenihan Jnr.\nIdeology and platform.\nFianna F\u00e1il is primarily cited as being on the centre or centre-right of the political spectrum. Fianna F\u00e1il's ideology has been characterised both as conservative and ambiguous or malleable. The party has also been ideologically described as centrist, Christian democratic, liberal-conservative, populist, conservative-liberal, socially conservative, liberal, national-liberal and national-conservative. In 2017, academics Eoin O'Malley and Sean McGraw wrote that Fianna F\u00e1il \"appears centrist, conservative, and attached to the state\", but that there was \"deep ambiguity concerning what type of party Fianna F\u00e1il really is\".\nIn the modern era, Fianna F\u00e1il is seen as a typical catch-all party and has defined itself as such. It has presented itself as a \"broad church\" and attracted support from across disparate social classes. In the 1980s, Brian Lenihan Snr declared \"there are no isms or [ide]ologies in my party\"; further, in the early 2000s, Fianna F\u00e1il leader Bertie Ahern affirmed the party's catch-all stance by defining Fianna F\u00e1il as a party that \"looks out for the small ranking guy, the middle-ranking guy and assists the big guy\". In 2023, party leader Miche\u00e1l Martin described Fianna F\u00e1il as \"a progressive republican party which rejects the failed and destructive idea that you must conform to the traditional left/right ideology\".\nBetween 1989 and 2011, Fianna F\u00e1il led coalition governments with parties of both the left and the right. Fianna F\u00e1il's platform contains a number of enduring commitments: to Irish unity; to the promotion and protection of the Irish language; and to maintaining Ireland's tradition of military neutrality. The party's name and logo incorporates the words 'The Republican Party'. According to Fianna F\u00e1il, \"Republican here stands both for the unity of the island and a commitment to the historic principles of European republican philosophy, namely liberty, equality and fraternity\". The party's main goal at its beginning was to reunite the North and the South.\nFianna F\u00e1il is supportive of the European Union. Although part of the liberal Renew group in the European Parliament, its liberal nature has been disputed. As of 2009, Fianna F\u00e1il did not always support Renew's positions on civil liberties though the party did legalize same-sex civil partnerships in 2010. In 2014, Fianna F\u00e1il expelled MEP Brian Crowley for joining the right-wing European Conservatives and Reformists Group, with the party stating that \"the ideas and principles of the ECR group and its component parties are totally incompatible with the core principles of Fianna F\u00e1il\". Since 2016, Fianna F\u00e1il has increasingly been seen as divided on social issues, and as moving towards a more social liberal profile. Fianna F\u00e1il supported the unsuccessful 2024 Irish constitutional referendums, which would have deleted a reference to women's domestic duties and broadened the definition of the family.\nEvidence from expert surveys, opinion polls and candidate surveys have failed to identify strong distinctions between Fianna F\u00e1il and Fine Gael. Fianna F\u00e1il is generally considered more populist and economically interventionist than its rival. University College Dublin professor Thomas D\u00e4ubler wrote that Fianna F\u00e1il had \"made a move to the centre\" in the 2016 election, which resulted in Fine Gael being placed \"considerably to the right\" of Fianna F\u00e1il. In 2020, \"Time\" magazine described Fianna F\u00e1il as \"slightly more socially conservative and further to the left on the economy\" than Fine Gael. Fianna F\u00e1il has been described in modern times as struggling with its identity as a party. In 2023, Jack Sheehan of \"The Irish Times\" wrote that \"for a decade now, a socially conservative, supposedly republican party has been led by a centrist social liberal with a more cautious position on Irish unification than even Leo Varadkar.\"\n20th century.\nIn the early 20th century, Fianna F\u00e1il had a more explicitly working-class orientation. In 1926, Se\u00e1n Lemass described the party as \"a progressive republican party based on the actual conditions of the moment\" while upon winning the 1932 Irish general election, newly elected Fianna F\u00e1il TD Se\u00e1n Moylan proclaimed that Fianna F\u00e1il's win meant a victory of \"the owners of the donkey and cart over the pony and trap class\". The Fianna F\u00e1il party of the 1930s has been described as an economically social democratic one that sought to create an economically independent state (autarky) via protectionist policies, based on its culturally nationalist thinking.\nDuring the leadership of Se\u00e1n Lemass in the 1960s, Fianna F\u00e1il began to utilise some corporatist policies (embracing the concept of 'social partnership'), taking some influence from Catholic social teaching. It was also during Lemass' time that the party shifted heavily away from autarkic thinking and towards a firm belief in free trade and foreign direct investment in Ireland.\nIn 1967, Jack Lynch described the party as \"left of centre\" while suggesting it was to the left of Fine Gael and Labour. However, during the 1969 Irish general election, the party ran red scare tactics against Labour after it began using the slogan \"the seventies will be socialist!\". As Fine Gael became increasingly socially liberal in the 1970s under Garret FitzGerald, the party reacted by embracing social conservatism and populism. In the same time period, the emergence of the Troubles and the Arms Crisis of 1971 tested the party's nationalism, but despite these events, Fianna F\u00e1il maintained their moderate culturally nationalist stance. In 1983, R. Ken Carty wrote of Fianna F\u00e1il and Fine Gael that they were \"heterogeneous in their bases of support, relatively undifferentiated in terms of policy or programme, and remarkably stable in their support levels\". \nIn the 1990s, Fianna F\u00e1il was described as a conservative and nationalist party.\nLeadership and president.\nThe following are the terms of office as party leader and as Taoiseach:\nElection results.\nFianna F\u00e1il was the most electorally successful party in 20th-century democratic Europe.\n\u00d3gra Fianna F\u00e1il.\n\u00d3gra Fianna F\u00e1il serves as the party's official youth wing.\nFianna F\u00e1il and Northern Ireland politics.\nOn 17 September 2007, Fianna F\u00e1il announced that the party would for the first time organise in Northern Ireland. The then Foreign Minister Dermot Ahern was asked to chair a committee on the matter: \"In the period ahead Dermot Ahern will lead efforts to develop that strategy for carrying through this policy, examining timescales and structures. We will act gradually and strategically. We are under no illusions. It will not be easy. It will challenge us all. But I am confident we will succeed\".\nThe party embarked on its first ever recruitment drive north of the border in September 2007 in northern universities, and established two 'Political Societies', the William Drennan Cumann in Queens University, Belfast, and the Watty Graham Cumann in UU Magee, Derry, which subsequently became official units of Fianna F\u00e1il's youth wing, attaining full membership and voting rights, and attained official voting delegates at the 2012 Ard Fheis. On 23 February 2008, it was announced that a former Ulster Unionist Party (UUP) councillor, Colonel Harvey Bicker, had joined Fianna F\u00e1il.\nBertie Ahern announced on 7 December 2007 that Fianna F\u00e1il had been registered in Northern Ireland by the UK Electoral Commission.\nThe party's Ard Fheis in 2009 unanimously passed a motion to organise in Northern Ireland by establishing forums, rather than cumainn, in each of its six counties. In December 2009, Fianna F\u00e1il secured its first Northern Ireland Assembly MLA when Gerry McHugh, an independent MLA, announced he had joined the party. Mr. McHugh confirmed that although he had joined the party, he would continue to sit as an independent MLA. In June 2010, Fianna F\u00e1il opened its first official office in Northern Ireland, in Crossmaglen, County Armagh. The then Taoiseach Brian Cowen officially opened the office, accompanied by Ministers \u00c9amon \u00d3 Cu\u00edv and Dermot Ahern and Deputies Rory O'Hanlon and Margaret Conlon. Discussing the party's slow development towards all-Ireland politics, Mr. Cowen observed: \"We have a very open and pragmatic approach. We are a constitutional republican party and we make no secret of the aspirations on which this party was founded. It has always been very clear in our mind what it is we are seeking to achieve, that is to reconcile this country and not being prisoners of our past history. To be part of a generation that will build a new Ireland, an Ireland of which we can all be proud\".\nFianna F\u00e1il has not contested any elections in Northern Ireland since its registration and recognition there in 2007. At the party's 2014 Ard Fheis, a motion was passed without debate to stand candidates for election north of the border for the first time in 2019.\nSince 24 January 2019, the party have been in partnership with the Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP) formerly the main Irish nationalist party in Northern Ireland, but now smaller than Sinn F\u00e9in. There had long been speculation about the eventual partnership for several years prior. This was initially met with a negative reaction from Seamus Mallon, former Deputy Leader of the SDLP, who stated he would be opposed to any such merger. Former leader of the SDLP Margaret Ritchie originally stated publicly that she opposed any merger, announcing to the Labour Party Conference that such a merger would not happen on her \"watch\". On 10 January 2019, Richie stated that she now supported a new partnership with Fianna F\u00e1il.\nBoth Fianna F\u00e1il and the SDLP currently have shared policies on key areas including addressing the current political situation in Northern Ireland, improving public services in both jurisdictions of Ireland, such as healthcare, housing, education, and governmental reform, and bringing about the further unity and cooperation of the people on the island and arrangements for a future poll on Irish reunification.\nIn September 2022, SDLP party leader Colum Eastwood announced the end of its partnership with Fianna F\u00e1il, saying that the SDLP needed to move forward by \"standing on its own two feet\".\nRepresentation in European institutions.\nFianna F\u00e1il joined the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe (ALDE) party on 16 April 2009, and the party's Members of the European Parliament (MEPs) sat in the ALDE Group during the 7th European Parliament term from June 2009 to 1 July 2014. The party is a full member of the Liberal International. Prior to this, the party was part of the Eurosceptic Union for Europe of the Nations parliamentary group between 1999 and 2009.\nParty headquarters, over the objections of some MEPs, had made several attempts to sever the party's links to the European right, including an aborted 2004 agreement to join the European Liberal Democrat and Reform (ELDR) Party, with whom it already sat in the Council of Europe under the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe (ALDE) banner. On 27 February 2009, Taoiseach Brian Cowen announced that Fianna F\u00e1il proposed to join the ELDR Party and intended to sit with them in the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe (ALDE) Group in the European Parliament after the 2009 European elections.\nIn October 2009, it was reported that Fianna F\u00e1il had irritated its new Liberal colleagues by failing to vote for the motion on press freedom in Italy (resulting in its defeat by a majority of one in the Parliament) and by trying to scupper their party colleagues' initiative for gay rights. In January 2010, a report by academic experts writing for the votewatch.eu site found that FF \"do not seem to toe the political line\" of the ALDE Group \"when it comes to budget and civil liberties\" issues.\nIn the 2014 European elections, Fianna F\u00e1il received 22.3% of first-preference votes but only returned a single MEP, a reduction in representation of two MEPs from the previous term. This was due to a combination of the party's vote further dropping in Dublin and a two candidate strategy in the Midlands North West constituency, which backfired, resulting in sitting MEP Pat \"the Cope\" Gallagher losing his seat. On 23 June 2014, returning MEP Brian Crowley announced that he intended to sit with the European Conservatives and Reformists (ECR) rather than the ALDE group during the upcoming 8th term of the European parliament. The following day on 24 June 2014 Crowley had the Fianna F\u00e1il party whip withdrawn. He has since been re-added to Fianna F\u00e1il's website.\nIn the European Committee of the Regions, Fianna F\u00e1il sits in the Renew Europe CoR group, with three full and two alternate members for the 2020\u20132025 mandate. Clare Colleran-Molloy is the Coordinator of the ENVE Commission and Gillian Coughlan is a member of the Bureau of the Renew Europe CoR group. \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11538", "revid": "27822", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11538", "title": "Fourth generation programming language", "text": ""}
{"id": "11539", "revid": "1301624146", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11539", "title": "Fujiwara clan", "text": "Powerful family of regents in Japan\nThe was a powerful family of imperial regents in Japan, descending from the Nakatomi clan and, as legend held, through them their ancestral god Ame-no-Koyane. The Fujiwara prospered since ancient times and dominated the imperial court until the Meiji Restoration in 1868. They held the title of Ason. The abbreviated form is .\nThe 8th century clan history states the following at the biography of the clan's patriarch, Fujiwara no Kamatari (614\u2013669): \"Kamatari, the Inner Palace Minister who was also called \u2018Ch\u016br\u014d\",\"\u2019 was a man of the Takechi district of Yamato Province. His forebears descended from Ame no Koyane no Mikoto; for generations they had administered the rites for Heaven and Earth, harmonizing the space between men and the gods. Therefore, it was ordered their clan was to be called \u014cnakatomi.\"\nThe clan originated when the founder, Nakatomi no Kamatari (614\u2013669) of the Nakatomi clan, was rewarded by Emperor Tenji with the honorific \"Fujiwara\"\u00a0\u2013 after the wisteria field on (in present-day Sakurai City) where Kamatari and the then-Prince Naka, whom he befriended in a game of kemari, conspired to eliminate the Soga clan\u00a0\u2013 which evolved as a surname for Kamatari and his descendants. In time, Fujiwara became known as a clan name.\nThe Fujiwara dominated the Japanese politics of the Heian period (794\u20131185) through the monopoly of regent positions, \"Sessh\u014d\" and \"Kampaku\". The family's primary strategy for central influence was through the marrying of Fujiwara daughters to the Emperors. Through this, the Fujiwara would gain influence over the next emperor who would, according to family tradition of that time, be raised in the household of his mother's side and owe loyalty to his grandfather. As abdicated emperors took over power by exercising \"insei\" (, cloistered rule) at the end of the 11th century, then followed by the rise of the warrior class, the Fujiwara gradually lost its control over mainstream politics.\nThe Northern Fujiwara (\u014csh\u016b Fujiwara) ruled the T\u014dhoku region (northeast Honsh\u016b) of Japan during the 12th century.\nBeyond the 12th century, they continued to monopolize the titles of \"Sessh\u014d\" and \"Kampaku\" for much of the time until the system was abolished in the Meiji era. Though their influence declined, the clan remained close advisors to the succeeding Emperors.\nAsuka and Nara period.\nThe Fujiwara clan's political influence was initiated during the Asuka period. Nakatomi no Kamatari, a member of the lower-nobility Nakatomi family led a coup against the Soga in 645 and initiated a series of sweeping government reforms that would be known as the Taika Reform. In 668 Emperor Tenji (reigned 668\u2013671), bestowed the \"kabane\" on Kamatari. The surname passed to the descendants of Fujiwara no Fuhito (659\u2013720), the second son and heir of Kamatari, who was prominent at the court of several emperors and empresses during the early Nara period. He made his daughter Miyako a concubine of Emperor Monmu. Her son, Prince Obito became Emperor Sh\u014dmu. Fuhito succeeded in making another of his daughters, K\u014dmy\u014dshi, the empress consort of Emperor Sh\u014dmu. She was the first empress consort of Japan who was not a daughter of the imperial family itself. Fuhito had four sons; and each of them became the progenitor of a cadet branch of the clan: \nAmong them, the Hokke came to be considered as the leaders of the entire clan. All four brothers died in 737 during a major smallpox epidemic in Japan.\nHeian period.\nDuring the Heian period of Japanese history, the Hokke managed to establish a hereditary claim to the position of regent, either for an underage emperor (\"sessh\u014d\") or for an adult one (\"kampaku\"). Some prominent Fujiwaras occupied these positions more than once, and for more than one emperor. Lesser members of the Fujiwara were court nobles, provincial governors and vice governors, members of the provincial aristocracy, and samurai. The Fujiwara was one of the four great families that dominated Japanese politics during the Heian Period (794 AC\u20131185 AC), and the most important of them at that time. The others were the Tachibana, the Taira and the Minamoto. The Fujiwara exercised tremendous power, especially during the period of regency governments in the 10th and 11th centuries, having many emperors as practically puppet monarchs.\nThe Fujiwara dominated the government of Japan 794\u20131160. There is no clear starting point of their dominance. However, their domination of civil administration was lost by the establishment of the first shogunate (i.e., Kamakura shogunate) under Minamoto no Yoritomo in 1192.\nFujiwara princes initially served as highest ministers of the imperial Court (\"kampaku\") and regents (\"sessh\u014d\") for underage monarchs. The Fujiwara were the proverbial \"power behind the throne\" for centuries. Apparently they never aspired to supplant the imperial dynasty. Instead, the clan's influence stemmed from its matrimonial alliances with the imperial family. Because consorts of crown princes, younger sons, and emperors were generally Fujiwara women, the male heads of the Fujiwara house were often the father-in-law, brother-in-law, uncle, or maternal grandfather of the emperor. The family reached the peak of its power under Fujiwara no Michinaga (966\u20131027). He was the grandfather of three emperors, the father of six empresses or imperial consorts, and the grandfather of seven additional imperial consorts; it is no exaggeration to say that it was Michinaga who ruled Japan during this period, not the titular Emperors. As a result of these unusually strong familial links, Michinaga never took the title of Kampaku\u2014he held more than the power that the position would bring, and had no need of the title.\nThe Fujiwara clan is featured prominently in \"The Pillow Book\", by Sei Sh\u014dnagon, and the character of Genji is partially based on Michinaga in the eponymous \"Tale of Genji\".\nFujiwara regime in the Heian period.\nThe Fujiwara Regency was the main feature of government during most of the Heian era. Kyoto (Heian-ky\u014d) was geopolitically a better seat of government; with good river access to the sea, it could be reached by land routes from the eastern provinces.\nJust before the move to the Heian-ky\u014d, the Emperor had abolished universal conscription in the eighth century and soon local, private militaries came into being. The Fujiwara and the clans of Taira and Minamoto created later during the ninth century were among the most prominent families supported by the new military class.\nIn the ninth and tenth centuries, much authority was lost to the great families, who disregarded the Chinese-style land and tax systems imposed by the government in Kyoto. Stability came to Heian Japan, but, even though succession was ensured for the Imperial family through heredity, power again concentrated in the hands of one noble family, the Fujiwara.\nFamily administrations now became public institutions. As the most powerful family, the Fujiwara governed Japan and determined the general affairs of state, such as succession to the throne. Family and state affairs were thoroughly intermixed, a pattern followed among other families, monasteries, and even the imperial family.\nAs the Soga had taken control of the throne in the sixth century, the Fujiwara by the ninth century had intermarried with the imperial family, and one of their members was the first head of the Emperor's Private Office. While the earliest parts of the Heian period was marked by unusually strong emperors governing themselves (in particular from Emperor Kanmu to Emperor Saga (781\u2013823)), the Fujiwara started to rebuild their influence first under Fujiwara no Fuyutsugu in the first half of the ninth century. Fuyutsugu's son Fujiwara no Yoshifusa was the first person not from the imperial family to become regent for a minor emperor when he gained that position when his grandson was enthroned as Emperor Seiwa in 858. His adopted son, Fujiwara no Mototsune, had himself further appointed \"kampaku\" (regent for an adult emperor, a newly invented position). After Mototsune's death Emperor Uda (who was not the son of a Fujiwara daughter) managed to regain control of much of government. However, after abdicating in favour of his son, Emperor Daigo (897\u2013930), while apparently intending to control government from retirement, Mototsune's son Fujiwara no Tokihira managed to maneuver himself back to very prominent position until his early death in 909. The remaining period of Daigo's reign was again relatively free from Fujiwara dominance, but from the beginning of the reign of his son Emperor Suzaku, the Fujiwara again re-established their dominance of the court with the leadership of Fujiwara no Tadahira.\nNevertheless, the Fujiwara were not demoted by Emperor Daigo but in many ways became stronger during his reign. Central control of Japan had continued to decline, and the Fujiwara, along with other great families and religious foundations, acquired ever larger \"sh\u014den\" and greater wealth during the early tenth century. By the early Heian period, the \"sh\u014den\" had obtained legal status, and the large religious establishments sought clear titles in perpetuity, waiver of taxes, and immunity from government inspection of the \"sh\u014den\" they held. Those people who worked the land found it advantageous to transfer title to sh\u014den holders in return for a share of the harvest. People and lands were increasingly beyond central control and taxation, a de facto return to conditions before the Taika Reform.\nWithin decades of Emperor Daigo's death, the Fujiwara had absolute control over the court. By the year 1000, Fujiwara no Michinaga was able to enthrone and dethrone emperors at will. Little authority was left for traditional officialdom, and government affairs were handled through the Fujiwara family's private administration. The Fujiwara had become what historian George B. Sansom has called \"hereditary dictators\".\nThe Fujiwara presided over a period of cultural and artistic flowering at the imperial court and among the aristocracy. There was great interest in graceful poetry and vernacular literature. Japanese writing had long depended on Chinese ideograms (\"kanji\"), but these were now supplemented by \"kana\", two types of phonetic Japanese script: \"katakana\", a mnemonic device using parts of Chinese ideograms; and \"hiragana\", a cursive form of \"kanji\" writing and an art form in itself. \"Hiragana\" gave written expression to the spoken word and, with it, to the rise in Japan's famous vernacular literature, much of it written by court women who had not been trained in Chinese as had their male counterparts. Three late tenth century and early eleventh century women presented their views of life and romance at the Heian court in \"Kager\u014d Nikki\" (\"The Gossamer Years\") by \"the mother of Michitsuna\", \"Makura no S\u014dshi\" (\"The Pillow Book\") by Sei Sh\u014dnagon, and \"Genji Monogatari\" (\"Tale of Genji\") by Murasaki Shikibu (herself a Fujiwara). Indigenous art also flourished under the Fujiwara after centuries of imitating Chinese forms. Vividly colored \"yamato-e\" (Japanese style) paintings of court life and stories about temples and shrines became common in the mid and late Heian periods, setting patterns for Japanese art to this day.\nDecline in food production, growth of the population, and competition for resources among the great families all led to the gradual decline of Fujiwara power and gave rise to military disturbances in the mid-tenth and eleventh centuries. Members of the Fujiwara, Taira, and Minamoto families\u00a0\u2013 all of whom had descended from the imperial family\u00a0\u2013 attacked one another, claimed control over vast tracts of conquered land, set up rival regimes, and generally broke the peace of Japan.\nThe Fujiwara controlled the throne until the reign of Emperor Go-Sanj\u014d (1068\u201373), the first emperor not born of a Fujiwara mother since the ninth century. Emperor Go-Sanj\u014d, determined to restore imperial control through strong personal rule, implemented reforms to curb Fujiwara influence. He also established an office to compile and validate estate records with the aim of reasserting central control. Many \"sh\u014den\" were not properly certified, and large landholders, like the Fujiwara, felt threatened with the loss of their lands. Emperor Go-Sanj\u014d also established the \"In no ch\u014d\", or Office of the Cloistered Emperor, which was held by a succession of emperors who abdicated to devote themselves to behind-the-scenes governance, or \"insei\" (Cloistered rule).\nThe \"In no ch\u014d\" filled the void left by the decline of Fujiwara power. Rather than being banished, the Fujiwara were mostly retained in their old positions of civil dictator and minister of the center while being bypassed in decision making. In time, many of the Fujiwara were replaced, mostly by members of the rising Minamoto family. While the Fujiwara fell into disputes among themselves and formed northern and southern factions, the insei system allowed the paternal line of the imperial family to gain influence over the throne. The period from 1086 to 1156 was the age of supremacy of the \"In no ch\u014d\" and of the rise of the military class throughout the country. Military might rather than civil authority dominated the government.\nA struggle for succession in the mid-twelfth century gave the Fujiwara an opportunity to regain their former power. Fujiwara no Yorinaga sided with the retired emperor in a violent battle in 1158 against the heir apparent, who was supported by the Taira and Minamoto. In the end, the Fujiwara were destroyed, the old system of government supplanted, and the \"insei\" system left powerless as bushi took control of court affairs, marking a turning point in Japanese history. Within a year, the Taira and Minamoto clashed, and a twenty-year period of Taira ascendancy began. The Taira were seduced by court life and ignored problems in the provinces. Finally, Minamoto no Yoritomo (1147\u201399) rose from his headquarters at Kamakura (in the Kant\u014d region, southwest of modern Tokyo) to defeat the Taira, and with them the child emperor Emperor Antoku they controlled, in the Genpei War (1180\u201385).\nAfter this downfall, the younger branches of the Fujiwara clan turned their focus from politics to the arts, producing literary scholars including Fujiwara no Shunzei and Fujiwara no Teika.\nDecline.\nOnly forty years after Michinaga's death, his Fujiwara heirs were not able to prevent the accession of Emperor Go-Sanj\u014d (reigned 1068\u201373), the first emperor since Emperor Uda whose mother was not a Fujiwara. The system of government by retired emperor (\"daij\u014d tenn\u014d\") (cloistered rule) beginning from 1087 further weakened the Fujiwara's control over the Imperial Court.\nThe Fujiwara-dominated Heian period approached its end along disturbances of 12th century. The dynastic struggle known as the H\u014dgen Disturbance (\"H\u014dgen no Ran\") led to the Taira emerging as the most powerful clan in 1156. During the Heiji Disturbance (\"Heiji no Ran\") in 1160 the Taira defeated the coalition of Fujiwara and Minamoto forces. This defeat marked the end of the Fujiwara's dominance.\nSplit and enduring influence.\nDuring the 13th century, the Fujiwara Hok-ke was split into five regent houses: Konoe, Takatsukasa, Kuj\u014d, Nij\u014d and Ichij\u014d.\nThey had a \"monopoly\" to the offices of \"sessh\u014d\" and \"kampaku\", and served in turn. The political power had shifted away from the court nobility in Kyoto to the new warrior class in the countryside. However, Fujiwara remained close advisers, regents and ministers to the emperors for centuries; the family retained political reputation and influence even until the 20th century (such as Fumimaro Konoe and Morihiro Hosokawa, who became the Prime Ministers). As such, they had a certain political power and much influence, as often the rival warriors and later bakufu sought their alliance. Oda Nobunaga and his sister Oichi claimed to have descent from the Taira and Fujiwara clans; regent Toyotomi Hideyoshi and shogun Tokugawa Ieyasu were related by marriage to various families from Fujiwara clan. Empress Sh\u014dken, wife of Emperor Meiji, was a descendant of the Fujiwara clan.\nUntil the marriage of the Crown Prince Hirohito (Emperor Sh\u014dwa) to Princess Nagako of Kuni (posthumously Empress K\u014djun) in January 1924, the principal consorts of emperors and crown princes had often been recruited from one of the Sekke Fujiwara. Imperial princesses were often married to Fujiwara lords\u00a0\u2013 throughout a millennium at least. As recently as Emperor Sh\u014dwa's third daughter, the former Princess Kazuko and Prince Mikasa's elder daughter, the former Princess Yasuko, married into Takatsukasa and Konoe families, respectively. Likewise a daughter of the last \"sh\u014dgun\" married a second cousin of Emperor Sh\u014dwa.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11540", "revid": "38984", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11540", "title": "Fifth amendment rights of witness", "text": ""}
{"id": "11542", "revid": "51046376", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11542", "title": "Federalism", "text": "Political concept\nFederalism is a mode of government that combines a general level of government (a central or federal government) with a regional level of sub-unit governments (e.g., provinces, states, cantons, territories, etc.), while dividing the powers of governing between the two levels of governments. Two illustrative examples of federated countries\u2014one of the world's oldest federations, and one recently organized\u2014are Australia and Micronesia.\nJohannes Althusius (1563\u20131638) is considered the father of modern federalism, along with Montesquieu. In 1603, Althusius first described the bases of this political philosophy in his \"Politica Methodice Digesta, Atque Exemplis Sacris et Profanis Illustrata\". By 1748, in his treatise \"The Spirit of Law\", Montesquieu (1689-1755) observed various examples of federalist governments: in corporate societies, in the \"polis\" bringing villages together, and in cities themselves forming confederations. In the modern era Federalism was first adopted by a union of the states of the Old Swiss Confederacy as of the mid-14th century.\nFederalism differs from confederalism, where the \"central government is created subordinate\" to the regional states\u2014and is notable for its \"regional-separation\" of governing powers (e.g., in the United States, the Articles of Confederation as the general level of government of the original Thirteen Colonies; and, later, the Confederate States of America). And federalism also differs from the unitary state, where the \"regional level is subordinate\" to the central/federal government, even after a devolution of powers\u2014and is notable for \"regional-integration of governing powers\", (e.g., the United Kingdom). \nFederalism is at the midpoint of variations on the pathway (or spectrum) of \"regional-integration or regional-separation\". It is bordered on the increasing-separation side by confederalism, and on the increasing-integration side by devolution within a unitary state; (see \"pathway\" graphic).\nSome characterize the European Union as a pioneering example of federalism in a multi-state setting\u2014with the concept termed a \"federal union of states\", as situated on the \"pathway\" (spectrum) of \"regional-integration or regional-separation\".\nExamples of federalism today, i.e., the federation of a central/federal government with regional sub-unit governments, include: Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Canada, Ethiopia, Germany, India, Iraq, Malaysia, Mexico, Micronesia, Nepal, Nigeria, Pakistan, Russia, Somalia, South Sudan, Sudan, Switzerland, the United Arab Emirates, the United States, and Venezuela.\nOverview.\nEtymology.\nThe\u00a0terms\u00a0\"federalism\"\u00a0and\u00a0\"confederalism\" share a root in the Latin word \"foedus\", meaning \"treaty, pact or covenant\". Until the late eighteenth century their two early meanings were essentially the same: a simple league among sovereign states, based on a treaty; (thus, initially the two were synonyms). It was in this sense that James Madison referred to the new US Constitution as \"neither a national nor a federal Constitution, but a composition of both\"\u2014i.e., constituting neither a single large unitary state nor a league/confederation among several small states, but a hybrid of the two forms\u2014according to Madison; \"The Federalist No. 39\". \nNotably, in the course of the nineteenth century in the United States, the meaning of federalism shifted, now referring uniquely to the novel compound-political form established at the Philadelphia Constitution Convention\u2014while the meaning of confederalism remained as a league of states.\nHistory.\nIn a narrow sense, federalism refers to the mode in which the body politic of a state is organized internally\u2014and this is the meaning most often used in modern times. Political scientists, however, use the term federalism in a much broader sense, referring instead to a \"multi-layer or pluralistic concept of social and political life\".\nThe first forms of federalism took place in ancient times, in the form of alliances between tribes or city states. According to historian Joseph Baratta, his colleagues generally begin the history of federalism with the Israelite tribal confederacy led by a military leader called a Judge between c.1200 \u2013 c.1000 BCE. Examples from the Hellenic world between the seventh to second century BCE were the Archaic League, the Aetolic League, the Peloponnesian League, and the Delian League. An early ancestor of federalism was the Achaean League in Hellenistic Greece. Unlike the Greek city states of Classical Greece, each of which insisted on keeping its complete independence, changing conditions in the Hellenistic period drove city states to band together even at the cost of surrendering part of their sovereignty. Several leagues of states existed in the contemporary China. Subsequent unions of states included the first and second Swiss Confederations (1291\u20131798 and 1815\u201348); the United Provinces of the Netherlands (1579\u20131795); the German Bund (1815\u201366); the first American union, known as the Confederation of the United States of America (1781\u201389); and the second American union, formed as the United States of America (1789-present).\nPolitical theory.\nModern federalism is a political system that (nominally) is based upon operating under democratic rules and institutions; and where governing powers are shared between a country's national and provincial/state governments. However, the term \"federalist\" comprises various political practices that differ in important details among the (so-called) federalist nations\u2014some of which are \"democratic in name only\" (e.g., modern Russia)\u2014leaving the terms \"federalist\", \"federalism\", \"federation\", etc., dependent on context. And, because the term \"federalization\" also proclaims distinctive political processes, its use also depends on context.\nTypically, political theory today discusses two main types of the federalization process:\nReasons for adoption.\nAccording to Daniel Ziblatt, there are four competing theoretical explanations for adopting a federal system:\nImmanuel Kant noted that \"the problem of setting up a state can be solved even by a nation of devils\"\u2014\"if\" they possess a constitution that pits opposing factions against each other with a durable system of binding checks and balances. Essentially, particular states may use federation as a mechanism (a safeguard) against the possibilities of rebellion or war\u2014or the rise of repressive government via a would-be dictator or a centralized oligarchy.\nProponents of federal systems have historically argued that the structures of checks-and-balances and power-sharing that are inherent in a federal system reduces threats\u2014both foreign and domestic. And federalism enables a state to be \"both large and diverse\", by mitigating the risk of a central government turning tyrannical.\nExamples.\nCountries around the world have implemented federal systems using variations of central and regional sovereignty for their governments. For convenience of studying these governments, they may be divided according to several categories, such as: \"minimalistic\" federations, which consist of only two sub-federal units (subunits); as compared to \"multi-regional\" federations, consisting of three or more regional governments (subunits). Or, based on their body polity type: emirate, provincial, state, republicanism or constitutional monarchy, democratic\u2014or \"democratic in-name-only\". And, federal systems may be differentiated between those whose \"entire\" territory is federated, vs. \"only part\" of their territory is federated. Some systems are national while others, like the European Union, are supra-national.\nTwo extremes of federalism are notable: 1) at one extreme, the strong federal state is almost completely unitary, with few powers reserved to local governments; 2) at the opposite extreme, the national government may be a federation in name-only, while actually operating as a confederation, (see \"pathway\" graphic re regional integration or regional separation). Federalism may encompass as few as two or three internal divisions, as is the case in Belgium or Bosnia and Herzegovina.\nIn Canada, federalism typically implies opposition to sovereignty movements\u2014most commonly the question of Quebec separatism. In 1999, the Government of Canada established the Forum of Federations as an international network for exchange of best practices among federal and federalizing countries. Headquartered in Ottawa, the Forum of Federations partner governments include Australia, Brazil, Ethiopia, Germany, India, Mexico, Nigeria, Pakistan and Switzerland.\nThe governments of Argentina, Australia, Brazil, India, and Mexico, among others, are organized along federalist principles.\nEurope vs. the United States.\nIn Europe, \"federalist\" is sometimes used to describe those who favor a common federal government, with distributed power at regional, national and supranational levels. The Union of European Federalists advocates for this development within the European Union, ultimately leading to the United States of Europe. Although there are medieval and early modern examples of European states which used confederal and federal systems, contemporary European federalism originated in post-war Europe; one of the more important initiatives was Winston Churchill's speech in Z\u00fcrich in 1946.\nIn the United States, federalism originally referred to belief in a stronger central government. When the U.S. Constitution was being drafted, the Federalist Party supported a stronger central government, while \"Anti-Federalists\" wanted a weaker central government. This is very different from the modern usage of \"federalism\" in Europe and the United States. The distinction stems from the fact that \"federalism\" is situated in the middle of the political spectrum between a confederacy and a unitary state. The U.S. Constitution was written as a replacement for the Articles of Confederation, under which the United States was a loose confederation with a weak central government.\nIn contrast, Europe has a greater history of unitary states than North America, thus European \"federalism\" argues for a weaker central government, relative to a unitary state. The modern American usage of the word is much closer to the European sense. As the power of the U.S. federal government has increased, some people have perceived a much more unitary state than they believe the Founding Fathers intended. Most people politically advocating \"federalism\" in the United States argue in favor of limiting the powers of the federal government, especially the judiciary (see Federalist Society, New Federalism).\nThe contemporary concept of federalism came about with the creation of an entirely new system of government that provided for democratic representation at two governing levels simultaneously, which was implemented in the US Constitution. In the United States implementation of federalism, a bicameral general government, consisting of a chamber of popular representation proportional to population (the House of Representatives), and a chamber of equal State-based representation consisting of two delegates per State (the Senate), was overlaid upon the pre-existing regional governments of the thirteen independent States. With each level of government allocated a defined sphere of powers, under a written constitution and the rule of law (that is, subject to the independent third-party arbitration of a supreme court in competence disputes), the two levels were thus brought into a coordinate relationship for the first time.\nIn 1946, Kenneth Wheare observed that the two levels of government in the US were \"co-equally supreme\". In this, he echoed the perspective of American founding father James Madison who saw the several States as forming \"distinct and independent portions of the supremacy\" in relation to the general government.\nIn anarchism.\nIn anarchism, federalism, also referred to as council system is a horizontalist and decentralized organizational doctrine which holds that society should be built from the bottom-up, from the periphery to the centre. Higher-order units are merely the direct expression of lower-order units delegating, combining and coordinating. Though there is no central government or administration, higher-order committees and councils, composed of delegates from federal constituencies, may convene under a popular, revocable mandate.\nEmbracing the principle of free and voluntary association as the basis of a federal society, constituent entities of an anarchist federation are ideally autonomous and self-determining, collaborating equally, freely and mutually within the federation through the values of solidarity and autonomy.\nUnlike a republican federation, federalism, in anarchy, is not simply a form of political division or devolution, but rather, federative principles apply to all aspects of society, including social relations and the economy. Consequently, anarchist federalism, promoting widespread, common ownership over the means of production, detests the centralized and unequal nature of capitalism, and the hierarchy of its companies and corporations: an anarchist federalist society would envisage widespread, federalized wealth distribution.\nComparing republican and anarchist federalism, James Guillaume states that Switzerland's federative cantonal system, despite its direct democracy, differs significantly from anarchist federalism: while Swiss federalism retains a state and provides only limited regional sovereignty, anarchist federalism as envisioned by Pierre-Joseph Proudhon is stateless, providing every autonomy with absolute sovereignty and distinct individuality. The Swiss constitution, in its support of indivisibility and nationhood and its view that its cantons are mere territorial divisions rather than sovereign constituencies, is incompatible with anarchist federalism and its principles of free association, decentralization and autonomy.\nAnarchist federalism is a rejection of the statism and nationalism present in modern federations, and instead provides an alternative system of federative organization founded on stateless individuality and autonomy. For anarchists, republican federalism is as oppressive as a centralized, unitary state, for all it is perceived to accomplish is delegate and transfer the perceived oppression of a state to local levels and jurisdictions.\nConstitutional structure.\nDivision of powers.\nIn a federation, the division of power between federal and regional governments is usually outlined in the constitution. Almost every country allows some degree of regional self-government, but in federations the right to self-government of the component states is constitutionally entrenched. Component states often also possess their own constitutions which they may amend as they see fit, although in the event of conflict the federal constitution usually takes precedence.\nIn almost all federations the central government enjoys the powers of foreign policy and national defense as exclusive federal powers. Were this not the case a federation would not be a single sovereign state, per the UN definition. Notably, the states of Germany retain the right to act on their own behalf at an international level, a condition originally granted in exchange for the Kingdom of Bavaria's agreement to join the German Empire in 1871. The constitutions of Germany and the United States provide that all powers not specifically granted to the federal government are retained by the states. The Constitution of some countries, like Canada and India, state that powers not explicitly granted to the provincial/state governments are retained by the federal government. Much like the US system, the Australian Constitution allocates to the Federal government (the Commonwealth of Australia) the power to make laws about certain specified matters which were considered too difficult for the States to manage, so that the States retain all other areas of responsibility. Under the division of powers of the European Union in the Lisbon Treaty, powers which are not either exclusively of or shared between the Union and the Member States as concurrent powers are retained by the constituent States.\nWhere every component state of a federation possesses the same powers, we are said to find 'symmetric federalism'. Asymmetric federalism exists where states are granted different powers, or some possess greater autonomy than others do. This is often done in recognition of the existence of a distinct culture in a particular region or regions. In Spain, the Basques and Catalans, as well as the Galicians, spearheaded a historic movement to have their national specificity recognized, crystallizing in the \"historical communities\" such as Navarre, Galicia, Catalonia, and the Basque Country. They have more powers than the later expanded arrangement for other Spanish regions, or the Spain of the autonomous communities (called also the \"coffee for everyone\" arrangement), partly to deal with their separate identity and to appease peripheral nationalist leanings, partly out of respect to specific rights they had held earlier in history. However, strictly speaking Spain is not a federation, but a system of asymmetric devolved government within a unitary state.\nIt is common that during the historical evolution of a federation there is a gradual movement of power from the component states to the centre, as the federal government acquires additional powers, sometimes to deal with unforeseen circumstances. The acquisition of new powers by a federal government may occur through formal constitutional amendment or simply through a broadening of the interpretation of a government's existing constitutional powers given by the courts.\nUsually, a federation is formed at two levels: the central government and the regions (states, provinces, territories), and little to nothing is said about second or third level administrative political entities. Brazil is an exception, because the 1988 Constitution included the municipalities as autonomous political entities making the federation tripartite, encompassing the Union, the States, and the municipalities. Each state is divided into municipalities (\"munic\u00edpios\") with their own legislative council (\"c\u00e2mara de vereadores\") and a mayor (\"prefeito\"), which are partly autonomous from both Federal and State Government. Each municipality has a \"little constitution\", called \"organic law\" (\"lei org\u00e2nica\"). Mexico is an intermediate case, in that municipalities are granted full-autonomy by the federal constitution and their existence as autonomous entities (\"municipio libre\", \"free municipality\") is established by the federal government and cannot be revoked by the states' constitutions. Moreover, the federal constitution determines which powers and competencies belong exclusively to the municipalities and not to the constituent states. However, municipalities do not have an elected legislative assembly.\nFederations often employ the paradox of being a union of states, while still being states (or having aspects of statehood) in themselves. For example, James Madison (author of the United States Constitution) wrote in Federalist Paper No. 39 that the US Constitution \"is in strictness neither a national nor a federal constitution; but a composition of both. In its foundation, it is federal, not national; in the sources from which the ordinary powers of the Government are drawn, it is partly federal, and partly national...\" This stems from the fact that states in the US maintain all sovereignty that they do not yield to the federation by their own consent. This was reaffirmed by the Tenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, which reserves all powers and rights that are not delegated to the Federal Government as left to the States and to the people.\nBicameralism.\nThe structures of most federal governments incorporate mechanisms to protect the rights of component states. One method, known as 'intrastate federalism', is to directly represent the governments of component states in federal political institutions. Where a federation has a bicameral legislature the upper house is often used to represent the component states while the lower house represents the people of the nation as a whole. A federal upper house may be based on a special scheme of apportionment, as is the case in the senates of the United States and Australia, where each state is represented by an equal number of senators irrespective of the size of its population.\nAlternatively, or in addition to this practice, the members of an upper house may be indirectly elected by the government or legislature of the component states, as occurred in the United States prior to 1913, or be actual members or delegates of the state governments, as, for example, is the case in the German Bundesrat and in the Council of the European Union. The lower house of a federal legislature is usually directly elected, with apportionment in proportion to population, although states may sometimes still be guaranteed a certain minimum number of seats.\nIntergovernmental relations.\nIn Canada, the provincial governments represent regional interests and negotiate directly with the central government. A First Ministers conference of the prime minister and the provincial premiers is the \"de facto\" highest political forum in the land, although it is not mentioned in the constitution.\nConstitutional change.\nFederations often have special procedures for amendment of the federal constitution. As well as reflecting the federal structure of the state this may guarantee that the self-governing status of the component states cannot be abolished without their consent. An amendment to the constitution of the United States must be ratified by three-quarters of either the state legislatures, or of constitutional conventions specially elected in each of the states, before it can come into effect. In referendums to amend the constitutions of Australia and Switzerland it is required that a proposal be endorsed not just by an overall majority of the electorate in the nation as a whole, but also by separate majorities in each of a majority of the states or cantons. In Australia, this latter requirement is known as a \"double majority\".\nSome federal constitutions also provide that certain constitutional amendments cannot occur without the unanimous consent of all states or of a particular state. The US constitution provides that no state may be deprived of equal representation in the senate without its consent. In Australia, if a proposed amendment will specifically impact one or more states, then it must be endorsed in the referendum held in each of those states. Any amendment to the Canadian constitution that would modify the role of the monarchy would require unanimous consent of the provinces. The German Basic Law provides that no amendment is admissible at all that would abolish the federal system.\nIn relation to conflict.\nIt has been argued that federalism and other forms of territorial autonomy are a useful way to structure political systems in order to prevent violence among different groups within countries because it allows certain groups to legislate at the subnational level. Some scholars have suggested, however, that federalism can divide countries and result in state collapse because it creates proto-states. Still others have shown that federalism is only divisive when it lacks mechanisms that encourage political parties to compete across regional boundaries.\nFederalism is sometimes viewed in the context of international negotiation as \"the best system for integrating diverse nations, ethnic groups, or combatant parties, all of whom may have cause to fear control by an overly powerful center\". However, those skeptical of federal prescriptions sometimes believe that increased regional autonomy can lead to secession or dissolution of the nation. In Syria, for example, federalization proposals have failed in part because \"Syrians fear that these borders could turn out to be the same as the ones that the fighting parties have currently carved out.\"\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11543", "revid": "49712780", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11543", "title": "Firmin Abauzit", "text": "French-Genevan scholar (1679\u20131767)\nFirmin Abauzit (11 November 1679\u00a0\u2013 20 March 1767) was a French scholar who worked on physics, theology and philosophy, and served as librarian in Geneva (Republic of Geneva) during his final 40 years. Abauzit is also notable for proofreading or correcting the writings of Isaac Newton and other scholars.\nBiography.\nFirmin Abauzit was born of Huguenot parents on 11 November 1679 at Uz\u00e8s, in Languedoc. His paternal family traces its origin to an Arab physician who settled in Toulouse during the 9th century. Accordingly, the name \u201cAbauzit\u201d is liked derived from the Arabic \u201cAbu Zaid\u201d (father of Zaid).\nHis father died when he was only two years of age; and when, on the revocation of the Edict of Nantes in 1685, the authorities took steps to have him educated in the Roman Catholic faith, his mother contrived his escape.\nFor two years his brother and he lived as fugitives in the mountains of the C\u00e9vennes, but they at last reached Geneva, where their mother afterwards joined them on escaping from the imprisonment in which she was held from the time of their flight. Abauzit at an early age acquired great proficiency in languages, physics, and theology.\nIn 1698, he traveled to Germany, then to Holland, where he became acquainted with Pierre Bayle, Pierre Jurieu and Jacques Basnage. Proceeding to England, he was introduced to Sir Isaac Newton, who found in him one of the earliest defenders of his discoveries against Castel. Newton corrected in the second edition of his \"Principia\" an error pointed out by Abauzit, and, when sending him the \"Commercium Epistolicum,\" said, \"You are well worthy to judge between Leibnitz and me.\"\nThe reputation of Abauzit induced William III to request him to settle in England, but he did not accept the king's offer, preferring to return to Geneva.\nThere from 1715 he rendered valuable assistance to a society that had been formed for translating the New Testament into French. He declined the offer of the chair of philosophy at the University of Geneva in 1723. He assisted in the French language New Testament in 1726. In 1727, he was granted citizenship in Geneva, and he accepted the office of honorary librarian to Geneva, the city of his adoption. It was while he was in Geneva in his later years that he authored many of his works. He died in Geneva at the age of 87, on 20 March 1767.\nLegacy.\nAbauzit was a man of great learning and of wonderful versatility. Whatever chanced to be discussed, it used to be said of Abauzit that he seemed to have made it a subject of particular study. Rousseau, who was jealously sparing of his praises, addressed to him, in his \"Julie, ou la nouvelle H\u00e9lo\u00efse\", a fine panegyric; and when a stranger flatteringly told Voltaire he had come to see a great man, the philosopher asked him if he had seen Abauzit. Among his acquaintances, Abauzit claimed Rousseau, Voltaire, Newton, and Bayle.\nLittle remains of the labours of this intellectual giant, his heirs having, it is said, destroyed the papers that came into their possession, because their own religious opinions were different. A few theological, archaeological, and astronomical articles from his pen appeared in the \"Journal helv\u00e9tique\" and elsewhere, and he contributed several papers to Rousseau's \"Dictionnaire de musique\" (1767). He wrote a work throwing doubt on the canonical authority of the Apocalypse, which called forth a reply from Dr Leonard Twells, and was published in Denis Diderot's \"Encyclop\u00e9die\". He also edited and made valuable additions to Jacob Spon's \"Histoire de la r\u00e9publique de Gen\u00e8ve\". A collection of his writings was published at Geneva in 1770 (\"\u0152uvres de feu M. Abauzit\"), and another at London in 1773 (\"\u0152uvres diverses de M. Abauzit\").\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11544", "revid": "1289606", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11544", "title": "French Foreign Legion", "text": "French Army corps of foreign nationals\nMilitary unit\nThe French Foreign Legion (, also known simply as , 'the Legion') is a corps of the French Army created to allow foreign nationals into French service. The Legion was founded in 1831 and today consists of several specialties, namely infantry, cavalry, engineers, and airborne troops. It formed part of the Arm\u00e9e d'Afrique, French Army units associated with France's colonial project in North Africa, until the end of the Algerian War in 1962.\nLegionnaires are today renowned as highly trained soldiers whose training focuses on traditional military skills and on the Legion's strong \"esprit de corps\", as its men come from different countries with different cultures. Consequently, training is often described as not only physically challenging, but also very stressful psychologically. Legionnaires may apply for French citizenship after three years' service, or immediately after being wounded in the line of duty: This latter provision is known as \"\" (\"French by spilled blood\").\nHistory.\nThe Foreign Legion was created by Louis Philippe, the King of the French, on 10 March 1831 to allow the incorporation of foreign nationals into the French Army from the foreign regiments of the Kingdom of France. Recruits included soldiers from the recently disbanded Swiss and German foreign regiments of the Bourbon monarchy and also people from shady backgrounds as well. The Royal Ordinance for the establishment of the new regiment specified that the foreigners recruited could only serve outside France. The French expeditionary force that had occupied Algiers in 1830 was in need of reinforcements, and the Legion was accordingly transferred by sea in detachments from Toulon to Algeria.\nSince its establishment in 1831, the Legion has consisted of hundreds of thousands in active service at its peak, and suffered the aggregated loss of nearly 40,000 men in France, Morocco, Tunisia, Madagascar, West Africa, Mexico, Italy, Crimea, Spain, Indo-China, Norway, Syria, Chad, Za\u00efre, Lebanon, Central Africa, Gabon, Kuwait, Rwanda, Djibouti, former Yugoslavia, Somalia, the Republic of Congo, Ivory Coast, Afghanistan, Mali, as well as others. The Legion was primarily used to help protect and expand the French colonial empire during the 19th century. The Foreign Legion was initially stationed only in Algeria, where it took part in the Pacification of Algeria and destruction of the natural habitat of the colony. Subsequently, the Foreign Legion was deployed in a number of conflicts, including the First Carlist War in 1835, the Crimean War in 1854, the Second Italian War of Independence in 1859, the French intervention in Mexico in 1863, the Franco-Prussian War in 1870, the Tonkin Campaign and Sino-French War in 1883, supporting growth of the French colonial empire in Sub-Saharan Africa, the Second Franco-Dahomean War in 1892, the Second Madagascar expedition in 1895 and the Mandingo Wars in 1894. In World War I, the Foreign Legion fought in many critical battles on the Western Front. It played a smaller role in World War II than in World War I, however, participated in the Norwegian, Syrian and North African campaigns. During the First Indochina War (1946\u20131954), the Foreign Legion saw its numbers swell. In Vietnam, the Legion lost a large number of men in the catastrophic Battle of Dien Bien Phu against forces of the Viet Minh.\nSubsequent military campaigns included those during the Suez Crisis, the Battle of Algiers and various offensives in Algeria launched by General Maurice Challe including Operation Oranie and Operation Jumelles. During the Algerian War of Independence (1954\u20131962), the Foreign Legion came close to being disbanded after some officers, men, and the highly decorated 1st Foreign Parachute Regiment (1er REP) took part in the Generals' putsch. In the 1960s and 1970s, Legion regiments had additional roles in sending units as a rapid deployment force to preserve French interests \u2013 in its former African colonies and in other nations as well; it also returned to its roots of being a unit always ready to be sent to conflict zones around the world.\nSome notable operations include the Chadian\u2013Libyan conflict in 1969\u20131972 (the first time that the Legion was sent in operations after the Algerian War), 1978\u20131979, and 1983\u20131987; Kolwezi in what is now the Democratic Republic of the Congo in May 1978. In 1981, the 1st Foreign Regiment and Foreign Legion regiments took part in the Multinational Force in Lebanon. In 1990, Foreign Legion regiments were sent to the Persian Gulf and participated in Op\u00e9ration Daguet, part of Division Daguet. Following the Gulf War in the 1990s, the Foreign Legion helped with the evacuation of French citizens and foreigners in Rwanda, Gabon and Zaire. The Foreign Legion was also deployed to Cambodia, Somalia, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina. In the mid-to late 1990s, the Foreign Legion was deployed to the Central African Republic, Congo-Brazzaville and in Kosovo. The French Foreign Legion also took part in operations in Rwanda in 1990\u20131994; and the Ivory Coast from 2002 to the present. In the 2000s, the Foreign Legion was deployed to Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan, Op\u00e9ration Licorne in Ivory Coast, the EUFOR Tchad/RCA in Chad, and Operation Serval in the Northern Mali conflict. \nAs discussed below, other countries have attempted to emulate the French Foreign Legion model. The Foreign Legion was primarily used, as part of the \"Arm\u00e9e d'Afrique\", to protect and expand the French colonial empire during the 19th century, but it also fought in almost all French wars including the Franco-Prussian War, World War I and World War II. The Foreign Legion has remained an important part of the French Army, and sea transport protected by the French Navy survived three Republics, the Second French Empire, two World Wars, the rise and fall of mass conscript armies, the dismantling of the French colonial empire, and the loss of the Foreign Legion's base, Algeria.\nConquest of Algeria 1830\u20131847.\nCreated to fight \"outside mainland France\", the Foreign Legion was stationed in Algeria, where it took part in the Algerian genocide and destruction of the natural habitat of the colony, notably by drying the marshes in the region of Algiers. The Foreign Legion was initially divided into six \"national battalions\" (Swiss, Poles, Germans, Italians, Spanish, and Dutch-Belgian). Smaller national groups, such as ten Englishmen recorded in December 1832, appear to have been placed randomly.\nIn late 1831, the first legionnaires landed in Algeria, the country that shaped its character and became the Foreign Legion's homeland for 130 years. The early years in Algeria were hard on the legion because it was often sent to the worst postings and received the worst assignments, and its members were generally uninterested in the new colony of the French. The Legion served alongside the Battalions of Light Infantry of Africa, formed in 1832, which was a penal military unit made up of men with prison records who still had to do their military service or soldiers with serious disciplinary problems.\nThe Foreign Legion's first service in Algeria came to an end after only four years, as it was needed elsewhere.\nCarlist War 1835\u20131839.\nThe French government sent the Foreign Legion to Spain to support Isabella II's claim to the Spanish throne against her uncle. On 28 June 1835, the unit was handed over to the Spanish government. The Foreign Legion landed via sea at Tarragona on 17 August with around 1,400 who were quickly dubbed \"Los Argelinos\" (the Algerians) by locals because of their previous posting.\nThe Foreign Legion's commander immediately dissolved the national battalions to improve the \"esprit de corps\". Later, he also created three squadrons of lancers and an artillery battery from the existing force to increase independence and flexibility. The Foreign Legion was dissolved on 8 December 1838, when it had dropped to only 500 men. The survivors returned to France, many reenlisting in the new Foreign Legion along with many of their former Carlist enemies.\nCrimean War.\nOn 9 June 1854, the French ship \"Jean Bart\" embarked four battalions of the Foreign Legion for the Crimean Peninsula. A further battalion was stationed at Gallipoli as brigade depot. Eight companies drawn from both regiments of the Foreign Legion took part in the Battle of Alma (20 September 1854). Reinforcements by sea brought the Legion contingent up to brigade strength. As the \"Foreign Brigade\", it served in the Siege of Sevastopol, during the winter of 1854\u20131855. \nThe lack of equipment was particularly challenging and cholera hit the Allied expeditionary force. Nevertheless, the \"leather bellies\" (the nickname given to the legionnaires by the Russians because of the large cartridge pouches that they wore attached to their waist-belts), performed well. On 21 June 1855, the Third Battalion, left Corsica for Crimea.\nOn 8 September the final assault was launched on Sevastopol. Two days later, the Second Foreign Regiment with flags and band playing ahead, marched through the streets of Sevastopol. Although initial reservations had been expressed about whether the Legion should be used outside Africa, the Crimean experience established its suitability for service in European warfare, as well as making a cohesive single entity of what had previously been two separate foreign regiments. Legion casualties in the Crimea were 1,703 killed and wounded out of total French losses by battle and disease of 95,615.\nItalian Campaign 1859.\nLike the rest of the \"Army of Africa\", the Foreign Legion provided detachments in the campaign of Italy. Two foreign regiments, grouped with the 2nd Regiment of Zouaves, were part of the Second Brigade of the Second Division of Mac Mahon's Corps. The Foreign Legion acquitted itself particularly well against the Austrians at the battle of Magenta (4 June 1859) and at the Battle of Solferino (24 June). Legion losses were significant and the 2nd Foreign Regiment lost Colonel Chabri\u00e8re, its commanding officer. In gratitude, the city of Milan awarded, in 1909, the \"commemorative medal of deliverance\", which still adorns the regimental flags of the Second Regiment.\nMexican Expedition 1863\u20131867.\nThe 38,000 strong French expeditionary force dispatched to Mexico via sea between 1862 and 1863 included two battalions of the Foreign Legion, increased to six battalions by 1866. Small cavalry and artillery units were raised from legionnaires serving in Mexico. The original intention was that Foreign Legion units should remain in Mexico for up to six years to provide a core for the Imperial Mexican Army. However the Legion was withdrawn with the other French forces during February\u2013March 1867.\nIt was in Mexico on 30 April 1863 that the Legion earned its legendary status. A company led by Captain Jean Danjou, numbering 62 Legionnaires and 3 Legion officers, was escorting a convoy to the besieged city of Puebla when it was attacked and besieged by three thousand Mexican loyalists, organised in two battalions of infantry and cavalry, numbering 2,200 and 800 respectively. The Legion detachment under Danjou, Sous-Lieutenant Jean Vilain, and Sous-Lieutenant Cl\u00e9ment Maudet made a stand in the \"Hacienda de la Trinidad\" \u2013 a farm near the village of Camarone. When only six survivors remained, out of ammunition, a bayonet assault was launched in which three of the six were killed. The remaining three wounded men were brought before the Mexican commander Colonel Mil\u00e1n, who allowed them to return to the French lines as an honor guard for the body of Danjou. The captain had a wooden hand, which was later returned to the Legion and is now kept in a case in the Legion Museum at Aubagne and paraded annually on Camerone Day. It is the Foreign Legion's most precious relic.\nDuring the Mexican Campaign, 6,654 French died. Of these, 1,918 were from a single regiment of the Legion.\nFranco-Prussian War 1870.\nAccording to French law, the Foreign Legion was not to be used within Metropolitan France except in the case of a national invasion, and was consequently not a part of Napoleon III's Imperial Army that capitulated at Sedan. With the defeat of the Imperial Army, the Second French Empire fell and the Third Republic was created.\nThe new Third Republic was desperately short of trained soldiers following Sedan, so the Foreign Legion was ordered to provide a contingent. On 11 October 1870 two provisional battalions disembarked via sea at Toulon, the first time the Foreign Legion had been deployed in France itself. It attempted to lift the Siege of Paris by breaking through the German lines. It succeeded in retaking Orl\u00e9ans, but failed to break the siege. In January 1871, France capitulated but civil war soon broke out, which led to revolution and the short-lived Paris Commune. The Foreign Legion participated in the suppression of the Commune, which was crushed with great bloodshed.\nTonkin Campaign and Sino-French War 1883\u20131888.\nThe Foreign Legion's First Battalion (Lieutenant-Colonel Donnier) sailed to Tonkin in late 1883, during the period of undeclared hostilities that preceded the Sino-French War (August 1884 to April 1885), and formed part of the attack column that stormed the western gate of S\u01a1n T\u00e2y on 16 December. The Second and Third Infantry Battalions (\"chef de bataillon\" Diguet and Lieutenant-Colonel Schoeffer) were also deployed to Tonkin shortly afterwards, and were present in all the major campaigns of the Sino-French War. Two Foreign Legion companies led the defence at the celebrated Siege of Tuy\u00ean Quang (24 November 1884 to 3 March 1885). In January 1885 the Foreign Legion's 4th Battalion (\"chef de bataillon\" Vitalis) was deployed to the French bridgehead at Keelung (Jilong) in Formosa (Taiwan), where it took part in the later battles of the Keelung Campaign. The battalion played an important role in Colonel Jacques Duchesne's offensive in March 1885 that captured the key Chinese positions of La Table and Fort Bamboo and disengaged Keelung.\nIn December 1883, during a review of the Second Legion Battalion on the eve of its departure for Tonkin to take part in the B\u1eafc Ninh Campaign, General Fran\u00e7ois de N\u00e9grier pronounced a famous \"mot\": \"Vous, l\u00e9gionnaires, vous \u00eates soldats pour mourir, et je vous envoie o\u00f9 l'on meurt!\" ('You, Legionnaires, you are soldiers in order to die, and I'm sending you to where one dies!')\nColonization of Africa.\nAs part of the Army of Africa, the Foreign Legion contributed to the expansion of the French colonial empire in Sub-Saharan Africa. Simultaneously, the Legion took part to the pacification of Algeria, suppressing various tribal rebellions and razzias.\nSecond Franco-Dahomean War 1892\u20131894.\nIn 1892, King B\u00e9hanzin ordered his soldiers to attack villages near Grand Popo and Porto-Novo (in modern-day Benin) in an effort to reassert the older boundaries of Dahomey. King B\u00e9hanzin rejected complaints by the French, who proceeded to declare war\nA battalion, led by commandant Faurax Montier, was formed from two companies of the First Foreign Regiment and two others from the second regiment. From Cotonou, the legionnaires marched to seize Abomey, the capital of the Kingdom of Dahomey. Two and a half months were needed to reach the city, at the cost of repeated battles against the Dahomean warriors, especially the Amazons of the King. King Behanzin surrendered and was captured by the legionnaires in January 1894.\nSecond Madagascar Expedition 1894\u20131895.\nIn 1895, a battalion formed by the First and Second Foreign Regiments was sent to the Kingdom of Madagascar as part of an expeditionary force whose mission was to conquer the island. The foreign battalion formed the backbone of the column launched on Antananarivo, the capital of Madagascar. After a few skirmishes, Queen Ranavalona III promptly surrendered. The Foreign Legion lost 226 men, only a tenth of whom died during actual combat. Others, like much of the expeditionary force, died from tropical diseases. Despite the success of the expedition, the quelling of sporadic rebellions would take another eight years until 1905, when the island was completely pacified by the French under Joseph Gallieni. During that time, insurrections against the Malagasy Christians of the island, missionaries and foreigners were particularly terrible. Queen Ranavalona III was deposed in January 1897 and was exiled to Algiers in Algeria, where she died in 1917.\nMandingo War 1898.\nFrom 1882 until his capture, Samori Ture, ruler of the Wassoulou Empire, fought the French colonial army, defeating them on several occasions, including a notable victory at Woyowayanko (2 April 1882), in the face of French heavy artillery. Nonetheless, Samori was forced to sign several treaties ceding territory to the French between 1886 and 1889. Samori began a steady retreat, but the fall of other resistance armies, particularly Babemba Traor\u00e9 at Sikasso, permitted the colonial army to launch a concentrated assault against his forces. A battalion of two companies from the 2nd Foreign Regiment was created in early 1894 to pacify the Niger. The Legionnaires' victory at the fortress of Ouilla and police patrols in the region accelerated the submission of the tribes. On 29 September 1898, Samori Ture was captured by the French Commandant Gouraud and exiled to Gabon, marking the end of the Wassoulou Empire.\nMarching Regiments of the Foreign Legion.\nWorld War I 1914\u20131918.\nThe annexation of Alsace and Lorraine by Germany in 1871 led to numerous volunteers from the two regions enlisting in the Foreign Legion, which gave them the option of French citizenship at the end of their service.\nWith the declaration of war on 29 July 1914, a call was made for foreigners residing in France to support their adopted country. While many would have preferred direct enlistment in the regular French Army, the only option immediately available was that of the Foreign Legion. On 3 August 1914 a reported 8,000 volunteers applied to enlist in the Paris recruiting office of the Legion.\nIn World War I, the Foreign Legion fought in many critical battles on the Western Front, including Artois, Champagne, Somme, Aisne, and Verdun (in 1917), and also suffered heavy casualties during 1918. The Foreign Legion was also in the Dardanelles and Macedonian front, and was highly decorated for its efforts. Many young foreigners volunteered for the Foreign Legion when the war broke out in 1914. There were marked differences between the idealistic volunteers of 1914 and the hardened men of the old Legion, making assimilation difficult. Nevertheless, the old and the new men of the Foreign Legion fought and died in vicious battles on the Western front, including Belloy-en-Santerre during the Battle of the Somme, where the poet Alan Seeger, after being mortally wounded by machine-gun fire, cheered on the rest of his advancing battalion.\nInterwar period 1918\u20131939.\nWhile suffering heavy casualties on the Western Front the Legion had emerged from World War I with an enhanced reputation and as one of the most highly decorated units in the French Army. In 1919, the government of Spain raised the Spanish Foreign Legion and modeled it after the French Foreign Legion. General Jean Mordacq intended to rebuild the Foreign Legion as a larger military formation, doing away with the legion's traditional role as a solely infantry formation. General Mordacq envisioned a Foreign Legion consisting not of regiments, but of divisions with cavalry, engineer, and artillery regiments in addition to the legion's infantry mainstay. In 1920, decrees ordained the establishment of regiments of cavalry and artillery. Immediately following the armistice the Foreign Legion experienced an increase of enlistments. The Foreign Legion began the process of reorganizing and redeploying to Algeria.\nThe Legion played a major part in the Rif War of 1920\u201325. In 1932, the Foreign Legion consisted of 30,000 men, serving in six multi-battalion regiments including the 1st Foreign Infantry Regiment 1er REI \u2013 Algeria, Syria and Lebanon; 2nd Foreign Infantry Regiment 2\u00e8me REI, 3rd Foreign Infantry Regiment 3\u00e8me REI, and 4th Foreign Infantry Regiment 4\u00e8me REI \u2013 Morocco, Lebanon; 5th Foreign Infantry 5\u00e8me REI \u2013 Indochina; and 1st Foreign Cavalry Regiment 1er REC \u2013 Lebanon, Tunisia and Morocco.\nIn 1931, G\u00e9n\u00e9ral Paul-Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Rollet assumed the role of 1st Inspector of the Foreign Legion, a post created at his initiative. While serving as colonel of the 1st Foreign Infantry Regiment (1925\u20131931), Rollet was responsible for planning the centennial celebrations of the Legion's foundation; scheduling this event for Camar\u00f3n Day 30 April 1931. He was subsequently credited with creating much of the modern mystique of the Legion by restoring or creating many of its traditions.\nWorld War II 1939\u20131945.\nThe Foreign Legion played a smaller role in World War II in mainland Europe than in World War I, though it saw involvement in many exterior theatres of operations, notably sea-transport protection through to the Norwegian, Syria-Lebanon, and North African campaigns. The 13th Demi-Brigade, formed for service in Norway, found itself in the UK at the time of the French Armistice (June 1940), was deployed to the British 8th Army in North Africa and distinguished itself in the Battle of Bir Hakeim (1942). Reflecting the divisions of the time, part of the Foreign Legion joined the Free French movement while another part served the Vichy government. Germany incorporated German legionnaires into the Wehrmacht's 90th Light Infantry Division in North Africa.\nThe Syria\u2013Lebanon Campaign of June 1941 saw legionnaire fighting legionnaire as the 13e D.B.L.E clashed with the 6th Foreign Infantry Regiment 6e REI at Damascus. Nevertheless, many legionnaires of the 6th Foreign Infantry Regiment 6e (dissolved on 31 December 1941) integrated into the Marching Regiment of the Foreign Legion R.M.L.E in 1942. Later, a thousand of the rank-and-file of the Vichy Legion unit joined the 13e D.B.L.E. of the Free French forces which were also part (as of September 1944) of Jean de Lattre de Tassigny's successful amalgam of the French Liberation Army (), the (400,000 men) amalgam consisted of the Armistice Army, the Free French Forces and the French Forces of the Interior which formed Army B and later became part of the French 1st Army with forces also issued from the French Resistance.\nAlsace-Lorraine.\nFollowing World War II, many French-speaking former German soldiers joined the Foreign Legion to pursue a military career, an option no longer possible in Germany, including French German soldiers of Malgr\u00e9-nous. It would have been considered problematic if the men from Alsace-Lorraine had not spoken French. These French-speaking former German soldiers made up as much as 60 percent of the Legion during the war in Indochina. Contrary to popular belief however, French policy was to exclude former members of the Waffen-SS, and candidates for induction were refused if they exhibited the tell-tale blood type tattoo, or even a scar that might be masking it.\nThe high percentage of Germans was contrary to normal policy concerning a single dominant nationality, and in more recent times Germans have made up a much smaller percentage of the Foreign Legion's composition.\nFirst Indochina War 1946\u20131954.\nDuring the First Indochina War (1946\u201354) the Foreign Legion saw its numbers swell due to the incorporation of World War II veterans. Although the Foreign Legion distinguished itself in a territory where it had served since the 1880s, it also suffered a heavy toll during this war. Some of the legionnaires, such as Stefan Kubiak, deserted and began fighting for the Vi\u1ec7t Minh upon witnessing torture of Vietnamese peasants at the hands of French troops. Constantly being deployed in operations, units of the Legion suffered particularly heavy losses in the climactic Battle of Dien Bien Phu, before the fortified valley finally fell on 7 May 1954.\nNo fewer than 72,833 served in Indochina during the eight-year war. The Legion suffered the loss of 10,283 of its own men in combat: 309 officers, 1082 sous-officiers and 9092 legionnaires. While only one of several Legion units involved in Indochina, the 1st Foreign Parachute Battalion (1er BEP) particularly distinguished itself, while being annihilated twice. It was renamed the 1st Foreign Parachute Regiment (1er REP) after its third reformation.\nThe 1er BEP sailed to Indochina on 12 November 1948 and was then engaged in combat operations in Tonkin. On 17 November 1950 the battalion parachuted into That Kh\u00e9 and suffered heavy losses at Coc Xa. Reconstituted on 1 March 1951, the battalion participated in combat operations at Cho Ben, on the Black River and in Annam. On 21 November 1953 the reconstituted 1er BEP was parachuted into Dien Bien Phu. In this battle, the unit lost 575 killed and missing. Reconstituted for the third time on 19 May 1954, the battalion left Indochina on 8 February 1955. The 1er BEP received five citations and the fourrag\u00e8re of the colors of the M\u00e9daille militaire for its service in Indochina. The 1er BEP became the 1st Foreign Parachute Regiment (1er REP) in Algeria on 1 September 1955.\nDien Bien Phu fell on 7 May 1954 at 17:30. The couple of hectares that were the battlefield today are corn fields surrounding a stele which commemorates the sacrifices of those who died there. While the garrison of Dien Bien Phu included French regular, North African, and locally recruited (Indochinese) units, the battle has become associated particularly with the paratroops of the Foreign Legion.\nDuring the Indochina War, the Legion operated several armoured trains which were an enduring \"Rolling Symbol\" during the chartered course duration of French Indochina. The Legion also operated various Passage Companies relative to the continental conflicts at hand.\nAlgerian War 1954\u20131962.\nForeign Legion paratroops.\nThe legion was heavily engaged in fighting against the National Liberation Front and the Arm\u00e9e de Lib\u00e9ration Nationale (ALN). The main activity during the period 1954\u20131962 was as part of the operations of the 10th Parachute Division and 25th Parachute Division. The 1st Foreign Parachute Regiment, 1er REP, was under the command of the 10th Parachute Division (France), 10\u00e8me DP, and the 2nd Foreign Parachute Regiment, 2\u00e8me REP, was under the command of the 25th Parachute Division (France), 25\u00e8me DP. While both the 1st Foreign Parachute Regiment (1er REP), and the 2nd Foreign Parachute Regiment (2\u00e8me REP), were part of the operations of French parachute divisions (10\u00e8me DP and 25\u00e8me DP established in 1956), the Legion's 1st Foreign Parachute Regiment (1er REP), and the Legion's 2nd Foreign Parachute Regiment (2\u00e8me REP), are older than the French divisions. The 1er REP was the former thrice-reconstituted 1st Foreign Parachute Battalion (1er BEP) and the 2\u00e8me REP was the former 2nd Foreign Parachute Battalion (2\u00e8me BEP). Both battalions were renamed and their Legionnaires transferred from Indochina on 1 August 1954 to Algeria by 1 November 1954. Both traced their origins to the Parachute Company of the 3rd Foreign Infantry Regiment commanded by Legion Lieutenant Jacques Morin attached to the III/1er R.C.P.\nWith the start of the War in Algeria on 1 November 1954, the two foreign participating parachute battalions back from Indochina, the 1st Foreign Parachute Battalion (1er BEP, III Formation) and the 2nd Foreign Parachute Battalion (2\u00e8me BEP), were not part of any French parachute divisions yet and were not designated as regiments until September and 1 December 1955 respectively.\nMain operations during the Algerian War included the Battle of Algiers and the Bataille of the Frontiers, fought by 60,000 soldiers including French and Legion paratroopers. For paratroopers of the Legion, the 1st Foreign Parachute Regiment (1er REP) and 2nd Foreign Parachute Regiment (2\u00e8me REP), were the only known foreign active parachute regiments, exclusively commanded by Pierre Paul Jeanpierre for the 1er REP and the paratrooper commanders of the 2\u00e8me REP. The remainder of French paratrooper units of the French Armed Forces were commanded by Jacques Massu, Buchond, Marcel Bigeard, Paul Aussaresses. Other Legion offensives in the mountains in 1959 included operations Jumelles, Cigales, and Ari\u00e8ge in the Aures and the last in Kabylie.\nThe image of the Legion as a professional and non-political force was tarnished when the elite 1st Foreign Parachute Regiment 1er REP, which was also part of the 10th Parachute Division played a leading role in the generals' putsch of 1961 and was subsequently disbanded.\nGenerals' putsch and reduction of Foreign Legion.\nComing out of a difficult Indochinese conflict, the Foreign Legion reinforced cohesion by extending the duration of basic training. Efforts exerted were successful during this transit; however, entering into December 1960 and the generals' putsch, a crisis hit the legion putting its faith at the corps of the Army.\nFor having rallied to the generals' putsch of April 1961, the 1st Foreign Parachute Regiment of the 10th Parachute Division was dissolved on 30 April 1961 at Zeralda.\nIn 1961, at the issue of the putsch, the 1st Mounted Saharan Squadron of the Foreign Legion () received the missions to assure surveillance and policing.\nThe independence of Algeria from the French in 1962 was traumatising since it ended with the enforced abandonment of the barracks command center at Sidi Bel Abb\u00e8s established in 1842. Upon being notified that the elite regiment was to be disbanded and that they were to be reassigned, legionnaires of the 1er REP burned the Chinese pavilion acquired following the Siege of Tuy\u00ean Quang in 1884. The relics from the Legion's history museum, including the wooden hand of Captain Jean Danjou, subsequently accompanied the Legion to France. Also removed from Sidi Bel Abb\u00e8s were the symbolic Legion remains of General Paul-Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Rollet ( The Father of the Legion ), Legion officer Prince Count Aage of Rosenborg, and Legionnaire Heinz Zimmermann (last fatal casualty in Algeria).\nThe Legion acquired its parade song \"Non, je ne regrette rien\" (\"No, I regret nothing\"), a 1960 \u00c9dith Piaf song sung by Sous-Officiers and legionnaires as they left their barracks for re-deployment following the Algiers putsch of 1961. The song has remained a part of Legion heritage since.\nThe 1st Foreign Parachute Regiment 1er REP was disbanded on 30 April 1961. However, the 2nd Foreign Parachute Regiment 2\u00e8me REP prevailed in existence, while most of the personnel of the Saharan Companies were integrated into the 1st Foreign Infantry Regiment, 2nd Foreign Infantry Regiment and 4th Foreign Infantry Regiment respectively.\nPost-colonial Africa.\nBy the mid-1960s the Legion had lost its traditional and spiritual home in French Algeria and elite units had been dissolved. President de Gaulle considered disbanding it altogether but, being reminded of the Marching Regiments, and that the 13th Demi-Brigade was one of the first units to declare for him in 1940 and taking also into consideration the effective service of various Saharan units and performances of other Legions units, he chose instead to downsize the Legion from 40,000 to 8,000 men and relocate it to metropolitan France. Legion units continued to be assigned to overseas service, although not in North Africa (see below).\n1962\u2013present.\nIn the early 1960s, and besides ongoing global rapid deployments, the Legion also stationed forces on various continents while operating different function units.\nThe main Disciplinary Company of the Foreign Legion (CDLE), based on rules and regulations set by g\u00e9n\u00e9ral Rollet in 1931, received serious offenders sent from Legion regiments garrisoned or operating in Algeria, Morocco, Tunisia, the Levant and Tonkin (special section of the 5th Foreign Infantry Regiment and later in 1963, part of a Saharan disciplinary section unit of the 5e REI and 2nd Foreign Infantry Regiment). It was dissolved on July 1, 1964.\nFrom 1965 to 1967, the Legion operated several companies, including the 5th Heavy Weight Transport Company (CTGP), mainly in charge of evacuating the Sahara. The area of responsibility of some of these units extended from the confines of the in-between of the Sahara to the Mediterranean. Ongoing interventions and rapid deployments two years later and the following years included in part:\nGulf War 1990\u20131991.\nIn September 1990, the 1st Foreign Regiment, the 1st Foreign Cavalry Regiment, the 2nd Foreign Parachute Regiment, the 2nd Foreign Infantry Regiment, and the 6th Foreign Engineer Regiment were sent to the Persian Gulf as a part of Op\u00e9ration Daguet along with the 1st Spahi Regiment, the 11th Marine Artillery Regiment, the 3rd Marine Infantry Regiment, the 21st Marine Infantry Regiment, the French Army Light Aviation, the R\u00e9giment d'infanterie-chars de marine, and components of the 35th Parachute Artillery Regiment, the 1st Parachute Hussard Regiment, and the 17th Parachute Engineer Regiment. Division Daguet was commanded by G\u00e9n\u00e9ral de brigade Bernard Janvier.\nThe Legion force, made up of 27 different nationalities, was attached to the French 6th Light Armoured Division whose mission was to protect the Coalition's left flank.\nAfter the four-week air campaign, coalition forces launched the ground offensive. They quickly penetrated deep into Iraq, with the Legion taking the As-Salman Airport, meeting little resistance. The war ended after a hundred hours of fighting on the ground, which resulted in very light casualties for the Legion. During war, French Foreign Legion engineers operated in support of the U.S. Army's 82nd Airborne Division, and provided the EOD services to the division. After the ceasefire, they conducted a joint mine clearing operation with a Royal Australian Navy clearance divers.\nOrganization.\nRegarding the operational aspect, the units of the Legion belong to different brigades or territorial commands of the French Army. With regard to the administrative management (including recruitment, traditions and training), these units depend on the Foreign Legion Command (COMLE), which itself is subordinate to the Army.\nThe regiments are now mainly stationed in Metropolitan France, with some units in the overseas departments and territories (mainly in French Guiana).\nCurrent deployments.\nThese are the following deployments:\nNote: English names for countries or territories are in parentheses.\nComposition.\nThe Legionnaires are an integral part of the French Army. Today, they constitute some 7\u20138% of its strength (or 11% of the Ground Operational Forces, FOT, French Army operational units).\nThe Foreign Legion is the only unit of the French Army open to people of any nationality. Most legionnaires still come from European countries but a growing percentage comes from Latin America and Asia. Most of the Foreign Legion's commissioned officers are French with approximately 10% being Legionnaires who have risen through the ranks.\nMembers come from 140 countries. In the past, legionnaires were forced to enlist under a pseudonym (\"declared identity\"). This policy was designed to allow recruits who wanted to restart their lives to enlist. The Legion held the belief that it was fairer to make all new recruits use declared identities. French citizens can enlist under a declared, fictitious, foreign citizenship (generally, a francophone one, often that of Belgium, Canada, or Switzerland). As of 20 September 2010, new recruits may enlist under their real identities or under declared identities. Recruits who do enlist with declared identities may, after one year's service, regularise their situations under their true identities. After serving in the Foreign Legion for three years, a legionnaire may apply for French citizenship. He must be serving under his real name, must have no problems with the authorities, and must have served with \"honour and fidelity\".\nThe Foreign Legion does not accept women in its ranks, however, there has been one official female legionnaire, Susan Travers, an Englishwoman who joined the Free French Forces during World War II. She became a member of the Foreign Legion after the war, and subsequently served in Vietnam during the First Indochina War. In October 2000, it was announced women would no longer be barred from service. However, this announcement was retracted one month later and blamed on a \"miscommunication\"; a spokesman confirmed the policy barring women from the Legion would remain unchanged.\nMembership by country.\nAs of 2008, legionnaires came from 140 countries. The majority of enlisted men originate from outside France, while the majority of the officer corps consists of Frenchmen. Many recruits originate from Eastern Europe and Latin America. Neil Tweedie of \"The Daily Telegraph\" said that Germany traditionally provided many recruits, \"somewhat ironically given the Legion's bloody role in two world wars.\"\nAs of 2024, Belarusian and Russian citizens are no longer allowed to join the legion due to the Russian invasion of Ukraine.\nAlsace-Lorraine.\nOriginal nationalities of the Foreign Legion reflect events in history at the time they joined. Many former Wehrmacht personnel joined in the wake of World War II as many soldiers returning to civilian life found it hard to find reliable employment. Jean-Denis Lepage reports that \"The Foreign Legion discreetly recruited from German P.O.W. camps\", but adds that the number of these recruits has been subsequently exaggerated. Bernard B. Fall, who was a supporter of the French government, writing in the context of the First Indochina War, questioned the notion that the Foreign Legion was mainly German at that time, calling it:\n[a] canard...with the sub-variant that all those Germans were at least SS generals and other much wanted war criminals. As a rule, and in order to prevent any particular nation from making the Foreign Legion into a Praetorian Guard, any particular national component is kept at about 25 percent of the total. Even supposing (and this was the case, of course) that the French recruiters, in the eagerness for candidates would sign up Germans enlisting as Swiss, Austrian, Scandinavian and other nationalities of related ethnic background, it is unlikely that the number of Germans in the Foreign Legion ever exceeded 35 percent. Thus, without making an allowance for losses, rotation, discharges, etc., the maximum number of Germans fighting in Indochina at any one time reached perhaps 7,000 out of 278,000. As to the ex-Nazis, the early arrivals contained a number of them, none of whom were known to be war criminals. French intelligence saw to that.\nSince, in view of the rugged Indochinese climate, older men without previous tropical experience constituted more a liability than an asset, the average age of the Foreign Legion enlistees was about 23. At the time of the battle of Dien Bien Phu, any legionnaire of that age group was at the worst, in his \"Hitler Youth\" shorts when the [Third] Reich collapsed.\nThe Foreign Legion accepts people enlisting under a nationality that is not their own. A proportion of the Swiss and Belgians are actually likely to be Frenchmen who wish to avoid detection. In addition many Alsatians are said to have joined the Foreign Legion when Alsace was part of the German Empire, and may have been recorded as German while considering themselves French.\nRegarding recruitment conditions within the Foreign Legion, see the official page (in English) dedicated to the subject: With regard to age limits, recruits can be accepted from ages ranging from 17\u00bd (with parental consent) to 39\u00bd years old.\nCountries that allow post-Foreign Legion contract.\nIn the European Union framework, post Legion enlistment is less clear. Denmark, Norway, Germany and Portugal allow post-Legion enlistment. The European Union twin threads seem to be recognized dual nationality status or restricting constitutional article.\nThe United States allows post-Legion enlistment in its National Guard of career soldiers (up to the rank of captain) who are Green Card holders.\nIsrael allows post-Legion enlistment.\nOne of the biggest national groups in the Legion are Poles. Polish law allows service in a foreign army, but only after written permission from the Polish Ministry of National Defence.\nRecruitment process.\nBasic training.\nWhile all rank and file members of the Legion are required to serve under \"Foreign Status\" (\"\u00e0 titre \u00e9tranger\"), even if they are French nationals, non-commissioned and commissioned officers can serve under either French or Foreign Status. Foreign Status NCOs and officers are exclusively promoted from the ranks and represent 10% of the officers corps of the Legion. French Status officers are either members of other units of the French Army attached to the Legion or promoted Legionnaires who have chosen to become French nationals.\nBasic training for the Foreign Legion is conducted in the 4th Foreign Regiment. This is an operational combat regiment which provides a training course of 15\u201317 weeks, before recruits are assigned to their operational units:\nEducation in the French language (reading, writing and pronunciation) is taught on a daily basis throughout all of basic training.\nTraditions.\nAs the Foreign Legion is composed of soldiers of different nationalities and backgrounds, it is necessary to develop an intense \"esprit de corps\", which is achieved through the development of camaraderie, specific traditions, the loyalty of its legionnaires, the quality of their training, and the pride of being a soldier in an elite unit.\nCode of honour.\nThe \"Legionnaire's Code of Honour\" is the Legion's creed, recited in French only. The Code of Honour was adopted in the 1980s.\nMottos.\n\"Honneur et Fid\u00e9lit\u00e9\".\nIn contrast to all other French Army units, the motto embroidered on the Foreign Legion's regimental flags is not \"Honneur et Patrie\" (Honour and Fatherland) but \"Honneur et Fid\u00e9lit\u00e9\" (Honour and Fidelity).\n\"Legio Patria Nostra\".\n\"Legio Patria Nostra\" (in French \"La L\u00e9gion est notre Patrie\", in English \"The Legion is our Fatherland\") is the Latin motto of the Foreign Legion. The adoption of the Foreign Legion as a new \"Fatherland\" does not imply the repudiation by the legionnaire of his original nationality. The Foreign Legion is required to obtain the agreement of any legionnaire before he is placed in any situation where he might have to serve against his country of birth.\nInsignia.\nThe Legion's emblem consists of a flaming heraldic grenade in the shape of a French \"fleur-de-lis\".\nRanks.\nAll volunteers in the Foreign Legion begin their careers as basic legionnaires with one in four eventually becoming a \"sous-officier\" (non-commissioned officer). On joining, a new recruit receives a monthly salary of \u20ac1,572 in addition to food and lodgings. He is also given his own new rifle, which according to the lore of the \"Legion\" must never be left on a battlefield. Promotion is concurrent with the ranks in the French Army.\nNon-commissioned and warrant officers.\nA \"dress uniform\"'s insignia is composed of three components; rank emblem, regimental patch, and seniority chevrons. In the one pictured, the three upward pointing gold chevrons indicate a \"Sergent-chef\". The diamond-shaped regimental patch (\"\u00c9cusson\") is formed of three green diamond shapes surrounding a grenade emblem, with the three diamonds indicating a Colonial unit, in comparison to one diamond for a unit of Regulars, or two diamonds for a Reserves unit. The L\u00e9gion grenade emblem has seven flames rather than the usual five, and the two downward pointing seniority chevrons indicate at least 10 years of service. Some \"Caporal\"s-\"Chef\" may have as many as six seniority chevrons for 30 or more years of service. This style of insignia is worn only on the left sleeve of the dress uniform, while a similar-sized insignia without the regimental diamond and seniority chevrons is worn on the right sleeve. An exception exists for the right sleeve insignia for the Pioneer units, which incorporates a gold or green Pioneer emblem, depending on rank, but not the seniority chevrons, which are worn on the left sleeve insignia below the regimental diamond as previously described.\n\"Sous-officiers\" (NCOs) including warrant officers account for 25% of the current Foreign Legion's total manpower.\nCommissioned officers.\nMost officers are regulars of the French Army though roughly 10% are former non-commissioned officers promoted from the ranks.\nSeniority chevrons.\nThe Foreign Legion uses gold coloured chevrons (\"chevrons d'anciennet\u00e9\") pointed downward to indicate seniority. Worn by ordinary legionnaires and non-commissioned officers beneath the rank insignia and regimental emblem only on the left sleeve of the dress uniform, each chevron denotes five years of service in the Legion. Seniority chevrons are not worn by commissioned officers.\nHonorary ranks.\nHonorary ranks have been awarded by the French Army to individuals credited with exceptional acts of courage since 1796. In the Foreign Legion, General Paul-Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Rollet introduced the practice of awarding honorary Legion ranks to distinguished individuals, both civilian and military, in the early 20th century.\nRecipients of these honorary appointments had participated with units of the Legion on active service in an exemplary manner, or had rendered exceptional service to the Legion in non-combat situations. More than 1,200 individuals have been granted honorary ranks in the Legion \"pour services \u00e9minent\". The majority of these awards have been made to military personnel in wartime, earning titles such as \"Legionnaire d'Honneur\" or \"Sergent-Chef de L\u00e9gion d'honneur\", while other recipients have included nurses, journalists, painters, and ministers who have rendered meritorious service to the Foreign Legion.\nPioneers.\nThe \"Pionniers\" (pioneers) are the combat engineers and a traditional unit of the Foreign Legion. The sapper traditionally sport large beards, wear leather aprons and gloves and hold axes. The sappers were very common in European armies during the Napoleonic Era but progressively disappeared during the 19th century. The French Army, including the Legion disbanded its regimental sapper platoons in 1870. However, in 1931 one of a number of traditions restored to mark the hundredth anniversary of the Legion's founding was the reestablishment of its bearded \"Pionniers\".\nIn the French Army, since the 18th century, every infantry regiment included a small detachment of pioneers. In addition to undertaking road building and entrenchment work, such units were tasked with using their axes and shovels to clear obstacles under enemy fire opening the way for the rest of the infantry. The danger of such missions was recognised by allowing certain privileges, such as being authorised to wear beards.\nThe current pioneer platoon of the Foreign Legion is provided by the Legion depot and headquarters regiment for public ceremonies. The unit has reintroduced the symbols of the Napoleonic sappers: the beard, the axe, the leather apron, the crossed-axes insignia and the leather gloves. When parades of the Foreign Legion are opened by this unit, it is to commemorate the traditional role of the sappers \"opening the way\" for the troops.\nMarching cadences and songs.\nAlso notable is the marching pace of the Foreign Legion. In comparison to the 116-step-per-minute pace of other French units, the Foreign Legion has an 88-step-per-minute marching speed. It is also referred to by Legionnaires as the \"crawl\". This can be seen at ceremonial parades and public displays attended by the Foreign Legion, particularly while parading in Paris on 14 July (Bastille Day Military Parade). Because of the impressively slow pace, the Foreign Legion is always the last unit marching in any parade. The Foreign Legion is normally accompanied by its own band, which traditionally plays the march of any one of the Foreign Legion's regiments, except that of the unit actually on parade. The regimental song of each unit and \"Le Boudin\" is sung by legionnaires standing at attention. Also, because the Foreign Legion must always stay together, it does not break formation into two when approaching the presidential grandstand, as other French military units do, in order to preserve the unity of the Legion.\nContrary to popular belief, the adoption of the Foreign Legion's slow marching speed was not due to a need to preserve energy and fluids during long marches under the hot Algerian sun. Its exact origins are unclear, but the official explanation is that although the pace regulation does not seem to have been instituted before 1945, it hails back to the slow marching pace of the Ancien R\u00e9gime, and its reintroduction was a \"return to traditional roots\". This was in fact, the march step of the Foreign Legion's ancestor units \u2013 the \"R\u00e9giments \u00c9trangers\" or Foreign Regiments of the \"Ancien R\u00e9gime\" French Army, the \"Grande Arm\u00e9e\"'s foreign units, and the pre-1831 foreign regiments.\nMarching songs.\n\"\"Le Boudin\".\n\"Le Boudin\"\" is the marching song of the Foreign Legion.\nOther songs.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUniform.\nFrom its foundation until World War I the Foreign Legion normally wore the uniform of the French line infantry for parade with a few special distinctions. Essentially this consisted of a dark blue coat (later tunic) worn with red trousers. The field uniform was often modified under the influence of the extremes of climate and terrain in which the Foreign Legion served. Shakos were soon replaced by the light cloth kepi, which was far more suitable for North African conditions. The practice of wearing heavy \"capotes\" (greatcoats) on the march and \"vestes\" (short hip-length jackets) as working dress in barracks was followed by the Foreign Legion from its establishment.\nOne short lived aberration was the wearing of green uniforms in 1856 by Foreign Legion units recruited in Switzerland for service in the Crimean War. In the Crimea itself (1854\u201359) a hooded coat and red or blue waist sashes were adopted for winter dress, while during the Mexican Intervention (1863\u201365) straw hats or sombreros were sometimes substituted for the kepi. When the latter was worn it was usually covered with a white \"havelock\" (linen cover) \u2013 the predecessor of the white kepi that was to become a symbol of the Foreign Legion. Foreign Legion units serving in France during the Franco-Prussian War of 1870\u201371 were distinguishable only by minor details of insignia from the bulk of the French infantry. However subsequent colonial campaigns saw an increasing use of special garments for hot weather wear such as collarless \"keo\" blouses in Tonkin 1884\u201385, khaki drill jackets in Dahomey (1892) and drab covered topees worn with all-white fatigue dress in Madagascar (1895).\nIn the early 20th century the legionnaire wore a red kepi with blue band and piping, dark blue tunic with red collar, red cuff patches, and red trousers. Distinctive features were the green epaulettes (replacing the red of the line) worn with red woollen fringes; plus the embroidered Legion badge of a red flaming grenade, worn on the kepi front instead of a regimental number. In the field a light khaki cover was worn over the kepi, sometimes with a protective neck curtain attached. The standard medium-blue double breasted greatcoat (\"capote\") of the French infantry was worn, usually buttoned back to free the legs for marching. From the 1830s the legionnaires had worn a broad blue woollen sash around the waist, like other European units of the French Army of Africa (such as the Zouaves or the Chasseurs d'Afrique), while indigenous units of the Army of Africa (spahis and tirailleurs) wore red sashes. White linen trousers tucked into short leather leggings were substituted for red serge in hot weather. This was the origin of the \"Beau Geste\" image.\nIn barracks a white bleached kepi cover was often worn together with a short dark blue jacket (\"veste\") or white blouse plus white trousers. The original kepi cover was khaki and due to constant washing turned white quickly. The white or khaki kepi cover was not unique to the Foreign Legion at this stage but was commonly seen amongst other French units in North Africa. It later became particularly identified with the Foreign Legion as the unit most likely to serve at remote frontier posts (other than locally recruited tirailleurs who wore fezzes or turbans). The variances of climate in North Africa led the French Army to the sensible expedient of letting local commanders decide on the appropriate \"tenue de jour\" (uniform of the day) according to circumstances. Thus a legionnaire might parade or walk out in blue tunic and white trousers in hot weather, blue tunic and red trousers in normal temperatures or wear the blue greatcoat with red trousers under colder conditions. The sash could be worn with greatcoat, blouse or veste but not with the tunic. Epaulettes were a detachable dress item worn only with tunic or greatcoat for parade or off duty wear.\nOfficers wore the same dark blue (almost black) tunics as those of their colleagues in the French line regiments, except that black replaced red as a facing colour on collar and cuffs. Gold fringed epaulettes were worn for full dress and rank was shown by the number of gold rings on both kepi and cuffs. Trousers were red with black stripes or white according to occasion or conditions. All-white or light khaki uniforms (from as early as the 1890s) were often worn in the field or for ordinary duties in barracks. Non-commissioned officers were distinguished by red or gold diagonal stripes on the lower sleeves of tunics, vestes and greatcoats. Small detachable stripes were buttoned on to the front of the white shirt-like blouse.\nPrior to 1914 units in Indo-China wore white or khaki Colonial Infantry uniforms with Foreign Legion insignia, to overcome supply difficulties. This dress included a white sun helmet of a model that was also issued to Foreign Legion units serving in the outposts of Southern Algeria, though never popular with its wearers. During the initial months of World War I, Foreign Legion units serving in France wore the standard blue greatcoat and red trousers of the French line infantry, distinguished only by collar patches of the same blue as the capote, instead of red. After a short period in sky-blue the Foreign Legion adopted khaki, in common with other units of the \"Arm\u00e9e d'Afrique\", with steel helmets, from early 1916. A mustard shade of khaki drill had been worn on active service in Morocco from 1909, replacing the classic blue and white. The latter continued to be worn in the relatively peaceful conditions of Algeria throughout World War I, although increasingly replaced by khaki drill. The pre-1914 blue and red uniforms could still be occasionally seen as garrison dress in Algeria until stocks were used up about 1919.\nDuring the early 1920s plain khaki drill uniforms of a standard pattern became universal issue for the Foreign Legion with only the red and blue kepi (with or without a cover) and green collar braiding to distinguish the Legionnaire from other French soldiers serving in North African and Indo-China. The neck curtain ceased to be worn from about 1915, although it survived in the newly raised Foreign Legion Cavalry Regiment into the 1920s. The white blouse (\"bourgeron\") and trousers dating from 1882 were retained for fatigue wear until the 1930s.\nAt the time of the Foreign Legion's centennial in 1931, a number of traditional features were reintroduced at the initiative of the then commander Colonel Rollet. These included the blue sash and green/red epaulettes. In 1939 the white covered kepi won recognition as the official headdress of the Foreign Legion to be worn on most occasions, rather than simply as a means of reflecting heat and protecting the blue and red material underneath. The Third Foreign Infantry Regiment adopted white tunics and trousers for walking-out dress during the 1930s\nand all Foreign Legion officers were required to obtain full dress uniforms in the pre-war colours of black and red from 1932 to 1939.\nDuring World War II the Foreign Legion wore a wide range of uniform styles depending on supply sources. These ranged from the heavy capotes and Adrian helmets of 1940 through to British battledress and American field uniforms from 1943 to 1945. The white kepi was stubbornly retained whenever possible.\nFrom 1940 until 1963 the Foreign Legion maintained four Saharan Companies (\"Compagnies Sahariennes\") as part of the French forces used to patrol and police the desert regions to the south of Morocco and Algeria. Special uniforms were developed for these units, modeled on those of the French officered Camel Corps (\"M\u00e9haristes\") having prime responsibility for the Sahara. In full dress these included black or white zouave style trousers, worn with white tunics and long flowing cloaks. The Legion companies maintained their separate identity by retaining their distinctive kepis, sashes and fringed epaulettes.\nThe white kepis, together with the sash and epaulettes survive in the Foreign Legion's modern parade dress. Since the 1990s the modern kepi has been made wholly of white material rather than simply worn with a white cover. Officers and senior noncommissioned officers still wear their kepis in the pre-1939 colours of dark blue and red. A green tie and (for officers) a green waistcoat recall the traditional branch colour of the Foreign Legion. From 1959 a green beret (previously worn only by the legion's paratroopers) became the universal ordinary duty headdress, with the kepi reserved for parade and off duty wear. Other items of currently worn dress are the standard issue of the French Army.\nEquipment.\nThe Legion is basically equipped with the same equipment as similar units elsewhere in the French Army. These include:\nLegacy.\nBeyond its reputation as an elite unit often engaged in serious fighting, the recruitment practices of the Foreign Legion have also led to a somewhat romanticised view of it being a place for disgraced or \"wronged\" men looking to leave behind their old lives and start new ones. This view of the legion has been used for dramatic effect in many films, not the least of which are the several versions of \"Beau Geste\". In Evelyn Waugh's \"Brideshead Revisited\", Sebastian Flyte's German companion, Kurt, has dishonourably left the Foreign Legion. Three songs by Edith Piaf, most notably \"Non, je ne regrette rien\" (No, I regret nothing), became associated with the legion, during the 1960s when members of the Legion were accused of being implicated in a failed coup d'\u00e9tat during the Algerian War. Today it is still a popular Legion \"chant\" sung when on parade, adapting it to their unique marching cadence of 88 steps to the minute. Various fictional portrayals and references to the legion have been made over the years, such as in film, television, music, video games and art. The comic strip \"Crock\", which depicted life in the legion, ran from 1975 to 2012.\nEmulation by other countries.\nChinese Ever Victorious Army.\nThe Ever Victorious Army was the name given to a Chinese imperial army in the late 19th century. Commanded by Frederick Townsend Ward, the new force originally comprised about 200 mostly European mercenaries, recruited in the Shanghai area from sailors, deserters and adventurers. Many were dismissed in the summer of 1861, but the remainder became the officers of the Chinese soldiers recruited mainly in and around Sungkiang (Songjiang). The Chinese troops were increased to 3,000 by May 1862, all equipped with Western firearms and equipment by the British authorities in Shanghai. Throughout its four-year existence the Ever Victorious Army was mainly to operate within a thirty-mile radius of Shanghai. It was disbanded in May 1864 with 104 foreign officers and 2,288 Chinese soldiers being paid off. The bulk of the artillery and some infantry transferred to the Chinese Imperial forces. It was the first Chinese army trained in European techniques, tactics, and strategy.\nIsraeli Mahal.\nIn Israel, Mahal (, an acronym for \"Mitnadvei \u1e24utz LaAretz\", which means \"Volunteers from outside the Land [of Israel]\") is a term designating non-Israelis serving in the Israeli military. The term originates with the approximately 4,000 both Jewish and non-Jewish volunteers who went to Israel to fight in the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War including Aliyah Bet. The original Mahalniks were mostly World War II veterans who had previously served in the American and British armed forces.\nToday, there is a program, Garin Tzabar, within the Israeli Ministry of Defense that administers the enlistment of non-Israeli citizens in the country's armed forces. Programs enable foreigners to join the Israel Defense Forces if they are of Jewish descent (which is defined as at least one grandparent).\nRhodesian Light Infantry and 7 Independent Company.\nDuring the Rhodesian Bush War of the 1960s and 1970s, the Rhodesian Security Forces enlisted volunteers from overseas on the same pay and conditions of service as locally based regulars. The vast majority of the Rhodesian Army's foreigners joined the Rhodesian Light Infantry (RLI), a heliborne commando regiment with a glamorous international reputation; this unit became colloquially known as the \"Rhodesian foreign legion\" as a result, even though foreigners never made up more than about a third of its men. According to Chris Cocks, an RLI veteran, \"the RLI was a mirror of the French Foreign Legion, in that recruiters paid little heed as to a man's past and asked no questions. ... And like the Foreign Legion, once in the ranks, a man's past was irrelevant.\" Just as French Foreign Legionnaires must speak French, the Rhodesian Army required its foreigners to be English-speakers. Many of them were professional soldiers, attracted by the regiment's reputation\u2014mostly former British soldiers, or Vietnam veterans from the United States, Australian and New Zealand forces\u2014and these became a key part of the unit. Others, with no military experience, were often motivated to join the Rhodesian Army by their opposition to communism, or a desire for adventure or to escape the past.\nAfter the Rhodesians' overseas recruiting campaign for English-speakers, started in 1974, proved successful, they began recruiting French-speakers as well, in 1977. These francophone recruits were placed in their own unit, 7 Independent Company, Rhodesia Regiment, which was commanded by French-speaking officers and operated entirely in French. The experiment was not generally considered a success by the Rhodesian commanders, however, and the company was disbanded in early 1978.\nRussian \"Foreign Legion\".\nIn 2010 the service conditions of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation changed to allow foreigners. The actual term Russian \"Foreign Legion\" is a colloquial expression without any official recognition. Under the plan, foreigners without dual citizenship are able to sign up for five-year contracts and will be eligible for Russian citizenship after serving three years. Experts say the change opens the way for Commonwealth of Independent States citizens to get fast-track Russian citizenship, and counter the effects of Russia's demographic crisis on its army recruitment.\nDonetsk &amp; Luhansk Peoples Republic \"Novo-Russia Foreign Legion\".\nDuring the war in Donbas, the separatist Donetsk People's Republic recruited foreigners who were ideologically aligned to Russia to come fight for them. This resulted in the formation of the Novo-Russia Foreign Legion, with hundreds of foreigners having reportedly joined its ranks. Ukraine reported that in 2015 around 30,000 foreign fighters were fighting for the separatists with the main nationalities being Russian and Serbian, with westerners making up a minority of fighters.\nSpanish \"Foreign Legion\".\nThe Spanish \"Tercio de Extranjeros\" was created in 1920, in direct emulation of the French Foreign Legion. It subsequently had a significant role in Spain's colonial wars in Morocco and in the Spanish Civil War on the Nationalist side. The Spanish Foreign Legion recruited foreigners until 1986 but unlike its French model, the number of non-Spanish recruits never exceeded 25%, most of these from Latin America. It is now called the \"Spanish Legion\" and has been involved in several modern conflicts and operations, including Afghanistan and the UN Mission in Lebanon UNIFIL .\nUkrainian International Legion &amp; Georgian Legion.\nThe Georgian Legion was formed fighting on the side of Ukraine in the war in Donbas and the Russo-Ukrainian War. The unit was organized in 2014, and in 2016 it was transferred under the control of the Ukrainian Army, under the 25th Mechanized Infantry Battalion \"Kyiv Rus\". Although formed by mostly ethnic Georgian volunteers, and commanded by veteran Georgian officer Mamuka Mamulashvili, the legion was noted as being particularly good at recruiting Americans; before the formation of the International Legion of Ukraine in 2022, most foreign fighters served the Georgian Legion.\nIn response to the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, the government of Ukraine quickly established a component of its Territorial Defense Forces consisting of volunteers from foreign countries. Within the International Legion, some single nationality battalions were established to avoid language barriers in order to facilitate their rapid response to the invasion.\nNotable members.\n\"The following is a list of notable people who are or were members of the Foreign Legion:\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nBooks"}
{"id": "11545", "revid": "51035919", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11545", "title": "Feedback", "text": "Process where information about current status is used to influence future status\nFeedback occurs when outputs of a system are routed back as inputs as part of a chain of cause and effect that forms a circuit or loop. The system can then be said to \"feed back\" into itself. The notion of cause-and-effect has to be handled carefully when applied to feedback systems:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Simple causal reasoning about a feedback system is difficult because the first system influences the second and second system influences the first, leading to a circular argument. This makes reasoning based upon cause and effect tricky, and it is necessary to analyze the system as a whole. As provided by Webster, feedback in business is the transmission of evaluative or corrective information about an action, event, or process to the original or controlling source.\u2014\u200a\nHistory.\nSelf-regulating mechanisms have existed since antiquity, and the idea of feedback started to enter economic theory in Britain by the 18th century, but it was not at that time recognized as a universal abstraction and so did not have a name.\nThe first ever known artificial feedback device was a float valve, for maintaining water at a constant level, invented in 270 BC in Alexandria, Egypt. This device illustrated the principle of feedback: a low water level opens the valve, the rising water then provides feedback into the system, closing the valve when the required level is reached. This then reoccurs in a circular fashion as the water level fluctuates.\nCentrifugal governors were used to regulate the distance and pressure between millstones in windmills since the 17th century. In 1788, James Watt designed his first centrifugal governor following a suggestion from his business partner Matthew Boulton, for use in the steam engines of their production. Early steam engines employed a purely reciprocating motion, and were used for pumping water \u2013 an application that could tolerate variations in the working speed, but the use of steam engines for other applications called for more precise control of the speed.\nIn 1868, James Clerk Maxwell wrote a famous paper, \"On governors\", that is widely considered a classic in feedback control theory. This was a landmark paper on control theory and the mathematics of feedback.\nThe verb phrase \"to feed back\", in the sense of returning to an earlier position in a mechanical process, was in use in the US by the 1860s, and in 1909, Nobel laureate Karl Ferdinand Braun used the term \"feed-back\" as a noun to refer to (undesired) coupling between components of an electronic circuit.\nBy the end of 1912, researchers using early electronic amplifiers (audions) had discovered that deliberately coupling part of the output signal back to the input circuit would boost the amplification (through regeneration), but would also cause the audion to howl or sing. This action of feeding back of the signal from output to input gave rise to the use of the term \"feedback\" as a distinct word by 1920.\nThe development of cybernetics from the 1940s onwards was centred around the study of circular causal feedback mechanisms.\nOver the years there has been some dispute as to the best definition of feedback. According to cybernetician Ashby (1956), mathematicians and theorists interested in the principles of feedback mechanisms prefer the definition of \"circularity of action\", which keeps the theory simple and consistent. For those with more practical aims, feedback should be a deliberate effect via some more tangible connection.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[Practical experimenters] object to the mathematician's definition, pointing out that this would force them to say that feedback was present in the ordinary pendulum ... between its position and its momentum\u2014a \"feedback\" that, from the practical point of view, is somewhat mystical. To this the mathematician retorts that if feedback is to be considered present only when there is an actual wire or nerve to represent it, then the theory becomes chaotic and riddled with irrelevancies.54\nFocusing on uses in management theory, Ramaprasad (1983) defines feedback generally as \"...information about the gap between the actual level and the reference level of a system parameter\" that is used to \"alter the gap in some way\". He emphasizes that the information by itself is not feedback unless translated into action.\nTypes.\nPositive and negative feedback.\nPositive feedback: If the signal feedback from output is in phase with the input signal, the feedback is called positive feedback.\nNegative feedback: If the signal feedback is out of phase by 180\u00b0 with respect to the input signal, the feedback is called negative feedback.\nAs an example of negative feedback, the diagram might represent a cruise control system in a car that matches a target speed such as the speed limit. The controlled system is the car; its input includes the combined torque from the engine and from the changing slope of the road (the disturbance). The car's speed (status) is measured by a speedometer. The error signal is the difference of the speed as measured by the speedometer from the target speed (set point). The controller interprets the speed to adjust the accelerator, commanding the fuel flow to the engine (the effector). The resulting change in engine torque, the feedback, combines with the torque exerted by the change of road grade to reduce the error in speed, minimising the changing slope.\nThe terms \"positive\" and \"negative\" were first applied to feedback prior to WWII. The idea of positive feedback already existed in the 1920s when the regenerative circuit was made. Friis and Jensen (1924) described this circuit in a set of electronic amplifiers as a case where \"the \"feed-back\" action is positive\" in contrast to negative feed-back action, which they mentioned only in passing. Harold Stephen Black's classic 1934 paper first details the use of negative feedback in electronic amplifiers. According to Black:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAccording to Mindell (2002) confusion in the terms arose shortly after this:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEven before these terms were being used, James Clerk Maxwell had described their concept through several kinds of \"component motions\" associated with the centrifugal governors used in steam engines. He distinguished those that lead to a continued \"increase\" in a disturbance or the amplitude of a wave or oscillation, from those that lead to a \"decrease\" of the same quality.\nTerminology.\nThe terms positive and negative feedback are defined in different ways within different disciplines.\nThe two definitions may be confusing, like when an incentive (reward) is used to boost poor performance (narrow a gap). Referring to definition 1, some authors use alternative terms, replacing \"positive\" and \"negative\" with \"self-reinforcing\" and \"self-correcting\", \"reinforcing\" and \"balancing\", \"discrepancy-enhancing\" and \"discrepancy-reducing\" or \"regenerative\" and \"degenerative\" respectively. And for definition 2, some authors promote describing the action or effect as \"positive\" and \"negative\" \"reinforcement\" or \"punishment\" rather than feedback.\nYet even within a single discipline an example of feedback can be called either positive or negative, depending on how values are measured or referenced.\nThis confusion may arise because feedback can be used to provide \"information\" or \"motivate\", and often has both a \"qualitative\" and a \"quantitative\" component. As Connellan and Zemke (1993) put it:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Quantitative\" feedback tells us how much and how many. \"Qualitative\" feedback tells us how good, bad or indifferent.102\nLimitations of negative and positive feedback.\nWhile simple systems can sometimes be described as one or the other type, many systems with feedback loops cannot be shoehorned into either type, and this is especially true when multiple loops are present.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther types of feedback.\nIn general, feedback systems can have many signals fed back and the feedback loop frequently contain mixtures of positive and negative feedback where positive and negative feedback can dominate at different frequencies or different points in the state space of a system.\nThe term bipolar feedback has been coined to refer to biological systems where positive and negative feedback systems can interact, the output of one affecting the input of another, and vice versa.\nSome systems with feedback can have very complex behaviors such as chaotic behaviors in non-linear systems, while others have much more predictable behaviors, such as those that are used to make and design digital systems.\nFeedback is used extensively in digital systems. For example, binary counters and similar devices employ feedback where the current state and inputs are used to calculate a new state which is then fed back and clocked back into the device to update it.\nApplications.\nMathematics and dynamical systems.\nBy using feedback properties, the behavior of a system can be altered to meet the needs of an application; systems can be made stable, responsive or held constant. It is shown that dynamical systems with a feedback experience an adaptation to the edge of chaos.\nPhysics.\nPhysical systems present feedback through the mutual interactions of its parts. Feedback is also relevant for the regulation of experimental conditions, noise reduction, and signal control. The thermodynamics of feedback-controlled systems has intrigued physicist since the Maxwell's demon, with recent advances on the consequences for entropy reduction and performance increase.\nBiology.\nIn biological systems such as organisms, ecosystems, or the biosphere, most parameters must stay under control within a narrow range around a certain optimal level under certain environmental conditions. The deviation of the optimal value of the controlled parameter can result from the changes in internal and external environments. A change of some of the environmental conditions may also require change of that range to change for the system to function. The value of the parameter to maintain is recorded by a reception system and conveyed to a regulation module via an information channel. An example of this is insulin oscillations.\nBiological systems contain many types of regulatory circuits, both positive and negative. As in other contexts, \"positive\" and \"negative\" do not imply that the feedback causes \"good\" or \"bad\" effects. A negative feedback loop is one that tends to slow down a process, whereas the positive feedback loop tends to accelerate it. The mirror neurons are part of a social feedback system, when an observed action is \"mirrored\" by the brain\u2014like a self-performed action.\nNormal tissue integrity is preserved by feedback interactions between diverse cell types mediated by adhesion molecules and secreted molecules that act as mediators; failure of key feedback mechanisms in cancer disrupts tissue function.\nIn an injured or infected tissue, inflammatory mediators elicit feedback responses in cells, which alter gene expression, and change the groups of molecules expressed and secreted, including molecules that induce diverse cells to cooperate and restore tissue structure and function. This type of feedback is important because it enables coordination of immune responses and recovery from infections and injuries. During cancer, key elements of this feedback fail. This disrupts tissue function and immunity.\nMechanisms of feedback were first elucidated in bacteria, where a nutrient elicits changes in some of their metabolic functions.\nFeedback is also central to the operations of genes and gene regulatory networks. Repressor (see Lac repressor) and activator proteins are used to create genetic operons, which were identified by Fran\u00e7ois Jacob and Jacques Monod in 1961 as \"feedback loops\". These feedback loops may be positive (as in the case of the coupling between a sugar molecule and the proteins that import sugar into a bacterial cell), or negative (as is often the case in metabolic consumption).\nOn a larger scale, feedback can have a stabilizing effect on animal populations even when profoundly affected by external changes, although time lags in feedback response can give rise to predator-prey cycles.\nIn zymology, feedback serves as regulation of activity of an enzyme by its direct product(s) or downstream metabolite(s) in the metabolic pathway (see Allosteric regulation).\nThe hypothalamic\u2013pituitary\u2013adrenal axis is largely controlled by positive and negative feedback, much of which is still unknown.\nIn psychology, the body receives a stimulus from the environment or internally that causes the release of hormones. Release of hormones then may cause more of those hormones to be released, causing a positive feedback loop. This cycle is also found in certain behaviour. For example, \"shame loops\" occur in people who blush easily. When they realize that they are blushing, they become even more embarrassed, which leads to further blushing, and so on.\nClimate science.\nThe climate system is characterized by strong positive and negative feedback loops between processes that affect the state of the atmosphere, ocean, and land. A simple example is the ice\u2013albedo positive feedback loop whereby melting snow exposes more dark ground (of lower albedo), which in turn absorbs heat and causes more snow to melt.\nControl theory.\nFeedback is extensively used in control theory, using a variety of methods including state space (controls), full state feedback, and so forth. In the context of control theory, \"feedback\" is traditionally assumed to specify \"negative feedback\".\nThe most common general-purpose controller using a control-loop feedback mechanism is a proportional-integral-derivative (PID) controller. Heuristically, the terms of a PID controller can be interpreted as corresponding to time: the proportional term depends on the \"present\" error, the integral term on the accumulation of \"past\" errors, and the derivative term is a prediction of \"future\" error, based on current rate of change.\nEducation.\nFor feedback in the educational context, see corrective feedback.\nMechanical engineering.\nIn ancient times, the float valve was used to regulate the flow of water in Greek and Roman water clocks; similar float valves are used to regulate fuel in a carburettor and also used to regulate tank water level in the flush toilet.\nThe Dutch inventor Cornelius Drebbel (1572\u20131633) built thermostats (c1620) to control the temperature of chicken incubators and chemical furnaces. In 1745, the windmill was improved by blacksmith Edmund Lee, who added a fantail to keep the face of the windmill pointing into the wind. In 1787, Tom Mead regulated the rotation speed of a windmill by using a centrifugal pendulum to adjust the distance between the bedstone and the runner stone (i.e., to adjust the load).\nThe use of the centrifugal governor by James Watt in 1788 to regulate the speed of his steam engine was one factor leading to the Industrial Revolution. Steam engines also use float valves and pressure release valves as mechanical regulation devices. A mathematical analysis of Watt's governor was done by James Clerk Maxwell in 1868.\nThe \"Great Eastern\" was one of the largest steamships of its time and employed a steam powered rudder with feedback mechanism designed in 1866 by John McFarlane Gray. Joseph Farcot coined the word \"servo\" in 1873 to describe steam-powered steering systems. Hydraulic servos were later used to position guns. Elmer Ambrose Sperry of the Sperry Corporation designed the first autopilot in 1912. Nicolas Minorsky published a theoretical analysis of automatic ship steering in 1922 and described the PID controller.\nInternal combustion engines of the late 20th century employed mechanical feedback mechanisms such as the vacuum timing advance but mechanical feedback was replaced by electronic engine management systems once small, robust and powerful single-chip microcontrollers became affordable.\nElectronic engineering.\nThe use of feedback is widespread in the design of electronic components such as amplifiers, oscillators, and stateful logic circuit elements such as flip-flops and counters. Electronic feedback systems are also very commonly used to control mechanical, thermal and other physical processes.\nIf the signal is inverted on its way round the control loop, the system is said to have \"negative feedback\"; otherwise, the feedback is said to be \"positive\". Negative feedback is often deliberately introduced to increase the stability and accuracy of a system by correcting or reducing the influence of unwanted changes. This scheme can fail if the input changes faster than the system can respond to it. When this happens, the lag in arrival of the correcting signal can result in over-correction, causing the output to oscillate or \"hunt\". While often an unwanted consequence of system behaviour, this effect is used deliberately in electronic oscillators.\nHarry Nyquist at Bell Labs derived the Nyquist stability criterion for determining the stability of feedback systems. An easier method, but less general, is to use Bode plots developed by Hendrik Bode to determine the gain margin and phase margin. Design to ensure stability often involves frequency compensation to control the location of the poles of the amplifier.\nElectronic feedback loops are used to control the output of electronic devices, such as amplifiers. A feedback loop is created when all or some portion of the output is fed back to the input. A device is said to be operating \"open loop\" if no output feedback is being employed and \"closed loop\" if feedback is being used.\nWhen two or more amplifiers are cross-coupled using positive feedback, complex behaviors can be created. These \"multivibrators\" are widely used and include:\nNegative feedback.\nNegative feedback occurs when the fed-back output signal has a relative phase of 180\u00b0 with respect to the input signal (upside down). This situation is sometimes referred to as being \"out of phase\", but that term also is used to indicate other phase separations, as in \"90\u00b0 out of phase\". Negative feedback can be used to correct output errors or to desensitize a system to unwanted fluctuations. In feedback amplifiers, this correction is generally for waveform distortion reduction or to establish a specified gain level. A general expression for the gain of a negative feedback amplifier is the asymptotic gain model.\nPositive feedback.\nPositive feedback occurs when the fed-back signal is in phase with the input signal. Under certain gain conditions, positive feedback reinforces the input signal to the point where the output of the device oscillates between its maximum and minimum possible states. Positive feedback may also introduce hysteresis into a circuit. This can cause the circuit to ignore small signals and respond only to large ones. It is sometimes used to eliminate noise from a digital signal. Under some circumstances, positive feedback may cause a device to latch, i.e., to reach a condition in which the output is locked to its maximum or minimum state. This fact is very widely used in digital electronics to make bistable circuits for volatile storage of information.\nThe loud squeals that sometimes occurs in sound reinforcement, public address systems, and rock music are known as audio feedback. If a microphone is in front of a loudspeaker that it is connected to, sound that the microphone picks up comes out of the speaker, and is picked up by the microphone and re-amplified. If the loop gain is sufficient, howling or squealing at the maximum power of the amplifier is possible.\nLoop gain.\nLoop gain is the sum of the gain, expressed as a ratio or in decibels, around a feedback loop. In a feedback loop, the output of a device, process or plant is sampled and applied to alter the input, to better control the output. The loop gain, along with the related concept of loop phase shift, determines the behavior of the device, and particularly whether the output is stable, or unstable, which can result in oscillation. The importance of loop gain as a parameter for characterizing electronic feedback amplifiers was first recognized by Heinrich Barkhausen in 1921, and was developed further by Hendrik Wade Bode and Harry Nyquist at Bell Labs in the 1930s.\nThe input signal is applied to the amplifier with open-loop gain \"A\" and amplified. The output of the amplifier is applied to a feedback network with gain \"B\", and subtracted from the input to the amplifier. The loop gain is the product of all gains in the loop. In the diagram shown, the loop gain is the product of the gains of the amplifier and the feedback network, \"\u2212AB\". The minus sign is because the feedback signal is subtracted from the input. \nThe gains \"A\" and \"B\", and therefore the loop gain, generally vary with the frequency of the input signal, and so are usually expressed as functions of the angular frequency \"\u03c9\" in radians per second. It is often displayed as a graph with the horizontal axis frequency \"\u03c9\" and the vertical axis gain. In amplifiers, the loop gain is the difference between the open-loop gain curve and the closed-loop gain curve (actually, the 1/B curve) on a dB scale.\nOscillator.\nAn electronic oscillator is an electronic circuit that produces a periodic, oscillating electronic signal, often a sine wave or a square wave. Oscillators convert direct current (DC) from a power supply to an alternating current signal. They are widely used in many electronic devices. Common examples of signals generated by oscillators include signals broadcast by radio and television transmitters, clock signals that regulate computers and quartz clocks, and the sounds produced by electronic beepers and video games.\nOscillators are often characterized by the frequency of their output signal:\nOscillators designed to produce a high-power AC output from a DC supply are usually called inverters.\nThere are two main types of electronic oscillator: the linear or harmonic oscillator and the nonlinear or relaxation oscillator.\nLatches and flip-flops.\nA latch or a flip-flop is a circuit that has two stable states and can be used to store state information. They typically constructed using feedback that crosses over between two arms of the circuit, to provide the circuit with a state. The circuit can be made to change state by signals applied to one or more control inputs and will have one or two outputs. It is the basic storage element in sequential logic. Latches and flip-flops are fundamental building blocks of digital electronics systems used in computers, communications, and many other types of systems.\nLatches and flip-flops are used as data storage elements. Such data storage can be used for storage of \"state\", and such a circuit is described as sequential logic. When used in a finite-state machine, the output and next state depend not only on its current input, but also on its current state (and hence, previous inputs). It can also be used for counting of pulses, and for synchronizing variably-timed input signals to some reference timing signal.\nFlip-flops can be either simple (transparent or opaque) or clocked (synchronous or edge-triggered). Although the term flip-flop has historically referred generically to both simple and clocked circuits, in modern usage it is common to reserve the term \"flip-flop\" exclusively for discussing clocked circuits; the simple ones are commonly called \"latches\".\nUsing this terminology, a latch is level-sensitive, whereas a flip-flop is edge-sensitive. That is, when a latch is enabled it becomes transparent, while a flip flop's output only changes on a single type (positive going or negative going) of clock edge.\nSoftware.\nFeedback loops provide generic mechanisms for controlling the running, maintenance, and evolution of software and computing systems. Feedback-loops are important models in the engineering of adaptive software, as they define the behaviour of the interactions among the control elements over the adaptation process, to guarantee system properties at run-time. Feedback loops and foundations of control theory have been successfully applied to computing systems. In particular, they have been applied to the development of products such as IBM Db2 and IBM Tivoli. From a software perspective, the autonomic (MAPE, monitor analyze plan execute) loop proposed by researchers of IBM is another valuable contribution to the application of feedback loops to the control of dynamic properties and the design and evolution of autonomic software systems.\nUser interface design.\nFeedback is also a useful design principle for designing user interfaces.\nVideo feedback.\nVideo feedback is the video equivalent of acoustic feedback. It involves a loop between a video camera input and a video output, e.g., a television screen or monitor. Aiming the camera at the display produces a complex video image based on the feedback.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11547", "revid": "723154", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11547", "title": "Furigana", "text": "Japanese style of ruby text\n is a Japanese reading aid consisting of smaller kana (syllabic characters) printed either above or next to kanji (logographic characters) or other characters to indicate their pronunciation. It is one type of ruby text. Furigana is also known as and in Japanese. In modern Japanese, it is usually used to gloss rare kanji, to clarify rare, nonstandard or ambiguous kanji readings, or in children's or learners' materials. Before the post-World War II script reforms, it was more widespread.\nFurigana is most often written in hiragana, though in certain cases it may be written in katakana, Roman alphabet letters or in other, simpler kanji. In vertical text, \"tategaki\", the furigana is placed to the right of the line of text; in horizontal text, \"yokogaki\", it is placed above the line of text, as illustrated below.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThese examples spell the word \"nihongo\", which is made up of three kanji characters: (\"ni\", written in hiragana as ), (\"hon\", written in hiragana as ) and (\"go\", written in hiragana as ).\nAppearance.\nFurigana may be added by character, in which case the furigana character(s) that correspond to a kanji are centered over that kanji; or by word or phrase, in which case the entire furigana text is centered over several kanji characters, even if the kanji do not represent equal shares of the kana needed to write them. The latter method is more common, especially since some words in Japanese have unique pronunciations (\"jukujikun\") that are not related to readings of any of the characters the word is written with.\nFurigana fonts are generally sized so that two kana characters fit naturally over one kanji; when more kana are required, this is resolved either by adjusting the furigana by using a condensed font (narrowing the kana), or by adjusting the kanji by intercharacter spacing (adding spaces around the kanji). In case an isolated kanji character has a long reading\u2014for example (where reads , \"tazusa\")\u2014the furigana may instead spill over into the space next to the neighboring kana characters, without condensing or changing spacing. Three-kana readings are not uncommon, particularly due to \"y\u014don\" with a long vowel, such as ; five kana are required for and six for , the longest of any character in the Joyo kanji. Very long readings also occur for certain kanji or symbols which have a \"gairaigo\" (loan word) reading; the word \"centimeter\" is generally written as \"cm\" (with two half-width characters, so occupying one space) and has the seven-kana reading (\"senchim\u0113toru\") (it can also be written as the kanji , though this is very rare); another common example is \"%\" (the percent sign), which has the five kana reading (\"p\u0101sento\"). These cause severe spacing problems due to length and these words being used as units (hence closely associated with the preceding figure).\nWhen it is necessary to distinguish between native Japanese \"kun'yomi\" pronunciations and Chinese-derived \"on'yomi\" pronunciations, for example in kanji dictionaries, the kun'yomi pronunciations are written in hiragana, and the on'yomi pronunciations are written in katakana. However, this distinction is really only important in dictionaries and other reference works. In ordinary prose, the script chosen will usually be hiragana. The one general exception to this is \"modern\" Chinese place names, personal names, and (occasionally) food names\u2014these will often be written with kanji, and katakana used for the furigana; in more casual writing these are simply written in katakana, as borrowed words. Occasionally this style is also used for loanwords from other languages (especially English). For example, the kanji (literally \"one horn beast\") might be glossed with katakana , \"yunik\u014dn\", to show the pronunciation of the loanword \"unicorn\", which is unrelated to the normal reading of the kanji. Generally, though, such loanwords are just written in straight katakana.\nThe distinction between regular kana and the smaller character forms (y\u014don and sokuon), which are used in regular orthography to mark such things as gemination and palatalization, is often not made in furigana: for example, the usual hiragana spelling of the word (\"kyakka\") is , but in furigana it might be written . This was especially common in old-fashioned movable type printing when smaller fonts were not available. Nowadays, with computer-based printing systems, this occurs less frequently.\nAlignment rules in word processing or typesetting.\nVarious word processing or typesetting software programs, such as Microsoft Word, Adobe InDesign, Adobe InCopy, etc. have features for adding ruby text, especially Japanese furigana. Among formatting features are different rules for aligning the kana over or to the right of the base text, usually either when the base text string is longer than the furigana string or vice versa. Extra spaces may be needed depending on the size of the shorter string (either the ruby string or the base string) relatively to the longer one.\nUsage.\nFurigana are most commonly used in works for children, who may not have sufficiently advanced reading skills to recognize the kanji, but can understand the word when written phonetically in hiragana. Because children learn hiragana before katakana, in books for very young children, there are hiragana\uff0dfurigana next to the katakana characters. It is common to use furigana on all kanji characters in works for young children. This is called in Japanese.\nNumeric characters used for counting (e.g. \"ni-hon\" \"two long things\"; \"futatsume\" \"second\"; \"dai-ni kan\" \"book 2\"; \"ni-p\u0113ji\" \"page 2\"; etc.) are usually not tagged with furigana. Exceptions include a few cases such as \u4e00\u4eba/1\u4eba \"hitori\" \"one person\" and \u4e8c\u4eba/2\u4eba \"futari\" \"two people\", which may be tagged with separate kana for each character (/), or non-separated kana for the whole word (/), depending on the style of the publisher in question; or characters for numerals greater than 1,000 (\u5343), such as \u4e07 (10,000), \u5104 (100,000,000), etc. Numeric words in established compounds (e.g. \"ippo\" \"step\"; \"hitome\" \"sight; attention\"), however, are generally tagged with furigana.\nMany children's manga, sh\u014dnen and sh\u014djo manga use furigana (again however, rarely on numerals). Sh\u014dnen and sh\u014djo manga tend to have furigana for all non-numeric characters, while some manga (such as early volumes of \"Doraemon\" and other manga published by Shogakukan), may also ignore furigana on elementary-grade kanji or easy words. Seinen and josei manga ignores furigana most of the time, even on the names of the characters if they're common names, although some publishers may still routinely use furigana for the first mentions of important characters' names in a volume or chapter. There are also books with a phonetic guide (mainly in hiragana but sometimes in r\u014dmaji) for Japanese learners, which may be bilingual or Japanese only. These are popular with foreigners wishing to master Japanese faster and enjoy reading Japanese short stories, novels or articles.\nDue to the small type used for furigana, for maximum readability, some manga publishers may use regular kana instead of small kana. For example, \u306f\u3063\u3057\u3093 \"hasshin\" may be spelled \u306f\u3064\u3057\u3093 *\"hatsushin\" instead.\nSome websites and tools exist which provide a phonetic guide for Japanese web pages (in hiragana, r\u014dmaji or kiriru-moji); these are popular with both Japanese children and foreign Japanese learners.\nIn works aimed at adult Japanese speakers, furigana may be used on a word written in uncommon kanji; in the mass media, they are generally used on words containing non-J\u014dy\u014d kanji.\nFurigana commonly appear alongside kanji names and their romanizations on signs for railway stations, even if the pronunciation of the kanji is commonly known. Furigana also appear often on maps to show the pronunciation of unusual place names.\nBefore the second world war, the Japanese youth might have arguably been almost illiterate, and unable to read texts containing high amounts of Kanji if not for furigana.\nNames.\nJapanese names are usually written in kanji. Because there are many possible readings for kanji names, including special name-only readings called nanori, furigana are often used to give the readings of names. On Japanese official forms, where the name is to be written, there is always an adjacent column for the name to be written in furigana.\nFurigana may also be used for foreign names written in kanji. Chinese and Korean names are the most common examples: Chinese names are usually pronounced with Japanese readings and the pronunciation written in hiragana, while Korean names are usually pronounced with Korean readings and the pronunciation written in katakana.\nLanguage learning.\nKanji and kanji compounds are often presented with furigana in Japanese-language textbooks for non-native speakers.\nFurigana are also often used in foreign-language textbooks for Japanese learners to indicate pronunciation. The words are written in the original foreign script, such as hangul for Korean, and furigana is used to indicate the pronunciation. According to Ministry of Education guidelines, and the opinions of educators, the use of Japanese furigana should be avoided in English teaching due to the differences in pronunciation between English and Japanese. For instance, the word \"birthdate\" might be glossed in furigana as (\"b\u0101sudeito\"), which corresponds to an imperfect pronunciation.\nOther effects.\nFurigana unrelated to the kanji they are assigned to are often used to convey certain effects, rather than to denote a phonetic guide, especially in manga, anime, video games, and tabletop games.\nThis usage is known as \"gikun\" (see also Kanji#Special readings). The specific effects vary.\nIt may be used to visually reinforce complex ideas without having to use long expressions. For example, the word \"akumu\" \"nightmare\" may be annotated with \"shinjitsu\" \"truth\" (i.e. &lt;ruby lang=\"ja\"&gt;\u60aa\u5922&lt;rp&gt;\uff08&lt;/rp&gt;&lt;rt&gt;\u3057\u3093\u3058\u3064&lt;/rt&gt;&lt;rp&gt;\uff09&lt;/rp&gt;&lt;/ruby&gt;) rather than its true reading, to convey the meaning of \"nightmarish truth\".\nSome authors may even use furigana that means the opposite of what the base text does to reinforce the complicated relationship between characters. For example, \"shin'y\u016b\" \"close friend\" may be annotated with \"raibaru\" \"rival\", to mean \"a rival who is also friend\".\nAnother use is to indicate the meanings of ambiguous or foreign words. For example, the word (\"koko\", \"here\") may be annotated with a more specific description like \"by\u014din\" \"hospital\" (i.e. &lt;ruby lang=\"ja\"&gt;\u75c5\u9662&lt;rp&gt;\uff08&lt;/rp&gt;&lt;rt&gt;\u3053\u3053&lt;/rt&gt;&lt;rp&gt;\uff09&lt;/rp&gt;&lt;/ruby&gt;) to mean \"here (at this hospital)\". Or in a work of science fiction, an astronaut may use the word \"furusato\" \"my hometown\", when referring to planet Earth; to clarify that for the reader, may be written over the word \"chiky\u016b\" \"Earth\". A similar technique is used in Japanese subtitles on foreign films to associate the written Japanese with the sounds actually being spoken by the actors, or in a translation of a work of fiction to preserve the original sound of a proper name in furigana while indicating its meaning with kanji. For example, \"Firebolt\" in the Harry Potter series is written &lt;ruby lang=\"ja\"&gt;\u708e\u306e\u96f7&lt;rp&gt;\uff08&lt;/rp&gt;&lt;rt&gt;\u30d5\u30a1\u30a4\u30a2\u30dc\u30eb\u30c8&lt;/rt&gt;&lt;rp&gt;\uff09&lt;/rp&gt;&lt;/ruby&gt;, composed of the kanji \"hon\u014d no ikazuchi\" \"flame thunderbolt\" and the furigana \"faiaboruto\".\nSome manga combine the rendition of a foreign word (especially an obscure one) in furigana as the intended reading of a term, with more familiar kanji as the meaning. For example, \"eki\" \"station\" may be annotated with \"sut\u0113shon\" (the rendition of the English \"station\") to convey a foreign, exotic feel;\nThis is sometimes done conversely, for example, by annotating an exotic term like \"b\u0113ze\" \"kiss\" with a more common synonym like \"kissu\".\nSome writers use furigana to represent slang pronunciations, particularly those that would be difficult to understand without the kanji to provide their meaning. Others use it simply to shrink kana spellings that are too long, thanks to the small type of furigana. For example, \"int\u0101p\u014dru\" \"Interpol\" may be shortened to &lt;ruby lang=\"ja\"&gt;ICPO&lt;rp&gt;\uff08&lt;/rp&gt;&lt;rt&gt;\u30a4\u30f3\u30bf\u30fc\u30dd\u30fc\u30eb&lt;/rt&gt;&lt;rp&gt;\uff09&lt;/rp&gt;&lt;/ruby&gt;.\nIn karaoke it is common for furigana to be placed on the song lyrics. The song lyrics are often written in kanji pronounced quite differently from the furigana. The furigana version is used for pronunciation.\nOther Japanese reading aids.\nOkurigana.\nOkurigana are kana that appear inline at normal size following kanji stems, typically to complete and to inflect adjectives and verbs. In this use they may also help to disambiguate kanji with multiple readings; for example, (, \"agaru\") vs. (, \"noboru\"). Unlike furigana, the use of okurigana is a mandatory part of the written language.\nKunten.\nIn the written style known as \"kanbun\", which is the Japanese approximation of Classical Chinese, small marks called \"kunten\" are sometimes added as reading aids. Unlike furigana, which indicate pronunciation, \"kunten\" indicate Japanese grammatical structures absent from the \"kanbun\", and also show how words should be reordered to fit Japanese sentence structure.\nFurikanji.\nFurigana are sometimes also used to indicate meaning, rather than pronunciation. Over the foreign text, smaller-sized Japanese words, in kana or kanji, corresponding to the \"meaning\" of the foreign words, effectively translate it in place. While rare now, some late 19th\u2013early 20th century authors used kanji as furigana for loanwords written in katakana. This usage is called in Japanese, since \"furigana\" implies the use of \"kana\". For example, \"ririkku\" \"lyric\" may be tagged with \"kashi\" \"lyrics\" for clarification rather than for phonetic guidance.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11548", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11548", "title": "Fiscal calendar", "text": ""}
{"id": "11551", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11551", "title": "Francis II, Holy Roman Emperor", "text": "Habsburg monarch from 1792 to 1835\nFrancis II and I (; 12 February 1768 \u2013 2 March 1835) was the last Holy Roman Emperor as Francis II from 1792 to 1806, and the first Emperor of Austria as Francis I from 1804 to 1835. He was also King of Hungary, Croatia and Bohemia, and served as the first president of the German Confederation following its establishment in 1815.\nThe eldest son of future Emperor Leopold II and Maria Luisa of Spain, Francis was born in Florence, where his father ruled as Grand Duke of Tuscany. Leopold became Holy Roman Emperor in 1790 but died two years later, and Francis succeeded him. His empire immediately became embroiled in the French Revolutionary Wars, the first of which ended in Austrian defeat and the loss of the left bank of the Rhine to France. After another French victory in the War of the Second Coalition, Napoleon crowned himself Emperor of the French. In response, Francis assumed the title of Emperor of Austria. He continued his leading role as Napoleon's adversary in the Napoleonic Wars, and suffered successive defeats that greatly weakened Austria as a European power. In 1806, after Napoleon created the Confederation of the Rhine, Francis abdicated as Holy Roman Emperor, which in effect marked the dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire. Following the defeat of the Fifth Coalition, Francis ceded more territory to France and was forced to wed his daughter Marie Louise to Napoleon.\nIn 1813, Francis turned against Napoleon and finally defeated him in the War of the Sixth Coalition, forcing the French emperor to abdicate. Austria took part as a leading member of the Holy Alliance at the Congress of Vienna, which was largely dominated by Francis's chancellor Klemens von Metternich, culminating in a new European order and the restoration of most of Francis's ancient dominions. Due to the establishment of the Concert of Europe, which resisted popular nationalist and liberal tendencies, Francis was viewed as a reactionary later in his reign. Francis died in 1835 at the age of 67 and was succeeded by his son, Ferdinand I.\nEarly life.\nFrancis was a son of Emperor Leopold II (1747\u20131792) and his wife Maria Luisa of Spain (1745\u20131792), daughter of Charles III of Spain. Francis was born in Florence, the capital of Tuscany, where his father reigned as Grand Duke from 1765 to 1790. Though he had a happy childhood surrounded by his many siblings, his family knew Francis was likely to be a future Emperor (his uncle Joseph had no surviving issue from either of his two marriages), and so in 1784 the young Archduke was sent to the Imperial Court in Vienna to educate and prepare him for his future role.\nEmperor Joseph II himself took charge of Francis's development. His disciplinarian regime was a stark contrast to the indulgent Florentine Court of Leopold. The Emperor wrote that Francis was \"stunted in growth\", \"backward in bodily dexterity and deportment\", and \"neither more nor less than a spoiled mother's child.\" Joseph concluded that \"the manner in which he was treated for upwards of sixteen years could not but have confirmed him in the delusion that the preservation of his own person was the only thing of importance.\"\nJoseph's martinet method of improving the young Francis was \"fear and unpleasantness.\" The young Archduke was isolated, the reasoning being that this would make him more self-sufficient as it was felt by Joseph that Francis \"failed to lead himself, to do his own thinking.\" Nonetheless, Francis greatly admired his uncle, if rather in fear of him. To complete his training, Francis was sent to join an army regiment in Hungary and he settled easily into the routine of military life. He was present at the siege of Belgrade which occurred during the Austro-Turkish War.\nAfter the death of Joseph II in 1790, Francis's father became Emperor. He had an early taste of power while acting as Leopold's deputy in Vienna while the incoming Emperor traversed the Empire attempting to win back those alienated by his brother's policies. The strain took a toll on Leopold and by the winter of 1791, he became ill. He gradually worsened throughout early 1792; on the afternoon of 1 March Leopold died, at the relatively young age of 44. Francis, just past his 24th birthday, was now Emperor, much sooner than he had expected.\nEmperor.\nWars with France.\nAs the head of the Holy Roman Empire and the ruler of the vast realms of Central and Eastern Europe, Francis felt threatened by the French revolutionaries and later Napoleon's expansionism as well as their social and political reforms which were being exported throughout Europe in the wake of the conquering French armies. Francis had a fraught relationship with France. His aunt Marie Antoinette, the wife of Louis XVI and Queen consort of France, was guillotined by the revolutionaries in 1793, at the beginning of his reign, although, on the whole, he was indifferent to her fate.Later, he led the Holy Roman Empire into the French Revolutionary Wars. He briefly commanded the Allied forces during the Flanders Campaign of 1794 before handing over command to his brother Archduke Charles. He was later defeated by Napoleon. By the Treaty of Campo Formio, he ceded the left bank of the Rhine to France in exchange for Venice and Dalmatia. He again fought against France during the War of the Second Coalition.\nOn 11 August 1804, in response to Napoleon crowning himself as emperor of the French earlier that year, he announced that he would henceforth assume the title of hereditary emperor of Austria as Francis I, a move that technically was illegal in terms of imperial law. Yet Napoleon had agreed beforehand and therefore it happened.\nNapoleonic Wars.\nDuring the War of the Third Coalition, the Austrian forces met a crushing defeat at Austerlitz, and Francis had to agree to the Treaty of Pressburg, which greatly weakened Austria and brought about the final collapse of the Holy Roman Empire. In July 1806, under massive pressure from France, Bavaria and fifteen other German states ratified the statutes founding the Confederation of the Rhine, with Napoleon designated Protector, and they announced to the Imperial Diet their intention to leave the Empire with immediate effect. Then, on 22 July, Napoleon issued an ultimatum to Francis demanding that he abdicate as Holy Roman Emperor by 10 August.\nFive days later, Francis bowed to the inevitable and, without mentioning the ultimatum, affirmed that since the Peace of Pressburg he had tried his best to fulfil his duties as emperor but that circumstances had convinced him that he could no longer rule according to his oath of office, the formation of the Confederation of the Rhine making that impossible. He added that \"we hereby decree that we regard the bond which until now tied us to the states of the Empire as dissolved\" in effect dissolving the empire. At the same time he declared the complete and formal withdrawal of his hereditary lands from imperial jurisdiction. After that date, he continued to reign as Francis I, Emperor of Austria.\nIn 1809, Francis, deeming another war with France as inevitable and influenced by hawks in Vienna, attacked France again, hoping to take advantage of the Peninsular War embroiling Napoleon in Spain. He was again defeated, and this time forced to ally himself with Napoleon, ceding territory to the Empire, joining the Continental System, and wedding his daughter Marie-Louise to the Emperor. The Napoleonic Wars drastically weakened Austria, making it entirely landlocked and threatened its preeminence among the states of Germany, a position that it would eventually cede to the Kingdom of Prussia.\nIn 1813, for the fifth and final time, Austria turned against France and joined Great Britain, Russia, Prussia and Sweden in their war against Napoleon. Austria played a major role in the final defeat of France\u2014in recognition of this, Francis, represented by Clemens von Metternich, presided over the Congress of Vienna, helping to form the Concert of Europe and the Holy Alliance, ushering in an era of conservatism in Europe. The German Confederation, a loose association of Central European states was created by the Congress of Vienna in 1815 to organize the surviving states of the Holy Roman Empire. The Congress was a personal triumph for Francis, who hosted the assorted dignitaries in comfort, though Francis undermined his allies Tsar Alexander and Frederick William III of Prussia by negotiating a secret treaty with the restored French king Louis XVIII.\nDomestic policy.\nThe violent events of the French Revolution impressed themselves deeply into the mind of Francis (as well as the other European monarchs), and he came to distrust radicalism in any form. In 1794, a \"Jacobin\" conspiracy was discovered in the Austrian and Hungarian armies. The leaders were put on trial, but the verdicts only skirted the perimeter of the conspiracy. Francis's brother Alexander Leopold (at that time Palatine of Hungary) wrote to the Emperor admitting \"Although we have caught a lot of the culprits, we have not really got to the bottom of this business yet.\" Nonetheless, two officers heavily implicated in the conspiracy were hanged and gibbeted, while numerous others were sentenced to imprisonment (many of whom died from the conditions).\nFrancis was from his experiences suspicious and set up an extensive network of police spies and censors to monitor dissent (in this he was following his father's lead, as the Grand Duchy of Tuscany had the most effective secret police in Europe). Even his family did not escape attention. His brothers, the Archdukes Charles and Johann had their meetings and activities spied upon. Censorship was also prevalent. The author Franz Grillparzer, a Habsburg patriot, had one play suppressed solely as a \"precautionary\" measure. When Grillparzer met the censor responsible, he asked him what was objectionable about the work. The censor replied, \"Oh, nothing at all. But I thought to myself, 'One can never tell'.\"\nIn military affairs Francis had allowed his brother, the Archduke Charles, extensive control over the army during the Napoleonic wars. Yet, distrustful of allowing any individual too much power, he otherwise maintained the separation of command functions between the Hofkriegsrat and his field commanders. In the later years of his reign he limited military spending, requiring it not exceed forty million florins per year; because of inflation this resulted in inadequate funding, with the army's share of the budget shrinking from half in 1817 to only twenty-three percent in 1830.\nFrancis presented himself as an open and approachable monarch (he regularly set aside two mornings each week to meet with his imperial subjects, regardless of status, by appointment in his office, even speaking to them in their own language), but his will was sovereign. In 1804, he had no compunction about announcing that through his authority as Holy Roman Emperor, he declared he was now Emperor of Austria (at the time a geographical term that had little resonance). Two years later, Francis personally wound up the moribund Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation. Both actions were of dubious constitutional legality.\nTo increase patriotic sentiment during the war with France, the anthem \"Gott erhalte Franz den Kaiser\" was composed in 1797 to be sung as the Kaiserhymne to music by Joseph Haydn. The lyrics were adapted for later Emperors and the music lives on as the German national anthem \"Deutschlandlied\".\nDeath.\nOn 2 March 1835, 43 years and a day after his father's death, Francis died in Vienna of a sudden fever at aged 67, in the presence of many of his family and with all the religious comforts. His funeral was magnificent, with his Viennese subjects respectfully filing past his coffin in the court chapel of the Hofburg palace for three days. Francis was interred in the traditional resting place of Habsburg monarchs, the Imperial Crypt in Vienna's Neue Markt Square. He is buried in tomb number 57, surrounded by tombs of his four wives.Francis passed on a main point in the political testament he left for his son and heir Ferdinand: to \"preserve unity in the family and regard it as one of the highest goods.\" In many portraits (particularly those painted by Peter Fendi) he was portrayed as the patriarch of a loving family, surrounded by his children and grandchildren.\nMarriages.\nFrancis II married on four occasions:\nChildren.\nFrom his first wife Elisabeth of W\u00fcrttemberg, one daughter, who died in infancy, and his second wife Maria Teresa of the Two Sicilies, eight daughters and four sons, of whom five died in infancy or childhood:\nTitles, honours and heraldry.\nTitles.\nFrom 1806 he used the grand title of the emperor of Austria: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFrom 1804 with the proclamation of the Empire of Austria until his abdication as Holy Roman Emperor in 1806 his grand title started \"By the Grace of God anointed Roman Emperor, ever Increaser of the Realm and King in Germania (\"\"von Gottes Gnaden erw\u00e4hlter R\u00f6mischer Kaiser, zu allen Zeiten Mehrer des Reichs sowie K\u00f6nig in Germanien\").\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11552", "revid": "39494085", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11552", "title": "Frederick Abel", "text": "English chemist (1827\u20131902)\nSir Frederick Augustus Abel, 1st Baronet (17 July 1827\u00a0\u2013 6 September 1902) was an English chemist who was recognised as the leading British authority on explosives. He is best known for the invention of cordite as a replacement for gunpowder in firearms.\nEducation.\nBorn in London as son of Johann Leopold Abel, Abel studied chemistry at the Royal Polytechnic Institution and in 1845 became one of the original 26 students of A. W. von Hofmann at the Royal College of Chemistry (now a constituent of Imperial College London). In 1852 he was appointed lecturer in chemistry at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, succeeding Michael Faraday, who had held that post since 1829.\nEarly career.\nFrom 1854 until 1888 Abel served as ordnance chemist at the Chemical Establishment of the Royal Arsenal at Woolwich, establishing himself as the leading British authority on explosives. Three years later was appointed chemist to the War Department and chemical referee to the government. During his tenure of this office, which lasted until 1888, he carried out a large amount of work in connection with the chemistry of explosives.\nNotable work.\nOne of the most important of his investigations had to do with the manufacture of guncotton, and he developed a process, consisting essentially of reducing the nitrated cotton to fine pulp, which enabled it to be safely manufactured and at the same time yielded the product in a form that increased its usefulness. This work to an important extent prepared the way for the \"smokeless powders\" which came into general use towards the end of the 19th century; cordite, the type adopted by the British government in 1891, was invented jointly by him and Sir James Dewar. He and Dewar were unsuccessfully sued by Alfred Nobel over infringement of Nobel's patent for a similar explosive called ballistite, the case finally being resolved in the House of Lords in 1895. He also extensively researched the behaviour of black powder when ignited, with the Scottish physicist Sir Andrew Noble. At the request of the British government, he devised the Abel test, a means of determining the flash point of petroleum products. His first instrument, the open-test apparatus, was specified in an Act of Parliament in 1868 for officially specifying petroleum products. It was superseded in August 1879 by the much more reliable Abel close-test instrument. Under his leadership, first, guncotton was developed at Waltham Abbey Royal Gunpowder Mills, patented in 1865, then, the propellant cordite, patented in 1889. In electricity, Abel studied the construction of electrical fuses and other applications of electricity to warlike purposes.\nLeadership and honours.\nHe was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1860 and received their Royal Medal in 1887. He was president of the Chemical Society (1875\u201377), of the Institution of Electrical Engineers (then the Society of Telegraph Engineers) (1877), of the Institute of Chemistry (1881\u201382) and of the Society of Chemical Industry (1882\u201383). He was also president of the Iron and Steel Institute in 1891 and was awarded the Bessemer Gold Medal in 1897 for his work on problems of steel manufacture. He was awarded the Telford Medal by the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1879.\nHe was made a Commander of the Order of the Bath (CB) in 1877. and knighted on 20 April 1883 \nHe took an important part in the work of the Inventions Exhibition (London) in 1885, and in 1887 became organizing secretary and first director of the Imperial Institute, a position he held till his death in 1902. He was Rede Lecturer and received an honorary doctorate from Cambridge University in 1888. He was upgraded Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath (KCB) on 3 February 1891, created a baronet, of Cadogan Place in the Parish of Chelsea in the County of London, on 25 May 1893 and made a Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order (GCVO) on 8 March 1901.\nAbel died at his residence in Whitehall Court, London, on 6 September 1902, aged 75, and was buried in Nunhead Cemetery, London. The baronetcy became extinct on his death.\nFamily.\nAbel married twice; first to Sarah Blanch, daughter of James Blanch, of Bristol; secondly after his first wife's death to Giulietta de La Feuillade. He left no children.\nBooks.\nHe also wrote several articles in the ninth edition of the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11554", "revid": "84755", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11554", "title": "Fugazi (disambiguation)", "text": "Fugazi may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "11555", "revid": "12530063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11555", "title": "Fluorescence", "text": "Emission of light by a substance that has absorbed light\nFluorescence is one of two kinds of photoluminescence, the emission of light by a substance that has absorbed light or other electromagnetic radiation. When exposed to ultraviolet radiation, many substances will glow (fluoresce) with colored visible light. The color of the light emitted depends on the chemical composition of the substance. Fluorescent materials generally cease to glow nearly immediately when the radiation source stops. This distinguishes them from the other type of light emission, phosphorescence. Phosphorescent materials continue to emit light for some time after the radiation stops.\nThis difference in duration is a result of quantum spin effects.\nFluorescence occurs when a photon from incoming radiation is absorbed by a molecule, exciting it to a higher energy level, followed by the emission of light as the molecule returns to a lower energy state. The emitted light may have a longer wavelength and, therefore, a lower photon energy than the absorbed radiation. For example, the absorbed radiation could be in the ultraviolet region of the electromagnetic spectrum (invisible to the human eye), while the emitted light is in the visible region. This gives the fluorescent substance a distinct color, best seen when exposed to UV light, making it appear to glow in the dark. However, any light with a shorter wavelength may cause a material to fluoresce at a longer wavelength. Fluorescent materials may also be excited by certain wavelengths of visible light, which can mask the glow, yet their colors may appear bright and intensified. Other fluorescent materials emit their light in the infrared or even the ultraviolet regions of the spectrum.\nFluorescence has many practical applications, including mineralogy, gemology, medicine, chemical sensors (fluorescence spectroscopy), fluorescent labelling, dyes, biological detectors, cosmic-ray detection, vacuum fluorescent displays, and cathode-ray tubes. Its most common everyday application is in (gas-discharge) fluorescent lamps and LED lamps, where fluorescent coatings convert UV or blue light into longer wavelengths, resulting in white light, which can appear indistinguishable from that of the traditional but energy-inefficient incandescent lamp.\nFluorescence also occurs frequently in nature, appearing in some minerals and many biological forms across all kingdoms of life. The latter is often referred to as \"biofluorescence\", indicating that the fluorophore is part of or derived from a living organism (rather than an inorganic dye or stain). However, since fluorescence results from a specific chemical property that can often be synthesized artificially, it is generally sufficient to describe the substance itself as \"fluorescent\".\nHistory.\nFluorescence was observed long before it was named and understood.\nAn early observation of fluorescence was known to the Aztecs and described in 1560 by Bernardino de Sahag\u00fan and in 1565 by Nicol\u00e1s Monardes in the infusion known as \"lignum nephriticum\" (Latin for \"kidney wood\"). It was derived from the wood of two tree species, \"Pterocarpus indicus\" and \"Eysenhardtia polystachya\".\nThe chemical compound responsible for this fluorescence is matlaline, which is the oxidation product of one of the flavonoids found in this wood.\nIn 1819, E.D. Clarke\nand in 1822 Ren\u00e9 Just Ha\u00fcy\ndescribed some varieties of fluorites that had a different color depending on whether the light was reflected or (apparently) transmitted. Ha\u00fcy incorrectly viewed the effect as light scattering similar to opalescence.Fig.5 In 1833 Sir David Brewster described a similar effect in chlorophyll which he also considered a form of opalescence.\nSir John Herschel studied quinine in 1845 and came to a different incorrect conclusion.\nIn 1842, A.E.\u00a0Becquerel observed that calcium sulfide emits light after being exposed to solar ultraviolet, making him the first to state that the emitted light is of longer wavelength than the incident light. While his observation of photoluminescence was similar to that described 10 years later by Stokes, who observed a fluorescence of a solution of quinine, the phenomenon that Becquerel described with calcium sulfide is now called phosphorescence.\nIn his 1852 paper on the \"Refrangibility\" (wavelength change) of light, George Gabriel Stokes described the ability of fluorspar, uranium glass and many other substances to change invisible light beyond the violet end of the visible spectrum into visible light. He named this phenomenon \"fluorescence\"\n \"I am almost inclined to coin a word, and call the appearance \"fluorescence\", from fluor-spar [i.e., fluorite], as the analogous term \"opalescence\" is derived from the name of a mineral.\"(p479, footnote)\nNeither Becquerel nor Stokes understood one key aspect of photoluminescence: the critical difference from incandescence, the emission of light by heated material. To distinguish it from incandescence, in the late 1800s, Gustav Wiedemann proposed the term luminescence to designate any emission of light more intense than expected from the source's temperature.\nAdvances in spectroscopy and quantum electronics between the 1950s and 1970s provided a way to distinguish between the three different mechanisms that produce the light, as well as narrowing down the typical timescales those mechanisms take to decay after absorption. In modern science, this distinction became important because some items, such as lasers, required the fastest decay times, which typically occur in the nanosecond (billionth of a second) range. In physics, this first mechanism was termed \"fluorescence\" or \"singlet emission\", and is common in many laser mediums such as ruby. Other fluorescent materials were discovered to have much longer decay times, because some of the atoms would change their spin to a triplet state, thus would glow brightly with fluorescence under excitation but produce a dimmer afterglow for a short time after the excitation was removed, which became labeled \"phosphorescence\" or \"triplet phosphorescence\". The typical decay times ranged from a few microseconds to one second, which are still fast enough by human-eye standards to be colloquially referred to as fluorescent. Common examples include fluorescent lamps, organic dyes, and even fluorspar. Longer emitters, commonly referred to as glow-in-the-dark substances, ranged from one second to many hours, and this mechanism was called persistent phosphorescence or persistent luminescence, to distinguish it from the other two mechanisms.\nPhysical principles.\nMechanism.\nFluorescence occurs when an excited molecule, atom, or nanostructure, relaxes to a lower energy state (usually the ground state) through emission of a photon without a change in electron spin. When the initial and final states have different multiplicity (spin), the phenomenon is termed phosphorescence.\nWhen a molecule in its ground state (called S0) is photoexcited it may end up in any one of a number of excited states (S1, S2, S3...). These higher excited states are different vibrational levels, populated in proportion to their overlap with the ground state according to the Franck-Condon principle. These vibrational excited states typically decay rapidly by to S1, followed by radiative transition to the ground state or to vibrational states close to the ground state. This transition is called fluorescence. All of these states are singlet states.\nA different pathway for deexcitation is intersystem crossing from the S1 to a triplet state T1. Decay from T1 to S0 is typically slower and less intense and is called phosphorescence.\nAbsorption of a photon of energy formula_1 results in an excited state of the same multiplicity (spin) of the ground state, usually a singlet (Sn with n &gt; 0). In solution, states with n &gt; 1 relax rapidly to the lowest vibrational level of the first excited state (S1) by transferring energy to the solvent molecules through non-radiative processes, including internal conversion followed by vibrational relaxation, in which the energy is dissipated as heat. Thus the fluorescence energy is typically less than the photoexcitation energy.\nThe excited state S1 can relax by other mechanisms that do not involve the emission of light. These processes, called non-radiative processes, compete with fluorescence emission and decrease its efficiency. Examples include internal conversion, intersystem crossing to the triplet state, and energy transfer to another molecule. An example of energy transfer is F\u00f6rster resonance energy transfer. Relaxation from an excited state can also occur through collisional quenching, a process where a molecule (the quencher) collides with the fluorescent molecule during its excited state lifetime. Molecular oxygen (O2) is an extremely efficient quencher of fluorescence because of its unusual triplet ground state.\nQuantum yield.\nThe fluorescence quantum yield gives the efficiency of the fluorescence process. It is defined as the ratio of the number of photons emitted to the number of photons absorbed.(p10)\n formula_2\nThe maximum possible fluorescence quantum yield is 1.0 (100%); each photon absorbed results in a photon emitted. Compounds with quantum yields of 0.10 are still considered quite fluorescent. Another way to define the quantum yield of fluorescence is by the rate of excited state decay:\n formula_3\nwhere formula_4 is the rate constant of spontaneous emission of radiation and\n formula_5\nis the sum of all rates of excited state decay. Other rates of excited state decay are caused by mechanisms other than photon emission and are, therefore, often called \"non-radiative rates\", which can include:\nThus, if the rate of any pathway changes, both the excited state lifetime and the fluorescence quantum yield will be affected.\nFluorescence quantum yields are measured by comparison to a standard. The quinine salt \"quinine sulfate\" in a sulfuric acid solution was regarded as the most common fluorescence standard,\nhowever, a recent study revealed that the fluorescence quantum yield of this solution is strongly affected by the temperature, and should no longer be used as the standard solution. The quinine in 0.1\u00a0M perchloric acid (\u03a6 = 0.60) shows no temperature dependence up to 45\u00a0\u00b0C, therefore it can be considered as a reliable standard solution.\nLifetime.\nThe fluorescence lifetime refers to the average time the molecule stays in its excited state before emitting a photon. Fluorescence typically follows first-order kinetics:\n formula_6\nwhere formula_7 is the concentration of excited state molecules at time formula_8, formula_9 is the initial concentration and formula_10 is the decay rate or the inverse of the fluorescence lifetime. This is an instance of exponential decay. Various radiative and non-radiative processes can de-populate the excited state. In such case the total decay rate is the sum over all rates:\n formula_11\nwhere formula_12 is the total decay rate, formula_13 the radiative decay rate and formula_14 the non-radiative decay rate. It is similar to a first-order chemical reaction in which the first-order rate constant is the sum of all of the rates (a parallel kinetic model). If the rate of spontaneous emission, or any of the other rates are fast, the lifetime is short. For commonly used fluorescent compounds, typical excited state decay times for photon emissions with energies from the UV to near infrared are within the range of 0.5 to 20 nanoseconds. The fluorescence lifetime is an important parameter for practical applications of fluorescence such as fluorescence resonance energy transfer and fluorescence-lifetime imaging microscopy.\nJablonski diagram.\nThe Jablonski diagram describes most of the relaxation mechanisms for excited state molecules. The diagram alongside shows how fluorescence occurs due to the relaxation of certain excited electrons of a molecule.\nFluorescence anisotropy.\nFluorophores are more likely to be excited by photons if the transition moment of the fluorophore is parallel to the electric vector of the photon. The polarization of the emitted light will also depend on the transition moment. The transition moment is dependent on the physical orientation of the fluorophore molecule. For fluorophores in solution, the intensity and polarization of the emitted light is dependent on rotational diffusion. Therefore, anisotropy measurements can be used to investigate how freely a fluorescent molecule moves in a particular environment.\nFluorescence anisotropy can be defined quantitatively as\n formula_15\nwhere formula_16 is the emitted intensity parallel to the polarization of the excitation light and formula_17 is the emitted intensity perpendicular to the polarization of the excitation light.\nAnisotropy is independent of the intensity of the absorbed or emitted light, it is the property of the light, so photobleaching of the dye will not affect the anisotropy value as long as the signal is detectable.\nFluorescence.\nStrongly fluorescent pigments often have an unusual appearance which is often described colloquially as a \"neon color\" (originally \"day-glo\" in the late 1960s, early 1970s). This phenomenon was termed \"Farbenglut\" by Hermann von Helmholtz and \"fluorence\" by Ralph M. Evans. It is generally thought to be related to the high brightness of the color relative to what it would be as a component of white. Fluorescence shifts energy in the incident illumination from shorter wavelengths to longer (such as blue to yellow) and thus can make the fluorescent color appear brighter (more saturated) than it could possibly be by reflection alone.\nRules.\nThere are several general rules that deal with fluorescence. Each of the following rules have exceptions but they are useful guidelines for understanding fluorescence (these rules do not necessarily apply to two-photon absorption).\nKasha's rule.\nKasha's rule states that the luminesce (fluorescence or phosphorescence) of a molecule will be emitted only from the lowest excited state of its given multiplicity. Vavilov's rule (a logical extension of Kasha's rule thusly called Kasha\u2013Vavilov rule) dictates that the quantum yield of luminescence is independent of the wavelength of exciting radiation and is proportional to the absorbance of the excited wavelength. Kasha's rule does not always apply and is violated by simple molecules, such an example is azulene. A somewhat more reliable statement, although still with exceptions, would be that the fluorescence spectrum shows very little dependence on the wavelength of exciting radiation.\nMirror image rule.\nFor many fluorophores the absorption spectrum is a mirror image of the emission spectrum.\nThis is known as the mirror image rule and is related to the Franck\u2013Condon principle which states that electronic transitions are vertical, that is energy changes without distance changing as can be represented with a vertical line in Jablonski diagram. This means the nucleus does not move and the vibration levels of the excited state resemble the vibration levels of the ground state.\nStokes shift.\nIn general, emitted fluorescence light has a longer wavelength and lower energy than the absorbed light. This phenomenon, known as Stokes shift, is due to energy loss between the time a photon is absorbed and when a new one is emitted. The causes and magnitude of Stokes shift can be complex and are dependent on the fluorophore and its environment. However, there are some common causes. It is frequently due to non-radiative decay to the lowest vibrational energy level of the excited state. Another factor is that the emission of fluorescence frequently leaves a fluorophore in a higher vibrational level of the ground state.\nIn nature.\nThere are many natural compounds that exhibit fluorescence, and they have a number of applications. Some deep-sea animals, such as the greeneye, have fluorescent structures.\nCompared to bioluminescence and biophosphorescence.\nFluorescence.\nFluorescence is the phenomenon of absorption of electromagnetic radiation, typically from ultraviolet or visible light, by a molecule and the subsequent emission of a photon of a lower energy (smaller frequency, longer wavelength). This causes the light that is emitted to be a different color than the light that is absorbed. Stimulating light excites an electron to an excited state. When the molecule returns to the ground state, it releases a photon, which is the fluorescent emission. The excited state lifetime is short, so emission of light is typically only observable when the absorbing light is on. Fluorescence can be of any wavelength but is often more significant when emitted photons are in the visible spectrum. When it occurs in a living organism, it is sometimes called biofluorescence. Fluorescence should not be confused with bioluminescence and biophosphorescence. Pumpkin toadlets that live in the Brazilian Atlantic forest are fluorescent.\nBioluminescence.\nBioluminescence differs from fluorescence in that it is the natural production of light by chemical reactions within an organism, whereas fluorescence is the absorption and reemission of light from the environment. Fireflies and anglerfish are two examples of bioluminescent organisms. To add to the potential confusion, some organisms are both bioluminescent and fluorescent, like the sea pansy Renilla reniformis, where bioluminescence serves as the light source for fluorescence.\nPhosphorescence.\nPhosphorescence is similar to fluorescence in its requirement of light wavelengths as a provider of excitation energy. The difference here lies in the relative stability of the energized electron. Unlike with fluorescence, in phosphorescence the electron retains stability, emitting light that continues to \"glow in the dark\" even after the stimulating light source has been removed. For example, glow-in-the-dark stickers are phosphorescent, but there are no truly \"biophosphorescent\" animals known.\nMechanisms.\nEpidermal chromatophores.\nPigment cells that exhibit fluorescence are called fluorescent chromatophores, and function somatically similar to regular chromatophores. These cells are dendritic, and contain pigments called fluorosomes. These pigments contain fluorescent proteins which are activated by K+ (potassium) ions, and it is their movement, aggregation, and dispersion within the fluorescent chromatophore that cause directed fluorescence patterning. Fluorescent cells are innervated the same as other chromatophores, like melanophores, pigment cells that contain melanin. Short term fluorescent patterning and signaling is controlled by the nervous system. Fluorescent chromatophores can be found in the skin (e.g. in fish) just below the epidermis, amongst other chromatophores.\nEpidermal fluorescent cells in fish also respond to hormonal stimuli by the \u03b1\u2013MSH and MCH hormones much the same as melanophores. This suggests that fluorescent cells may have color changes throughout the day that coincide with their circadian rhythm. Fish may also be sensitive to cortisol induced stress responses to environmental stimuli, such as interaction with a predator or engaging in a mating ritual.\nPhylogenetics.\nEvolutionary origins.\nThe incidence of fluorescence across the tree of life is widespread, and has been studied most extensively in cnidarians and fish. The phenomenon appears to have evolved multiple times in multiple taxa such as in the anguilliformes (eels), gobioidei (gobies and cardinalfishes), and tetradontiformes (triggerfishes), along with the other taxa discussed later in the article. Fluorescence is highly genotypically and phenotypically variable even within ecosystems, in regards to the wavelengths emitted, the patterns displayed, and the intensity of the fluorescence. Generally, the species relying upon camouflage exhibit the greatest diversity in fluorescence, likely because camouflage may be one of the uses of fluorescence.\nIt is suspected by some scientists that GFPs and GFP-like proteins began as electron donors activated by light. These electrons were then used for reactions requiring light energy. Functions of fluorescent proteins, such as protection from the sun, conversion of light into different wavelengths, or for signaling are thought to have evolved secondarily.\nAdaptive functions.\nCurrently, relatively little is known about the functional significance of fluorescence and fluorescent proteins. However, it is suspected that fluorescence may serve important functions in signaling and communication, mating, lures, camouflage, UV protection and antioxidation, photoacclimation, dinoflagellate regulation, and in coral health.\nAquatic.\nWater absorbs light of long wavelengths, so less light from these wavelengths reflects back to reach the eye. Therefore, warm colors from the visual light spectrum appear less vibrant at increasing depths. Water scatters light of shorter wavelengths above violet, meaning cooler colors dominate the visual field in the photic zone. Light intensity decreases 10 fold with every 75 m of depth, so at depths of 75 m, light is 10% as intense as it is on the surface, and is only 1% as intense at 150 m as it is on the surface. Because the water filters out the wavelengths and intensity of water reaching certain depths, different proteins, because of the wavelengths and intensities of light they are capable of absorbing, are better suited to different depths. Theoretically, some fish eyes can detect light as deep as 1000 m. At these depths of the aphotic zone, the only sources of light are organisms themselves, giving off light through chemical reactions in a process called bioluminescence.\nFluorescence is simply defined as the absorption of electromagnetic radiation at one wavelength and its reemission at another, lower energy wavelength. Thus any type of fluorescence depends on the presence of external sources of light. Biologically functional fluorescence is found in the photic zone, where there is not only enough light to cause fluorescence, but enough light for other organisms to detect it.\nThe visual field in the photic zone is naturally blue, so colors of fluorescence can be detected as bright reds, oranges, yellows, and greens. Green is the most commonly found color in the marine spectrum, yellow the second most, orange the third, and red is the rarest. Fluorescence can occur in organisms in the aphotic zone as a byproduct of that same organism's bioluminescence. Some fluorescence in the aphotic zone is merely a byproduct of the organism's tissue biochemistry and does not have a functional purpose. However, some cases of functional and adaptive significance of fluorescence in the aphotic zone of the deep ocean is an active area of research.\nPhotic zone.\nFish.\nBony fishes living in shallow water generally have good color vision due to their living in a colorful environment. Thus, in shallow-water fishes, red, orange, and green fluorescence most likely serves as a means of communication with conspecifics, especially given the great phenotypic variance of the phenomenon.\nMany fish that exhibit fluorescence, such as sharks, lizardfish, scorpionfish, wrasses, and flatfishes, also possess yellow intraocular filters. Yellow intraocular filters in the lenses and cornea of certain fishes function as long-pass filters. These filters enable the species to visualize and potentially exploit fluorescence, in order to enhance visual contrast and patterns that are unseen to other fishes and predators that lack this visual specialization. Fish that possess the necessary yellow intraocular filters for visualizing fluorescence potentially exploit a light signal from members of it. Fluorescent patterning was especially prominent in cryptically patterned fishes possessing complex camouflage. Many of these lineages also possess yellow long-pass intraocular filters that could enable visualization of such patterns.\nAnother adaptive use of fluorescence is to generate orange and red light from the ambient blue light of the photic zone to aid vision. Red light can only be seen across short distances due to attenuation of red light wavelengths by water. Many fish species that fluoresce are small, group-living, or benthic/aphotic, and have conspicuous patterning. This patterning is caused by fluorescent tissue and is visible to other members of the species, however the patterning is invisible at other visual spectra. These intraspecific fluorescent patterns also coincide with intra-species signaling. The patterns present in ocular rings to indicate directionality of an individual's gaze, and along fins to indicate directionality of an individual's movement. Current research suspects that this red fluorescence is used for private communication between members of the same species. Due to the prominence of blue light at ocean depths, red light and light of longer wavelengths are muddled, and many predatory reef fish have little to no sensitivity for light at these wavelengths. Fish such as the fairy wrasse that have developed visual sensitivity to longer wavelengths are able to display red fluorescent signals that give a high contrast to the blue environment and are conspicuous to conspecifics in short ranges, yet are relatively invisible to other common fish that have reduced sensitivities to long wavelengths. Thus, fluorescence can be used as adaptive signaling and intra-species communication in reef fish.\nAdditionally, it is suggested that fluorescent tissues that surround an organism's eyes are used to convert blue light from the photic zone or green bioluminescence in the aphotic zone into red light to aid vision.\nSharks.\nA new fluorophore was described in two species of sharks, wherein it was due to an undescribed group of brominated tryptophane-kynurenine small molecule metabolites.\nCoral.\nFluorescence serves a wide variety of functions in coral. Fluorescent proteins in corals may contribute to photosynthesis by converting otherwise unusable wavelengths of light into ones for which the coral's symbiotic algae are able to conduct photosynthesis. Also, the proteins may fluctuate in number as more or less light becomes available as a means of photoacclimation. Similarly, these fluorescent proteins may possess antioxidant capacities to eliminate oxygen radicals produced by photosynthesis. Finally, through modulating photosynthesis, the fluorescent proteins may also serve as a means of regulating the activity of the coral's photosynthetic algal symbionts.\nCephalopods.\n\"Alloteuthis subulata\" and \"Loligo vulgaris\", two types of nearly transparent squid, have fluorescent spots above their eyes. These spots reflect incident light, which may serve as a means of camouflage, but also for signaling to other squids for schooling purposes.\nJellyfish.\nAnother, well-studied example of fluorescence in the ocean is the hydrozoan \"Aequorea victoria\". This jellyfish lives in the photic zone off the west coast of North America and was identified as a carrier of green fluorescent protein (GFP) by Osamu Shimomura. The gene for these green fluorescent proteins has been isolated and is scientifically significant because it is widely used in genetic studies to indicate the expression of other genes.\nMantis shrimp.\nSeveral species of mantis shrimp, which are stomatopod crustaceans, including \"Lysiosquillina glabriuscula\", have yellow fluorescent markings along their antennal scales and carapace (shell) that males present during threat displays to predators and other males. The display involves raising the head and thorax, spreading the striking appendages and other maxillipeds, and extending the prominent, oval antennal scales laterally, which makes the animal appear larger and accentuates its yellow fluorescent markings. Furthermore, as depth increases, mantis shrimp fluorescence accounts for a greater part of the visible light available. During mating rituals, mantis shrimp actively fluoresce, and the wavelength of this fluorescence matches the wavelengths detected by their eye pigments.\nAphotic zone.\nSiphonophores.\n\"Siphonophorae\" is an order of marine animals from the phylum Hydrozoa that consist of a specialized medusoid and polyp zooid. Some siphonophores, including the genus Erenna that live in the aphotic zone between depths of 1600 m and 2300 m, exhibit yellow to red fluorescence in the photophores of their tentacle-like tentilla. This fluorescence occurs as a by-product of bioluminescence from these same photophores. The siphonophores exhibit the fluorescence in a flicking pattern that is used as a lure to attract prey.\nDragonfish.\nThe predatory deep-sea dragonfish \"Malacosteus niger\", the closely related genus \"Aristostomias\" and the species \"Pachystomias microdon\" use fluorescent red accessory pigments to convert the blue light emitted from their own bioluminescence to red light from suborbital photophores. This red luminescence is invisible to other animals, which allows these dragonfish extra light at dark ocean depths without attracting or signaling predators.\nTerrestrial.\nAmphibians.\nFluorescence is widespread among amphibians and has been documented in several families of frogs, salamanders and caecilians, but the extent of it varies greatly.\nThe polka-dot tree frog (\"Hypsiboas punctatus\"), widely found in South America, was unintentionally discovered to be the first fluorescent amphibian in 2017. The fluorescence was traced to a new compound found in the lymph and skin glands. The main fluorescent compound is Hyloin-L1 and it gives a blue-green glow when exposed to violet or ultraviolet light. The scientists behind the discovery suggested that the fluorescence can be used for communication. They speculated that fluorescence possibly is relatively widespread among frogs. Only a few months later, fluorescence was discovered in the closely related \"Hypsiboas atlanticus\". Because it is linked to secretions from skin glands, they can also leave fluorescent markings on surfaces where they have been.\nIn 2019, two other frogs, the tiny pumpkin toadlet (\"Brachycephalus ephippium\") and red pumpkin toadlet (\"B. pitanga\") of southeastern Brazil, were found to have naturally fluorescent skeletons, which are visible through their skin when exposed to ultraviolet light. It was initially speculated that the fluorescence supplemented their already aposematic colours (they are toxic) or that it was related to mate choice (species recognition or determining fitness of a potential partner), but later studies indicate that the former explanation is unlikely, as predation attempts on the toadlets appear to be unaffected by the presence/absence of fluorescence.\nIn 2020 it was confirmed that green or yellow fluorescence is widespread not only in adult frogs that are exposed to blue or ultraviolet light, but also among tadpoles, salamanders and caecilians. The extent varies greatly depending on species; in some it is highly distinct and in others it is barely noticeable. It can be based on their skin pigmentation, their mucus or their bones.\nButterflies.\nSwallowtail (\"Papilio\") butterflies have complex systems for emitting fluorescent light. Their wings contain pigment-infused crystals that provide directed fluorescent light. These crystals function to produce fluorescent light best when they absorb radiance from sky-blue light (wavelength about 420\u00a0nm). The wavelengths of light that the butterflies see the best correspond to the absorbance of the crystals in the butterfly's wings. This likely functions to enhance the capacity for signaling.\nParrots.\nParrots have fluorescent plumage that may be used in mate signaling. A study using mate-choice experiments on budgerigars (\"Melopsittacus undulates\") found compelling support for fluorescent sexual signaling, with both males and females significantly preferring birds with the fluorescent experimental stimulus. This study suggests that the fluorescent plumage of parrots is not simply a by-product of pigmentation, but instead an adapted sexual signal. Considering the intricacies of the pathways that produce fluorescent pigments, there may be significant costs involved. Therefore, individuals exhibiting strong fluorescence may be honest indicators of high individual quality, since they can deal with the associated costs.\nArachnids.\nSpiders fluoresce under UV light and possess a huge diversity of fluorophores. Andrews, Reed, &amp; Masta noted that spiders are the only known group in which fluorescence is \"taxonomically widespread, variably expressed, evolutionarily labile, and probably under selection and potentially of ecological importance for intraspecific and interspecific signaling\". They showed that fluorescence evolved multiple times across spider taxa, with novel fluorophores evolving during spider diversification.\nIn some spiders, ultraviolet cues are important for predator\u2013prey interactions, intraspecific communication, and camouflage-matching with fluorescent flowers. Differing ecological contexts could favor inhibition or enhancement of fluorescence expression, depending upon whether fluorescence helps spiders be cryptic or makes them more conspicuous to predators. Therefore, natural selection could be acting on expression of fluorescence across spider species.\nScorpions are also fluorescent, in their case due to the presence of beta-carboline in their cuticles.\nPlatypus.\nIn 2020 fluorescence was reported for several platypus specimens.\nFlying Squirrels.\nIn 2019 it was observed, by chance, that a flying squirrel fluoresced pink under UV light. Subsequent research by biologists at Northland College in Northern Wisconsin found that this is true for all three species of North American flying squirrels. Non-flying squirrels do not fluoresce under UV light.\nThis fluorescence may be an accident of evolution and serve no biological purpose.\nPlants.\nMany plants are fluorescent due to the presence of chlorophyll, which is probably the most widely distributed fluorescent molecule, producing red emission under a range of excitation wavelengths. This attribute of chlorophyll is commonly used by ecologists to measure photosynthetic efficiency.\nThe \"Mirabilis jalapa\" flower contains violet, fluorescent betacyanins and yellow, fluorescent betaxanthins. Under white light, parts of the flower containing only betaxanthins appear yellow, but in areas where both betaxanthins and betacyanins are present, the visible fluorescence of the flower is faded due to internal light-filtering mechanisms. Fluorescence was previously suggested to play a role in pollinator attraction, however, it was later found that the visual signal by fluorescence is negligible compared to the visual signal of light reflected by the flower.\nAbiotic.\nGemology, mineralogy and geology.\nIn addition to the eponymous fluorspar, many\ngemstones and minerals may have a distinctive fluorescence or may fluoresce differently under short-wave ultraviolet, long-wave ultraviolet, visible light, or X-rays.\nMany types of calcite and amber will fluoresce under shortwave UV, longwave UV and visible light. Rubies, emeralds, and diamonds exhibit red fluorescence under long-wave UV, blue and sometimes green light; diamonds also emit light under X-ray radiation.\nFluorescence in minerals is caused by a wide range of activators. In some cases, the concentration of the activator must be restricted to below a certain level, to prevent quenching of the fluorescent emission. Furthermore, the mineral must be free of impurities such as iron or copper, to prevent quenching of possible fluorescence. Divalent manganese, in concentrations of up to several percent, is responsible for the red or orange fluorescence of calcite, the green fluorescence of willemite, the yellow fluorescence of esperite, and the orange fluorescence of wollastonite and clinohedrite. Hexavalent uranium, in the form of the uranyl cation (UO22+), fluoresces at all concentrations in a yellow green, and is the cause of fluorescence of minerals such as autunite or andersonite, and, at low concentration, is the cause of the fluorescence of such materials as some samples of hyalite opal. Trivalent chromium at low concentration is the source of the red fluorescence of ruby. Divalent europium is the source of the blue fluorescence, when seen in the mineral fluorite. Trivalent lanthanides such as terbium and dysprosium are the principal activators of the creamy yellow fluorescence exhibited by the yttrofluorite variety of the mineral fluorite, and contribute to the orange fluorescence of zircon. Powellite (calcium molybdate) and scheelite (calcium tungstate) fluoresce intrinsically in yellow and blue, respectively. When present together in solid solution, energy is transferred from the higher-energy tungsten to the lower-energy molybdenum, such that fairly low levels of molybdenum are sufficient to cause a yellow emission for scheelite, instead of blue. Low-iron sphalerite (zinc sulfide), fluoresces and phosphoresces in a range of colors, influenced by the presence of various trace impurities.\nCrude oil (petroleum) fluoresces in a range of colors, from dull-brown for heavy oils and tars through to bright-yellowish and bluish-white for very light oils and condensates. This phenomenon is used in oil exploration drilling to identify very small amounts of oil in drill cuttings and core samples.\nHumic acids and fulvic acids produced by the degradation of organic matter in soils (humus) may also fluoresce because of the presence of aromatic cycles in their complex molecular structures. Humic substances dissolved in groundwater can be detected and characterized by spectrofluorimetry.\nOrganic liquids.\nOrganic (carbon based) solutions such anthracene or stilbene, dissolved in benzene or toluene, fluoresce with ultraviolet or gamma ray irradiation. The decay times of this fluorescence are on the order of nanoseconds, since the duration of the light depends on the lifetime of the excited states of the fluorescent material, in this case anthracene or stilbene.\nScintillation is defined a flash of light produced in a transparent material by the passage of a particle (an electron, an alpha particle, an ion, or a high-energy photon). Stilbene and derivatives are used in scintillation counters to detect such particles. Stilbene is also one of the gain mediums used in dye lasers.\nAtmosphere.\nFluorescence is observed in the atmosphere when the air is under energetic electron bombardment. In cases such as the natural aurora, high-altitude nuclear explosions, and rocket-borne electron gun experiments, the molecules and ions formed have a fluorescent response to light.\nIn novel technology.\nIn August 2020 researchers reported the creation of the brightest fluorescent solid optical materials so far by enabling the transfer of properties of highly fluorescent dyes via spatial and electronic isolation of the dyes by mixing cationic dyes with anion-binding cyanostar macrocycles. According to a co-author these materials may have applications in areas such as solar energy harvesting, bioimaging, and lasers.\nApplications.\nLighting.\nThe common fluorescent lamp relies on fluorescence. Inside the glass tube is a partial vacuum and a small amount of mercury. An electric discharge in the tube causes the mercury atoms to emit mostly ultraviolet light. The tube is lined with a coating of a fluorescent material, called the \"phosphor\", which absorbs ultraviolet light and re-emits visible light. Fluorescent lighting is more energy-efficient than incandescent lighting elements. However, the uneven spectrum of traditional fluorescent lamps may cause certain colors to appear different from when illuminated by incandescent light or daylight. The mercury vapor emission spectrum is dominated by a short-wave UV line at 254\u00a0nm (which provides most of the energy to the phosphors), accompanied by visible light emission at 436\u00a0nm (blue), 546\u00a0nm (green) and 579\u00a0nm (yellow-orange). These three lines can be observed superimposed on the white continuum using a hand spectroscope, for light emitted by the usual white fluorescent tubes. These same visible lines, accompanied by the emission lines of trivalent europium and trivalent terbium, and further accompanied by the emission continuum of divalent europium in the blue region, comprise the more discontinuous light emission of the modern trichromatic phosphor systems used in many compact fluorescent lamp and traditional lamps where better color rendition is a goal.\nFluorescent lights were first available to the public at the 1939 New York World's Fair. Improvements since then have largely been better phosphors, longer life, and more consistent internal discharge, and easier-to-use shapes (such as compact fluorescent lamps). Some high-intensity discharge (HID) lamps couple their even-greater electrical efficiency with phosphor enhancement for better color rendition.\nWhite light-emitting diodes (LEDs) became available in the mid-1990s as LED lamps, in which blue light emitted from the semiconductor strikes phosphors deposited on the tiny chip. The combination of the blue light that continues through the phosphor and the green to red fluorescence from the phosphors produces a net emission of white light.\nGlow sticks sometimes utilize fluorescent materials to absorb light from the chemiluminescent reaction and emit light of a different color.\nAnalytical chemistry.\nMany analytical procedures involve the use of a fluorometer, usually with a single exciting wavelength and single detection wavelength. Because of the sensitivity that the method affords, fluorescent molecule concentrations as low as 1 part per trillion can be measured.\nFluorescence in several wavelengths can be detected by an array detector, to detect compounds from HPLC flow. Also, TLC plates can be visualized if the compounds or a coloring reagent is fluorescent. Fluorescence is most effective when there is a larger ratio of atoms at lower energy levels in a Boltzmann distribution. There is, then, a higher probability of excitement and release of photons by lower-energy atoms, making analysis more efficient.\nSpectroscopy.\nUsually the setup of a fluorescence assay involves a light source, which may emit many different wavelengths of light. In general, a single wavelength is required for proper analysis, so, in order to selectively filter the light, it is passed through an excitation monochromator, and then that chosen wavelength is passed through the sample cell. After absorption and re-emission of the energy, many wavelengths may emerge due to Stokes shift and various electron transitions. To separate and analyze them, the fluorescent radiation is passed through an emission monochromator, and observed selectively by a detector.\nLasers.\nLasers most often use the fluorescence of certain materials as their active media, such as the red glow produced by a ruby (chromium sapphire), the infrared of titanium sapphire, or the unlimited range of colors produced by organic dyes. These materials normally fluoresce through a process called spontaneous emission, in which the light is emitted in all directions and often at many discrete spectral lines all at once. In many lasers, the fluorescent medium is \"pumped\" by exposing it to an intense light source, creating a population inversion, meaning that more of its atoms become in an excited state (high energy) rather than at ground state (low energy). When this occurs, the spontaneous fluorescence can then induce the other atoms to emit their photons in the same direction and at the same wavelength, creating stimulated emission. When a portion of the spontaneous fluorescence is trapped between two mirrors, nearly all of the medium's fluorescence can be stimulated to emit along the same line, producing a laser beam.\nBiochemistry and medicine.\nFluorescence in the life sciences is used generally as a non-destructive way of tracking or analysis of biological molecules by means of the fluorescent emission at a specific frequency where there is no background from the excitation light, as relatively few cellular components are naturally fluorescent (called intrinsic or autofluorescence).\nIn fact, a protein or other component can be \"labelled\" with an extrinsic fluorophore, a fluorescent dye that can be a small molecule, protein, or quantum dot, finding a large use in many biological applications.(pxxvi)\nThe quantification of a dye is done with a spectrofluorometer and finds additional applications in:\nForensics.\nFingerprints can be visualized with fluorescent compounds such as ninhydrin or DFO (1,8-Diazafluoren-9-one). Blood and other substances are sometimes detected by fluorescent reagents, like fluorescein. Fibers, and other materials that may be encountered in forensics or with a relationship to various collectibles, are sometimes fluorescent.\nNon-destructive testing.\nFluorescent penetrant inspection is used to find cracks and other defects on the surface of a part. Dye tracing, using fluorescent dyes, is used to find leaks in liquid and gas plumbing systems.\nSignage.\nFluorescent colors are frequently used in signage, particularly road signs. Fluorescent colors are generally recognizable at longer ranges than their non-fluorescent counterparts, with fluorescent orange being particularly noticeable. This property has led to its frequent use in safety signs and labels.\nOptical brighteners.\nFluorescent compounds are often used to enhance the appearance of fabric and paper, causing a \"whitening\" effect. A white surface treated with an optical brightener can emit more visible light than that which shines on it, making it appear brighter. The blue light emitted by the brightener compensates for the diminishing blue of the treated material and changes the hue away from yellow or brown and toward white. Optical brighteners are used in laundry detergents, high brightness paper, cosmetics, high-visibility clothing and more.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11556", "revid": "13220696", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11556", "title": "Fundamental theorem of arithmetic", "text": "Integers have unique prime factorizations\nIn mathematics, the fundamental theorem of arithmetic, also called the unique factorization theorem and prime factorization theorem, states that every integer greater than 1 is either prime or can be represented uniquely as a product of prime numbers, up to the order of the factors. For example,\nformula_1\nThe theorem says two things about this example: first, that 1200 can be represented as a product of primes, and second, that no matter how this is done, there will always be exactly four 2s, one 3, two 5s, and no other primes in the product.\nThe requirement that the factors be prime is necessary: factorizations containing composite numbers may not be unique (for example, formula_2).\nUsing the standard conventions for the product of a sequence (the value of the empty product is and the product of a single factor is the factor itself), the theorem is often stated as: \"every positive integer can be represented uniquely as a product of prime numbers, up to the order of the factors\".\nThis theorem is one of the main reasons why 1 is not considered a prime number: if 1 were prime, then factorization into primes would not be unique; for example, formula_3\nThe theorem generalizes to other algebraic structures that are called unique factorization domains and include principal ideal domains, Euclidean domains, and polynomial rings over a field. However, the theorem does not hold for algebraic integers. This failure of unique factorization is one of the reasons for the difficulty of the proof of Fermat's Last Theorem. The implicit use of unique factorization in rings of algebraic integers is behind the error of many of the numerous false proofs that have been written during the 358 years between Fermat's statement and Wiles's proof.\nHistory.\nThe fundamental theorem can be derived from Book VII, propositions 30, 31 and 32, and Book IX, proposition 14 of Euclid's \"Elements\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If two numbers by multiplying one another make some\nnumber, and any prime number measure the product, it will\nalso measure one of the original numbers.\u2014\u200a\n(In modern terminology: if a prime \"p\" divides the product \"ab\", then \"p\" divides either \"a\" or \"b\" or both.) Proposition 30 is referred to as Euclid's lemma, and it is the key in the proof of the fundamental theorem of arithmetic.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Any composite number is measured by some prime number.\u2014\u200a\n(In modern terminology: every integer greater than one is divided evenly by some prime number.) Proposition 31 is proved directly by infinite descent.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Any number either is prime or is measured by some prime number.\u2014\u200a\nProposition 32 is derived from proposition 31, and proves that the decomposition is possible.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If a number be the least that is measured by prime numbers, it will not be measured by any\nother prime number except those originally measuring it.\u2014\u200a\n(In modern terminology: a least common multiple of several prime numbers is not a multiple of any other prime number.) Book IX, proposition 14 is derived from Book VII, proposition 30, and proves partially that the decomposition is unique \u2013 a point critically noted by Andr\u00e9 Weil. Indeed, in this proposition the exponents are all equal to one, so nothing is said for the general case.\nWhile Euclid took the first step on the way to the existence of prime factorization, Kam\u0101l al-D\u012bn al-F\u0101ris\u012b took the final step and stated for the first time the fundamental theorem of arithmetic.\nArticle 16 of Gauss's \"Disquisitiones Arithmeticae\" seems to be the first proof of the uniqueness part of the theorem.\nApplications.\nCanonical representation of a positive integer.\nEvery positive integer \"n\" &gt; 1 can be represented in exactly one way as a product of prime powers\nformula_4\nwhere \"p\"1 &lt; \"p\"2 &lt; ... &lt; \"p\"k are primes and the \"n\"\"i\" are positive integers. This representation is commonly extended to all positive integers, including 1, by the convention that the empty product is equal to 1 (the empty product corresponds to \"k\" = 0).\nThis representation is called the canonical representation of \"n\", or the standard form of \"n\". For example,\n999 = 33\u00d737,\n1000 = 23\u00d753,\n1001 = 7\u00d711\u00d713.\nFactors \"p\"0 = 1 may be inserted without changing the value of \"n\" (for example, 1000 = 23\u00d730\u00d753). In fact, any positive integer can be uniquely represented as an infinite product taken over all the positive prime numbers, as\nformula_5\nwhere a finite number of the \"n\"\"i\" are positive integers, and the others are zero. \nAllowing negative exponents provides a canonical form for positive rational numbers.\nArithmetic operations.\nThe canonical representations of the product, greatest common divisor (GCD), and least common multiple (LCM) of two numbers \"a\" and \"b\" can be expressed simply in terms of the canonical representations of \"a\" and \"b\" themselves:\nformula_6\nHowever, integer factorization, especially of large numbers, is much more difficult than computing products, GCDs, or LCMs, so these formulas have limited use in practice.\nArithmetic functions.\nMany arithmetic functions are defined using the canonical representation. In particular, the values of additive and multiplicative functions are determined by their values on the powers of prime numbers.\nProof.\nThe proof of uniqueness uses Euclid's lemma (\"Elements\" VII, 30): If a prime divides the product of two integers, then it must divide at least one of these integers.\nExistence.\nIt must be shown that every integer greater than 1 is either prime or a product of primes. Let \"n\" be an integer greater than 1 and make the inductive assumption that every integer greater than 1 and less than \"n\" is either prime or a product of primes. If \"n\" is prime, there is nothing more to prove. Otherwise, there are integers \"a\" and \"b\", where \"n\" = \"a b\", and 1 &lt; \"a\" \u2264 \"b\" &lt; \"n\". By the inductive hypothesis, \"a\" = \"p\"1 \"p\"2 \u22c5\u22c5\u22c5 \"p\"\"j\" and \"b\" = \"q\"1 \"q\"2 \u22c5\u22c5\u22c5 \"q\"\"k\" are products of primes. But then \"n\" = \"a b\" = \"p\"1 \"p\"2 \u22c5\u22c5\u22c5 \"p\"\"j\" \"q\"1 \"q\"2 \u22c5\u22c5\u22c5 \"q\"\"k\" is a product of primes.\nUniqueness.\nSuppose, to the contrary, there is an integer that has two distinct prime factorizations. Let \"n\" be the least such integer and write \"n\" = \"p\"1 \"p\"2 ... \"p\"\"j\" = \"q\"1 \"q\"2 ... \"q\"\"k\", where each \"p\"\"i\" and \"q\"\"i\" is prime. We see that \"p\"1 divides \"q\"1 \"q\"2 ... \"q\"\"k\", so \"p\"1 divides some \"q\"\"i\" by Euclid's lemma. Without loss of generality, say \"p\"1 divides \"q\"1. Since \"p\"1 and \"q\"1 are both prime, it follows that \"p\"1 = \"q\"1. Returning to our factorizations of \"n\", we may cancel these two factors to conclude that \"p\"2 ... \"p\"\"j\" = \"q\"2 ... \"q\"\"k\". We now have two distinct prime factorizations of some integer strictly smaller than \"n\", which contradicts the minimality of \"n\".\nUniqueness without Euclid's lemma.\nThe fundamental theorem of arithmetic can also be proved without using Euclid's lemma. The proof that follows is inspired by Euclid's original version of the Euclidean algorithm. \nAssume that formula_7 is the smallest positive integer which is the product of prime numbers in two different ways. Incidentally, this implies that formula_7, if it exists, must be a composite number greater than formula_9. Now, say \nformula_10\nEvery formula_11 must be distinct from every formula_12 Otherwise, if say formula_13 then there would exist some positive integer formula_14 that is smaller than s and has two distinct prime factorizations. One may also suppose that formula_15 by exchanging the two factorizations, if needed.\nSetting formula_16 and formula_17 one has formula_18\nAlso, since formula_15 one has formula_20\nIt then follows that\nformula_21\nAs the positive integers less than s have been supposed to have a unique prime factorization, formula_22 must occur in the factorization of either formula_23 or Q. The latter case is impossible, as Q, being smaller than s, must have a unique prime factorization, and formula_22 differs from every formula_12 The former case is also impossible, as, if formula_22 is a divisor of formula_27 it must be also a divisor of formula_28 which is impossible as formula_22 and formula_30 are distinct primes.\nTherefore, there cannot exist a smallest integer with more than a single distinct prime factorization. Every positive integer must either be a prime number itself, which would factor uniquely, or a composite that also factors uniquely into primes, or in the case of the integer formula_9, not factor into any prime.\nGeneralizations.\nThe first generalization of the theorem is found in Gauss's second monograph (1832) on biquadratic reciprocity. This paper introduced what is now called the ring of Gaussian integers, the set of all complex numbers \"a\" + \"bi\" where \"a\" and \"b\" are integers. It is now denoted by formula_32 He showed that this ring has the four units \u00b11 and \u00b1\"i\", that the non-zero, non-unit numbers fall into two classes, primes and composites, and that (except for order), the composites have unique factorization as a product of primes (up to the order and multiplication by units).\nSimilarly, in 1844 while working on cubic reciprocity, Eisenstein introduced the ring formula_33, where formula_34 \u00a0 formula_35 is a cube root of unity. This is the ring of Eisenstein integers, and he proved it has the six units formula_36 and that it has unique factorization.\nHowever, it was also discovered that unique factorization does not always hold. An example is given by formula_37. In this ring one has\nformula_38\nExamples like this caused the notion of \"prime\" to be modified. In formula_39 it can be proven that if any of the factors above can be represented as a product, for example, 2 = \"ab\", then one of \"a\" or \"b\" must be a unit. This is the traditional definition of \"prime\". It can also be proven that none of these factors obeys Euclid's lemma; for example, 2 divides neither (1 + formula_40) nor (1 - formula_40) even though it divides their product 6. In algebraic number theory 2 is called irreducible in formula_39 (only divisible by itself or a unit) but not prime in formula_39 (if it divides a product it must divide one of the factors). The mention of formula_39 is required because 2 is prime and irreducible in formula_45 Using these definitions it can be proven that in any integral domain a prime must be irreducible. Euclid's classical lemma can be rephrased as \"in the ring of integers formula_46 every irreducible is prime\". This is also true in formula_47 and formula_48 but not in formula_49\nThe rings in which factorization into irreducibles is essentially unique are called unique factorization domains. Important examples are polynomial rings over the integers or over a field, Euclidean domains and principal ideal domains.\nIn 1843 Kummer introduced the concept of ideal number, which was developed further by Dedekind (1876) into the modern theory of ideals, special subsets of rings. Multiplication is defined for ideals, and the rings in which they have unique factorization are called Dedekind domains.\nThere is a version of unique factorization for ordinals, though it requires some additional conditions to ensure uniqueness.\nAny commutative M\u00f6bius monoid satisfies a unique factorization theorem and thus possesses arithmetical properties similar to those of the multiplicative semigroup of positive integers. Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic is, in fact, a special case of the unique factorization theorem in commutative M\u00f6bius monoids.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nThe \"Disquisitiones Arithmeticae\" has been translated from Latin into English and German. The German edition includes all of his papers on number theory: all the proofs of quadratic reciprocity, the determination of the sign of the Gauss sum, the investigations into biquadratic reciprocity, and unpublished notes.\nThe two monographs Gauss published on biquadratic reciprocity have consecutively numbered sections: the first contains \u00a7\u00a7 1\u201323 and the second \u00a7\u00a7 24\u201376. Footnotes referencing these are of the form \"Gauss, BQ, \u00a7 \"n\"\". Footnotes referencing the \"Disquisitiones Arithmeticae\" are of the form \"Gauss, DA, Art. \"n\"\".\nThese are in Gauss's \"Werke\", Vol II, pp.\u00a065\u201392 and 93\u2013148; German translations are pp.\u00a0511\u2013533 and 534\u2013586 of the German edition of the \"Disquisitiones\"."}
{"id": "11558", "revid": "37119240", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11558", "title": "Flamenco", "text": "Genre of Spanish music and dance\nFlamenco () is an art form based on the various folkloric music traditions of southern Spain, developed within the gitano subculture of the region of Andalusia, and also having historical presence in Extremadura and Murcia. In a wider sense, the term is used to refer to a variety of both contemporary and traditional musical styles typical of southern Spain. Flamenco is closely associated to the gitanos of the Romani ethnicity who have contributed significantly to its origination and professionalization. However, its style is uniquely Andalusian and flamenco artists have historically included Spaniards of both gitano and non-gitano heritage.\nThe oldest record of flamenco music dates to 1774 in the book \"Las Cartas Marruecas\" (The Moroccan Letters) by Jos\u00e9 Cadalso. The development of flamenco over the past two centuries is well documented: \"the theatre movement of sainetes (one-act plays) and tonadillas, popular song books and song sheets, customs, studies of dances, and \"toques\", perfection, newspapers, graphic documents in paintings and engravings.\u00a0... in continuous evolution together with rhythm, the poetic stanzas, and the ambiance.\"\nOn 16 November 2010, UNESCO declared flamenco one of the Masterpieces of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity.\nEtymology.\nHistorically, the term \"flamenco\" was used to identify the Romani people (gitanos) of Spain. The English traveller George Borrow who travelled through Spain during the 1830s stated that the gitanos were also called Flemish (in Spanish, 'flamenco') due to German and Flemish being erroneously considered synonymous. According to flamencologist Cristina Cruces-Rold\u00e1n, a year prior to Borrow's account, there already existed a gitano party in Madrid that was clearly identified as flamenco. This equivalency between gitano and flamenco is also noted by , Dem\u00f3filo, and the scholar Irving Brown who stated in 1938 that \"flamenco is simply another term for gitano, with special connotations.\"\nThe origins of the term lie in the sociological prejudice towards the Roma who were seen as ruffians and cocky troublemakers by the Spaniards and were thus associated with the 18th century German colonists of the Sierra Morena who formed groups of urban Bohemians that lived outside the law and were seen as idle and lazy. Other less successful hypotheses include those of Felipe Pedrell and Carlos Alemendros who state that while the term \"flamenco\" is Spanish for Flemish, it is actually synonymous with \"cantador\" (professional singer) in reference to the group of Flemish singers brought by Spanish King Carlos I in 1516. Another hypothesis that is not widely accepted is the Arabist theory of Blas Infante, which in his book \"Or\u00edgenes de lo flamenco (Origins of flamenco)\" presents \"flamenco\" as a phonetic deformation of Arabic \"fellah-mengu\" (runaway laborer) or was derived from the Arabic terms \"Felah-Mengus\", which together mean \"wandering peasant\".\nThe first use of the term flamenco to refer to the music genre appears in a 1847 newspaper article of \"El Espectador\" where it was referred to as a \"gitano genre\". In the early years of flamenco, the term was versatile and was used to refer to a variety of concepts in the gitano-Andalusian world. For example, in the 1860s-70s this versatility was exemplified through its use to refer to a musical style and a certain aesthetic, manners, and way of life that were perceived to be gitano. At that time, flamenco was not a strict genre but a way of performing music in a gitano-Andalusian style.\nHistory.\nCultural origins.\nThere are hypotheses that point to the influence on flamenco of types of dance from the Indian subcontinent; the place of origin of the Romani people. The North Indian scales of flamenco were introduced to Andalusia by the Romani migrations from Northern India. These Roma migrants also brought bells, and an extensive repertoire of songs and dances. Upon arrival to Andalusia in the 15th century, they were exposed to the rich Arab-Andalusian music culture, itself a hybrid of Spanish music tradition going back to the 8th century with the establishment of Al-Andalus, which brought in traditions and music from the Arabian Peninsula, Northern Africa and Sephardic features. Some of the instruments associated with flamenco and Spanish folklore in different regions today, are the wooden castanets and tambourines, both believed to originate during the Al Andalus period. This centuries-long period of cultural intermingling, formed the roots of flamenco song and dance genres.\nIt is believed that the flamenco genre emerged at the end of the 18th century in cities and agrarian towns of Baja Andalusia, highlighting Jerez de la Frontera as the first written vestige of this art, although there is practically no data related to those dates and the manifestations of this time are more typical of the bolero school than of flamenco. It appeared as a modern art form from the convergence of the urban subaltern groups, gitano communities, and journeyman of Andalusia that formed the marginalized flamenco artistic working class who established flamenco as a singular art form, marked from the beginning by the gitano brand. Andalusia was the origin and cradle of the early flamenco cantaores and of the three or four dozen gitano families who created and cultivated flamenco.\n\"Casticismo\".\nDuring the end of the 18th and beginning of the 19th century, a number of factors led to rise in Spain of a phenomenon known as \"Costumbrismo Andaluz\" or \"Andalusian Mannerism\".\nIn 1783 Carlos III promulgated a pragmatics that regulated the social situation of the . This was a momentous event in the history of Spanish gitanos who, after centuries of marginalization and persecution, saw their legal situation improve substantially.\nAfter the Spanish War of Independence (1808\u20131812), a feeling of racial pride developed in the Spanish conscience, in opposition to the \"gallified\" \"afrancesados\" - Spaniards who were influenced by French culture and the idea of the enlightenment. In this context, gitanos were seen as an ideal embodiment of Spanish culture and the emergence of the bullfighting schools of Ronda and Seville, the rise of the Bandidos and Vaqueros led to a taste for Andalusian romantic culture which triumphed in the Madrid court.\nAt this time there is evidence of disagreements due to the introduction of innovations in art.\nThe \"cantante\" caf\u00e9s.\nIn 1881 Silverio Franconetti opened the first flamenco singer caf\u00e9 in Seville. In Silverio's caf\u00e9 the cantaores were in a very competitive environment, which allowed the emergence of the professional cantaor and served as a crucible where flamenco art was configured. Locals learned the cantes, while reinterpreting the Andalusian folk songs in their own style, expanding the repertoire. Likewise, the taste of the public contributed to configure the flamenco genre, unifying its technique and its theme.\nAntiflamencoism in the \"Generation of '98\".\n\"Flamenquismo\", defined by the Royal Spanish Academy as a \"fondness for flamenco art and customs\", is a conceptual catch-all where flamenco singing and a fondness for bullfighting, among other traditional Spanish elements, fit. These customs were strongly attacked by the generation of 98, all of its members being \"anti-flamenco\", with the exception of the Machado brothers, Manuel and Antonio. Being Sevillians and sons of the folklorist Dem\u00f3filo Machado, the brothers had a more complex view of the matter. The greatest standard bearer of anti-flamenquism was the Madrid writer Eugenio Noel, who, in his youth, had been a militant \"casticista\". Noel attributed to flamenco and bullfighting the origin of the ills of Spain which he saw as manifestations of the country's Oriental character which hindered economic and social development. These considerations caused an insurmountable rift to be established for decades between flamenco and most \"intellectuals\" of the time.\nFlamenca opera.\nBetween 1920 and 1955, flamenco shows began to be held in bullrings and theaters, under the name \"flamenco opera\". This denomination was an economic strategy of the promoters, since opera only paid 3% while variety shows paid 10%. At this time, flamenco shows spread throughout Spain and the main cities of the world. The great social and commercial success achieved by flamenco at this time eliminated some of the oldest and most sober styles from the stage, in favor of lighter airs, such as canti\u00f1as, los cantes de ida y vuelta and fandangos, of which many personal versions were created. The purist critics attacked this lightness of the cantes, as well as the use of falsete and the gaitero style.\nIn the line of purism, the poet Federico Garc\u00eda Lorca and the composer Manuel de Falla had the idea of concurso de cante jondo in Granada in 1922. Both artists conceived of flamenco as folklore, not as a scenic artistic genre; for this reason, they were concerned, since they believed that the massive triumph of flamenco would end its purest and deepest roots. To remedy this, they organized a cante jondo contest in which only amateurs could participate and in which festive cantes (such as canti\u00f1as) were excluded, which Falla and Lorca did not consider jondos, but flamencos. The jury was chaired by Antonio Chac\u00f3n, who at that time was the leading figure in cante. The winners were \"El Tenazas\", a retired professional cantaor from Mor\u00f3n de la Frontera, and Manuel Ortega, an eight-year-old boy from Seville who would go down in flamenco history as Manolo Caracol. The contest turned out to be a failure due to the scant echo it had and because Lorca and Falla did not know how to understand the professional character that flamenco already had at that time, striving in vain to seek a purity that never existed in an art that was characterized by mixture and the personal innovation of its creators. Apart from this failure, with the Generation of '27, whose most eminent members were Andalusians and therefore knew the genre first-hand, the recognition of flamenco by intellectuals began.\nAt that time, there were already flamenco recordings related to Christmas, which can be divided into two groups: the traditional flamenco carol and flamenco songs that adapt their lyrics to the Christmas theme. These cantes have been maintained to this day, the Zambomba Jerezana being spatially representative, declared an Asset of Intangible Cultural Interest by the Junta de Andaluc\u00eda in December 2015.\nDuring the Spanish Civil War, a large number of singers were exiled or died defending the Republic and the humiliations to which they were being subjected by the National Party: Bando Nacional: Corruco de Algeciras, Chaconcito, El Carbonerillo, El Chato De Las Ventas, Vallejito, Rita la Cantaora, Angelillo, Guerrita are some of them. In the postwar period and the first years of the Franco regime, the world of flamenco was viewed with suspicion, as the authorities were not clear that this genre contributed to the national conscience. However, the regime soon ended up adopting flamenco as one of the quintessential Spanish cultural manifestations. The singers who have survived the war go from stars to almost outcasts, singing for the young men in the private rooms of the brothels in the center of Seville where they have to adapt to the whims of aristocrats, soldiers and businessmen who have become rich.\nIn short, the period of the flamenco opera was open to creativity and comprised most of the flamenco repertoire. It was the Golden Age of this genre, with figures such as Antonio Chac\u00f3n, Manuel Vallejo, Manuel Torre, La Ni\u00f1a de los Peines, Pepe Marchena and Manolo Caracol.\nAcademic study.\nStarting in the 1950s, abundant anthropological and musicological studies on flamenco began to be published. In 1954 Hispavox published the first \"Antolog\u00eda del Cante Flamenco\", a sound recording that was a great shock to its time, dominated by orchestrated cante and, consequently, mystified. In 1955, the Argentine intellectual Anselmo Gonz\u00e1lez Climent published an essay called \"Flamencolog\u00eda\", whose title he baptized the \"set of knowledge, techniques, etc., on flamenco singing and dancing.\" This book dignified the study of flamenco by applying the academic methodology of musicology to it and served as the basis for subsequent studies on this genre.\nAs a result, in 1956 the National Contest of Cante Jondo de C\u00f3rdoba was organized and in 1958 the first flamencology chair was founded in Jerez de la Frontera, the oldest academic institution dedicated to the study, research, conservation, promotion and defense of the flamenco art. Likewise, in 1963 the Cordovan poet Ricardo Molina and the Sevillian cantaor Antonio Mairena published Alalim\u00f3n Mundo y Formas del Cante flamenco, which has become a must-have reference work.\nFor a long time the Mairenistas postulates were considered practically unquestionable, until they found an answer in other authors who elaborated the \"Andalusian thesis\", which defended that flamenco was a genuinely Andalusian product, since it had been developed entirely in this region and because its styles basic ones derived from the folklore of Andalusia. They also maintained that the Andalusian gitanos had contributed decisively to their formation, highlighting the exceptional nature of flamenco among gypsy music and dances from other parts of Spain and Europe. The unification of the gitanos and Andalusian thesis has ended up being the most accepted today. In short, between the 1950s and 1970s, flamenco went from being a mere show to also becoming an object of study.\nFlamenco protest during the Franco regime.\nFlamenco became one of the symbols of Spanish national identity during the Franco regime, since the regime knew how to appropriate a folklore traditionally associated with Andalusia to promote national unity and attract tourism, constituting what was called national-flamenquismo. Hence, flamenco had long been seen as a reactionary or retrograde element. In the mid-60s and until the transition, cantadores who opposed the regime began to appear with the use of protest lyrics. These include: Jos\u00e9 Menese and lyricist Francisco Moreno Galv\u00e1n, Enrique Morente, Manuel Gerena, El Lebrijano, El Cabrero, Lole y Manuel, el Piki or Luis Mar\u00edn, among many others.\nIn contrast to this conservatism with which it was associated during the Franco regime, flamenco suffered the influence of the wave of activism that also shook the university against the repression of the regime when university students came into contact with this art in the recitals that were held, for example, at the Colegio Mayor de San Juan Evangelista: \"flamenco amateurs and professionals got involved with performances of a manifestly political nature. It was a kind of flamenco protest charged with protest, which meant censorship and repression for the flamenco activists \".\nAs the political transition progressed, the demands were deflated as flamenco inserted itself within the flows of globalized art. At the same time, this art was institutionalized until it reached the point that the Junta de Andaluc\u00eda was attributed in 2007 \"exclusive competence in matters of knowledge, conservation, research, training, promotion and dissemination\".\nFlamenco fusion.\nIn the 1970s, there were airs of social and political change in Spain, and Spanish society was already quite influenced by various musical styles from the rest of Europe and the United States. There were also numerous singers who had grown up listening to Antonio Mairena, Pepe Marchena and Manolo Caracol. The combination of both factors led to a revolutionary period called flamenco fusion.\nThe singer Roc\u00edo Jurado internationalized flamenco at the beginning of the 70s, replacing the bata de cola with evening dresses. Her facet in the \"Fandangos de Huelva\" and in the Alegr\u00edas was recognized internationally for her perfect voice tessitura in these genres. She used to be accompanied in her concerts by guitarists Enrique de Melchor and Tomatito, not only at the national level but in countries like Colombia, Venezuela and Puerto Rico.\nThe musical representative Jos\u00e9 Antonio Pulp\u00f3n was a decisive character in that fusion, as he urged the cantaor Agujetas to collaborate with the Sevillian Andalusian rock group \"Pata Negra\", the most revolutionary couple since Antonio Chac\u00f3n and Ram\u00f3n Montoya, initiating a new path for flamenco. It also fostered the artistic union between the virtuoso guitarist from Algeciras Paco de Luc\u00eda and the long-standing singer from the island Camar\u00f3n de la Isla, who gave a creative impulse to flamenco that would mean its definitive break with Mairena's conservatism. When both artists undertook their solo careers, Camar\u00f3n became a mythical cantaor for his art and personality, with a legion of followers, while Paco de Luc\u00eda reconfigured the entire musical world of flamenco, opening up to new influences, such as Brazilian music, Arabic and jazz and introducing new musical instruments such as the Peruvian cajon, the transverse flute, etc.\nOther leading performers in this process of formal flamenco renewal were Juan Pe\u00f1a El Lebrijano, who married flamenco with Andalusian music, and Enrique Morente, who throughout his long artistic career has oscillated between the purism of his first recordings and the crossbreeding with rock, or Remedios Amaya from Triana, cultivator of a unique style of tangos from Extremadura, and a wedge of purity in her cante make her part of this select group of established artists. Other singers with their own style include Cancanilla de Marbella. In 2011 this style became known in India thanks to Mar\u00eda del Mar Fern\u00e1ndez, who acts in the video clip of the film You Live Once, entitled Se\u00f1orita. The film was seen by more than 73 million viewers.\nNew flamenco.\nIn the 1980s a new generation of flamenco artists emerged who had been influenced by the mythical cantaor Camar\u00f3n, Paco de Luc\u00eda, Morente, etc. These artists were interested in popular urban music, which in those years was renewing the Spanish music scene, it was the time of the Movida madrile\u00f1a. Among them are \"Pata Negra\", who fused flamenco with blues and rock, Ketama, of pop and Cuban inspiration and Ray Heredia, creator of his own musical universe where flamenco occupies a central place.\nAlso the recording company Nuevos Medios released many musicians under the label nuevo flamenco and this denomination has grouped musicians very different from each other like Rosario Flores, daughter of Lola Flores, or the renowned singer Mal\u00fa, niece of Paco de Luc\u00eda and daughter of Pepe de Luc\u00eda, who despite sympathizing with flamenco and keeping it in her discography has continued with her personal style. However, the fact that many of the interpreters of this new music are also renowned cantaores, in the case of Jos\u00e9 Merc\u00e9, El Cigala, and others, has led to labeling everything they perform as flamenco, although the genre of their songs differs quite a bit from the classic flamenco. This has generated very different feelings, both for and against.\nOther contemporary artists of that moment were O'Funkillo and Ojos de Brujo, Arc\u00e1ngel, Miguel Poveda, Mayte Mart\u00edn, Marina Heredia, Estrella Morente or Manuel Lombo, etc.\nBut the discussion between the difference of flamenco and new flamenco in Spain has just gained strength during since 2019 due to the success of new flamenco attracting the taste of the youngest Spanish fans but also in the international musical scene emphasizing the problem of how should we call this new musical genre mixed with flamenco.\nOne of the artists who has reinvented flamenco is Rosal\u00eda, an indisputable name on the international music scene. \"Pienso en tu mir\u00e1\", \"Di mi nombre\" or the song that catapulted her to fame, \"Malamente\", are a combination of styles that includes a flamenco/south Spain traditional musical base. Rosal\u00eda has broken the limits of this musical genre by embracing other urban rhythms, but has also created a lot of controversy about which genre is she using. The Catalan artist has been awarded several Latin Grammy Awards and MTV Video Music Awards, which also, at just 30 years old, garners more than 40 million monthly listeners on Spotify.\nBut it is not the only successful case, the Granada-born Dellafuente, C. Tangana, MAKA, RVFV, Demarco Flamenco, Maria \u00c0rnal and Marcel Bag\u00e9s, El Ni\u00f1o de Elche, S\u00edlvia P\u00e9rez Cruz; Califato 3/4, Juanito Makand\u00e9, Soledad Morente, Mar\u00eda Jos\u00e9 Llergo o Fuel Fandango are only a few of the new spanish musical scene that includes flamenco in their music.\nIt seems that the Spanish music scene is experiencing a change in its music and new rhythms are re-emerging together with new artists who are experimenting to cover a wider audience that wants to maintain the closeness that flamenco has transmitted for decades.\nFlamenco culture overseas.\nThe state of New Mexico, located in the southwest of the United States, maintains a strong identity with flamenco culture. The University of New Mexico located in Albuquerque offers a graduate degree program in flamenco. Flamenco performances are widespread in the Albuquerque and Santa Fe communities, with the National institute of Flamenco sponsoring an annual festival, as well as a variety of professional flamenco performances offered at various locales. Emmy Grimm, known by her stage name http:// is a professional flamenco dancer and native to New Mexico who performs as well as teaches flamenco in Santa Fe. She continues studying her art by traveling to Spain to work intensively with Carmela Greco and La Popi, as well as Jos\u00e9 Galv\u00e1n, Juana Amaya, Yolanda Heredia, Ivan Vargas Heredia, Torombo and Rocio Alcaide Ruiz.\nMain \"Palos\".\n\"Palos\" (formerly known as \"cantes\") are flamenco styles, classified by criteria such as rhythmic pattern, mode, chord progression, stanzaic form and geographic origin. There are over 50 different \"palos\", some are sung unaccompanied while others have guitar or other accompaniment. Some forms are danced while others are not. Some are reserved for men and others for women while some may be performed by either, though these traditional distinctions are breaking down: the \"Farruca\", for example, once a male dance, is now commonly performed by women too.\nThere are many ways to categorize \"Palos\" but they traditionally fall into three classes: the most serious is known as \"cante jondo\" (or \"cante grande\"), while lighter, frivolous forms are called \"Cante Chico\". Forms that do not fit either category are classed as \"Cante Intermedio\" . These are the best known \"palos\" (; ):\nAlegr\u00edas.\nThe alegr\u00edas are thought to derive from the Aragonese jota, which took root in Cadiz during the Peninsular war and the establishment of the Cortes de Cadiz. That is why its classic lyrics contain so many references to the Virgen del Pilar, the Ebro River and Navarra.\nEnrique Butr\u00f3n is considered to have formalized the current flamenco style of alegr\u00edas and Ignacio Espeleta who introduced the characteristic \"tiriti, tran, tran...\". Some of the best known interpreters of alegr\u00edas are Enrique el Mellizo, Chato de la Isla, Pinini, Peric\u00f3n de C\u00e1diz, Aurelio Sell\u00e9s, La Perla de C\u00e1diz, Chano Lobato and El Folli.\nOne of the structurally strictest forms of flamenco, a traditional dance in alegr\u00edas must contain each of the following sections: a salida (entrance), paseo (walkaround), silencio (similar to an adagio in ballet), castellana (upbeat section) https:// (Literally \"a tap of the foot\") and buler\u00edas. This structure though, is not followed when alegr\u00edas are sung as a standalone song (with no dancing). In that case, the stanzas are combined freely, sometimes together with other types of canti\u00f1as.\nAlegr\u00edas has a rhythm consisting of 12 beats. It is similar to Soleares. Its beat emphasis is as follows: 1 2 [3] 4 5 [6] 7 [8] 9 [10] 11 [12]. Alegr\u00edas originated in C\u00e1diz. Alegr\u00edas belongs to the group of \"palos\" called Canti\u00f1as and it is usually played in a lively rhythm (120\u2013170 beats per minute). The livelier speeds are chosen for dancing, while quieter rhythms are preferred for the song alone.\nBuler\u00edas.\nBuler\u00edas a fast flamenco rhythm made up of a 12 beat cycle with emphasis in two general forms as follows: [12] 1 2 [3] 4 5 [6] 7 [8] 9 [10] 11 or [12] 1 2 [3] 4 5 6 [7] [8] 9 [10] 11. It originated among the Cal\u00e9 Romani people of Jerez during the 19th century, originally as a fast, upbeat ending to \"soleares\" or \"alegrias\". It is among the most popular and dramatic of the flamenco forms and often ends any flamenco gathering, often accompanied by vigorous dancing and tapping.\nMusic.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There are three fundamental elements which can help define whether or not something really is flamenco: A flamenco mode -or musical tonality-; the \"comp\u00e1s\" -rhythm- and the performer.\u00a0.. who should be a Flamenco! All three of these elements: tonality, \"comp\u00e1s\", a flamenco performer and then something less easily identifiable- \"Flamencura\"- must be present together if we are to wend up with a piece of music which can be labelled 'flamenco'. By themselves, these elements won't turn a piece of music into flamenco.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Three fundamental elements that help define whether or not a dance belongs to the Flamenco genre are the presence of a Flamenco mode (musical tonality), \"compas\", and a Flamenco performer (Martinez, 2003). These three elements contribute to the authenticity of a Flamenco performance also known as \"flamencura\" (Martinez, 2003). There is also no such thing as a passive audience during Flamenco performances [participatory music]. The audience joins in the performance by clapping their hands and even sometimes singing along (Totton, 2003).\nStructure.\nA typical flamenco recital with voice and guitar accompaniment comprises a series of pieces (not exactly \"songs\") in different palos. Each song is a set of verses (called \"copla\", \"tercio\", or \"letras\"), punctuated by guitar interludes (\"falsetas\"). The guitarist also provides a short introduction setting the tonality, \"comp\u00e1s\" (see below) and tempo of the cante . In some palos, these falsetas are played with a specific structure too; for example, the typical sevillanas is played in an AAB pattern, where A and B are the same falseta with only a slight difference in the ending .\nHarmony.\nFlamenco uses the flamenco mode (which can also be described as the modern Phrygian mode (\"modo frigio\"), or a harmonic version of that scale with a major 3rd degree), in addition to the major and minor scales commonly used in modern Western music. The Phrygian mode occurs in \"palos\" such as sole\u00e1, most buler\u00edas, siguiriyas, tangos and tientos.\nA typical chord sequence, usually called the \"Andalusian cadence\" may be viewed as in a modified Phrygian: in E the sequence is Am\u2013G\u2013F\u2013E . According to Manolo Sanl\u00facar E is here the tonic, F has the harmonic function of dominant while Am and G assume the functions of subdominant and mediant respectively .\nGuitarists tend to use only two basic inversions or \"chord shapes\" for the tonic chord (music), the open 1st inversion E and the open 3rd inversion A, though they often transpose these by using a capo. Modern guitarists such as Ram\u00f3n Montoya, have introduced other positions: Montoya himself started to use other chords for the tonic in the modern Dorian sections of several \"palos\"; F\u266f for \"tarantas\", B for \"grana\u00ednas\" and A\u266d for the \"minera\". Montoya also created a new \"palo\" as a solo for guitar, the \"ronde\u00f1a\" in C\u266f with \"scordatura\". Later guitarists have further extended the repertoire of tonalities, chord positions and \"scordatura\".\nThere are also \"palos\" in major mode; most canti\u00f1as and alegr\u00edas, guajiras, some \"buler\u00edas\" and \"ton\u00e1s\", and the \"cabales\" (a major type of \"siguiriyas\"). The minor mode is restricted to the \"Farruca\", the \"milongas\" (among \"cantes de ida y vuelta\"), and some styles of \"tangos, buler\u00edas\", etc. In general traditional palos in major and minor mode are limited harmonically to two-chord (tonic\u2013dominant) or three-chord (tonic\u2013subdominant\u2013dominant) progressions . However modern guitarists have introduced chord substitution, transition chords, and even modulation.\n\"Fandangos\" and derivative \"palos\" such as \"malague\u00f1as\", \"tarantas\" and \"cartageneras are bimodal\": guitar introductions are in Phrygian mode while the singing develops in major mode, modulating to Phrygian at the end of the stanza .\nMelody.\nDionisio Preciado, quoted by Sabas de , established the following characteristics for the melodies of flamenco singing:\nMusicologist Hip\u00f3lito Rossy adds the following characteristics :\nComp\u00e1s or time signature.\nComp\u00e1s is the Spanish word for metre or time signature (in classical music theory). It also refers to the rhythmic cycle, or layout, of a \"palo\".\nThe comp\u00e1s is fundamental to flamenco. Comp\u00e1s is most often translated as rhythm but it demands far more precise interpretation than any other Western style of music. If there is no guitarist available, the comp\u00e1s is rendered through hand clapping (\"palmas\") or by hitting a table with the knuckles. The guitarist uses techniques like strumming (\"rasgueado\") or tapping the soundboard (\"golpe\"). Changes of chords emphasize the most important downbeats.\nFlamenco uses three basic counts or measures: Binary, Ternary and a form of a twelve-beat cycle that is unique to flamenco. There are also free-form styles including, among others, the ton\u00e1s, saetas, malague\u00f1as, tarantos, and some types of fandangos:\nThere are three types of 12-beat rhythms, which vary in their layouts, or use of accentuations: sole\u00e1, seguiriya and buler\u00eda:\nThe Buler\u00edas is the emblematic palo of flamenco: today its 12-beat cycle is most often played with accents on the 3rd, 6th, 8th, 10th and 12th beats. The accompanying \"palmas\" are played in groups of 6 beats, giving rise to a multitude of counter-rhythms and percussive voices within the 12 beat comp\u00e1s. In certain regions like, Jerez, Spain, the rhythm stays in a simpler six-count rhythm, only including the twelve count in a musical resolve. This is like starting the counting at 9 so it goes this way: 9 10 11 12 1 2 - again, bold means the emphasis when clapping. In real life it is counted from 1 like: 1 2 3 4 5 6 and so on.\nForms of flamenco expression.\nToque (guitar).\nThe posture and technique of flamenco guitarists, called \"tocaores\", differs from that used by the players of classical guitar. While the classical guitarist supports the guitar on his left leg in an inclined way, the flamenco guitarist usually crosses his legs and supports it on the one that is higher, placing the neck in an almost horizontal position with respect to the ground. Modern guitarists usually use classical guitars, although there is a specific instrument for this genre called flamenco guitar. This is less heavy, and its body is narrower than that of the classical guitar, so its sound is lower and does not overshadow the cantaor. It is usually made of cypress wood, with the handle of cedar and the top of fir. The cypress gives it a brilliant sound very suitable for the characteristics of flamenco. Formerly, the palo santo from Rio or India was also used, being the first of higher quality, but currently it is in disuse due to its scarcity. The palo santo gave guitars an amplitude of sound especially suitable for solo playing. At present, the most widely used headstock is the metal one, since the wooden one poses tuning problems.\nThe main guitar makers were Antonio de Torres Jurado (Almer\u00eda, 1817\u20131892) considered the father of the guitar, Manuel Ram\u00edrez de Galarreta, the Great Ram\u00edrez (Madrid, 1864 -1920), and his disciples Santos Hern\u00e1ndez (Madrid, 1873\u20131943), who built several guitars for the maestro Sabicas, Domingo Esteso and Modesto Borreguero. Also noteworthy are the Conde Brothers, Faustino (1913\u20131988), Mariano (1916\u20131989) and Julio (1918\u20131996), nephews of Domingo Esteso, whose children and heirs continue the saga.\nThe guitarists use the technique of alzap\u00faa, picado, the strum and the tremolo, among others. One of the first touches that is considered flamenco, such as the \"ronde\u00f1a\", was the first composition recorded for solo guitar, by Juli\u00e1n Arcas (Mar\u00eda, Almer\u00eda, 1832 \u2013 Antequera, M\u00e1laga, 1882) in Barcelona in 1860. The strum can be performed with 5, 4 or 3 fingers, the latter invented by Sabicas. The use of the thumb is also characteristic of flamenco playing. Guitarists rest their thumb on the guitar's soundboard and their index and middle fingers on the string above the one they are playing, thus achieving greater power and sound than the classical guitarist. The middle finger is also placed on the pickguard of the guitar for more precision and strength when plucking the string. Likewise, the use of the pickguard as an element of percussion gives great strength to flamenco guitar playing. The melodic or flourishing phrase that is inserted between the chord sequences intended to accompany the couplet is called \"falseta\".\nThe accompaniment and solo playing of flamenco guitarists is based on both the modal harmonic system and the tonal system, although the most frequent is a combination of both. Some flamenco songs are performed \"a palo seco\" (a cappella), without guitar accompaniment.\nCante (song).\nAccording to the Royal Spanish Academy, \"cante\" is called the \"action or effect of singing any Andalusian singing\", defining \"flamenco singing\" as \"agitated Andalusian singing\" and cante jondo as \"the most genuine song. Andalusian, of deep feeling \". The interpreter of flamenco singing is called \"cantaor\" instead of singer, with the loss of the intervocalic characteristic of the Andalusian dialect.\nThe most important award in flamenco singing is probably the Llave de Oro del Cante, which has been awarded five times to: Tom\u00e1s el Nitri, Manuel Vallejo, Antonio Mairena, Camar\u00f3n de la Isla and Fosforito.\nBaile (dance).\n\"El baile flamenco\" is known for its emotional intensity, proud carriage, expressive use of the arms and rhythmic stamping of the feet, unlike tap dance or Irish dance which use different techniques. As with any dance form, many different styles of flamenco have developed.\nIn the 20th century, flamenco danced informally at gitano (Roma) celebrations in Spain was considered the most \"authentic\" form of flamenco. There was less virtuoso technique in gitano flamenco, but the music and steps are fundamentally the same. The arms are noticeably different from classical flamenco, curving around the head and body rather than extending, often with a bent elbow.\n\"Flamenco puro\" otherwise known as \"flamenco por derecho\" is considered the form of performance flamenco closest to its gitano influences. In this style, the dance is often performed solo, and is based on signals and calls of structural improvisation rather than choreographed. In the improvisational style, castanets are not often used.\n\"Classical flamenco\" is the style most frequently performed by Spanish flamenco dance companies. It is danced largely in a proud and upright style. For women, the back is often held in a marked back bend. Unlike the more gitano influenced styles, there is little movement of the hips, the body is tightly held, and the arms are long, like a ballet dancer. In fact, many of the dancers in these companies are trained in Ballet Cl\u00e1sico Espa\u00f1ol more than in the improvisational language of flamenco. Flamenco has both influenced and been influenced by Ballet Cl\u00e1sico Espa\u00f1ol, as evidenced by the fusion of the two ballets created by 'La Argentinita' in the early part of the 20th century and later, by Joaqu\u00edn Cort\u00e9s, eventually by the entire Ballet Nacional de Espa\u00f1a et al.\nIn the 1950s Jose Greco was one of the most famous male flamenco dancers, performing on stage worldwide and on television including the Ed Sullivan Show, and reviving the art almost singlehandedly. Greco's company left a handful of prominent pioneers, most notably: Maria Benitez and Vicente Romero of New Mexico. Today, there are many centers of flamenco art. Albuquerque, New Mexico is considered the \"Center of the Nation\" for flamenco art. Much of this is due to the late (d. 2024) Mar\u00eda Ben\u00edtez's 37 years of sold-out summer seasons. Albuquerque boasts three distinct prominent centers: National Institute of Flamenco, Casa Flamenca and Flamenco Works. Each center dedicates time to daily training, cultural diffusion and world-class performance equaled only to world-class performances one would find in the heart of Southern Spain, Andaluc\u00eda.\nModern flamenco is a highly technical dance style requiring years of study. The emphasis for both male and female performers is on lightning-fast footwork performed with absolute precision. In addition, the dancer may have to dance while using props such as castanets, canes, shawls and fans.\n\"Flamenco nuevo\" is a recent marketing phenomenon in flamenco. Marketed as a \"newer version\" of flamenco, its roots came from world-music promoters trying to sell albums of artists who created music that \"sounded like\" or had Spanish-style influences. Though some of this music was played in similar pitches, scales and was well-received, it has little to nothing to do with the art of flamenco guitar, dance, cante Jondo or the improvisational language. \"Nuevo flamenco\" consists largely of compositions and repertoire, while traditional flamenco music and dance is a language composed of stanzas, actuated by oral formulaic calls and signals.\nThe flamenco most foreigners are familiar with is a style that was developed as a spectacle for tourists. To add variety, group dances are included and even solos are more likely to be choreographed. The frilly, voluminous spotted dresses are derived from a style of dress worn for the Sevillanas at the annual Feria in Seville.\nIn traditional flamenco, only the very young or older dancers are considered to have the emotional innocence or maturity to adequately convey the \"duende\" (soul) of the genre . Therefore, unlike other dance forms, where dancers turn professional through techniques early on to take advantage of youth and strength, many flamenco dancers do not hit their peak until their thirties and will continue to perform into their fifties and beyond. One artist that is considered a young master is Juan Manuel Fernandez Montoya, otherwise known as \"Farruquito\". At age 12, Farruquito was considered a pioneer and for \"flamenco puro\", or \"flamenco por derecho\", because of his emotional depth.\nRegulated teaching of flamenco in educational centers.\nIn Spain, regulated flamenco studies are officially taught in various music conservatories, dance conservatories and music schools in various autonomous communities.\nConservatories of music.\nFlamenco guitar studies in official educational centers began in Spain in 1988 at the hands of the great concert performer and teacher from Granada Manuel Cano Tamayo, who obtained a position as emeritus professor at the https:// from C\u00f3rdoba.\nThere are specialized flamenco conservatories throughout the country, although mainly in the Andalusia region, such as the aforementioned C\u00f3rdoba Conservatory, the https:// or the Superior Music School of Catalonia, among others. Outside of Spain, a unique case is the Rotterdam Conservatory, in the Netherlands, which offers regulated flamenco guitar studies under the direction of maestro Paco Pe\u00f1a since 1985, a few years before they existed in Spain.\nUniversity.\nIn 2018 the first university master's degree in flamenco research and analysis begins, after the previous attempts of the \"Doctorate Program of Approach to Flamenco\", taught by several universities such as Huelva, Seville, C\u00e1diz and C\u00f3rdoba, among others.\nHistory.\nThe fandango, which in the 17th century was the most widespread song and dance throughout Spain, eventually ended up generating local and regional variants, especially in the province of Huelva. In Alta Andaluc\u00eda and bordering areas, the fandangos were accompanied with the bandola, an instrument with which they accompanied themselves following a regular beat that allowed dancing and from whose name the style derives \" abandoned \". Thus arose the fandangos of Lucena, the drones of Puente Genil, the primitive malague\u00f1as, the ronde\u00f1as, the jaberas, the jabegotes, the verdiales, the chacarr\u00e1, the grana\u00edna, the taranto and the taranta. Due to the expansion of the Sevillanas in Baja Andalusia, the fandango gradually lost its role as a support for the dance, which allowed the singer to shine and freedom, generating a multitude of fandangos of personal creation in the 20th century. Likewise, thousands of Andalusian peasants, especially from the Eastern Andalusian provinces, emigrated to the mining sites Murcian, where the tarantos and taranta s evolved. The Tarante de Linares, evolved into the mining of the Union, the Cartagena and the Levantica. At the time of the caf\u00e9s cantantes, some of these cantes were separated from the dance and acquired a free beat, which allowed the performers to show off. The great promoter of this process was Antonio Chac\u00f3n, who developed precious versions of malague\u00f1as, granainas and cantes mineros.\nThe stylization of romance and cord sheets gave rise to . The extraction of the romances from quatrains or three significant verses gave rise to the primitive ton\u00e1s, the ca\u00f1a and the polo, which share meter and melody, but differing in their execution. The guitar accompaniment gave them a beat that made them danceable. It is believed that their origin was in Ronda, a city in Alta Andaluc\u00eda close to Baja Andaluc\u00eda and closely related to it, and that from there they reached the Sevillian suburb of Triana, with a great tradition of corridos, where they became the sole\u00e1. From the festive performance of corridos and soleares, the jaleos arose in Triana, who traveled to Extremadura and in Jerez and Utrera led to the buler\u00eda, from where they spread throughout Baja Andaluc\u00eda, generating local variations.\nLexicon.\nOle.\nAdolfo Salazar states that the expressive voice \"ole\", with which Andalusian \"cantaores\" and \"bailaores\" are encouraged, can come from the Hebrew verb \"oleh\" which means \"to throw upwards\", showing that the dervish girovaghi of Tunisia, Maghreb, also dance around to the sound of repeated \"ole\" or \"joleh\". The use of the word \"arza\", which is the Andalusian dialect form, of pronouncing the voice imperative \"rise\", with the characteristic Andalusian equalization of / l / and / r / implosives. The indiscriminate use of the voices \"arza\" and \"ole\" is frequent when it comes to \"jalear\", but the most evidence of the origin of this word can be from the cal\u00f3: \"Ol\u00e1\", which means \"come\". Likewise, in Andalusia it is known as jaleo al ojeo de hunt, that is, the act of glancing, which is \"driving away the game with voices, shots, blows or noise, so that they 'get up'\".\nDuende.\nAccording to the RAE dictionary (1956!) The \"duende\" in Andalusia is a \"mysterious and ineffable charm\", a charisma that the gitanos call duende. Federico Garc\u00eda Lorca, in his lecture \"Teor\u00eda y juego del duende\" confirms this ineffability of the duende by defining it with the following words from Goethe: \"Mysterious power that everyone feels and that no philosopher explains\". In the flamenco imaginary, the duende goes beyond technique and inspiration, in Lorca's words \"To search for the duende there is no map or exercise\". When a flamenco artist experiences the arrival of this mysterious charm, the expressions \"have duende\" or sing, play or dance \"with duende\" are used.\nAlong with those previously mentioned, there are many other words and expressions characteristic of the flamenco genre, such as \"tablao flamenco\", \"flamenco spree\", \"third\", \"aflamencar\", and \"flamenco\".\nIn different \"Palos\".\nEach \"palo\" within flamenco is associated with its own characteristic lexicon. While this connection had long been recognized informally, recent research has provided quantitative evidence. A computational study analyzing more than 2000 flamenco lyrics applied natural language processing and machine learning techniques to classify songs by \"palo\". The findings showed that differences in vocabulary allow automatic classification of lyrics with notable accuracy. This confirmed that the distinct origins, histories, and cultural contexts of each \"palo\" are reflected in their lexical patterns.\nThe study also examined semantic fields and inter-genre distances, identifying relationships among major palos and supporting historical theories regarding their development. For example, alegr\u00edas were found to emphasize festive themes and references to C\u00e1diz, seguiriyas to convey profound concerns and Romani expressions, and buler\u00edas to encompass a wide range of topics. A network analysis highlighted lexical connections among \"palos\", with buler\u00edas acting as a central link.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11561", "revid": "49291118", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11561", "title": "Father Christmas", "text": "Folkloric figure originating in England\nFather Christmas is the traditional English name for the personification of Christmas. Although now known as a Christmas gift-bringer, and typically considered to be synonymous with Santa Claus, he was originally part of a much older and unrelated English folkloric tradition. The recognisably modern figure of the English Father Christmas developed in the late Victorian period, but Christmas had been personified for centuries before then.\nEnglish personifications of Christmas were first recorded in the 15th century, with Father Christmas himself first appearing in the mid 17th century in the aftermath of the English Civil War. The Puritan-controlled English government had legislated to abolish Christmas, considering it popish, and had outlawed its traditional customs. Royalist political pamphleteers, linking the old traditions with their cause, adopted Old Father Christmas as the symbol of 'the good old days' of feasting and good cheer. Following the Restoration in 1660, Father Christmas's profile declined. His character was maintained during the late 18th and into the 19th century by the Christmas folk plays later known as mummers' plays.\nUntil Victorian times, Father Christmas was concerned with adult feasting and merry-making. He had no particular connection with children, nor with the giving of presents, nocturnal visits, stockings, chimneys or reindeer. But as later Victorian Christmases developed into child-centric family festivals, Father Christmas became a bringer of gifts. \nThe popular American myth of Santa Claus arrived in England in the 1850s and Father Christmas started to take on Santa Claus's attributes. By the 1880s the new customs had become established, with the nocturnal visitor sometimes being known as Santa Claus and sometimes as Father Christmas. He was often illustrated wearing a long red hooded gown trimmed with white fur.\nMost residual distinctions between Father Christmas and Santa Claus largely faded away in the early years of the 20th century, and modern dictionaries consider the terms Father Christmas and Santa Claus to be synonymous.\nEarly midwinter celebrations.\nThe custom of merrymaking and feasting at Christmastide first appears in the historical record during the High Middle Ages (c 1100\u20131300). This almost certainly represented a continuation of pre-Christian midwinter celebrations in Britain of which\u2014as the historian Ronald Hutton has pointed out\u2014\"we have no details at all\". Personifications came later, and when they did they reflected the existing custom.\n15th century\u2014the first English personifications of Christmas.\nThe first known English personification of Christmas was associated with merry-making, singing and drinking. A carol attributed to Richard Smart, Rector of Plymtree in Devon from 1435 to 1477, has 'Sir Christemas' announcing the news of Christ's birth and encouraging his listeners to drink: \"\"Buvez bien par toute la compagnie\", / Make good cheer and be right merry, / And sing with us now joyfully: Nowell, nowell.\"\nMany Christmas customs of the Late Middle Ages incorporated both sacred and secular themes. In Norwich in January 1443, at a traditional battle between the flesh and the spirit (represented by Christmas and Lent), John Gladman, crowned and disguised as 'King of Christmas', rode behind a pageant of the months \"disguysed as the seson requird\" on a horse decorated with tinfoil.\n16th century\u2014feasting, entertainment and music.\nIn most of England the archaic word 'Yule' had been replaced by 'Christmas' by the 11th century, but in some places 'Yule' survived as the normal dialect term. The City of York maintained an annual St Thomas's Day celebration of \"The Riding of Yule and his Wife\" which involved a figure representing Yule who carried bread and a leg of lamb. In 1572, the riding was suppressed on the orders of Edmund Grindal, the Archbishop of York (term 1570\u20131576), who complained of the \"undecent and uncomely disguising\" which drew multitudes of people from divine service.\nSuch personifications, illustrating the medieval fondness for pageantry and symbolism, extended throughout the Tudor and Stuart periods with Lord of Misrule characters, sometimes called 'Captain Christmas', 'Prince Christmas' or 'The Christmas Lord', presiding over feasting and entertainment in grand houses, university colleges and Inns of Court.\nIn his allegorical play \"Summer's Last Will and Testament\", written in about 1592, Thomas Nashe introduced for comic effect a miserly Christmas character who refuses to keep the feast. He is reminded by Summer of the traditional role that he ought to be playing: \"Christmas, how chance thou com\u2019st not as the rest, / Accompanied with some music, or some song? / A merry carol would have graced thee well; / Thy ancestors have used it heretofore.\"\n17th century\u2014religion and politics.\nPuritan criticisms.\nEarly 17th century writers used the techniques of personification and allegory as a means of defending Christmas from attacks by radical Protestants.\nResponding to a perceived decline in the levels of Christmas hospitality provided by the gentry, Ben Jonson in \"Christmas, His Masque\" (1616) dressed his Old Christmas in out-of-date fashions: \"attir'd in round Hose, long Stockings, a close Doublet, a high crownd Hat with a Broach, a long thin beard, a Truncheon, little Ruffes, white shoes, his Scarffes, and Garters tyed crosse\". Surrounded by guards, Christmas asserts his rightful place in the Protestant Church and protests against attempts to exclude him: \"Why Gentlemen, doe you know what you doe? ha! would you ha'kept me out? Christmas, old Christmas? Christmas of London, and Captaine Christmas? ... they would not let me in: I must come another time! a good jeast, as if I could come more then once a yeare; why, I am no dangerous person, and so I told my friends, o'the Guard. I am old Gregorie Christmas still, and though I come out of Popes-head-alley as good a Protestant, as any i'my Parish.\"\nThe stage directions to \"The Springs Glorie\", a 1638 court masque by Thomas Nabbes, state, \"Christmas is personated by an old reverend Gentleman in a furr'd gown and cappe &amp;c.\" Shrovetide and Christmas dispute precedence, and Shrovetide issues a challenge: \"I say Christmas you are past date, you are out of the Almanack. Resigne, resigne.\" To which Christmas responds: \"Resigne to thee! I that am the King of good cheere and feasting, though I come but once a yeare to raigne over bak't, boyled, roast and plum-porridge, will have being in despight of thy lard-ship.\"\nThis sort of character was to feature repeatedly over the next 250 years in pictures, stage plays and folk dramas. Initially known as 'Sir Christmas' or 'Lord Christmas', he later became increasingly referred to as 'Father Christmas'.\nPuritan revolution\u2014enter 'Father Christmas'.\nThe rise of puritanism led to accusations of popery in connection with pre-reformation Christmas traditions. When the Puritans took control of government in the mid-1640s they made concerted efforts to abolish Christmas and to outlaw its traditional customs. For 15 years from around 1644, before and during the Interregnum of 1649-1660, the celebration of Christmas in England was forbidden. The suppression was given greater legal weight from June 1647 when parliament passed an \"Ordinance for Abolishing of Festivals\" which formally abolished Christmas in its entirety, along with the other traditional church festivals of Easter and Whitsun.\nIt was in this context that Royalist pamphleteers linked the old traditions of Christmas with the cause of King and Church, while radical puritans argued for the suppression of Christmas both in its religious and its secular aspects. In the hands of Royalist pamphlet writers, Old Father Christmas served as the symbol and spokesman of 'the good old days' of feasting and good cheer, and it became popular for Christmastide's defenders to present him as lamenting past times.\n\"The Arraignment, Conviction and Imprisoning of Christmas\" (January 1646) describes a discussion between a town crier and a Royalist gentlewoman enquiring after Old Father Christmas who 'is gone from hence'. Its anonymous author, a parliamentarian, presents Father Christmas in a negative light, concentrating on his allegedly popish attributes: \"For age, this hoarie headed man was of great yeares, and as white as snow; he entred the Romish Kallender time out of mind; [he] is old ...; he was full and fat as any dumb Docter of them all. He looked under the consecrated Laune sleeves as big as Bul-beefe ... but, since the catholike liquor is taken from him, he is much wasted, so that he hath looked very thin and ill of late ... But yet some other markes that you may know him by, is that the wanton Women dote after him; he helped them to so many new Gownes, Hatts, and Hankerches, and other fine knacks, of which he hath a pack on his back, in which is good store of all sorts, besides the fine knacks that he got out of their husbands' pockets for household provisions for him. He got Prentises, Servants, and Schollars many play dayes, and therefore was well beloved by them also, and made all merry with Bagpipes, Fiddles, and other musicks, Giggs, Dances, and Mummings.\"\nThe character of 'Christmas' (also called 'father Christmas') speaks in a pamphlet of 1652, immediately after the English Civil War, published anonymously by the satirical Royalist poet John Taylor: \"The Vindication of Christmas or, His Twelve Yeares' Observations upon the Times\". A frontispiece illustrates an old, bearded Christmas in a brimmed hat, a long open robe and undersleeves. Christmas laments the pitiful quandary he has fallen into since he came into \"this headlesse countrey\". \"I was in good hope that so long a misery would have made them glad to bid a merry Christmas welcome. But welcome or not welcome, I am come...\" He concludes with a verse: \"Lets dance and sing, and make good chear, / For Christmas comes but once a year.\"\nIn 1658 Josiah King published \"The Examination and Tryall of Old Father Christmas\" (the earliest citation for the specific term 'Father Christmas' recognised by the \"Oxford English Dictionary\"). King portrays Father Christmas as a white-haired old man who is on trial for his life based on evidence laid against him by the Commonwealth. Father Christmas's counsel mounts the defence: \"Me thinks my Lord, the very Clouds blush, to see this old Gentleman thus egregiously abused. if at any time any have abused themselves by immoderate eating, and drinking or otherwise spoil the creatures, it is none of this old mans fault; neither ought he to suffer for it; for example the Sun and the Moon are by the heathens worship\u2019d are they therefore bad because idolized? so if any abuse this old man, they are bad for abusing him, not he bad, for being abused.\" The jury acquits.\nRestoration.\nFollowing the Restoration in 1660, most traditional Christmas celebrations were revived, although as these were no longer contentious the historic documentary sources become fewer.\nIn 1678 Josiah King reprinted his 1658 pamphlet with additional material. In this version, the restored Father Christmas is looking better: \"[he] look't so smug and pleasant, his cherry cheeks appeared through his thin milk white locks, like [b]lushing Roses vail'd with snow white Tiffany ... the true Emblem of Joy and Innocence.\"\n\"Old Christmass Returnd\", a ballad collected by Samuel Pepys, celebrated the revival of festivities in the latter part of the century: \"Old Christmass is come for to keep open house / He scorns to be guilty of starving a mouse, / Then come boyes and welcome, for dyet the chief / Plumb pudding, Goose, Capon, minc't pies &amp; Roast beef\".\n18th century\u2014a low profile.\nAs interest in Christmas customs waned, Father Christmas's profile declined. He still continued to be regarded as Christmas's presiding spirit, although his occasional earlier associations with the Lord of Misrule died out with the disappearance of the Lord of Misrule himself. The historian Ronald Hutton notes, \"after a taste of genuine misrule during the Interregnum nobody in the ruling elite seems to have had any stomach for simulating it.\" Hutton also found \"patterns of entertainment at late Stuart Christmases are remarkably timeless [and] nothing very much seems to have altered during the next century either.\" The diaries of 18th and early 19th century clergy take little note of any Christmas traditions.\nIn \"The Country Squire\", a play of 1732, Old Christmas is depicted as someone who is rarely-found: a generous squire. The character Scabbard remarks, \"Men are grown so ... stingy, now-a-days, that there is scarce One, in ten Parishes, makes any House-keeping. ... Squire Christmas ... keeps a good House, or else I do not know of One besides.\" When invited to spend Christmas with the squire, he comments \"I will ... else I shall forget Christmas, for aught I see.\" Similar opinions were expressed in \"Round About Our Coal Fire ... with some curious Memories of Old Father Christmas; Shewing what Hospitality was in former Times, and how little there remains of it at present\" (1734, reprinted with Father Christmas subtitle 1796).\nDavid Garrick's popular 1774 Drury Lane production of \"A Christmas Tale\" included a personified Christmas character who announced \"Behold a personage well known to fame; / Once lov'd and honour'd \u2013 Christmas is my name! /.../ I, English hearts rejoic'd in days of yore; / for new strange modes, imported by the score, / You will not sure turn Christmas out of door!\"\nEarly records of folk plays.\nBy the late 18th century Father Christmas had become a stock character in the Christmas folk plays later known as mummers plays. During the following century they became probably the most widespread of all calendar customs. Hundreds of villages had their own mummers who performed traditional plays around the neighbourhood, especially at the big houses. Father Christmas appears as a character in plays of the Southern England type, being mostly confined to plays from the south and west of England and Wales. His ritual opening speech is characterised by variants of a couplet closely reminiscent of John Taylor's \"But welcome or not welcome, I am come...\" from 1652.\nThe oldest extant speech is from Truro, Cornwall in the late 1780s:\n19th century\u2014revival.\nDuring the Victorian period, Christmas customs enjoyed a significant revival, including the figure of Father Christmas himself as the emblem of 'good cheer'. His physical appearance at this time became more variable, and he was by no means always portrayed as the old and bearded figure imagined by 17th century writers.\n'Merry England' view of Christmas.\nIn his 1808 poem \"Marmion\", Walter Scott wrote:\nEngland was merry England, when / Old Christmas brought his sports again.\n'Twas Christmas broach'd the mightiest ale; / 'Twas Christmas told the merriest tale;\nA Christmas gambol oft could cheer / The poor man's heart through half the year.\nScott's phrase Merry England has been adopted by historians to describe the romantic notion that there was a Golden Age of the English past, allegedly since lost, that was characterised by universal hospitality and charity. The notion had a profound influence on the way that popular customs were seen, and most of the 19th century writers who bemoaned the state of contemporary Christmases were, at least to some extent, yearning for the mythical Merry England version.\nThomas Hervey's \"The Book of Christmas\" (1836), illustrated by Robert Seymour, exemplifies this view. In Hervey's personification of the lost charitable festival, \"Old Father Christmas, at the head of his numerous and uproarious family, might ride his goat through the streets of the city and the lanes of the village, but he dismounted to sit for some few moments by each man's hearth; while some one or another of his merry sons would break away, to visit the remote farm-houses or show their laughing faces at many a poor man's door.\" Seymour's illustration shows Old Christmas dressed in a fur gown, crowned with a holly wreath, and riding a yule goat.\nIn an extended allegory, Hervey imagines his contemporary Old Father Christmas as a white-bearded magician dressed in a long robe and crowned with holly. His children are identified as Roast Beef (Sir Loin) and his faithful squire or bottle-holder Plum Pudding; the slender figure of Wassail with her fount of perpetual youth; a 'tricksy spirit' who bears the bowl and is on the best of terms with the Turkey; Mumming; Misrule, with a feather in his cap; the Lord of Twelfth Night under a state-canopy of cake and wearing his ancient crown; Saint Distaff looking like an old maid (\"she used to be a sad romp; but her merriest days we fear are over\"); Carol singing; the Waits; and the twin-faced Janus.\nHervey ends by lamenting the lost \"uproarious merriment\" of Christmas, and calls on his readers \"who know anything of the 'old, old, very old, gray-bearded gentleman' or his family to aid us in our search after them; and with their good help we will endeavor to restore them to some portion of their ancient honors in England\".\nFather Christmas or Old Christmas, represented as a jolly-faced bearded man often surrounded by plentiful food and drink, started to appear regularly in illustrated magazines of the 1840s. He was dressed in a variety of costumes and usually had holly on his head, as in these illustrations from the \"Illustrated London News\":\nCharles Dickens's 1843 novel \"A Christmas Carol\" was highly influential, and has been credited both with reviving interest in Christmas in England and with shaping the themes attached to it. A famous image from the novel is John Leech's illustration of the 'Ghost of Christmas Present'. Although not explicitly named Father Christmas, the character wears a holly wreath, is shown sitting among food, drink and wassail bowl, and is dressed in the traditional loose furred gown\u2014but in green rather than the red that later become ubiquitous.\nLater 19th century mumming.\nOld Father Christmas continued to make his annual appearance in Christmas folk plays throughout the 19th century, his appearance varying considerably according to local custom. Sometimes, as in Hervey's book of 1836, he was portrayed (below left) as a hunchback.\nOne unusual portrayal (below centre) was described several times by William Sandys between 1830 and 1852, all in essentially the same terms: \"Father Christmas is represented as a grotesque old man, with a large mask and comic wig, and a huge club in his hand.\" This representation is considered by the folklore scholar Peter Millington to be the result of the southern Father Christmas replacing the northern Beelzebub character in a hybrid play. A spectator to a Worcestershire version of the \"St George\" play in 1856 noted, \"Beelzebub was identical with Old Father Christmas.\"\nA mummers play mentioned in \"The Book of Days\" (1864) opened with \"Old Father Christmas, bearing, as emblematic devices, the holly bough, wassail-bowl, &amp;c\". A corresponding illustration (below right) shows the character wearing not only a holly wreath but also a gown with a hood.\nIn a Hampshire folk play of 1860 Father Christmas is portrayed as a disabled soldier: \"[he] wore breeches and stockings, carried a begging-box, and conveyed himself upon two sticks; his arms were striped with chevrons like a noncommissioned officer.\"\nIn the latter part of the 19th century and the early years of the next the folk play tradition in England rapidly faded, and the plays almost died out after the First World War taking their ability to influence the character of Father Christmas with them.\nFather Christmas as gift-giver.\nIn pre-Victorian personifications, Father Christmas had been concerned essentially with adult feasting and games. He had no particular connection with children, nor with the giving of presents. But as Victorian Christmases developed into family festivals centred mainly on children, Father Christmas started to be associated with the giving of gifts.\nThe Cornish Quaker diarist Barclay Fox relates a family party given on 26 December 1842 that featured \"the venerable effigies of Father Christmas with scarlet coat &amp; cocked hat, stuck all over with presents for the guests, by his side the old year, a most dismal &amp; haggard old beldame in a night cap and spectacles, then 1843 [the new year], a promising baby asleep in a cradle\".\nIn Britain, the first evidence of a child writing letters to Father Christmas requesting gift has been found in 1895.\nSanta Claus crosses the Atlantic.\nThe figure of Santa Claus had originated in the US, drawing at least partly upon Dutch St Nicolas traditions. A New York publication of 1821, \"A New-Year\u2019s Present\", contained an illustrated poem \"Old Santeclaus with Much Delight\" in which a Santa Claus figure on a reindeer sleigh brings presents for good children and a \"long, black birchen rod\" for use on the bad ones. In 1823 came the famous poem \"A Visit from St. Nicholas\", usually attributed to the New York writer Clement Clarke Moore, which developed the character further. Moore's poem became immensely popular and Santa Claus customs, initially localized in the Dutch American areas, were becoming general in the United States by the middle of the century.\nThe January 1848 edition of \"Howitt's Journal of Literature and Popular Progress\", published in London, carried an illustrated article entitled \"New Year's Eve in Different Nations\". This noted that one of the chief features of the American New Year's Eve was a custom carried over from the Dutch, namely the arrival of Santa Claus with gifts for the children. Santa Claus is \"no other than the Pelz Nickel of Germany ... the good Saint Nicholas of Russia ... He arrives in Germany about a fortnight before Christmas, but as may be supposed from all the visits he has to pay there, and the length of his voyage, he does not arrive in America, until this eve.\"\nIn 1851 advertisements began appearing in Liverpool newspapers for a new transatlantic passenger service to and from New York aboard the Eagle Line's ship \"Santa Claus\", and returning visitors and emigrants to the British Isles on this and other vessels will have been familiar with the American figure. There were some early adoptions in Britain. A Scottish reference has Santa Claus leaving presents on New Year's Eve 1852, with children \"hanging their stockings up on each side of the fire-place, in their sleeping apartments, at night, and waiting patiently till morning, to see what Santa Claus puts into them during their slumbers\". In Ireland in 1853, on the other hand, presents were being left on Christmas Eve according to a character in a newspaper short story who says \"...\u00a0tomorrow will be Christmas. What will Santa Claus bring us?\" A poem published in Belfast in 1858 includes the lines \"The children sleep; they dream of him, the fairy, / Kind Santa Claus, who with a right good will / Comes down the chimney with a footstep airy ...\"\n\"A Visit from St. Nicholas\" was published in England in December 1853 in \"Notes and Queries\". An explanatory note states that the St Nicholas figure is known as Santa Claus in New York State and as Krishkinkle in Pennsylvania.\n1854 marked the first English publication of \"Carl Krinkin; or, The Christmas Stocking\" by the popular American author Susan Warner. The novel was published three times in London in 1854\u20135, and there were several later editions. Characters in the book include both Santa Claus (complete with sleigh, stocking and chimney), leaving presents on Christmas Eve and\u2014separately\u2014Old Father Christmas. The Stocking of the title tells of how in England, \"a great many years ago\", it saw Father Christmas enter with his traditional refrain \"Oh! here come I, old father Christmas, welcome or not ...\" He wore a crown of yew and ivy, and he carried a long staff topped with holly-berries. His dress \"was a long brown robe which fell down about his feet, and on it were sewed little spots of white cloth to represent snow\".\nMerger with Santa Claus.\nAs the US-inspired customs became popular in England, Father Christmas started to take on Santa Claus's attributes. His costume became more standardised, and although depictions often still showed him carrying holly, the holly crown became rarer and was often replaced with a hood. It still remained common, though, for Father Christmas and Santa Claus to be distinguished, and as late as the 1890s there were still examples of the old-style Father Christmas appearing without any of the new American features.\nAppearances in public.\nThe blurring of public roles occurred quite rapidly. In an 1854 newspaper description of the public Boxing Day festivities in Luton, Bedfordshire, a gift-giving Father Christmas/Santa Claus figure was already being described as 'familiar': \"On the right-hand side was Father Christmas's bower, formed of evergreens, and in front was the proverbial Yule log, glistening in the snow ... He wore a great furry white coat and cap, and a long white beard and hair spoke to his hoar antiquity. Behind his bower he had a large selection of fancy articles which formed the gifts he distributed to holders of prize tickets from time to time during the day ... Father Christmas bore in his hand a small Christmas tree laden with bright little gifts and bon-bons, and altogether he looked like the familiar Santa Claus or Father Christmas of the picture book.\" Discussing the shops of Regent Street in London, another writer noted in December of that year, \"you may fancy yourself in the abode of Father Christmas or St. Nicholas himself.\"\nDuring the 1860s and the 1870s, Father Christmas became a popular subject on Christmas cards, where he was shown in many different costumes. Sometimes he gave presents and sometimes received them.\nAn illustrated article of 1866 explained the concept of \"The Cave of Mystery\". In an imagined children's party this took the form of a recess in the library which evoked \"dim visions of the cave of Aladdin\" and was \"well filled ... with all that delights the eye, pleases the ear, or tickles the fancy of children\". The young guests \"tremblingly await the decision of the improvised Father Christmas, with his flowing grey beard, long robe, and slender staff\".\nFrom the 1870s onwards, Christmas shopping had begun to evolve as a separate seasonal activity, and by the late 19th century it had become an important part of the English Christmas. The purchasing of toys, especially from the new department stores, became strongly associated with the season. The first retail Christmas Grotto was set up in JR Robert's store in Stratford, London in December 1888, and shopping arenas for children\u2014often called 'Christmas Bazaars'\u2014spread rapidly during the 1890s and 1900s, helping to assimilate Father Christmas/Santa Claus into society.\nSometimes the two characters continued to be presented as separate, as in a procession at the Olympia Exhibition of 1888 in which both Father Christmas and Santa Claus took part, with Little Red Riding Hood and other children's characters in between. At other times the characters were conflated: in 1885 Mr Williamson's London Bazaar in Sunderland was reported to be a \"Temple of juvenile delectation and delight. In the well-lighted window is a representation of Father Christmas, with the printed intimation that 'Santa Claus is arranging within.'\"\nEven after the appearance of the store grotto, it was still not firmly established who should hand out gifts at parties. A writer in the \"Illustrated London News\" of December 1888 suggested that a Sibyl should dispense gifts from a 'snow cave', but a little over a year later she had changed her recommendation to a gypsy in a 'magic cave'. Alternatively, the hostess could \"have Father Christmas arrive, towards the end of the evening, with a sack of toys on his back. He must have a white head and a long white beard, of course. Wig and beard can be cheaply hired from a theatrical costumier, or may be improvised from tow in case of need. He should wear a greatcoat down to his heels, liberally sprinkled with flour as though he had just come from that land of ice where Father Christmas is supposed to reside.\"\nAs secret nocturnal visitor.\nThe nocturnal visitor aspect of the American myth took much longer to become naturalised. From the 1840s it had been accepted readily enough that presents were left for children by unseen hands overnight on Christmas Eve, but the receptacle was a matter of debate, as was the nature of the visitor. Dutch tradition had St Nicholas leaving presents in shoes laid out on 5 December, while in France shoes were filled by P\u00e8re No\u00ebl. The older shoe custom and the newer American stocking custom trickled only slowly into Britain, with writers and illustrators remaining uncertain for many years. Although the stocking eventually triumphed, the shoe custom had still not been forgotten by 1901 when an illustration entitled \"Did you see Santa Claus, Mother?\" was accompanied by the verse \"Her Christmas dreams / Have all come true; / Stocking o'erflows / and likewise shoe.\"\nBefore Santa Claus and the stocking became ubiquitous, one English tradition had been for fairies to visit on Christmas Eve to leave gifts in shoes set out in front of the fireplace.\nAspects of the American Santa Claus myth were sometimes adopted in isolation and applied to Father Christmas. In a short fantasy piece, the editor of the \"Cheltenham Chronicle\" in 1867 dreamt of being seized by the collar by Father Christmas, \"rising up like a Geni of the Arabian Nights ... and moving rapidly through the \"aether\"\". Hovering over the roof of a house, Father Christmas cries 'Open Sesame' to have the roof roll back to disclose the scene within.\nIt was not until the 1870s that the tradition of a nocturnal Santa Claus began to be adopted by ordinary people. The poem \"The Baby's Stocking\", which was syndicated to local newspapers in 1871, took it for granted that readers would be familiar with the custom, and would understand the joke that the stocking might be missed as \"Santa Claus wouldn't be looking for anything half so small.\" On the other hand, when \"The Preston Guardian\" published its poem \"Santa Claus and the Children\" in 1877 it felt the need to include a long preface explaining exactly who Santa Claus was.\nFolklorists and antiquarians were not, it seems, familiar with the new local customs and Ronald Hutton notes that in 1879 the newly formed Folk-Lore Society, ignorant of American practices, was still \"excitedly trying to discover the source of the new belief\".\nIn January 1879 the antiquarian Edwin Lees wrote to \"Notes and Queries\" seeking information about an observance he had been told about by 'a country person': \"On Christmas Eve, when the inmates of a house in the country retire to bed, all those desirous of a present place a stocking outside the door of their bedroom, with the expectation that some mythical being called Santiclaus will fill the stocking or place something within it before the morning. This is of course well known, and the master of the house does in reality place a Christmas gift secretly in each stocking; but the giggling girls in the morning, when bringing down their presents, affect to say that Santiclaus visited and filled the stockings in the night. From what region of the earth or air this benevolent Santiclaus takes flight I have not been able to ascertain ...\" Lees received several responses, linking 'Santiclaus' with the continental traditions of St Nicholas and 'Petit Jesus' (Christkind), but no-one mentioned Father Christmas and no-one was correctly able to identify the American source.\nBy the 1880s the American myth had become firmly established in the popular English imagination, the nocturnal visitor sometimes being known as Santa Claus and sometimes as Father Christmas (often complete with a hooded robe). An 1881 poem imagined a child awaiting a visit from Santa Claus and asking \"Will he come like Father Christmas, / Robed in green and beard all white? / Will he come amid the darkness? / Will he come at all tonight?\" The French writer Max O'Rell, who evidently thought the custom was established in the England of 1883, explained that Father Christmas \"descend par la chemin\u00e9e, pour remplir de bonbons et de joux les bas que les enfants ont suspendus au pied du lit.\" [comes down the chimney, to fill with sweets and games the stockings that the children have hung from the foot of the bed]. And in her poem \"Agnes: A Fairy Tale\" (1891), Lilian M Bennett treats the two names as interchangeable: \"Old Santa Claus is exceedingly kind, / but he won't come to Wide-awakes, you will find... / Father Christmas won't come if he can hear / You're awake. So to bed my bairnies dear.\" The commercial availability from 1895 of Tom Smith &amp; Co's \"Santa Claus Surprise Stockings\" indicates how deeply the American myth had penetrated English society by the end of the century.\nRepresentations of the developing character at this period were sometimes labelled 'Santa Claus' and sometimes 'Father Christmas', with a tendency for the latter still to allude to old-style associations with charity and with food and drink, as in several of these \"Punch\" illustrations:\n20th century.\nAny residual distinctions between Father Christmas and Santa Claus largely faded away in the early years of the new century, and it was reported in 1915, \"The majority of children to-day ... do not know of any difference between our old Father Christmas and the comparatively new Santa Claus, as, by both wearing the same garb, they have effected a happy compromise.\"\nIt took many years for authors and illustrators to agree that Father Christmas's costume should be portrayed as red\u2014although that was always the most common colour\u2014and he could sometimes be found in a gown of brown, green, blue or white. Mass media approval of the red costume came following a Coca-Cola advertising campaign that was launched in 1931.\nFather Christmas's common form for much of the 20th century was described by his entry in the \"Oxford English Dictionary\". He is \"the personification of Christmas as a benevolent old man with a flowing white beard, wearing a red sleeved gown and hood trimmed with white fur, and carrying a sack of Christmas presents\". One of the OED's sources is a 1919 cartoon in \"Punch\", reproduced here. The caption reads:\n\"Uncle James (who after hours of making up rather fancies himself as Father Christmas)\". \"Well, my little man, and do you know who I am?\"\n\"The Little Man.\" \"No, as a matter of fact I don't. But Father's downstairs; perhaps he may be able to tell you.\"\nIn 1951 an editorial in \"The Times\" opined that while most adults may be under the impression that [the English] Father Christmas is home-bred, and is \"a good insular John Bull old gentleman\", many children, \"led away ... by the false romanticism of sledges and reindeer\", post letters to Norway addressed simply to Father Christmas or, \"giving him a foreign veneer, Santa Claus\".\nDifferences between the English and US representations were discussed in \"The Illustrated London News\" of 1985. The classic illustration by the US artist Thomas Nast was held to be \"the authorised version of how Santa Claus should look\u2014in America, that is.\" In Britain, people were said to stick to the older Father Christmas, with a long robe, large concealing beard, and boots similar to Wellingtons.\nFather Christmas appeared in many 20th century English-language works of fiction, including J. R. R. Tolkien's \"Father Christmas Letters\", a series of private letters to his children written between 1920 and 1942 and first published in 1976. Other 20th century publications include C. S. Lewis's \"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\" (1950), Raymond Briggs's \"Father Christmas\" (1973) and its sequel \"Father Christmas Goes on Holiday\" (1975). The character was also celebrated in popular songs, including \"I Believe in Father Christmas\" by Greg Lake (1974) and \"Father Christmas\" by The Kinks (1977).\nIn 1991, Raymond Briggs's two books were adapted as an animated short film, \"Father Christmas\", starring Mel Smith as the voice of the title character.\n21st century.\nModern dictionaries consider the terms Father Christmas and Santa Claus to be synonymous. The respective characters are now to all intents and purposes indistinguishable, although some people are still said to prefer the term 'Father Christmas' over 'Santa Claus', nearly 150 years after Santa Claus's arrival in England. According to \"Brewer's Dictionary of Phrase and Fable\" (19th edn, 2012), Father Christmas is considered to be \"[a] British rather than a US name for Santa Claus, associating him specifically with Christmas. The name carries a somewhat socially superior cachet and is thus preferred by certain advertisers.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11562", "revid": "102175", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11562", "title": "Fossil record", "text": ""}
{"id": "11563", "revid": "10242667", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11563", "title": "Federal jurisdiction (United States)", "text": "Legal scope of the powers of the U.S. federal government\nFederal jurisdiction refers to the legal scope of the government's powers in the United States of America.\nThe United States is a federal republic, governed by the U.S. Constitution, containing fifty states and a federal district which elect the President and Vice President, and having other territories and possessions in its national jurisdiction. This government is variously known as the Union, the United States, or the federal government.\nUnder the Constitution and various treaties, the legal jurisdiction of the United States includes territories and territorial waters.\nLegislative Branch.\nOne aspect of federal jurisdiction is the extent of legislative power. Under the Constitution, Congress has power to legislate in only the areas that are delegated to it. Under clause 17 however, Congress has power to \"exercise exclusive Legislation in all cases whatsoever\" over the federal district (Washington, D.C.) and other territory ceded to the federal government by the states, such as for military installations.\nFederal jurisdiction in this sense is important in criminal law because federal law does not supersede state criminal law. Congress has enacted the Assimilative Crimes Act (\u00a0https://), which provides that any act that would have been a crime under the laws of the state in which a federal enclave is situated is also a federal crime. As most such enclaves are occupied by the military, military law is especially concerned with these enclaves, especially the issue of establishing who has jurisdiction and what type of jurisdiction. In such areas, the federal government may have proprietary jurisdiction (rights as landowner), concurrent jurisdiction (with federal and state law applicable), or exclusive jurisdiction over the land where an act was committed. Courts-martial involving military members subject to the Uniform Code of Military Justice apply regardless of location.\nArticle Four of the United States Constitution also states that the Congress has the power to enact laws \"respecting the Territory or other Property belonging to the United States.\" Federal jurisdiction exists over any territory thus subject to laws enacted by the Congress.\nJudicial branch.\nThe American legal system includes both state courts and federal courts. State courts hear cases involving state law, and such federal laws as are not restricted to hearing in federal courts. Federal courts may hear only those cases where federal jurisdiction can be established. Specifically, the court must have both subject-matter jurisdiction over the matter of the claim and personal jurisdiction over the parties.\nThe Federal Courts are courts of limited jurisdiction, meaning that they exercise only those powers granted to them by the Constitution and Federal Laws. There are several forms of subject-matter jurisdiction, but the two most commonly appealed to are federal-question jurisdiction and diversity jurisdiction. Federal question jurisdiction is available when the plaintiff raises a claim that arises under the laws, treaties, or Constitution of the United States, as opposed to claims arising under state law. By the \"Well-Pleaded Complaint\" rule, federal question jurisdiction is not available if the federal issue arises as only a defense to a state-law claim. Diversity jurisdiction, on the other hand, is available regarding state-law claims if every plaintiff is from a different state from every defendant (the requirement for so-called complete or total diversity) and the amount in controversy exceeds $75,000.\nIf a Federal Court has subject matter jurisdiction over one or more of the claims in a case, it has discretion to exercise ancillary jurisdiction over other state law claims.\nThe Supreme Court has \"cautioned that ... Court[s] must take great care to 'resist the temptation' to express preferences about [certain types of cases] in the form of jurisdictional rules. Judges must strain to remove the influence of the merits from their jurisdictional rules. The law of jurisdiction must remain apart from the world upon which it operates\".\nGenerally, when a case has successfully overcome the hurdles of standing, Case or Controversy and State Action, it will be heard by a trial court. The non-governmental party may raise claims or defenses relating to alleged constitutional violation(s) by the government. If the non-governmental party loses, the constitutional issue may form part of the appeal. Eventually, a petition for certiorari may be sent to the Supreme Court. If the Supreme Court grants certiorari and accepts the case, it will receive written briefs from each side (and any amici curiae or friends of the court\u2014usually interested third parties with some expertise to bear on the subject) and schedule oral arguments. The Justices will closely question both parties. When the Court renders its decision, it will generally do so in a single majority opinion and one or more dissenting opinions. Each opinion sets forth the facts, prior decisions, and legal reasoning behind the position taken. The majority opinion constitutes binding precedent on all lower courts; when faced with very similar facts, they are bound to apply the same reasoning or face reversal of their decision by a higher court.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11564", "revid": "33329518", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11564", "title": "Fossil Record", "text": "Fossil Record is a biannual peer-reviewed scientific journal covering palaeontology. It was established in 1998 as the Mitteilungen aus dem Museum f\u00fcr Naturkunde in Berlin, Geowissenschaftliche Reihe and originally published on behalf of the Museum f\u00fcr Naturkunde by Wiley-VCH. On 1 January 2022, \"Fossil Record\" changed publisher to Pensoft Publishers, the editor-in-chief is Florian Witzmann.\nAbstracting and indexing.\nThe journal is abstracted and indexed in the Science Citation Index Expanded, BIOSIS Previews, The Zoological Record, and Scopus. According to the \"Journal Citation Reports\", the journal has a 2020 impact factor of 2.081.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11568", "revid": "22831189", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11568", "title": "Falsifiable", "text": ""}
{"id": "11569", "revid": "172130", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11569", "title": "Frequency modulation synthesis", "text": "Form of sound synthesis\nFrequency modulation synthesis (or FM synthesis) is a form of sound synthesis whereby the frequency of a waveform is changed by modulating its frequency with a modulator. The (instantaneous) frequency of an oscillator is altered in accordance with the amplitude of a modulating signal.\nFM synthesis can create both harmonic and inharmonic sounds. To synthesize harmonic sounds, the modulating signal must have a harmonic relationship to the original carrier signal. As the amount of frequency modulation increases, the sound grows progressively complex. Through the use of modulators with frequencies that are non-integer multiples of the carrier signal (i.e. inharmonic), inharmonic bell-like and percussive spectra can be created.\nFM synthesis using analog oscillators may result in pitch instability. However, FM synthesis can also be implemented digitally, which is more stable and became standard practice.\nApplications.\nIn synthesizers.\nDigital FM synthesis (equivalent to phase modulation using the time integration of instantaneous frequency) was the basis of several musical instruments beginning as early as 1974. Yamaha built the first prototype digital synthesizer in 1974, based on FM synthesis, before commercially releasing the Yamaha GS-1 in 1980. The Synclavier I, manufactured by New England Digital Corporation beginning in 1978, included a digital FM synthesizer, using an FM synthesis algorithm licensed from Yamaha. Yamaha's groundbreaking Yamaha DX7 synthesizer, released in 1983, brought FM to the forefront of synthesis in the mid-1980s.\nIn PCs, arcades, game consoles, and mobile phones.\nFM synthesis also became the usual setting for games and software up until the mid-nineties. Sound cards for IBM PC compatible systems like the AdLib and Sound Blaster popularized Yamaha chips like the OPL2 and OPL3. Other computers such as the Sharp X68000 and MSX (Yamaha CX5M computer unit) utilize the OPM sound chip (with later CX5M units using the OPP sound chip). The NEC PC-88 and PC-98 computers use either the OPN and OPNA sound chips.\nFor arcade systems and game consoles, OPM was used in many arcade boards from the 1980s and 1990s (including Sega's System 16 and Capcom's CP System arcade boards); OPN was also used in some arcade boards in the 1980s. OPNB was notably used in SNK's Neo Geo arcade (MVS) and home console (AES) machines, as well as being used as the main basic sound generator in Taito's arcade boards (with a variant of the OPNB being used in the Taito Z System board). The related OPN2 was used in Sega's Mega Drive (Genesis), Fujitsu's FM Towns Marty, and some of Sega's arcade boards (e.g. Sega System C-2 and Sega System 32) as one of its sound generator chips.\nFM synthesis was also used on a wide range of mobile phones in the 2000s to play ringtones and other sounds, using the Yamaha SMAF format.\nHistory.\nDon Buchla (mid-1960s).\nDon Buchla implemented FM on his instruments in the mid-1960s, prior to Chowning's patent. His 158, 258 and 259 dual oscillator modules had a specific FM control voltage input, and the model 208 (Music Easel) had a modulation oscillator hard-wired to allow FM as well as AM of the primary oscillator. These early applications used analog oscillators, and this capability was also followed by other modular synthesizers and portable synthesizers including Minimoog and ARP Odyssey.\nJohn Chowning (late-1960s\u20131970s).\nBy the mid-20th century, frequency modulation (FM), a means of carrying sound, had been understood for decades and was being used to broadcast radio transmissions. FM synthesis was developed since 1967 at Stanford University, California, by John Chowning, . His was licensed to Japanese company Yamaha in 1973. The implementation commercialized by Yamaha (US Patent 4018121 Apr 1977 or U.S. Patent 4,018,121) , .\n1970s\u20131980s.\nExpansions by Yamaha.\nYamaha's engineers began adapting Chowning's algorithm for use in a commercial digital synthesizer, adding improvements such as the \"key scaling\" method , though it would take several years before Yamaha released their FM digital synthesizers. In the 1970s, Yamaha were granted a number of patents, under the company's former name \"Nippon Gakki Seizo Kabushiki Kaisha\", evolving Chowning's work. Yamaha built the first prototype FM digital synthesizer in 1974. Yamaha eventually commercialized FM synthesis technology with the Yamaha GS-1, the first FM digital synthesizer, released in 1980. FM synthesis was the basis of some of the early generations of digital synthesizers, most notably those from Yamaha, as well as New England Digital Corporation under license from Yamaha. \nYamaha's DX7 synthesizer, released in 1983, was ubiquitous throughout the 1980s. Several other models by Yamaha provided variations and evolutions of FM synthesis during that decade.\nYamaha had patented its hardware implementation of FM in the 1970s, allowing it to nearly monopolize the market for FM technology until the mid-1990s.\nRelated development by Casio.\nCasio developed a related form of synthesis called phase distortion synthesis, used in its CZ range of synthesizers. It had a similar (but slightly differently derived) sound quality to the DX series.\n1990s.\nFree use of FM after the patent expiration.\nWith the expiration of the Stanford University FM patent in 1995, digital FM synthesis can now be implemented freely by other manufacturers. The FM synthesis patent brought Stanford $20\u00a0million before it expired, making it (in 1994) \"the second most lucrative licensing agreement in Stanford's history\".\nToday, FM is mostly found in software-based synths such as Native Instruments' FM8 or Image-Line's Sytrus plug-ins, but it has also been incorporated into the synthesis repertoire of some modern digital synthesizers, usually coexisting as an option alongside other methods of synthesis such as subtractive, sample-based synthesis, additive synthesis, and other techniques. The degree of complexity of the FM in such hardware synths may vary from simple 2-operator FM, to the highly flexible 6-operator engines of the Korg Kronos and Alesis Fusion, to creation of FM in extensively modular engines such as those in the latest synthesisers by Kurzweil Music Systems.\nLater use of FM and other technologies: Realtime Convolution &amp; Modulation (AFM + Sample) and Formant Shaping Synthesis.\nThe Yamaha SY99 and FS1R synthesizers marketed their highly powerful FM abilities as counterparts to sample-based synthesis and formant synthesis respectively. New hardware synths specifically marketed for their FM capabilities disappeared from the market after the release of FS1R in 1999, \nThe FS1R had 16 operators, 8 standard FM operators and 8 additional operators that used a noise source rather than an oscillator as its sound source. By adding in tuneable noise sources the FS1R could model the sounds produced in the human voice and in a wind instrument, along with making percussion instrument sounds. The FS1R also contained an additional wave form called the Formant wave form. Formants can be used to model resonating body instrument sounds like the cello, violin, acoustic guitar, bassoon, English horn, or human voice. Formants can even be found in the harmonic spectrum of several brass instruments.\n2000s\u2013present.\nAdditional improvements: Variable Phase Modulation, FM-X Synthesis, Altered FM, etc..\nIn 2016, Korg released the Korg Volca FM, a, 3-voice, 6 operators FM iteration of the Korg Volca series of compact, affordable desktop modules. Korg has also released the https:// (2020) and opsix SE (2023), integrating 6 operators FM synthesis with subtractive, analogue modeling, additive, semi-modular and Waveshaping.\nYamaha released the Montage in 2016, which combines a 128-voice sample-based engine with a 128-voice FM engine. This iteration of FM is called FM-X, and features 8 operators; each operator has a choice of several basic wave forms, but each wave form has several parameters to adjust its spectrum. It was then followed by the more affordable Yamaha MODX in 2018, with 64-voice, 8 operators FM-X architecture in addition to a 128-voice sample-based engine. The MODX+ released in 2022 increased the number of voices of the FM-X engine to 128, the same as with the Montage. The Montage was succeeded by the Montage M in 2023, which uses the same 128-voice, 8 operators FM-X engine alongside a 128-voice sample-based engine and a newly-introduced 16-voice 3 oscillator analog-based engine known as AN-X.\nElektron launched the Digitone in 2018, which is an 8-voice, 4 operators FM synth featuring Elektron's renowned sequence engine.\nFM-X synthesis was first introduced with the Yamaha Montage synthesizers in 2016. FM-X uses 8 operators. Each FM-X operator has a set of multi-spectral wave forms to choose from, which means each FM-X operator can be equivalent to a stack of 3 or 4 DX7 FM operators. The list of selectable wave forms includes sine waves, the All1 and All2 wave forms, the Odd1 and Odd2 wave forms, and the Res1 and Res2 wave forms. The sine wave selection works the same as the DX7 wave forms. The All1 and All2 wave forms are a saw-tooth wave form. The Odd1 and Odd2 wave forms are pulse or square waves. These two types of wave forms can be used to model the basic harmonic peaks in the bottom of the harmonic spectrum of most instruments. The Res1 and Res2 wave forms move the spectral peak to a specific harmonic and can be used to model either triangular or rounded groups of harmonics further up in the spectrum of an instrument. Combining an All1 or Odd1 wave form with multiple Res1 (or Res2) wave forms (and adjusting their amplitudes) can model the harmonic spectrum of an instrument or sound. \nCombining sets of 8 FM operators with multi-spectral wave forms was first introduced in the FS1R, released in 1999 by Yamaha. It was able to achieve similar results to that of FM-X using 8 noise operators.\nSpectral analysis.\nThere are multiple variations of FM synthesis, including:\n\"etc\".\nAs the basic of these variations, we analyze the spectrum of 2 operators (linear FM synthesis using two sinusoidal operators) on the following.\n2 operators.\nThe spectrum generated by FM synthesis with one modulator is expressed as follows:\nFor modulation signal formula_1, the carrier signal is:\nformula_2\nIf we were to ignore the constant phase terms on the carrier formula_3 and the modulator formula_4, finally we would get the following expression, as seen on and :\nformula_5\nwhere formula_6 are angular frequencies (formula_7) of carrier and modulator, formula_8 is frequency modulation index, and amplitudes formula_9 is formula_10-th , respectively.\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "11570", "revid": "40374695", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11570", "title": "FM synthesis", "text": ""}
{"id": "11572", "revid": "5229428", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11572", "title": "Font (disambiguation)", "text": "Font may refer to:\nOther.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "11574", "revid": "50470141", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11574", "title": "Friedrich Wilhelm Bessel", "text": "German astronomer and mathematician (1784\u20131846)\nFriedrich Wilhelm Bessel (; 22 July 1784 \u2013 17 March 1846) was a German astronomer, mathematician, physicist, and geodesist. He was the first astronomer who determined reliable values for the distance from the Sun to another star by the method of parallax. Certain important mathematical functions were first studied systematically by Bessel and were named Bessel functions in his honour.\nLife and family.\nBessel was born in Minden, Westphalia, then capital of the Prussian administrative region Minden-Ravensberg, as second son of a civil servant into a large family. At the age of 14 he left the school, because he did not like the education in Latin language, and apprenticed in the import-export concern Kulenkamp at Bremen. The business's reliance on cargo ships led him to turn his mathematical skills to problems in navigation. This in turn led to an interest in astronomy as a way of determining longitude.\nBessel came to the attention of Heinrich Wilhelm Olbers, a practising physician of Bremen and well-known astronomer, by producing a refinement on the orbital calculations for Halley's Comet in 1804, using old observation data taken from Thomas Harriot and Nathaniel Torporley in 1607. Franz Xaver von Zach edited the results in his journal \"Monatliche Correspondenz\".\nHaving finished his commercial education, Bessel left Kulenkamp in 1806 and became assistant at Johann Hieronymus Schr\u00f6ter's private observatory in Lilienthal near Bremen as successor of Karl Ludwig Harding. There he worked on James Bradley's stellar observation data to produce precise positions for some 3,222 stars.\nDespite lacking any higher education, especially at university, Bessel was appointed director of the newly founded K\u00f6nigsberg Observatory by King Frederick William III of Prussia in January 1810, at the age of 25, and remained in that position until his death. Some elder professors of the Philosophical Faculty disputed Bessel's right to teach mathematics without any academic degree. Therefore, he turned to his fellow Carl Friedrich Gauss, who provided the award of an honorary doctor degree from the University of G\u00f6ttingen in March 1811. Both scientists were in correspondence from 1804 to 1843. In 1837 they got in quarrel about Gauss's habit of very slow publication.\nIn 1842 Bessel took part in the annual meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science in Manchester, accompanied by the geophysicist Georg Adolf Erman and the mathematician Carl Gustav Jacob Jacobi, where he gave a report on astronomical clocks.\nBessel married Johanna Hagen, the daughter of the chemist and pharmacist Karl Gottfried Hagen who was the uncle of the physician and biologist Hermann August Hagen and the hydraulic engineer Gotthilf Hagen, the latter also Bessel's student and assistant from 1816 to 1818. The physicist Franz Ernst Neumann, Bessel's close companion and colleague, was married to Johanna Hagen's sister Florentine. Neumann introduced Bessel's exacting methods of measurement and data reduction into his mathematico-physical seminar, which he co-directed with Carl Gustav Jacob Jacobi at K\u00f6nigsberg. These exacting methods had a lasting impact upon the work of Neumann's students and upon the Prussian conception of precision in measurement.\nBessel had two sons and three daughters. His elder son became an architect but died suddenly in 1840 aged 26; his younger son died shortly after birth. His eldest daughter, Marie, married the physicist Georg Adolf Erman, member of the scholar family Erman. One of their sons in turn was the renowned Egyptologist Adolf Erman. His third daughter Johanna married the politician Adolf Hermann Hagen; one of their sons was the physicist Ernst Bessel Hagen, and the mathematician Erich Bessel-Hagen was their grandson. Bessel was godfather of Adolf von Baeyer, son of his collaborator Johann Jacob Baeyer.\nAfter several months of illness Bessel died in March 1846 at his observatory from retroperitoneal fibrosis.\nWork.\nWhile the observatory was still in construction Bessel elaborated the \"Fundamenta Astronomiae\" based on Bradley's observations. As a preliminary result he produced tables of atmospheric refraction that won him the Lalande Prize from the French Academy of Sciences in 1811. The K\u00f6nigsberg Observatory began operation in 1813.\nStarting in 1819, Bessel determined the position of over 50,000 stars with a meridian circle from Reichenbach, assisted by some of his qualified students. The most prominent of them was Friedrich Wilhelm Argelander, his successors were Otto August Rosenberger and August Ludwig Busch.\nBessel determined the first reliable value for the distance between a star and the Solar System with a heliometer from Fraunhofer using the method of stellar parallax. In 1838 he published a parallax of 0.314 arcseconds for 61 Cygni, which indicated that the star is 10.3 ly away. Compared with the current measurement of 11.4 ly, Bessel's figure had an error of 9.6%. Thanks to these results astronomers had not only enlarged the vision of the universe well beyond the cosmic magnitude, but after the discovery in 1728 by James Bradley of the aberration of light a second empirical evidence of the Earth's relative movement was produced. A short time later Friedrich Georg Wilhelm Struve and Thomas Henderson reported the parallaxes of Vega and Alpha Centauri.\nPrecise measurements with a new meridian circle from Adolf Repsold allowed Bessel to notice deviations in the motions of Sirius and Procyon, which must be caused by the gravitational attraction of unseen companions.\nHis announcement of Sirius's \"dark companion\" in 1844 was the first correct claim of a previously unobserved companion by positional measurement, and eventually led to the discovery of Sirius B by Alvan Graham Clark in 1862, the first discovery of a white dwarf. John Martin Schaeberle discovered Procyon B in 1896.\nBessel was the first scientist who realized the effect later called \"personal equation\", that several simultaneously observing persons determine slightly different values, especially recording the transit time of stars.\nIn 1824, Bessel developed a new method for calculating the circumstances of eclipses using the so-called Besselian elements. His method simplified the calculation to such an extent, without sacrificing accuracy, that it is still in use.\nOn Bessel's proposal the Prussian Academy of Sciences started the edition of the \"Berliner Akademische Sternkarten\" (\"Berlin Academic Star Charts\") in 1825 as an international project with Johann Franz Encke as executive editor. One unpublished new chart enabled Johann Gottfried Galle to find Neptune near the position calculated by Le Verrier in September 1846 at Berlin Observatory.\nIn the 18th century a series of cylinder functions were introduced to solve string vibration problems by Daniel Bernoulli, Leonhard Euler and others. These functions were used by Joseph-Louis Lagrange and Bessel to solve the Kepler's equation. Bessel later systematically studied the mathematical properties of these functions, now known as Bessel functions. These functions are critical for the solution of certain differential equations, these functions are used throughout both classical and quantum physics. In his studies of this functions, Bessel published for the first time the Fourier series, before Joseph Fourier who had worked on it but his work was published decades later.\nA correction term in the formula for the sample variance estimator is named in his honour. This is the use of the factor \"n\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01 in the denominator of the formula, rather than just \"n\". This occurs when the \"sample mean\" rather than the \"population mean\" is used to centre the data and since the sample mean is a linear combination of the data the residual to the sample mean overcounts the number of degrees of freedom by the number of constraint equations \u2014 in this case one.\nLike numerous astronomers of his time Bessel dealt on the field of geodesy, too,\nfirst theoretically, when he published a method for solving the main geodetic problem.\nIn 1830 he got the royal order for the survey of East Prussia with the purpose to connect the yet existing Prussian and Russian triangulation networks. This work was carried out in cooperation with Johann Jacob Baeyer, then major of the Prussian army; the final report was published in 1838.\nHe also obtained an estimate of increased accuracy for the Earth's ellipsoid, nowadays called the Bessel ellipsoid, based on several arc measurements.\nHonors and prizes.\nBessel was one of the first members of the Order Pour le Merite (Civil class) when it was established in 1842.\nThe first cosmic object named after Bessel is the largest crater in the Moon's Mare Serenitatis. The main-belt asteroid 1552\u00a0Bessel was named at the centenary of the parallax determination in 1938.\nGeographical commemorations are two fjords in Greenland, Bessel Fjord, NE Greenland and Bessel Fjord, NW Greenland.\n\"Xyletinus besseli\" a fossil beetle from the Eocene belonging to the family Ptinidae, found in the Baltic amber in Sambia, was named in his honour.\nBeSSel, the https://, is named after him.\nPublications.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11577", "revid": "1588193", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11577", "title": "FSB", "text": "FSB may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "11578", "revid": "16861812", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11578", "title": "Facism", "text": ""}
{"id": "11579", "revid": "29596807", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11579", "title": "Fermi paradox", "text": "Discrepancy of the lack of evidence for alien life despite its apparent likelihood\nThe Fermi paradox is the discrepancy between the lack of conclusive evidence of advanced extraterrestrial life and the apparently high likelihood of its existence. Those affirming the paradox generally conclude that if the conditions required for life to arise from non-living matter are as permissive as the available evidence on Earth indicates, then extraterrestrial life would be sufficiently common such that it would be implausible for it not to have been detected.\nThe paradox is named after physicist Enrico Fermi, who informally posed the question\u2014often remembered as \"Where is everybody?\"\u2014during a 1950 conversation at Los Alamos with colleagues Emil Konopinski, Edward Teller, and Herbert York. The paradox first appeared in print in a 1963 paper by Carl Sagan and the paradox has since been fully characterized by scientists. Early formulations of the paradox have also been identified in writings by Bernard Le Bovier de Fontenelle (1686) and Jules Verne (1865), and by Soviet rocket scientist Konstantin Tsiolkovsky.\nThere have been many attempts to resolve the Fermi paradox, such as suggesting that intelligent extraterrestrial beings are extremely rare, that the lifetime of such civilizations is short, or that they exist but (for various reasons) humans see no evidence.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nChain of reasoning.\nSome of the facts and hypotheses that together serve to highlight the apparent contradiction:\nHistory.\nLos Alamos conversation.\nEnrico Fermi was a Nobel Prize-winning physicist who predicted the existence of neutrinos and helped create the first artificial nuclear reactor, an early feat of the Manhattan Project. He was known to pose simple but seemingly unanswerable questions\u2014termed \"Fermi questions\"\u2014to his colleagues and students, like \"How many atoms of Caesar's last breath do you inhale with each lungful of air?\"\nIn 1950, Fermi visited Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico and, while walking to the Fuller Lodge for lunch, conversed with fellow physicists Emil Konopinski, Edward Teller, and Herbert York about reports of flying saucers and the feasibility of faster-than-light travel. When the conversation shifted to unrelated topics at the lodge, Fermi blurted a question variously recalled as: \"Where is everybody?\" (Teller), \"Don't you ever wonder where everybody is?\" (York), or \"But where is everybody?\" (Konopinski). According to Teller, \"The result of his question was general laughter because of the strange fact that, in spite of Fermi's question coming out of the blue, everybody around the table seemed to understand at once that he was talking about extraterrestrial life.\"\nAccording to York, Fermi \"followed up with a series of calculations on the probability of earthlike planets, the probability of life given an earth, the probability of humans given life, the likely rise and duration of high technology, and so on. He concluded on the basis of such calculations that we ought to have been visited long ago and many times over.\" However, Teller recalled that Fermi did not elaborate on his question beyond \"perhaps a statement that the distances to the next location of living beings may be very great and that, indeed, as far as our galaxy is concerned, we are living somewhere in the sticks, far removed from the metropolitan area of the galactic center.\"\nPredecessors.\nFermi was not the first to note the paradox. In his 1686 book \"Conversations on the Plurality of Worlds\", Bernard Le Bovier de Fontenelle\u2014later the secretary of the French Academy of Sciences\u2014constructs a dialogue in which Fontenelle's claims of \"intelligent beings exist in other worlds, for instance the Moon\" are refuted by a character who notes that \"If this were the case, the Moon's inhabitants would already have come to us before now.\" This may have inspired a similar discussion in Jules Verne's 1865 novel \"Around the Moon\", which has also been identified as an early conceptualization of the Fermi paradox.\nAnother early formulation Fermi paradox was presented and dissected in the 1930s writings of Russian rocket scientist Konstantin Tsiolkovsky. Although his rocketry work was embraced by the materialist Soviets, his philosophical writings were suppressed and unknown for most of the 20th century. Tsiolkovsky noted that critics refute the existence of advanced extraterrestrial life as such civilizations would have visited humanity or left some detectable evidence. He posed a solution to the paradox: humanity is quarantined by aliens to protect its independent cultural development, which resembles the zoo hypothesis proposed by John Ball.\nPopularization.\nThe Fermi question first appeared in print in a footnote of a 1963 paper by Carl Sagan. Two years later, Stephen Dole noted the dilemma at a symposium\u2014\"If there are so many advanced forms of life around, where is everybody?\"\u2014but did not attribute it to Fermi. A chapter of \"Intelligent Life in the Universe\", co-authored by Sagan and Iosif Shklovsky, was headlined with the Fermi-attributed \"Where are they?\" The Fermi question also appeared in NASA's 1970 Project Cyclops report, a 1973 book by Sagan, and a 1975 article in \"JBIS Interstellar Studies\" by David Viewing that first described it as a paradox.\nLater that year, Michael Hart published a detailed examination of the paradox in the \"Quarterly Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society\". Hart, who concluded that \"we are the first civilization in our Galaxy\", proposed four broad categories of solutions to the paradox: those that are physical (a space travel limitation), sociological (aliens choose not to visit Earth), temporal (aliens have not had time to travel to Earth), or that extraterrestrials have already visited. His paper sparked significant interest in the paradox among academics and even politicians, with a discussion held in the House of Lords. A seminal response\u2014\"Extraterrestrial intelligent beings do not exist\"\u2014was written by Frank Tipler, who argued that, if an advanced extraterrestrial civilization existed, their self-replicating spacecraft should have already been detected in the Solar System. The term \"Fermi paradox\" was coined in a 1977 article by David Stephenson and was widely adopted.\nThe popularization of the Fermi paradox damaged SETI efforts, and Senator William Proxmire cited Tipler when he spurred the termination of the federally funded NASA SETI program in 1981. According to Robert Gray, the paradox may contribute to a \"\"de facto\" prohibition on government support for research in a branch of astrobiology\".\nCriticism.\nFermi did not publish anything regarding the paradox, with Sagan once suggesting the quote to be apocryphal. Scientists like Robert Gray have criticized its attribution to Fermi, and alternative terms like the \"Hart\u2013Tipler argument\" or \"Tsiolkovsky\u2013Fermi\u2013Viewing\u2013Hart paradox\" have been proposed. According to Gray, the current understanding of the paradox misinterprets Fermi's question and subsequent discussion, which was challenging the feasibility of interstellar travel rather than the existence of advanced extraterrestrial life.\nBasis.\nThe Fermi paradox is a conflict between the argument that scale and probability seem to favor intelligent life being common in the universe, and the total lack of evidence of intelligent life having ever arisen anywhere other than on Earth.\nThe first aspect of the Fermi paradox is a function of the scale or the large numbers involved: there are an estimated 200\u2013400 billion stars in the Milky Way (2\u20134 \u00d7 1011) and 70 sextillion (7\u00d71022) in the observable universe. Even if intelligent life occurs on only a minuscule percentage of planets around these stars, there might still be a great number of extant civilizations, and if the percentage were high enough it would produce a significant number of extant civilizations in the Milky Way. This assumes the mediocrity principle, by which Earth is a typical planet.\nThe second aspect of the Fermi paradox is the argument of probability: given intelligent life's ability to overcome scarcity, and its tendency to colonize new habitats, it seems possible that at least some civilizations would be technologically advanced, seek out new resources in space, and colonize their star system and, subsequently, surrounding star systems. Since there is no significant evidence on Earth, or elsewhere in the known universe, of other intelligent life after 13.8\u00a0billion years of the universe's history, there is a conflict requiring a resolution. Some examples of possible resolutions are that intelligent life is rarer than is thought, that assumptions about the general development or behavior of intelligent species are flawed, or, more radically, that the scientific understanding of the nature of the universe is quite incomplete.\nThe Fermi paradox can be asked in two ways. The first is, \"Why are no aliens or their artifacts found on Earth, or in the Solar System?\". If interstellar travel is possible, even the \"slow\" kind nearly within the reach of Earth technology, then it would only take from 5 million to 50\u00a0million years to colonize the galaxy. This is relatively brief on a geological scale, let alone a cosmological one. Since there are many stars older than the Sun, and since intelligent life might have evolved earlier elsewhere, the question then becomes why the galaxy has not been colonized already. Even if colonization is impractical or undesirable to all alien civilizations, large-scale exploration of the galaxy could be possible by probes. These might leave detectable artifacts in the Solar System, such as old probes or evidence of mining activity, but none of these have been observed.\nThe second form of the question is \"Why are there no signs of intelligence elsewhere in the universe?\". This version does not assume interstellar travel, but includes other galaxies as well. For distant galaxies, travel times may well explain the lack of alien visits to Earth, but a sufficiently advanced civilization could potentially be observable over a significant fraction of the size of the observable universe. Even if such civilizations are rare, the scale argument indicates they should exist somewhere at some point during the history of the universe, and since they could be detected from far away over a considerable period of time, many more potential sites for their origin are within range of human observation. It is unknown whether the paradox is stronger for the Milky Way galaxy or for the universe as a whole.\nDrake equation.\nThe theories and principles in the Drake equation are closely related to the Fermi paradox. The equation was formulated by Frank Drake in 1961 in an attempt to find a systematic means to evaluate the numerous probabilities involved in the existence of alien life. The equation is\nformula_1\nwhere formula_2 is the number of technologically advanced civilizations in the Milky Way galaxy, and formula_2 is asserted to be the product of\nThe fundamental problem is that the last four terms (formula_7, formula_8, formula_9, and formula_10) are entirely unknown, rendering statistical estimates impossible.\nThe Drake equation has been used by both optimists and pessimists, with wildly differing results. The first scientific meeting on the search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI), which had 10 attendees including Frank Drake and Carl Sagan, speculated that the number of civilizations was roughly between 1,000 and 100,000,000 civilizations in the Milky Way galaxy. Conversely, Frank Tipler and John D. Barrow used pessimistic numbers and speculated that the average number of civilizations in a galaxy is much less than one. Almost all arguments involving the Drake equation suffer from the overconfidence effect, a common error of probabilistic reasoning about low-probability events, by guessing specific numbers for likelihoods of events whose mechanism is not understood, such as the likelihood of abiogenesis on an Earth-like planet, with estimates varying over many hundreds of orders of magnitude. An analysis that takes into account some of the uncertainty associated with this lack of understanding has been carried out by Anders Sandberg, Eric Drexler and Toby Ord, and suggests \"a substantial \"ex ante\" probability of there being no other intelligent life in our observable universe\".\nGreat Filter.\nThe Great Filter, a concept introduced by Robin Hanson in 1996, represents whatever natural phenomena that would make it unlikely for life to evolve from inanimate matter to an advanced civilization. The most commonly agreed-upon low probability event is abiogenesis: a gradual process of increasing complexity of the first self-replicating molecules by a randomly occurring chemical process. Other proposed great filters are the emergence of eukaryotic cells or of meiosis or some of the steps involved in the evolution of a brain capable of complex logical deductions.\nAstrobiologists Dirk Schulze-Makuch and William Bains, reviewing the history of life on Earth, including convergent evolution, concluded that transitions such as oxygenic photosynthesis, the eukaryotic cell, multicellularity, and tool-using intelligence are likely to occur on any Earth-like planet given enough time. They argue that the Great Filter may be abiogenesis, the rise of technological human-level intelligence, or an inability to settle other worlds because of self-destruction or a lack of resources. Paleobiologist Olev Vinn has suggested that the great filter may have universal biological roots related to evolutionary animal behavior.\nGrabby Aliens.\nIn 2021, the concepts of quiet, loud, and grabby aliens were introduced by Hanson \"et al.\" The proposed \"loud\" aliens expand rapidly in a highly detectable way throughout the universe and endure, while \"quiet\" aliens are hard or impossible to detect and eventually disappear. \"Grabby\" aliens prevent the emergence of other civilizations in their sphere of influence, which expands at a rate near the speed of light. The authors argue that if loud civilizations are rare, as they appear to be, then quiet civilizations are also rare. The paper suggests that humanity's existing stage of technological development is relatively early in the potential timeline of intelligent life in the universe, as loud aliens would otherwise be observable by astronomers.\nEarlier in 2013, Anders Sandberg and Stuart Armstrong examined the potential for intelligent life to spread intergalactically throughout the universe and the implications for the Fermi Paradox. Their study suggests that with sufficient energy, intelligent civilizations could potentially colonize the entire Milky Way galaxy within a few million years, and spread to nearby galaxies in a timespan that is cosmologically brief. They conclude that intergalactic colonization appears possible with the resources of a single planetary system and that intergalactic colonization is of comparable difficulty to interstellar colonization, and therefore the Fermi paradox is much sharper than commonly thought.\nCritics such as David Kipping have contended that the \"Grabby Aliens\" model is reliant on unproven assumptions, lacking enough scientific rigor to be empirically falsifiable, and suggested other explanations for the proposed earliness of humans such as planets in M-dwarf systems being uninhabitable. Robin Hanson has responded to these criticisms.\nAnthropics.\nAnthropic reasoning and the question of why we happen to find ourselves as humans creates a number of potential problems for astrobiology. Walter Barta argues that Hanson's grabby aliens model creates an anthropic dilemma. According to Hanson's model, most observers in our reference class should be grabby aliens themselves. This leads to the question of why we do not find ourselves as grabby aliens, but rather as a species confined to a single planet.\nEmpirical evidence.\nThere are two parts of the Fermi paradox that rely on empirical evidence\u2014that there are many potentially habitable planets, and that humans see no evidence of life. The first point, that many suitable planets exist, was an assumption in Fermi's time, but is since supported by the discovery that exoplanets are common. Existing models predict billions of habitable worlds in the Milky Way.\nThe second part of the paradox, that humans see no evidence of extraterrestrial life, is also an active field of scientific research. This includes both efforts to find any indication of life, and efforts specifically directed to finding intelligent life. These searches have been made since 1960, and several are ongoing.\nAlthough astronomers do not usually search for extraterrestrials, they have observed phenomena that they could not immediately explain without positing an intelligent civilization as the source. For example, pulsars, when first discovered in 1967, were called little green men (LGM) because of the precise repetition of their pulses. In all cases, explanations with no need for intelligent life have been found for such observations, but the possibility of discovery remains. Proposed examples include asteroid mining that would change the appearance of debris disks around stars, or spectral lines from nuclear waste disposal in stars.\nElectromagnetic emissions.\nRadio technology and the ability to construct a radio telescope are presumed to be a natural advance for technological species, theoretically creating effects that might be detected over interstellar distances. The careful searching for non-natural radio emissions from space may lead to the detection of alien civilizations. Sensitive alien observers of the Solar System, for example, would note unusually intense radio waves for a G2 star due to Earth's television and telecommunication broadcasts. In the absence of an apparent natural cause, alien observers might infer the existence of a terrestrial civilization. Such signals could be either \"accidental\" by-products of a civilization, or deliberate attempts to communicate, such as the Arecibo message. It is unclear whether \"leakage\", as opposed to a deliberate beacon, could be detected by an extraterrestrial civilization. The most sensitive radio telescopes on Earth, as of 2019[ [update]], would not be able to detect non-directional radio signals (such as broadband) even at a fraction of a light-year away, but other civilizations could hypothetically have much better equipment.\nA number of astronomers and observatories have attempted and are attempting to detect such evidence, mostly through SETI organizations such as the SETI Institute and Breakthrough Listen. Several decades of SETI analysis have not revealed any unusually bright or meaningfully repetitive radio emissions.\nDirect planetary observation.\nExoplanet detection and classification is a very active sub-discipline in astronomy; the first candidate terrestrial planet discovered within a star's habitable zone was found in 2007. New refinements in exoplanet detection methods, and use of existing methods from space (such as the Kepler and TESS missions) are starting to detect and characterize Earth-size planets, to determine whether they are within the habitable zones of their stars. Such observational refinements may allow for a better estimation of how common these potentially habitable worlds are.\nConjectures about interstellar probes.\nThe Hart\u2013Tipler conjecture is a form of contraposition which states that because no interstellar probes have been detected, there likely is no other intelligent life in the universe, as such life should be expected to eventually create and launch such probes. Self-replicating probes could exhaustively explore a galaxy the size of the Milky Way in as little as a million years. If even a single civilization in the Milky Way attempted this, such probes could spread throughout the entire galaxy. Another speculation for contact with an alien probe\u2014one that would be trying to find human beings\u2014is an alien Bracewell probe. Such a hypothetical device would be an autonomous space probe whose purpose is to seek out and communicate with alien civilizations (as opposed to von Neumann probes, which are usually described as purely exploratory). These were proposed as an alternative to carrying a slow speed-of-light dialogue between vastly distant neighbors. Rather than contending with the long delays a radio dialogue would suffer, a probe housing an artificial intelligence would seek out an alien civilization to carry on a close-range communication with the discovered civilization. The findings of such a probe would still have to be transmitted to the home civilization at light speed, but an information-gathering dialogue could be conducted in real time.\nDirect exploration of the Solar System has yielded no evidence indicating a visit by aliens or their probes. Detailed exploration of areas of the Solar System where resources would be plentiful may yet produce evidence of alien exploration, though the entirety of the Solar System is relatively vast and difficult to investigate. Attempts to signal, attract, or activate hypothetical Bracewell probes in Earth's vicinity have not succeeded.\nSearches for stellar-scale artifacts.\nIn 1959, Freeman Dyson observed that every developing human civilization constantly increases its energy consumption, and he conjectured that a civilization might try to harness a large part of the energy produced by a star. He proposed a hypothetical \"Dyson sphere\" as a means: a shell or cloud of objects enclosing a star to absorb and utilize as much radiant energy as possible. Such a feat of astroengineering would drastically alter the observed spectrum of the star involved, changing it at least partly from the normal emission lines of a natural stellar atmosphere to those of black-body radiation, probably with a peak in the infrared. Dyson speculated that advanced alien civilizations might be detected by examining the spectra of stars and searching for such an altered spectrum.\nThere have been attempts to find evidence of Dyson spheres that would alter the spectra of their core stars. Direct observation of thousands of galaxies has shown no explicit evidence of artificial construction or modifications. In October 2015, there was speculation that a dimming of light from star KIC 8462852, observed by the Kepler space telescope, could have been a result of such a Dyson sphere under construction. However, in 2018, further observations determined that the amount of dimming varied by the frequency of the light, pointing to dust, rather than an opaque object such as a Dyson sphere, as the cause of the dimming.\nHypothetical explanations for the paradox.\nRarity of intelligent life.\nExtraterrestrial life is rare or non-existent.\nThose who think that intelligent extraterrestrial life is (nearly) impossible argue that the conditions needed for the evolution of life\u2014or at least the evolution of biological complexity\u2014are rare or even unique to Earth. Under this assumption, called the rare Earth hypothesis, a rejection of the mediocrity principle, complex multicellular life is regarded as exceedingly unusual.\nThe rare Earth hypothesis argues that the evolution of biological complexity requires a host of fortuitous circumstances, such as a galactic habitable zone, a star and planet(s) having the requisite conditions, such as enough of a continuous habitable zone, the advantage of a giant guardian like Jupiter and a large moon, conditions needed to ensure the planet has a magnetosphere and plate tectonics, the chemistry of the lithosphere, atmosphere, and oceans, the role of \"evolutionary pumps\" such as massive glaciation and rare bolide impacts. Perhaps most importantly, advanced life needs whatever it was that led to the transition of (some) prokaryotic cells to eukaryotic cells, sexual reproduction and the Cambrian explosion.\nIn his book \"Wonderful Life\" (1989), Stephen Jay Gould suggested that if the \"tape of life\" were rewound to the time of the Cambrian explosion, and one or two tweaks made, human beings probably never would have evolved. Other thinkers such as Fontana, Buss, and Kauffman have written about the self-organizing properties of life.\nExtraterrestrial intelligence is rare or non-existent.\nIt is possible that even if complex life is common, intelligence (and consequently civilizations) is not. While there are remote sensing techniques that could perhaps detect life-bearing planets without relying on the signs of technology, none of them have the ability to determine if any detected life is intelligent. This is sometimes referred to as the \"algae vs. alumnae\" problem.\nCharles Lineweaver states that when considering any extreme trait in an animal, intermediate stages do not necessarily produce \"inevitable\" outcomes. For example, large brains are no more \"inevitable\", or convergent, than are the long noses of animals such as aardvarks and elephants. As he points out, \"dolphins have had ~20million years to build a radio telescope and have not done so\". In addition, Rebecca Boyle points out that of all the species that have evolved in the history of life on the planet Earth, only one\u2014human beings and only in the beginning stages\u2014has ever become space-faring.\nExtraterrestrial intelligence is relatively new.\nGiven that the expected lifespan of the universe is at least one trillion years and the age of the universe is around 14 billion years, it is possible that humans have emerged at or near the earliest possible opportunity for intelligent life to evolve. Avi Loeb, an astrophysicist and cosmologist, has suggested that Earth may be a very early example of a life-bearing planet and that life-bearing planets may be more likely trillions of years from now. He has put forward the view that the Universe has only recently reached a state in which life is possible and this is the reason humanity has not detected extraterrestrial life. The firstborn hypothesis posits that humans are the first, or one of the first, intelligent species to evolve. Therefore, many intelligent species may eventually exist, but few, if any, currently do. Moreover, it is possible that said species, even if they already exist, are developing more slowly, or have more limited resources on their home world, meaning that they may take longer than humans have to achieve spaceflight.\nPeriodic extinction by natural events.\nNew life might commonly die out due to runaway heating or cooling on their fledgling planets. On Earth, there have been numerous major extinction events that destroyed the majority of complex species alive at the time; the extinction of the non-avian dinosaurs is the best known example. These are thought to have been caused by events such as impact from a large asteroid, massive volcanic eruptions, or astronomical events such as gamma-ray bursts. It may be the case that such extinction events are common throughout the universe and periodically destroy intelligent life, or at least its civilizations, before the species is able to develop the technology to communicate with other intelligent species.\nHowever, the chances of extinction by natural events may be very low on the scale of a civilization's lifetime. Based on an analysis of impact craters on Earth and the Moon, the average interval between impacts large enough to cause global consequences (like the Chicxulub impact) is estimated to be around 100 million years.\nEvolutionary explanations.\nIntelligent alien species have not developed advanced technologies.\nIt may be that while alien species with intelligence exist, they are primitive or have not reached the level of technological advancement necessary to communicate. Along with non-intelligent life, such civilizations would also be very difficult to detect. A trip using conventional rockets would take hundreds of thousands of years to reach the nearest stars.\nTo skeptics, the fact that over the history of life on the Earth, only one species has developed a civilization to the point of being capable of spaceflight, and this only in the early stages, lends credence to the idea that technologically advanced civilizations are rare in the universe.\nIt is the nature of intelligent life to destroy itself.\nThis is the argument that technological civilizations may usually or invariably destroy themselves before or shortly after developing radio or spaceflight technology. The astrophysicist Sebastian von Hoerner stated that the progress of science and technology on Earth was driven by two factors\u2014the struggle for domination and the desire for an easy life. The former potentially leads to complete destruction, while the latter may lead to biological or mental degeneration. Possible means of annihilation via major global issues, where global interconnectedness actually makes humanity more vulnerable than resilient, are many, including war, accidental environmental contamination or damage, the development of biotechnology, synthetic life like mirror life, resource depletion, climate change, or artificial intelligence. This general theme is explored both in fiction and in scientific hypotheses.\nIn 1966, Sagan and Shklovskii speculated that technological civilizations will either tend to destroy themselves within a century of developing interstellar communicative capability or master their self-destructive tendencies and survive for billion-year timescales. Self-annihilation may also be viewed in terms of thermodynamics: insofar as life is an ordered system that can sustain itself against the tendency to disorder, Stephen Hawking's \"external transmission\" or interstellar communicative phase, where knowledge production and knowledge management is more important than transmission of information via evolution, may be the point at which the system becomes unstable and self-destructs. Here, Hawking emphasizes self-design of the human genome (transhumanism) or enhancement via machines (e.g., brain\u2013computer interface) to enhance human intelligence and reduce aggression, without which he implies human civilization may be too stupid collectively to survive an increasingly unstable system. For instance, the development of technologies during the \"external transmission\" phase, such as weaponization of artificial general intelligence or antimatter, may not be met by concomitant increases in human ability to manage its own inventions. Consequently, disorder increases in the system: global governance may become increasingly destabilized, worsening humanity's ability to manage the possible means of annihilation listed above, resulting in global societal collapse.\nA less theoretical example might be the resource-depletion issue on Polynesian islands, of which Easter Island is only the best known. David Brin points out that during the expansion phase from 1500 BC to 800 AD there were cycles of overpopulation followed by what might be called periodic cullings of adult males through war or ritual. He writes, \"There are many stories of islands whose men were almost wiped out\u2014sometimes by internal strife, and sometimes by invading males from other islands.\"\nUsing extinct civilizations such as Easter Island as models, a study conducted in 2018 by Adam Frank \"et al.\" posited that climate change induced by \"energy intensive\" civilizations may prevent sustainability within such civilizations, thus explaining the paradoxical lack of evidence for intelligent extraterrestrial life. Based on dynamical systems theory, the study examined how technological civilizations (exo-civilizations) consume resources and the feedback effects this consumption has on their planets and its carrying capacity. According to Adam Frank \"[t]he point is to recognize that driving climate change may be something generic. The laws of physics demand that any young population, building an energy-intensive civilization like ours, is going to have feedback on its planet. Seeing climate change in this cosmic context may give us better insight into what's happening to us now and how to deal with it.\" Generalizing the Anthropocene, their model produces four different outcomes:\nOnly one intelligent species can exist in a given region of space.\nAnother hypothesis is that an intelligent species beyond a certain point of technological capability will destroy other intelligent species as they appear, perhaps by using self-replicating probes. Science fiction writer Fred Saberhagen has explored this idea in his \"Berserker\" series, as has physicist Gregory Benford and also, science fiction writer Greg Bear in his \"The Forge of God\" novel, and later Liu Cixin in his \"The Three-Body Problem\" series.\nA species might undertake such extermination out of expansionist motives, greed, paranoia, or aggression. In 1981, cosmologist Edward Harrison argued that such behavior would be an act of prudence: an intelligent species that has overcome its own self-destructive tendencies might view any other species bent on galactic expansion as a threat. It has also been suggested that a successful alien species would be a superpredator, as are humans. Another possibility invokes the \"tragedy of the commons\" and the anthropic principle: the first lifeform to achieve interstellar travel will necessarily (even if unintentionally) prevent competitors from arising, and humans simply happen to be first.\nCivilizations only broadcast detectable signals for a brief period of time.\nIt may be that alien civilizations are detectable through their radio emissions for only a short time, reducing the likelihood of spotting them. The usual assumption is that civilizations outgrow radio through technological advancement. However, there could be other leakage such as that from microwaves used to transmit power from solar satellites to ground receivers. Regarding the first point, in a 2006 \"Sky &amp; Telescope\" article, Seth Shostak wrote, \"Moreover, radio leakage from a planet is only likely to get weaker as a civilization advances and its communications technology gets better. Earth itself is increasingly switching from broadcasts to leakage-free cables and fiber optics, and from primitive but obvious carrier-wave broadcasts to subtler, hard-to-recognize spread-spectrum transmissions.\"\nMore hypothetically, advanced alien civilizations may evolve beyond broadcasting at all in the electromagnetic spectrum and communicate by technologies not developed or used by mankind. Some scientists have hypothesized that advanced civilizations may send neutrino signals. If such signals exist, they could be detectable by neutrino detectors that are under construction for other goals.\nAlien life may be too incomprehensible.\nAnother possibility is that human theoreticians have underestimated how much alien life might differ from that on Earth. Aliens may be psychologically unwilling to attempt to communicate with human beings. Perhaps human mathematics is parochial to Earth and not shared by other life, though others argue this can only apply to abstract math since the math associated with physics must be similar (in results, if not in methods).\nIn his 2009 book, SETI scientist Seth Shostak wrote, \"Our experiments [such as plans to use drilling rigs on Mars] are still looking for the type of extraterrestrial that would have appealed to Percival Lowell [astronomer who believed he had observed canals on Mars].\"\nPhysiology might also be a communication barrier. Carl Sagan speculated that an alien species might have a thought process orders of magnitude slower (or faster) than that of humans. A message broadcast by that species might seem like random background noise to humans, and therefore go undetected.\nPaul Davies stated that 500 years ago the very idea of a computer doing work merely by manipulating internal data may not have been viewed as a technology at all. He writes, \"Might there be a still higher level[...] If so, this 'third level' would never be manifest through observations made at the informational level, still less the matter level. There is no vocabulary to describe the third level, but that doesn't mean it is non-existent, and we need to be open to the possibility that alien technology may operate at the third level, or maybe the fourth, fifth[...] levels.\"\nArthur C. Clarke hypothesized that \"our technology must still be laughably primitive; we may well be like jungle savages listening for the throbbing of tom-toms, while the ether around them carries more words per second than they could utter in a lifetime\". Another thought is that technological civilizations invariably experience a technological singularity and attain a post-biological character.\nSociological explanations.\nExpansionism is not the cosmic norm.\nIn response to Tipler's idea of self-replicating probes, Stephen Jay Gould wrote, \"I must confess that I simply don't know how to react to such arguments. I have enough trouble predicting the plans and reactions of the people closest to me. I am usually baffled by the thoughts and accomplishments of humans in different cultures. I'll be damned if I can state with certainty what some extraterrestrial source of intelligence might do.\"\nAlien species may have only settled part of the galaxy.\nAccording to a study by Frank \"et al.\", advanced civilizations may not colonize everything in the galaxy due to their potential adoption of steady states of expansion. This hypothesis suggests that civilizations might reach a stable pattern of expansion where they neither collapse nor aggressively spread throughout the galaxy. A February 2019 article in \"Popular Science\" states, \"Sweeping across the Milky Way and establishing a unified galactic empire might be inevitable for a monolithic super-civilization, but most cultures are neither monolithic nor super\u2014at least if our experience is any guide.\" Astrophysicist Adam Frank, along with co-authors such as astronomer Jason Wright, ran a variety of simulations in which they varied such factors as settlement lifespans, fractions of suitable planets, and recharge times between launches. They found many of their simulations seemingly resulted in a \"third category\" in which the Milky Way remains partially settled indefinitely. The abstract to their 2019 paper states, \"These results break the link between Hart's famous 'Fact A' (no interstellar visitors on Earth now) and the conclusion that humans must, therefore, be the only technological civilization in the galaxy. Explicitly, our solutions admit situations where our current circumstances are consistent with an otherwise settled, steady-state galaxy.\"\nAn alternative scenario is that long-lived civilizations may only choose to colonize stars during closest approach. As low mass K- and M-type dwarfs are by far the most common types of main sequence stars in the Milky Way, they are more likely to pass close to existing civilizations. These stars have longer life spans, which may be preferred by such a civilization. Interstellar travel capability of 0.3 light years is theoretically sufficient to colonize all M-dwarfs in the galaxy within 2 billion years. If the travel capability is increased to 2 light years, then all K-dwarfs can be colonized in the same time frame.\nAlien species may isolate themselves in virtual worlds.\nAvi Loeb suggests that one possible explanation for the Fermi paradox is virtual reality technology. Individuals of extraterrestrial civilizations may prefer to spend time in virtual worlds or metaverses that have different physical law constraints as opposed to focusing on colonizing planets. Nick Bostrom suggests that some advanced beings may divest themselves entirely of physical form, create massive artificial virtual environments, transfer themselves into these environments through mind uploading, and exist totally within virtual worlds, ignoring the external physical universe.\nIt may be that intelligent alien life develops an \"increasing disinterest\" in their outside world. Possibly any sufficiently advanced society will develop highly engaging media and entertainment well before the capacity for advanced space travel, with the rate of appeal of these social contrivances being destined, because of their inherent reduced complexity, to overtake any desire for complex, expensive endeavors such as space exploration and communication. Once any sufficiently advanced civilization becomes able to master its environment, and most of its physical needs are met through technology, various \"social and entertainment technologies\", including virtual reality, are postulated to become the primary drivers and motivations of that civilization.\nArtificial intelligence may not be aggressively expansionist.\nWhile artificial intelligence supplanting its creators could only deepen the Fermi paradox, such as through enabling the colonizing of the galaxy through self-replicating probes, it is also possible that after replacing its creators, artificial intelligence either doesn't expand or endure for a variety of reasons. Michael A. Garrett has suggested that biological civilizations may universally underestimate the speed that AI systems progress, and not react to it in time, thus making it a possible great filter. He also argues that this could make the longevity of advanced technological civilizations less than 200 years, thus explaining the great silence observed by SETI.\nEconomic explanations.\nLack of resources needed to physically spread throughout the galaxy.\nThe ability of an alien culture to colonize other star systems is based on the idea that interstellar travel is technologically feasible. While the existing understanding of physics rules out the possibility of faster-than-light travel, it appears that there are no major theoretical barriers to the construction of \"slow\" interstellar ships, even though the engineering required is considerably beyond existing human capabilities. This idea underlies the concept of the Von Neumann probe and the Bracewell probe as a potential evidence of extraterrestrial intelligence.\nIt is possible, however, that scientific knowledge cannot properly gauge the feasibility and costs of such interstellar colonization. Theoretical barriers may not yet be understood, and the resources needed may be so great as to make it unlikely that any civilization could afford to attempt it. Even if interstellar travel and colonization are possible, they may be difficult, leading to a more gradual pace of colonization based on percolation.\nColonization efforts may not occur as an unstoppable hyper-aggressive rush, but rather as an uneven tendency to \"percolate\" outwards, within an eventual slowing and termination of the effort given the enormous costs involved and the expectation that colonies will inevitably develop a culture and civilization of their own. Colonization may thus occur in \"clusters\", with large areas remaining uncolonized at any one time, and planets only restarting the colonization process when their populations begin to outstrip their world's carrying capacity.\nInformation is cheaper to transmit than matter is to transfer.\nIf a human-capability machine intelligence is possible, and if it is possible to transfer such constructs over vast distances and rebuild them on a remote machine, then it might not make strong economic sense to travel the galaxy by spaceflight. Louis K. Scheffer calculates the cost of radio transmission of information across space to be cheaper than spaceflight by a factor of 108\u20131017. For a machine civilization, the costs of interstellar travel are therefore enormous compared to the more efficient option of sending computational signals across space to already established sites. After the first civilization has physically explored or colonized the galaxy, as well as sent such machines for easy exploration, then any subsequent civilizations, after having contacted the first, may find it cheaper, faster, and easier to explore the galaxy through intelligent mind transfers to the machines built by the first civilization. However, since a star system needs only one such remote machine, and the communication is most likely highly directed, transmitted at high-frequencies, and at a minimal power to be economical, such signals would be hard to detect from Earth.\nBy contrast, in economics the counter-intuitive Jevons paradox implies that higher productivity results in higher demand. In other words, increased economic efficiency results in increased economic growth. For example, increased renewable energy has the risk of not directly resulting in declining fossil fuel use, but rather additional economic growth as fossil fuels instead are directed to alternative uses. Thus, technological innovation makes human civilization more capable of higher levels of consumption, as opposed to its existing consumption being achieved more efficiently at a stable level.\nOther species' home planets cannot support industrial economies.\nAmedeo Balbi and Adam Frank propose the concept of an \"oxygen bottleneck\" for the emergence of the industrial production necessary for spaceflight. The \"oxygen bottleneck\" refers to the critical level of atmospheric oxygen necessary for fire and combustion. Earth's atmospheric oxygen concentration is about 21%, but has been much lower in the past and may also be on many exoplanets. The authors argue that while the threshold of oxygen required for the existence of complex life and ecosystems is relatively low, industrial processes which are necessary precursors to spaceflight, particularly metal smelting and many forms of electricity generation, require higher oxygen concentrations of at least some 18%. A planet with oxygen sufficient to support intelligent life but not to develop advanced metallurgy would be technologically gated by its extremely limited industrial capabilities at a level likely incapable of supporting spaceflight. Thus, the presence of high levels of oxygen in a planet's atmosphere is not only a potential biosignature but also a critical factor in the emergence of detectable technological civilizations.\nAnother hypothesis in this category is the \"waterworlds hypothesis\". According to author and scientist David Brin: \"it turns out that our Earth skates the very inner edge of our sun's continuously habitable\u2014or 'Goldilocks'\u2014zone. And Earth may be anomalous. It may be that because we are so close to our sun, we have an anomalously oxygen-rich atmosphere, and we have anomalously little ocean for a water world. In other words, 32 percent continental mass may be high among water worlds...\" Brin continues, \"In which case, the evolution of creatures like us, with hands and fire and all that sort of thing, may be rare in the galaxy. In which case, when we do build starships and head out there, perhaps we'll find lots and lots of life worlds, but they're all like Polynesia. We'll find lots and lots of intelligent lifeforms out there, but they're all dolphins, whales, squids, who could never build their own starships. What a perfect universe for us to be in, because nobody would be able to boss us around, and we'd get to be the voyagers, the \"Star Trek\" people, the starship builders, the policemen, and so on.\"\nIntelligent alien species have not developed advanced technologies.\nIt may be that while alien species with intelligence exist, they are primitive or have not reached the level of technological advancement necessary to communicate. Along with non-intelligent life, such civilizations would also be very difficult to detect from Earth. A trip using conventional rockets would take hundreds of thousands of years to reach the nearest stars.\nTo skeptics, the fact that over the history of life on the Earth, only one species has developed a civilization to the point of being capable of spaceflight, and this only in the early stages, lends credence to the idea that technologically advanced civilizations are rare in the universe.\nDeveloping practical spaceflight technology is very difficult or expensive.\nThe rapid increase of scientific and technological progress seen in the 18th to 20th centuries (the Industrial Revolution), compared to earlier eras, led to the common assumption that such progress will continue at exponential rates as time goes by, eventually leading to the progress level required for space exploration. The \"universal limit to technological development\" (ULTD) hypothesis proposes that there is a limit to the potential growth of a civilization, and that this limit may be placed well below the point required for space exploration. Such limits may be based on the enormous strain spaceflight may put on a planet's resources, physical limitations (such as faster-than-light travel being impossible), and even limitations based on the species' own biology.\nDiscovering extraterrestrial life is very difficult.\nHumans are not listening properly.\nThere are some assumptions that underlie the SETI programs that may cause searchers to miss signals that exist. Extraterrestrials might, for example, transmit signals that have a very high or low data rate, or employ unconventional (in human terms) frequencies, which would make them hard to distinguish from background noise. Signals might be sent from non-main sequence star systems that humans search with lower priority; our programs assume that most alien life will be orbiting Sun-like stars.\nRadio signals cannot be straightforwardly detected at interstellar distances.\nThe greatest challenge is the sheer size of the radio search needed to look for signals (effectively spanning the entire observable universe), the limited amount of resources committed to SETI, and the sensitivity of modern instruments. SETI estimates, for instance, that with a radio telescope as sensitive as the Arecibo Observatory, Earth's television and radio broadcasts would only be detectable at distances up to 0.3 light-years, less than 1/10 the distance to the nearest star. A signal is much easier to detect if it consists of a deliberate, powerful transmission directed at Earth. Such signals could be detected at ranges of hundreds to tens of thousands of light-years distance. However, this means that detectors must be listening to an appropriate range of frequencies, and be in that region of space to which the beam is being sent. Many SETI searches assume that extraterrestrial civilizations will be broadcasting a deliberate signal, like the Arecibo message, in order to be found. Moreover, as human communication technology has advanced, humans have reduced the use of broadband radio transmissions in favor of more efficient and higher-bandwidth methods such as satellite communication and fibre optics. It may be that alien civilizations, having, as we have, largely moved past high-power radio broadcasting, producing very few, if any, detectable transmissions.\nThus, to detect alien civilizations through their radio emissions, Earth observers need very sensitive instruments, and moreover must hope that:\n1) Aliens have developed radio technology, and,\n2) Aliens use radio as a primary means of communication, and,\n3) For reasons unknown, their transmitters are orders of magnitude more powerful than ours, or they are deliberately broadcasting high-power radio signals towards Earth as part of their own efforts to contact other civilizations, and,\n4) We are listening at the right frequency, at the right time, and,\n5) We recognize their transmission as an attempt at communication.\nHumans have not listened for long enough.\nHumanity's ability to detect intelligent extraterrestrial life has existed for only a very brief period\u2014from 1937 onwards, if the invention of the radio telescope is taken as the dividing line\u2014and \"Homo sapiens\" is a geologically recent species. The whole period of modern human existence to date is a very brief period on a cosmological scale, and radio transmissions have only been propagated since 1895. Thus, it remains possible that human beings have neither existed long enough nor made themselves sufficiently detectable to be found by extraterrestrial intelligence.\nIntelligent life may be too far away.\nIt may be that non-colonizing technologically capable alien civilizations exist, but that they are simply too far apart for meaningful two-way communication. Sebastian von Hoerner estimated the average duration of civilization at 6,500 years and the average distance between civilizations in the Milky Way at 1,000 light years. If two civilizations are separated by several thousand light-years, it is possible that one or both cultures may become extinct before meaningful dialogue can be established. Human searches may be able to detect their existence, but communication will remain impossible because of distance. It has been suggested that this problem might be ameliorated somewhat if contact and communication is made through a Bracewell probe. In this case at least one partner in the exchange may obtain meaningful information. Alternatively, a civilization may simply broadcast its knowledge, and leave it to the receiver to make what they may of it. This is similar to the transmission of information from ancient civilizations to the present, and humanity has undertaken similar activities like the Arecibo message, which could transfer information about Earth's intelligent species, even if it never yields a response or does not yield a response in time for humanity to receive it. It is possible that observational signatures of self-destroyed civilizations could be detected, depending on the destruction scenario and the timing of human observation relative to it.\nA related speculation by Sagan and Newman suggests that if other civilizations exist, and are transmitting and exploring, their signals and probes simply have not arrived yet, i.e. that Humans are a relatively early civilization. However, critics have noted that this is unlikely, since it requires that humanity's advancement has occurred at a very special point in time, while the Milky Way is in transition from empty to full. This is a tiny fraction of the lifespan of a galaxy under ordinary assumptions, so the likelihood that humanity is in the midst of this transition is considered low in the paradox. In 2021, Hanson et al. reconsidered this likelihood and concluded it is indeed plausible when assuming that many civilizations are \"grabby\", i.e. displace other civilizations. Under this assumption there is a selection effect of the sort that provided we exist and are not (yet) destroyed by grabby aliens, we are very unlikely to observe aliens. Specifically, grabby aliens imply a typical civilizational expansion rate at nearly the speed of light because otherwise many other civilizations would be visible. The transition time between detection of an alien technosignature and extinction would be vanishingly short in cosmological timeframes, making it likely we are before that time period.\nSome SETI skeptics may also believe that humanity is at a very special point of time\u2014specifically, a transitional period from no space-faring societies to one space-faring society, namely that of human beings.\nIntelligent life exists buried below the surfaces of ice planets.\nPlanetary scientist Alan Stern put forward the idea that there could be a number of worlds with subsurface oceans (such as Jupiter's Europa or Saturn's Enceladus). The surface would provide a large degree of protection from such things as cometary impacts and nearby supernovae, as well as creating a situation in which a much broader range of orbital configurations are capable of supporting life. Life, and potentially intelligence and civilization, could evolve below the surface of such a planet, but be very hard to detect, insofar as it is generally only possible to observe the surface of planets from space. Stern states, \"If they have technology, and let's say they're broadcasting, or they have city lights or whatever\u2014we can't see it in any part of the spectrum, except maybe very-low-frequency [radio].\" Moreover, such a civilization may have great difficulty getting to space, insofar as even getting to the surface of their world could present a considerable engineering challenge involving tunneling through many kilometres of ice. This may severely hamper their ability to communicate with us.\nAdvanced civilizations may limit their search for life to technological signatures.\nIf life is abundant in the universe but the cost of space travel is high, an advanced civilization may choose to focus its search not on signs of life in general, but on those of other advanced civilizations, and specifically on radio signals. Since humanity has only recently began to use radio communication, its signals may have yet to arrive to other inhabited planets, and if they have, probes from those planets may have yet to arrive on Earth.\nWillingness to communicate.\nEveryone is listening but no one is transmitting.\nAlien civilizations might be technically capable of contacting Earth, but could be only listening instead of transmitting. If all or most civilizations act in the same way, the galaxy could be full of civilizations eager for contact, but everyone is listening and no one is transmitting. This is the so-called \"SETI Paradox\". The only civilization known, humanity, does not explicitly transmit, except for a few small efforts.\nAlien governments are choosing not to respond.\nEven these limited efforts, and certainly any attempt to expand them, are controversial. It is not even clear humanity would respond to a detected signal\u2014the official policy within the SETI community is that \"[no] response to a signal or other evidence of extraterrestrial intelligence should be sent until appropriate international consultations have taken place\". However, given the possible impact of any reply, it may be very difficult to obtain any consensus on whether to reply, and if so, who would speak and what they would say. It is therefore quite possible that an alien civilization led by cautious decision-makers might conclude that not responding is the soundest option. Moreover, as the only observed civilization does not have a planetary central government capable of making a binding decision about a response, alien civilizations, themselves divided into various political units without a central decision-making authority, may be aware of our existence and technically capable of responding, but cannot agree on whether and/or how to do so.\nCommunication is dangerous.\nAn alien civilization might feel it is too dangerous to communicate, either for humanity or for them. It is argued that when very different civilizations have met on Earth, the results have often been disastrous for one side or the other, and the same may well apply to interstellar contact. Even contact at a safe distance could lead to infection by computer code or even ideas themselves. Perhaps prudent civilizations actively hide not only from Earth but from everyone, out of fear of other civilizations.\nPerhaps the Fermi paradox itself, however aliens may conceive of it, is the reason for any civilization to avoid contact with other civilizations, even if no other obstacles existed. From any one civilization's point of view, it would be unlikely for them to be the first ones to make first contact. According to this reasoning, it is likely that previous civilizations faced fatal problems upon first contact and doing so should be avoided. So perhaps every civilization keeps quiet because of the possibility that there is a real reason for others to do so.\nIn 1987, science fiction author Greg Bear explored this concept in his novel \"The Forge of God\". In \"The Forge of God\", humanity is likened to a baby crying in a hostile forest: \"There once was an infant lost in the woods, crying its heart out, wondering why no one answered, drawing down the wolves.\" One of the characters explains, \"We've been sitting in our tree chirping like foolish birds for over a century now, wondering why no other birds answered. The galactic skies are full of hawks, that's why. Planetisms that don't know enough to keep quiet, get eaten.\"\nIn Liu Cixin's 2008 novel \"The Dark Forest\", the author proposes a literary explanation for the Fermi paradox in which countless alien civilizations exist, but are both silent and paranoid, destroying any nascent lifeforms loud enough to make themselves known. This is because any other intelligent life may represent a future threat. As a result, Liu's fictional universe contains a plethora of quiet civilizations which do not reveal themselves, as in a \"dark forest\"...filled with \"armed hunter(s) stalking through the trees like a ghost\". This idea has come to be known as the dark forest hypothesis.\nEarth is deliberately being avoided.\nThe zoo hypothesis states that intelligent extraterrestrial life exists and does not contact life on Earth to allow for its natural evolution and development as a sort of cosmic closed nature reserve. A variation on the zoo hypothesis is the laboratory hypothesis, where humanity has been or is being subject to experiments, with Earth or the Solar System effectively serving as a laboratory. The zoo hypothesis may break down under the uniformity of motive flaw: all it takes is a single culture or civilization (or even a faction or rogue actor within one) to decide to act contrary to the interplanetary consensus, and the probability of such a violation of hegemony increases with the number of civilizations, tending not towards a galactic league with a single policy towards Earth, but towards multiple competing factions. However, if artificial superintelligences are paramount in galactic politics, and such intelligences tend towards consolidation behind a central authority, then this would at least partially address the uniformity of motive flaw by dissuading rogue behavior.\nAnalysis of the inter-arrival times between civilizations in the galaxy based on common astrobiological assumptions suggests that the initial civilization would have a commanding lead over the later arrivals, inasmuch as it has had time to assert control over resources, and settle the best planets (assuming similar biological needs to competitors). As such, it may have established what has been termed the \"zoo hypothesis\" through force or as a galactic or universal norm and the resultant \"paradox\" by a cultural founder effect with or without the continued activity of the founder. Some colonization scenarios predict spherical expansion across star systems, with continued expansion coming from the systems just previously settled. It has been suggested that this would cause a strong selection process among colonists, favoring cultural, biological, or political adaptation to living aboard spacecraft or space habitats for long periods of time; as a result, they may only settle a very limited number of the highest-quality planets, or simply stay aboard their ships and forgo planets entirely. This may result in a lack of interest in colonization, instead focusing on planets only as a destructible source of non-renewable resources. Alternatively, they may have an ethic of protection for \"nursery worlds\", and protect them without intervening. Moreover, having developed spaceborne habitation sufficient to support their needs, they may obtain resources through asteroid mining and mostly ignore terrestrial worlds insofar as they require a much greater expenditure of fuel and resources to make it to land on for mining compared to smaller objects.\nIt is possible that a civilization advanced enough to travel between planetary systems could be actively visiting or observing Earth while remaining undetected or unrecognized. Following this logic, and building on arguments that other proposed solutions to the Fermi paradox may be implausible, Ian Crawford and Dirk Schulze-Makuch have argued that technological civilisations are either very rare in the Galaxy or are deliberately hiding from us.\nEarth is deliberately being isolated.\nA related idea to the zoo hypothesis is that, beyond a certain distance, the perceived universe is a simulated reality. The planetarium hypothesis speculates that beings may have created this simulation so that the universe appears to be empty of other life.\nConspiracy theories: alien life is already here, unacknowledged and/or deliberately concealed.\nA significant fraction of the population believes that at least some UFOs (Unidentified Flying Objects) are spacecraft piloted by aliens. While most of these are unrecognized or mistaken interpretations of mundane phenomena, some occurrences remain puzzling even after investigation. The scientific consensus is that although they may be unexplained, they do not rise to the level of convincing evidence.\nSimilarly, it is theoretically possible that SETI groups are not reporting positive detections, or governments have been blocking signals or suppressing publication. This response might be attributed to security or economic interests from the potential use of advanced extraterrestrial technology. It has been suggested that the detection of an extraterrestrial radio signal or technology could well be the most highly secret information that exists. Claims that this has already happened are common in the popular press, but the scientists involved report the opposite experience\u2014the press becomes informed and interested in a potential detection even before a signal can be confirmed.\nRegarding the idea that aliens are in secret contact with governments, David Brin writes, \"Aversion to an idea, simply because of its long association with crackpots, gives crackpots altogether too much influence.\"\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\nBooks and reports.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nJournal articles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11580", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11580", "title": "Filker", "text": ""}
{"id": "11582", "revid": "1311389369", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11582", "title": "Fundamentalism", "text": "Unwavering attachment to a set of irreducible beliefs\nFundamentalism is a tendency among certain groups and individuals that is characterized by the application of a strict literal interpretation to scriptures, dogmas, or ideologies, along with a strong belief in the importance of distinguishing one's ingroup and outgroup,\nwhich leads to an emphasis on some conception of \"purity\", and a desire to return to a previous ideal from which advocates believe members have strayed. The term is usually used in the context of religion to indicate an unwavering attachment to a set of irreducible beliefs (the \"fundamentals\").\nThe term \"fundamentalism\" is generally regarded by scholars of religion as referring to a largely modern religious phenomenon which, while itself a reinterpretation of religion as defined by the parameters of modernism, reifies religion in reaction against modernist, secularist, liberal and ecumenical tendencies developing in religion and society in general that it perceives to be foreign to a particular religious tradition. Depending upon the context, the label \"fundamentalism\" can be a pejorative rather than a neutral characterization, similar to the ways that calling political perspectives \"right-wing\" or \"left-wing\" can have negative connotations.\nReligious fundamentalism.\nBuddhism.\nBuddhist fundamentalism has targeted other religious and ethnic groups, as in Myanmar. A Buddhist-dominated country, Myanmar has seen tensions between Muslim minorities and the Buddhist majority, especially during the 2013 Burma anti-Muslim riots (possibly instigated by hardline groups such as the 969 Movement). as well as during actions which are associated with the Rohingya genocide (2016 onwards).\nBuddhist fundamentalism also features in Sri Lanka. Buddhist-dominated Sri Lanka has seen recent tensions between Muslim minorities and the Buddhist majority, especially during the 2014 anti-Muslim riots in Sri Lanka and in the course of the 2018 anti-Muslim riots in Sri Lanka, allegedly instigated by hardline groups such as the Bodu Bala Sena.\nHistoric and contemporary examples of Buddhist fundamentalism occur in each of the three main branches of Buddhism: Theravada, Mahayana, and Vajrayana. In addition to the above examples of fundamentalism in Theravada-dominated societies, the reification of a protector deity, Dorje Shugden, by 19th-century Tibetan lama Pabongkhapa could be seen as an example of fundamentalism in the Vajrayana tradition. Dorje Shugden was a key tool in Pabongkhapa's persecution of the flourishing Rim\u00e9 movement, an ecumenical movement which fused the teachings of the Sakya, Kagyu and Nyingma, in response to the dominance of the Gelug school. While Pabongkhapa had an initially inclusive view early in his life, he received a number of signs that he had displeased Dorje Shugden by receiving teachings from non-Gelug schools, and thus initiated a revival movement that opposed the mixing of non-Gelug practices by Gelug practitioners. The main function of the deity was presented as \"the protection of the Ge-luk tradition through violent means, even including the killing of its enemies.\" Crucially, however, these \"\u2018enemies\u2019 of the Gelug refers less to the members of rival\nschools than to members of the Gelug tradition \u2018who mix Dzong-ka-ba\u2019s tradition with elements coming from other traditions, particularly the Nying-ma\nDzok-chen\u2019.\"\nIn Japan, a prominent example has been the practice among some members of the Mahayana Nichiren sect of shakubuku \u2013 a method of proselytizing which involves the strident condemnation of other sects as deficient or evil.\nChristianity.\nGeorge Marsden has defined Christian fundamentalism as the demand for strict adherence to certain theological doctrines, in opposition to Modernist theology. Its supporters originally coined the term in order to describe what they claimed were five specific classic theological beliefs of Christianity, and the coinage of the term led to the development of a Christian fundamentalist movement within the Protestant community of the United States in the early part of the 20th century. Fundamentalism as a movement arose in the United States, starting among conservative Presbyterian theologians at Princeton Theological Seminary in the late 19th century. It soon spread to conservatives among the Baptists and other denominations around 1910 to 1920. The movement's purpose was to reaffirm key theological tenets and defend them against the challenges of liberal theology and higher criticism.\nThe concept of \"fundamentalism\" has roots in the Niagara Bible Conferences which were held annually between 1878 and 1897. During those conferences, the tenets widely considered to be \"fundamental\" Christian belief were identified.\n\"Fundamentalism\" was prefigured by \"The Fundamentals: A Testimony To The Truth\", a collection of twelve pamphlets published between 1910 and 1915 by brothers Milton and Lyman Stewart. It is widely considered to be the foundation of modern Christian fundamentalism.\nIn 1910, the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church identified what became known as the \"five fundamentals\":\nIn 1920, the word \"fundamentalist\" was first used in print by Curtis Lee Laws, editor of \"The Watchman Examiner\", a Baptist newspaper. Laws proposed that those Christians who were fighting for the fundamentals of the faith should be called \"fundamentalists\".\nTheological conservatives who rallied around the five fundamentals came to be known as \"fundamentalists\". They rejected the existence of commonalities with theologically related religious traditions, such as the grouping of Christianity, Islam, and Judaism into one Abrahamic family of religions. By contrast, while Evangelical groups (such as the Billy Graham Evangelistic Association) typically agree with the \"fundamentals\" as they are expressed in \"The Fundamentals\", they are often willing to participate in events with religious groups that do not hold to the \"essential\" doctrines.\nEthnic tribal religions.\nA few scholars label some indigenist revitalization movements within ethnic and indigenous religions who reject the changes brought by the modern states and major religions in favor of a return to traditional ways as fundamentalists in contrast with syncretic reform movements. Thus, numerous new generally fundamentalist Native American religious movements include the Pueblo Revolt (1680s), the Shawnee Prophet Movement (1805\u20131811), the Cherokee Prophet Movement (1811\u20131813), the Red Stick War (1813\u20131814), White Path's Rebellion (1826), the Winnebago Prophet Movement (1830\u20131832), the first Ghost Dance (1869\u20131870) and the second Ghost Dance (1889\u20131890), and the Snake movements among the Cherokee, Choctaw, and Muscogee Creek peoples during the 1890s.\nHinduism.\nThe existence of fundamentalism in Hinduism is a complex and contradictory phenomenon. While some would argue that certain aspects of Gaudiya Vaishnavism manifest fundamentalist tendencies, these tendencies are more clearly displayed in Hindutva, the predominant form of Hindu nationalism in India today, and an increasingly powerful and influential voice within the religion. Hinduism includes a diversity of ideas on spirituality and traditions, but has no ecclesiastical order, no unquestionable religious authorities, no governing body, no prophet(s) nor any binding holy book; Hindus can choose to be polytheistic, pantheistic, panentheistic, pandeistic, henotheistic, monotheistic, monistic, agnostic, atheistic or humanist. According to Doniger, \"ideas about all the major issues of faith and lifestyle \u2013 vegetarianism, nonviolence, belief in rebirth, even caste \u2013 are subjects of debate, not dogma.\"\nSome would argue that, because of the wide range of traditions and ideas covered by the term Hinduism, a lack of theological 'fundamentals' means that a dogmatic 'religious fundamentalism' per se is hard to find. Others point to the recent rise of Hindu nationalism in India as evidence to the contrary. The religion \"defies our desire to define and categorize it.\" In India, the term \"dharma\" is preferred, which is broader than the Western term \"religion.\"\nHence, certain scholars argue that Hinduism lacks dogma and thus a specific notion of \"fundamentalism,\" while other scholars identify several politically active Hindu movements as part of a \"Hindu fundamentalist family.\"\nIslam.\nFundamentalism within Islam goes back to the early history of Islam in the 7th century, to the time of the Kharijites. From their essentially political position, they developed extreme doctrines that set them apart from both mainstream Shia and Sunni Muslims. The Kharijites were particularly noted for adopting a radical approach to \"takfir\", whereby they declared other Muslims to be unbelievers and therefore deemed them worthy of death.\nThe Shia and Sunni religious conflicts since the 7th century created an opening for radical ideologues, such as Ali Shariati (1933\u201377), to merge social revolution with Islamic fundamentalism, as exemplified by the Iranian Revolution in 1979. Islamic fundamentalism has appeared in many countries; the Salafi-Wahhabi version is promoted worldwide and financed by Saudi Arabia, Qatar, and Pakistan.\nThe Iran hostage crisis of 1979\u201380 marked a major turning point in the use of the term \"fundamentalism\". The media, in an attempt to explain the ideology of Ayatollah Khomeini and the Iranian Revolution to a Western audience described it as a \"fundamentalist version of Islam\" by way of analogy to the Christian fundamentalist movement in the U.S. Thus was born the term \"Islamic fundamentalist\", which became a common use of the term in following years.\nJudaism.\nJewish fundamentalism has been used to characterize militant religious Zionism, and both Ashkenazi and Sephardic versions of Haredi Judaism. Ian S. Lustik has characterized \"Jewish fundamentalism\" as \"an ultranationalist, eschatologically based, irredentist ideology\".\nNew Atheism.\nThe term \"New Atheism\" describes the positions of some atheist academics, writers, scientists, and philosophers of the 20th and 21st centuries. Critics have described New Atheism as \"secular fundamentalism\".\nPolitics.\nIn modern politics, fundamentalism has been associated with right-wing conservative ideology, especially social conservatism. Social conservatives often support policies in line with religious fundamentalism, such as support for school prayer and opposition to LGBT rights and abortion. Conversely, secularism has been associated with left-wing or liberal ideology, as it takes the opposite stance to said policies, however, various left-wing policies have likewise been deemed forms of fundamentalism, notably stronger forms of wokeness.\nPolitical usage of the term \"fundamentalism\" has been criticized. It has been used by political groups to berate opponents, using the term flexibly depending on their political interests. According to Judith Nagata, a professor of Asia Research Institute in the National University of Singapore, \"The Afghan \"mujahiddin\", locked in combat with the Soviet enemy in the 1980s, could be praised as 'freedom fighters' by their American backers at the time, while the present Taliban, viewed, among other things, as protectors of American enemy Osama bin Laden, are unequivocally 'fundamentalist'.\"\n\"Fundamentalist\" has been used pejoratively to refer to philosophies perceived as literal-minded or carrying a pretense of being the sole source of objective truth, regardless of whether it is usually called a religion. For instance, the Archbishop of Wales has criticized \"atheistic fundamentalism\" broadly and said \"Any kind of fundamentalism, be it Biblical, atheistic or Islamic, is dangerous\". He also said, \"the new fundamentalism of our age ... leads to the language of expulsion and exclusivity, of extremism and polarisation, and the claim that, because God is on our side, he is not on yours.\" He claimed it led to situations such as councils calling Christmas \"Winterval\", schools refusing to put on nativity plays and crosses being removed from chapels. Others have countered that some of these attacks on Christmas are urban legends, not all schools do nativity plays because they choose to perform other traditional plays like \"A Christmas Carol\" or \"The Snow Queen\" and, because of rising tensions between various religions, opening up public spaces to alternate displays rather than the Nativity scene is an attempt to keep government religion-neutral.\nIn \"The New Inquisition\", Robert Anton Wilson lampoons the members of skeptical organizations such as the Committee for the Scientific Investigation of Claims of the Paranormal as fundamentalist materialists, alleging that they dogmatically dismiss any evidence that conflicts with materialism as hallucination or fraud.\nIn France, during a protestation march against the imposition of restrictions on the wearing of headscarves in state-run schools, a banner labeled the ban as \"secular fundamentalism\". In the United States, private or cultural intolerance of women wearing the hijab (Islamic headcovering) and political activism by Muslims also has been labeled \"secular fundamentalism\".\nThe term \"fundamentalism\" is sometimes applied to signify a counter-cultural fidelity to a principle or set of principles, as in the pejorative term \"market fundamentalism\", used to imply exaggerated religious-like faith in the ability of unfettered \"laissez-faire\" or free-market capitalist economic views or policies to solve economic and social problems. According to economist John Quiggin, the standard features of \"economic fundamentalist rhetoric\" are \"dogmatic\" assertions and the claim that anyone who holds contrary views is not a real economist. Retired professor in religious studies Roderick Hindery lists positive qualities attributed to political, economic, or other forms of cultural fundamentalism, including \"vitality, enthusiasm, willingness to back up words with actions, and the avoidance of facile compromise\" as well as negative aspects such as psychological attitudes, occasionally elitist and pessimistic perspectives, and in some cases literalism.\nCriticism.\nA criticism by Elliot N. Dorff:\nIn order to carry out the fundamentalist program in practice, one would need a perfect understanding of the ancient language of the original text, if indeed the true text can be discerned from among variants. Furthermore, human beings are the ones who transmit this understanding between generations. Even if one wanted to follow the literal word of God, the need for people first to understand that word necessitates human interpretation. Through that process human fallibility is inextricably mixed into the very meaning of the divine word. As a result, it is impossible to follow the indisputable word of God; one can only achieve a human understanding of God's will.\nHoward Thurman was interviewed in the late 1970s for a BBC feature on religion. He told the interviewer:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I say that creeds, dogmas, and theologies are inventions of the mind. It is the nature of the mind to make sense out of experience, to reduce the conglomerates of experience to units of comprehension which we call principles, or ideologies, or concepts. Religious experience is dynamic, fluid, effervescent, yeasty. But the mind can't handle these so it has to imprison religious experience in some way, get it bottled up. Then, when the experience quiets down, the mind draws a bead on it and extracts concepts, notions, dogmas, so that religious experience can make sense to the mind. Meanwhile, religious experience goes on experiencing, so that by the time I get my dogma stated so that I can think about it, the religious experience becomes an object of thought.\nInfluential criticisms of fundamentalism include James Barr's books on Christian fundamentalism and Bassam Tibi's analysis of Islamic fundamentalism.\nA study at the University of Edinburgh found that of its six measured dimensions of religiosity, \"lower intelligence is most associated with higher levels of fundamentalism.\"\nUse as a label.\nThe Associated Press' \"AP Stylebook\" recommends that the term fundamentalist not be used for any group that does not apply the term to itself. Many scholars have adopted a similar position. Other scholars, however, use the term in the broader descriptive sense to refer to various groups in various religious traditions including those groups that would object to being classified as fundamentalists, such as in the Fundamentalism Project.\nTex Sample asserts that it is a mistake to refer to a Muslim, Jewish, or Christian fundamentalist. Rather, a fundamentalist's fundamentalism is their primary concern, over and above other denominational or faith considerations.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11585", "revid": "7852030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11585", "title": "Show Me Love (film)", "text": "1998 film by Lukas Moodysson\nShow Me Love () is a 1998 Swedish romantic comedy-drama film written and directed by Lukas Moodysson in his feature-length directorial debut. It stars Rebecka Liljeberg and Alexandra Dahlstr\u00f6m as two seemingly disparate teenage girls who begin a tentative romantic relationship. The film was released theatrically in Sweden on 23 October 1998, and premiered internationally at the 1998 Cannes Film Festival.\nIt received an overwhelmingly positive reception and won four Guldbagge Awards (Sweden's official film awards) at the 1999 ceremony. Its international awards include the Teddy Award at the 1999 Berlin International Film Festival, and the Special Jury Prize at the 34th Karlovy Vary International Film Festival. The film was selected as the Swedish entry for the Best Foreign Language Oscar at the 71st Academy Awards, but it did not make the final shortlist.\nThe Swedish title refers to the small town of \u00c5m\u00e5l in V\u00e4stra G\u00f6taland County, western Sweden. However, only a few scenes were filmed in \u00c5m\u00e5l, and they were not included in the final product. Primary filming took place in the nearby town of Trollh\u00e4ttan, the location of the production company Film i V\u00e4st's studios.\nPlot.\nTwo girls, Agnes and Elin, attend school in the small town of \u00c5m\u00e5l, Sweden. Elin is outgoing and popular but finds her life unsatisfying and dull. Agnes, by contrast, has no real friends and is constantly depressed. Agnes is in love with Elin but cannot find any way to express it.\nAgnes' parents worry about their daughter's reclusive life and try to be reassuring. Her mother decides, against Agnes' will, to throw a 16th birthday party for her. Agnes is afraid no one will come. Viktoria, a girl in a wheelchair, shows up and Agnes shouts at her in front of her parents, telling her they are friends only because no one else will talk to them. Agnes, overcome with anger and depression, goes to her room and cries into her pillow shouting that she wishes she were dead, while her father tries to soothe her. Viktoria leaves and Agnes's family eats the food made for the party.\nElin arrives at Agnes' house, mainly as an excuse to avoid going to another party, where there will be a boy (Johan, played by Mathias Rust) she wants to avoid. Elin's older sister, Jessica, who comes with her, dares her to kiss Agnes, who is rumoured to be a lesbian. Elin fulfills the dare and then runs out with Jessica, only to soon feel guilty for having humiliated Agnes.\nAfter becoming drunk at the other party, Elin gets sick and throws up. Johan tries to help her and ends up professing his love to her. Elin leaves Johan and the party, only to return to Agnes's house to apologize for how she acted earlier. In doing so, Elin stops Agnes from cutting herself. She even manages to persuade Agnes to return with her to the other party. On the way, Elin shares her real feelings about being trapped in \u00c5m\u00e5l. She asks Agnes about being a lesbian and believes that their problems could be solved by leaving \u00c5m\u00e5l and going to Stockholm. On impulse, Elin persuades Agnes to hitchhike to Stockholm, which is a five-hour journey by car. They find a driver who agrees to take them, believing them to be sisters who are visiting their grandmother. While sitting in the back seat, they have their first real kiss. The driver sees them and, shocked at the behaviour of the two 'sisters', orders them to leave the car.\nElin discovers that she is attracted to Agnes but is afraid to admit it. She proceeds to ignore Agnes and refuses to talk to her. Elin's sister Jessica sees that she is in love and pushes her to figure out who it is. To cover the fact that she is in love with Agnes, Elin lies, pretending to be in love with Johan, and loses her virginity during a short-lived relationship with him. Elin eventually admits her feelings, when, after a climactic scene in a school bathroom, they are forced to 'out' their relationship to the school.\nThe film ends with Elin and Agnes sitting in Elin's bedroom drinking chocolate milk. Elin explains that she often adds too much chocolate until her milk is nearly black. She must fill another glass with milk and mix it and that her sister Jessica often gets mad that she finishes the chocolate. Elin has the last word saying \"It makes a lot of chocolate milk. But that doesn't matter\".\nTitle.\nThe original title of the film, \"Fucking \u00c5m\u00e5l\", refers to the girls' feelings about their small town: In a key scene, Elin shouts in desperation \"varf\u00f6r m\u00e5ste vi bo i fucking j\u00e4vla kuk-\u00c5m\u00e5l?\" (which roughly translates to \"why do we have to live in fucking bloody cock-\u00c5m\u00e5l?\").\nAccording to Moodysson, the problem with the original title started when the film was Sweden's candidate for the Academy Awards, though eventually it was not chosen as a nominee. The Hollywood industry magazine \"Variety\" refused to run an advertisement for \"Fucking \u00c5m\u00e5l\". Thus, American distributor Strand Releasing asked for a new title. Moodysson took the new title from the song at the end of the film, by Robyn. Distributors in other native English-speaking countries then followed suit. \nReception.\nPolitical controversy.\nEven before the film was completed, it created controversy in the town of \u00c5m\u00e5l. Local politicians campaigned to get the title changed because they argued that it would show the town in an unfair way and even undermine it as an economic centre. Further pressure was brought on the makers of the film, the Film i V\u00e4st studio, who are partly financed by Swedish local authorities, including \u00c5m\u00e5l.\nHowever, the local complaints had no effect on the content or release of the film. Since the release, the town of \u00c5m\u00e5l has tried to embrace the publicity generated, despite the fact that the town's name is missing from the English title. In the early 2000s the town founded the pop music \"Fucking \u00c5m\u00e5l Festival.\"\nCritical and commercial response.\n\"Fucking \u00c5m\u00e5l\" received the highest audience figures for a Swedish film in 1998\u20139, with a total audience of 867,576 and a total audience for the whole of Europe of 2.1 million. It grossed $6.5 million in Sweden and $3 million in Norway. Some international reports stated that the film had outgrossed the Hollywood film \"Titanic\" in Sweden. In fact, \"Titanic\" had over twice as many viewers as \"Show Me Love\" in Sweden in 1998.\n\"Show Me Love\" has an approval rating of 91% on review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, based on 44 reviews, and an average rating of 7.5/10. The website's critical consensus states: \"A naturalistic depiction of teenage life, \"Show Me Love\" has a charming, authentic feel\". Metacritic assigned the film a weighted average score of 73 out of 100, based on 17 critics, indicating \"generally favorable reviews\". It is among the top ten of the British Film Institute list of the 50 films you should see by the age of 14.\nThe film received consistently good reviews, including the realism and credibility of its portrayal of what it is like to be a teenager in a small town in the 1990s. In addition, the efforts of the young actors were praised. Jan-Olov Andersson at Aftonbladet felt that Dahlstr\u00f6m's and Liljeberg's imaginative appearance and interaction was \"sensationally credible\", and Bo Ludvigsson at Svenska Dagbladet wrote that it was \"a warm, strong and confident film about the courage to be human\". Ludvigsson also believed that \"Fucking \u00c5m\u00e5l\", with its storytelling drive, leave and authenticity, was well above most of the Swedish films of recent years. Anders Hansson at G\u00f6teborgs-Posten thought that director Moodysson with fairly ordinary elements created \"a film with unusual rise\".\nAutostraddle placed it at number 20 on its \"Top 100 Best Lesbian Movies\" list.\nCultural impact.\nAccording to Russian singer Lena Katina, producer Ivan Shapovalov was inspired to create the pop duo t.A.T.u. after the release of this film. The track \"Show Me Love\" is featured in their album \"200 km/h in the Wrong Lane\".\nThe creators of the 2018 Netflix series \"Everything Sucks!\" called the film the \"biggest influence\" on that show's creation.\nAwards and nominations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Awards table/styles.css\" /&gt;\n! scope=\"col\" | Year\n! scope=\"col\" | Award\n! scope=\"col\" | Category!! scope=\"col\" |Nominee(s)\n! scope=\"col\" | Result!! scope=\"col\" class=\"unsortable\" | Ref.\n! rowspan=\"24\" | 1999\n! rowspan=\"3\" | 2000\nSoundtrack.\nThe film's soundtrack was released through Metronome Records and consists of songs in English and Swedish language. Swedish band Broder Daniel, who contributed three English language songs to \"Fucking \u00c5m\u00e5l\", saw a spike in popularity after the film's release. The band also released an EP titled \"Fucking \u00c5m\u00e5l\".\nLabel: Metronome Records\nFormat: CD, compilation\nCountry: Sweden\nReleased: 1998\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11586", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11586", "title": "Full disclosure (computer security)", "text": "Policy in computer security\nIn the field of computer security, independent researchers often discover flaws in software that can be abused to cause unintended behaviour; these flaws are called vulnerabilities. The process by which the analysis of these vulnerabilities is shared with third parties is the subject of much debate, and is referred to as the researcher's \"disclosure policy\". Full disclosure is the practice of publishing analysis of software vulnerabilities as early as possible, making the data accessible to everyone without restriction. The primary purpose of widely disseminating information about vulnerabilities is so that potential victims are as knowledgeable as those who attack them.\nIn his 2007 essay on the topic, Bruce Schneier stated \"Full disclosure \u2013 the practice of making the details of security vulnerabilities public \u2013 is a damned good idea. Public scrutiny is the only reliable way to improve security, while secrecy only makes us less secure.\" Leonard Rose, co-creator of an electronic mailing list that has superseded bugtraq to become the de facto forum for disseminating advisories, explains \"We don't believe in security by obscurity, and as far as we know, full disclosure is the only way to ensure that everyone, not just the insiders, have access to the information we need.\"\nThe vulnerability disclosure debate.\nThe controversy around the public disclosure of sensitive information is not new. The issue of full disclosure was first raised in the context of locksmithing, in a 19th-century controversy regarding whether weaknesses in lock systems should be kept secret in the locksmithing community, or revealed to the public. Today, there are three major disclosure policies under which most others can be categorized: Non Disclosure, Coordinated Disclosure, and Full Disclosure.\nThe major stakeholders in vulnerability research have their disclosure policies shaped by various motivations, it is not uncommon to observe campaigning, marketing or lobbying for their preferred policy to be adopted and chastising those who dissent. Many prominent security researchers favor full disclosure, whereas most vendors prefer coordinated disclosure. Non disclosure is generally favored by commercial exploit vendors and blackhat hackers.\nCoordinated vulnerability disclosure.\nCoordinated vulnerability disclosure is a policy under which researchers agree to report vulnerabilities to a coordinating authority, which then reports it to the vendor, tracks fixes and mitigations, and coordinates the disclosure of information with stakeholders including the public. In some cases the coordinating authority is the vendor. The premise of coordinated disclosure is typically that nobody should be informed about a vulnerability until the software vendor says it is time. While there are often exceptions or variations of this policy, distribution must initially be limited and vendors are given privileged access to nonpublic research.\nThe original name for this approach was \"responsible disclosure\", based on the essay by Microsoft Security Manager Scott Culp \u201cIt's Time to End Information Anarchy\u201d (referring to full disclosure). Microsoft later called for the term to be phased out in favor of \u201cCoordinated Vulnerability Disclosure\u201d (CVD).\nAlthough the reasoning varies, many practitioners argue that end-users cannot benefit from access to vulnerability information without guidance or patches from the vendor, so the risks of sharing research with malicious actors is too great for too little benefit. As Microsoft explain, \"[Coordinated disclosure] serves everyone's best interests by ensuring that customers receive comprehensive, high-quality updates for security vulnerabilities but are not exposed to malicious attacks while the update is being developed.\"\nTo prevent vendors to indefinitely delaying the disclosure, a common practice in the security industry, pioneered by Google, is to publish all the details of vulnerabilities after a deadline, usually 90 or 120 days reduced to 7 days if the vulnerability is under active exploitation.\nFull disclosure.\nFull disclosure is the policy of publishing information on vulnerabilities without restriction as early as possible, making the information accessible to the general public without restriction. In general, proponents of full disclosure believe that the benefits of freely available vulnerability research outweigh the risks, whereas opponents prefer to limit the distribution.\nThe free availability of vulnerability information allows users and administrators to understand and react to vulnerabilities in their systems, and allows customers to pressure vendors to fix vulnerabilities that vendors may otherwise feel no incentive to solve. There are some fundamental problems with coordinated disclosure that full disclosure can resolve.\nDiscovery of a specific flaw or vulnerability is not a mutually exclusive event, multiple researchers with differing motivations can and do discover the same flaws independently.\nThere is no standard way to make vulnerability information available to the public, researchers often use mailing lists dedicated to the topic, academic papers or industry conferences.\nNon disclosure.\nNon disclosure is the policy that vulnerability information should not be shared, or should only be shared under non-disclosure agreement (either contractually or informally).\nCommon proponents of non-disclosure include commercial exploit vendors, researchers who intend to exploit the flaws they find, and proponents of security through obscurity.\nDebate.\nIn 2009, Charlie Miller, Dino Dai Zovi and Alexander Sotirov announced at the CanSecWest conference the \"No More Free Bugs\" campaign, arguing that companies are profiting and taking advantage of security researchers by not paying them for disclosing bugs. This announcement made it to the news and opened a broader debate about the problem and its associated incentives.\nArguments against coordinated disclosure.\nResearchers in favor of coordinated disclosure believe that users cannot make use of advanced knowledge of vulnerabilities without guidance from the vendor, and that the majority is best served by limiting distribution of vulnerability information. Advocates argue that low-skilled attackers can use this information to perform sophisticated attacks that would otherwise be beyond their ability, and the potential benefit does not outweigh the potential harm caused by malevolent actors. Only when the vendor has prepared guidance that even the most unsophisticated users can digest should the information be made public.\nThis argument presupposes that vulnerability discovery is a mutually exclusive event, that only one person can discover a vulnerability. There are many examples of vulnerabilities being discovered simultaneously, often being exploited in secrecy before discovery by other researchers. While there may exist users who cannot benefit from vulnerability information, full disclosure advocates believe this demonstrates a contempt for the intelligence of end users. While it's true that some users cannot benefit from vulnerability information, if they're concerned with the security of their networks they are in a position to hire an expert to assist them as you would hire a mechanic to help with a car.\nArguments against non disclosure.\nNon disclosure is typically used when a researcher intends to use knowledge of a vulnerability to attack computer systems operated by their enemies, or to trade knowledge of a vulnerability to a third party for profit, who will typically use it to attack their enemies.\nResearchers practicing non disclosure are generally not concerned with improving security or protecting networks. However, some proponents argue that they simply do not want to assist vendors, and claim no intent to harm others.\nWhile full and coordinated disclosure advocates declare similar goals and motivations, simply disagreeing on how best to achieve them, non disclosure is entirely incompatible.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11587", "revid": "47265688", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11587", "title": "Feminist theology", "text": "Feminist theology is a movement found in several religions, including Buddhism, Hinduism, Zoroastrianism, Sikhism, Jainism, Neopaganism, Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith, Judaism, Islam, Christianity, and New Thought, to reconsider the traditions, practices, scriptures, and theologies of those religions from a feminist perspective. Some of the goals of feminist theology include increasing the role of women among clergy and religious authorities, reinterpreting patriarchal (male-dominated) imagery and language about God, determining women's place in relation to career and motherhood, studying images of women in the religions' sacred texts, and matriarchal religion.\nMethodology.\nDevelopment of feminist theology.\nWhile there is no specific date to pinpoint the beginning of this movement, its origins can be traced back to the 1960s article, \"The Human Situation: A Feminine View\", written by Valerie Saiving (Goldstein). Her piece of work questioned theologies written by men for men in a modern perspective to then dismantle what it had created over the years: patriarchal systems that oppress women. After Saiving's work was published, many scholars took up her ideas and elaborated upon them, which built the feminist theology movement further. Grenz and Olson view the steps of feminist theology in threes: first, feminist theologians critique the treatment of women in the past, second, they determine alternative biblical/religious texts that support feminist ideologies, and third, they claim the theology that adheres to such standards, through reclamation, abolishment, and/or revision. Grenz and Olson also mention that while all feminists agree there is a flaw in the system, there is disagreement over how far outside of the Bible and the Christian tradition women are willing to go to seek support for their ideals. This concept is also important when feminist theology is relating to other religions or spiritual connections outside of Christianity.\nPrehistoric religion and archaeology.\nThe primacy of a monotheistic or near-monotheistic \"Great Goddess\" is advocated by some modern matriarchists as a female version of, preceding, or analogue to, the Abrahamic God associated with the historical rise of monotheism in the Mediterranean Axis Age.\nMother Nature (sometimes known as \"Mother Earth\") is a common representation of nature that focuses on the life-giving and nurturing features of nature by embodying it in the form of the mother. Images of women representing mother earth, and mother nature, are timeless. In prehistoric times, goddesses were worshipped for their association with fertility, fecundity, and agricultural bounty. Priestesses held dominion over aspects of Incan, Assyrian, Babylonian, Slavonic, Roman, Greek, Indian, and Iroquoian religions in the millennia prior to the inception of patriarchy.\nGender and God.\nOthers who practice feminist spirituality may instead adhere to a feminist re-interpretation of Western monotheistic traditions. In those cases, the notion of God as having a male gender is rejected, and God is not referred to using male pronouns. Feminist spirituality may also object to images of God that they perceive as authoritarian, parental, or disciplinarian, instead emphasizing \"maternal\" attributes such as nurturing, acceptance, and creativity.\nCarol P. Christ is the author of the widely reprinted essay \"Why Women Need the Goddess\", which argues in favor of the concept of there having been an ancient religion of a supreme goddess. This essay was presented as the keynote address to an audience of over 500 at the \"Great Goddess Re-emerging\" conference at the University of California at Santa Cruz in the spring of 1978, and was first published in \"Heresies: The Great Goddess Issue\" (1978), pgs. 8\u201313. Carol P. Christ also co-edited the classic feminist religion anthologies \"Weaving the Visions: New Patterns in Feminist Spirituality\" (1989) and \"Womanspirit Rising\" (1979/1989); the latter included her essay \"Why Women Need the Goddess\".\nThe Latter-Day Saint movement is unique among Christian denominations in that it affirms the existence of a Divine Feminine as a part of its core doctrine. The Latter-Day Saint Divine Feminine is called \"Heavenly Mother\". While Latter-day Saints do not pray to Heavenly Mother, she is considered to be the wife of Heavenly Father and therefore His equal in heaven, according to \"The Family: A Proclamation to the World\"'s description of husbands and wives as equal partners.\nNew Thought movement.\nNew Thought as a movement had no single origin, but was rather propelled along by a number of spiritual thinkers and philosophers and emerged through a variety of religious denominations and churches, particularly the Unity Church, Religious Science, and Church of Divine Science. It was a feminist movement in that most of its teachers and students were women; notable among the founders of the movement were Emma Curtis Hopkins, known as the \"teacher of teachers\" Myrtle Fillmore, Malinda Cramer, and Nona L. Brooks; with its churches and community centers mostly led by women, from the 1880s to today.\nWithin specific religions.\nJudaism.\nJewish feminism is a movement that seeks to make the religious, political, and social status of Jewish women equal to that of Jewish men. Feminist movements, with varying approaches and successes, have opened up within all major denominations of Judaism.\nThere are different approaches and versions of feminist theology that exist within the Jewish community.\nSome of these theologies promote the idea that it is important to have a feminine characterization of God within the siddur (Jewish prayerbook) and service. They challenge the male rabbi teachings that only emphasize God as a man with masculine traits only.\nIn 1976, Rita Gross published the article \"Female God Language in a Jewish Context\" (Davka Magazine 17), which Jewish scholar and feminist Judith Plaskow considers \"probably the first article to deal theoretically with the issue of female God-language in a Jewish context\". \u00a0Gross was Jewish herself at this time.\nReconstructionist Rabbi Rebecca Alpert (\"Reform Judaism\", Winter 1991) comments:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The experience of praying with \"Siddur Nashim\" [the first Jewish prayer book to refer to God using female pronouns and imagery, written by Margaret Wenig and Naomi Janowitz in 1976] ... transformed my relationship with God. For the first time, I understood what it meant to be made in God's image. To think of God as a woman like myself, to see Her as both powerful and nurturing, to see Her imaged with a woman's body, with womb, with breasts \u2013 this was an experience of ultimate significance. Was this the relationship that men have had with God for all these millennia? How wonderful to gain access to those feelings and perceptions.\nIn 1990 Rabbi Margaret Wenig wrote the sermon, \"God Is a Woman and She Is Growing Older\", which as of 2011 has been published ten times (three times in German) and preached by rabbis from Australia to California.\nRabbi Paula Reimers (\"Feminism, Judaism, and God the Mother\", \"Conservative Judaism\" 46 (1993)) comments:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Those who want to use God/She language want to affirm womanhood and the feminine aspect of the deity. They do this by emphasizing that which most clearly distinguishes the female experience from the male. A male or female deity can create through speech or through action, but the metaphor for creation which is uniquely feminine is birth. Once God is called female, then, the metaphor of birth and the identification of the deity with nature and its processes become inevitable\nAhuva Zache affirms that using both masculine and feminine language for God can be a positive thing, but reminds her Reform Jewish readership that God is beyond gender (\"Is God male, female, both or neither? How should we phrase our prayers in response to God's gender?\", in the Union for Reform Judaism's iTorah, https://):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Feminine imagery of God does not in any way threaten Judaism. On the contrary, it enhances the Jewish understanding of God, which should not be limited to masculine metaphors. All language that humans use to describe God is only a metaphor. Using masculine and feminine metaphors for God is one way to remind ourselves that gendered descriptions of God are just metaphors. God is beyond gender.\nThese views are highly controversial even within liberal Jewish movements. Orthodox Jews and many Conservative Jews\nhold that it is wrong to use English female pronouns for God, viewing such usage as an intrusion of modern, western feminist ideology into Jewish tradition. Liberal prayer books tend increasingly to also avoid male-specific words and pronouns, seeking that all references to God in translations be made in gender-neutral language. For example, the UK Liberal movement's \"Siddur Lev Chadash\" (1995) does so, as does the UK Reform Movement's \"Forms of Prayer\" (2008). In Mishkan T'filah, the American Reform Jewish prayer book released in 2007, references to God as \"He\" have been removed, and whenever Jewish patriarchs are named (Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob), so also are the matriarchs (Sarah, Rebecca, Rachel, and Leah.) In 2015 the Reform Jewish High Holy Days prayer book Mishkan HaNefesh was released; it is intended as a companion to Mishkan T'filah. It includes a version of the High Holy Days prayer Avinu Malkeinu that refers to God as both \"Loving Father\" and \"Compassionate Mother\". Other notable changes are replacing a line from the Reform movement's earlier prayerbook, \"Gates of Repentance\", that mentioned the joy of a bride and groom specifically, with the line \"rejoicing with couples under the chuppah [wedding canopy]\", and adding a third, non-gendered option to the way worshippers are called to the Torah, offering \"mibeit\", Hebrew for \"from the house of\", in addition to the traditional \"son of\" or \"daughter of\".\nIn 2003 \"The Female Face of God in Auschwitz: A Jewish Feminist Theology of the Holocaust\", the first full-length feminist theology of the Holocaust, written by Melissa Raphael, was published. Judith Plaskow's \"Standing Again at Sinai: Judaism from a Feminist Perspective\" (1991), and Rachel Adler's \"Engendering Judaism: An Inclusive Theology and Ethics\" (1999) are the only two full-length Jewish feminist works to focus entirely on theology in general (rather than specific aspects such as Holocaust theology.) This work of feminist theology in regards to Judaism, also contextualizes the other goals of this movement, to re frame historical texts and how they are being taught. It is in addition to how God is being viewed but also the role of women historically and how they are being treated today in a new feminist light. \nWhile there is some opposition faced, Jewish communities believing feminism is too Western and does not validate Judaism, there is also the approval of an insider feminist perspective that takes into consideration traditions and modern thought.\nChristianity.\nChristian feminism is an aspect of feminist theology which seeks to advance and understand the equality of men and women morally, socially, spiritually, and in leadership from a Christian perspective. This is through reformation to be along the lines of feminist thought in regards to their religion. Christian feminists argue that contributions by women in that direction are necessary for a complete understanding of Christianity.\nThese theologians believe that God does not discriminate on the basis of biologically determined characteristics, such as sex and race. Their major issues include the ordination of women, male dominance in Christian marriage, recognition of equal spiritual and moral abilities, reproductive rights, and the search for a feminine or gender-transcendent divine. Christian feminists often draw on the teachings of more historical texts that reinforce that feminism does not go against Christianity but has always been in its texts.\nMary Daly grew up an Irish Catholic and all of her education was received through Catholic schools. She has three doctorate degrees, one from St. Mary's College in sacred theology then two from University of Fribourg, Switzerland in theology and philosophy. While in her early works Daly expressed a desire to reform Christianity from the inside, she would later come to the conclusion that Christianity is not able to enact the necessary changes as it is. According to Ford's The Modern Theologians, \"Mary Daly has done more than anyone to clarify the problems women have concerning the central core symbolism of Christianity, and its effects on their self-understanding and their relationship to God.\" Daly is a prime example of how some feminist theologians come to the conclusion that reclamation and reform are no longer a viable option, that condemnation is the only way out.\nRosemary Radford Ruether writes about crucial additional interpretations of how Christian feminist theology is impacted by the world. Ruether grew up Roman Catholic and attended Catholic schools through her sophomore year of high school. She was a classics major at Scripps College, worked for the Delta Ministry in 1965 and taught at Howard University School of Religion from 1966 to 1976. \"Rosemary Ruether has written on the question of Christian credibility, with particular attention to ecclesiology and its engagement with church-world conflicts; Jewish-Christian relations...; politics and religion in America; and Feminism\". Ruether is said to be one of the major Christian feminist theologians of our time. Her book https:// is the earliest feminist theological assessment of Christian theology.\nIn the 1970s Phyllis Trible pioneered a Christian feminist approach to biblical scholarship, using the approach of rhetorical criticism developed by her dissertation advisor, James Muilenburg.\nChristian feminist theology has consistently been critiqued as being focused on primarily white women. This has resulted in the development of movements such as womanist theology, focusing on African American women coined by the works of Alice Walker, Asian feminist theology, and mujerista theology, introduced by Ada Maria Isasi-Diaz concerning Latinas.\nThe term Christian egalitarianism is sometimes preferred by those advocating gender equality and equity among Christians who do not wish to associate themselves with the feminist movement.\nWomen apologists have become more visible in Christian academia. Their defense of the faith is differentiated by a more personal, cultural and listening approach \"driven by love\".\nTo learn more about feminism in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints, go to this article.\nSome advocates of liberation theology will refer to God as \"she\". This is particularly true of many of the faculty at Union Theological seminary which is a hub of liberation theology and even Senator Rafael Warnock referred to God as \"she' in his exegiesis of John 3.\nSee also: Unity Church, Christian Science, Christian theological praxis and Postmodern Christianity.\nIslam.\nIslamic feminism is a form of feminism concerned with the role of women in Islam. It aims for the full equality of all Muslims, regardless of gender, in public and private life. Islamic feminists advocate women's rights, gender equality, and social justice grounded in an Islamic framework. Although rooted in Islam, the movement's pioneers have also utilized secular and non-Muslim feminist discourses and recognize the role of Islamic feminism as part of an integrated global feminist movement. Advocates of the movement seek to highlight the deeply rooted teachings of equality in the Quran and encourage a questioning of the patriarchal interpretation of Islamic teaching through the Qur'an (holy book), \"hadith\" (sayings of Muhammad) and \"sharia\" (law) towards the creation of a more equal and just society. This is done through the advocation of the female autonomy in line with the guideline of the Qur'an. Feminist theologians like Azizah al-Hibri, professor of law at University of Richmond, founded KARAMAH: Muslim Women Lawyers for Human Rights. Feminist theology and Islam is also used to strengthen the spiritual connection to the women of Islam when they undergo severe trauma, to promote human rights especially those of women. Fatima Mernissi's book, \"The Forgotten Queens of Islam\", is a crucial piece in feminist theology for Islam and how it relates to a non western state.\nOther theologists include Riffat Hassan, Amina Wadud, and Asma Barlas. \nThis theology has been used to educate, re-frame religion, pose as a building block for peace, and the advancement of women's rights, in legislation and in society.\nSikhism.\nIn Sikhism women are equal to men. The verse from the Sikh scripture the Guru Granth Sahib states that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;From woman, man is born; within woman, man is conceived; to woman he is engaged and married. Woman becomes his friend; through woman, the future generations come. When his woman dies, he seeks another woman; to woman he is bound. So why call her bad? From her, kings are born. From woman, woman is born; without woman, there would be no one at all.\u2014\u200a\nAccording to scholars such as Nikky-Guninder Kaur Singh, feminist theology in Sikhism is also the feminization of rituals such as the ceremonial rite of who lights a funeral pyre. Singh further states that this is the reclamation of religion to inspire \"personal and social renewal of change\" and that these theologians are seen as gurus rather than simply women or scholars. The teachings of Guru Nanak focus on the singularity between men and women, with anything that differs denounced. He cites the example that origins and traditions stem from women as supervisors and in control, as well as engaged in history, such as Mai Bhago, who rallied men to fight against imperial forces alongside her in the battle at Muktsar in 1705.\nHinduism.\nWithin Ancient Hinduism, women have been held in equal honour as men. The Manusmriti for example states: \"The society that provides respect and dignity to women flourishes with nobility and prosperity. And a society that does not put women on such a high pedestal has to face miseries and failures regardless of how so much noble deeds they perform otherwise.\" Manusmriti Chapter 3 Verse 56.\nWithin the Vedas the Hindu holy texts, women were given the highest possible respect and equality. The Vedic period was glorified by this tradition. Many rishis were women, indeed so that several of them authored many of the slokas, a poem, proverb or hymn, in the Vedas. For instance, in the Rigveda there is a list of women rishis. Some of them are: Ghosha, Godha, Gargi, Vishwawra, Apala, Upanishad, Brahmjaya, Aditi, Indrani, Sarma, Romsha, Maitreyi, Kathyayini, Urvashi, Lopamudra, Yami, Shashwati, Sri, Laksha and many others. In the Vedic period women were free to enter into brahmacharya just like men, and attain salvation.\nDuring Hindu wedding ceremonies, the following slokas are uttered by the grooms, yet in recent years their importance is understood less frequently with no active desire to analyze them in depth to come to the conclusions that was being portrayed:\n\"O bride! I accept your hand to enhance our joint good fortune. I pray to you to accept me as your husband and live with me until our old age. ...\" \"Rigveda Samhita\" Part -4, sukta 85, sloka 9702\n\"O bride! May you be like the empress of your mother-in-law, father-in-law, sisters-in-law and brothers-in-law (sisters and brothers of the groom). May your writ run in your house.\" \"Rigveda Samhita\" Part -4, sukta 85, sloka 9712\nThis sloka from the Atharvaveda clearly states that the woman leads and the man follows: \"The Sun God follows the first illuminated and enlightened goddess Usha (dawn) in the same manner as men emulate and follow women.\" \"Athravaveda Samhita\", Part 2, Kanda 27, sukta 107, sloka 5705.\nWomen were considered to be the embodiment of great virtue and wisdom. Thus we have: \"O bride! May the knowledge of the Vedas be in front of you and behind you, in your center and in your ends. May you conduct your life after attaining the knowledge of the Vedas. May you be benevolent, the harbinger of good fortune and health and live in great dignity and indeed illuminate your husband's home.\" \"Atharva Veda\" 14-1-64. Women were allowed full freedom of worship. \"The wife should do agnihotra (yagna), sandhya (puja) and all other daily religious rituals. If, for some reason, her husband is not present, the woman alone has full rights to do yagna\". \"Rigveda Samhita\", part 1, sukta 79, sloka 872.\nMoving on towards the Monotheistic era of Hinduism when such ideals such as Shaivism and Vaishnavism, a specific deity for feministic worship was brought about under the Shaktism branch. From a Hinduism point of view women are equal in all measures to men in comparison, historical texts have stated this and is the basis of Hinduism, recognizing women as valuable and interconnected between men and women. Shakti, the name meaning power and referring to the female counterpart of Shiva, possesses connected powers that do not belong to just male or female but rather works together, equally dependent upon the other. Hindu feminist scholars also go beyond the reconstruction of texts but also the reestablishment of society and Hinduism in practice.\nNeopaganism.\nSome currents of Neopaganism, in particular Wicca, have a ditheistic concept of a single goddess and a single god, who in hieros gamos represent a united whole. Polytheistic reconstructionists focus on reconstructing polytheistic religions, including the various goddesses and figures associated with indigenous cultures.\nWicca is a duo theistic belief system. Members of Wicca will work individually with both a God, the son and partner of the Mother Earth, and the Goddess herself. The Goddess is commonly referred to as the Triple Goddess in Wicca. She is also commonly addressed as the Mother Goddess or the Mother Earth. The Goddess represents creation, strength, destruction and the Earth at once. Wicca's common theme across its beliefs is the feminist movement of the Female Goddess, which honours the importance of the female body.\nWiccan Feminism demonstrates the strength of women within the faith. Wicca's history of leading women begins with examples of members such as Zsuzsanna Budapest (1940), who founded one of Wicca's first feminist covens, has formed further feminist traditions within the faith over time. Wicca encourages a balance in power between men and women, regardless of gender and does not favour one gender over the other. Wicca does not shame femininity, but rather embraces and uplifts the female body. Members of the practice acknowledge the menstrual cycle as a powerful form of creation and life. Women are not shamed for being open about their sexuality and individualism, as Wicca considers menstruation, pregnancy and menopause to be manifestations of the divine feminine and a source of creation. The faith's feminist approach and emphasis of a female deity creates an appeal to women, which has led to the majority of the Wiccan population being primarily female over the years. Wicca has a feminist approach to life as it encourages a theme of balance in power between men and women, highlighting the importance of equality in the faith.\nThe term \"thealogy\" is sometimes used in the context of the Neopagan Goddess movement, a pun on theology and \"thea\" \u03b8\u03b5\u03ac \"goddess\" intended to suggest a feminist approach to theism.\nThe Goddess movement is a loose grouping of social and religious phenomena that grew out of second-wave feminism, predominantly in North America, Western Europe, Australia, and New Zealand in the 1970s, and the metaphysical community as well. Spurred by the perception that women were not treated equitably in many religions, some women turned to a Female Deity as more in tune with their spiritual needs. Education in the Arts became a vehicle for the study of humanitarian philosophers like David Hume at that time. A unifying theme of this diverse movement is the femaleness of Deity (as opposed and contrasted to a patriarchal God).\nGoddess beliefs take many forms: some people in the Goddess movement recognize multiple goddesses, some also include gods, while others honour what they refer to as \"the Goddess\", which is not necessarily seen as monotheistic, but is often understood to be an inclusive, encompassing term incorporating many goddesses in many different cultures. The term \"the Goddess\" may also be understood to include a multiplicity of ways to view deity personified as female, or as a metaphor, or as a process. (Christ 1997, 2003) The term \"The Goddess\" may also refer to the concept of The One Divine Power, or the traditionally worshiped \"Great Goddess\" of ancient times.\nIn the latter part of the 20th century, feminism was influential in the rise of Neopaganism in the United States, and particularly the Dianic tradition. Some feminists find the worship of a goddess, rather than a god, to be consonant with their views. Others are polytheists, and worship a number of goddesses. The collective set of beliefs associated with this is sometimes known as thealogy and sometimes referred to as the Goddess movement. See also Dianic Wicca.\nBuddhism.\nBuddhist feminism seeks to advance and understand the equality of men and women morally, socially, spiritually, and in leadership from a Buddhist perspective and within Buddhism. While some core beliefs in Buddhism may cause friction with Western feminism, Buddhist feminist theology strives to find the common ground and balance between tradition and the goals of this movement. \nIn carrying the teachings of Buddhism, feminist theologians critique the common feminist ideology as \"other-ing\" males. This idea is in conflict with Buddhist beliefs of interconnections between all. The enemy is not the \"other\" but the idea that there is not a singular connection and being the same. \nBuddhist feminist theologies take into consideration religious ideologies, challenge Western feminist views, and reclaim what Buddhism is at its core, interconnected and accepting.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11588", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11588", "title": "Frequency shift keying", "text": ""}
{"id": "11589", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11589", "title": "FSK", "text": "FSK may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "11592", "revid": "2278355", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11592", "title": "Freeware", "text": "Software distributed and used at no cost, with other rights still reserved\nFreeware is software, often proprietary, that is distributed at no monetary cost to the end user. There is no agreed-upon set of rights, license, or EULA that defines \"freeware\" unambiguously; every publisher defines its own rules for the freeware it offers. For instance, modification, redistribution by third parties, and reverse engineering are permitted by some publishers but prohibited by others. Unlike with free and open-source software, which are also often distributed free of charge, the source code for freeware is typically not made available. Freeware may be intended to benefit its producer by, for example, encouraging sales of a more capable version, as in the freemium and shareware business models; or by collecting and selling user's personal data.\nHistory.\nThe term \"freeware\" was coined in 1982 by Andrew Fluegelman, who wanted to sell PC-Talk, the communications application he had created, outside of commercial distribution channels. Fluegelman distributed the program via the same process as \"shareware\". As software types can change, freeware can change into shareware.\nIn the 1980s and 1990s, the term \"freeware\" was often applied to software released without source code.\nDefinitions.\nSoftware license.\nFreeware software is available for use without charge and typically has limited functionality with a more capable version available commercially or as shareware. It is typically fully functional for an unlimited period of time.\nIn contrast to what the Free Software Foundation calls free software, the author of freeware usually restricts the rights of the user to use, copy, distribute, modify, make derivative works, or reverse engineer the software. The software license may impose additional usage restrictions; for instance, the license may be \"free for private, non-commercial use\" only, or usage over a network, on a server, or in combination with certain other software packages may be prohibited. Restrictions may be required by license or enforced by the software itself; e.g., the package may fail to function over a network.\nRelation to other forms of software licensing.\nThe U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) defines \"open source software\" (i.e., free software or free and open-source software), as distinct from \"freeware\" or \"shareware\"; it is software where \"the Government does not have access to the original source code\". The \"free\" in \"freeware\" refers to the price of the software, which is typically proprietary and distributed without source code. By contrast, the \"free\" in \"free software\" refers to freedoms granted users under the software license (for example, to run the program for any purpose, modify and redistribute the program to others), and such software may be sold at a price.\nAccording to the Free Software Foundation (FSF), \"freeware\" is a loosely defined category and it has no clear accepted definition, although FSF asks that free software (libre; unrestricted and with source code available) should not be called freeware.\nIn contrast the Oxford English Dictionary simply characterizes freeware as being \"available free of charge (sometimes with the suggestion that users should make a donation to the provider)\".\nSome freeware products are released alongside paid versions that either have more features or less restrictive licensing terms. This approach is known as freemium (\"free\" + \"premium\"), since the \"free\" version is intended as a promotion for the premium version. The two often share a code base, using a compiler flag to determine which is produced. For example, BBEdit has a BBEdit Lite edition which has fewer features. XnView is available free of charge for personal use but must be licensed for commercial use. The \"free\" version may be advertising supported, as was the case with the DivX.\nAd-supported software and registerware also bear resemblances to freeware. Ad-supported software does not ask for payment for a license, but displays advertising to either cover development costs or as a means of income. Registerware forces the user to subscribe with the publisher before being able to use the product. While commercial products may require registration to ensure licensed use, registerware do not.\nShareware permits redistribution, but the license only allows limited use before paying the license fee. Some features may be disabled prior to payment, in which case it is sometimes known as crippleware.\nBoth freeware and shareware sometimes have a limited evaluation period, after which the software is automatically disabled or starts displaying a request to pay a registration fee. In the latter case it is colloquially known as nagware.\nCreative Commons licenses.\nThe Creative Commons offer licenses, applicable to all by copyright governed works including software, which allow a developer to define \"freeware\" in a legal safe and internationally law domains respecting way. The typical freeware use case \"share\" can be further refined with Creative Commons restriction clauses like non-commerciality (CC BY-NC) or no-derivatives (CC BY-ND), see description of licenses. There are , for instance The White Chamber, Mari0 or Assault Cube, all freeware by being CC BY-NC-SA licensed with only non-commercial sharing allowed.\nRestrictions.\nFreeware cannot economically rely on commercial promotion. In May 2015 advertising freeware on Google AdWords was restricted to \"authoritative source\"[s]. Thus web sites and blogs are the primary resource for information on which freeware is available, useful, and is not malware. However, there are also many computer magazines or newspapers that provide ratings for freeware and include compact discs or other storage media containing freeware. Freeware is also often bundled with other products such as digital cameras or scanners.\nFreeware has been criticized as \"unsustainable\" because it requires a single entity to be responsible for updating and enhancing the product, which is then given away without charge. Other freeware projects are simply released as one-off programs with no promise or expectation of further development. These may include source code, as does free software, so that users can make any required or desired changes themselves, but this code remains subject to the license of the compiled executable and does not constitute free software.\n\"Free\" trial.\nA \"free\" trial is another related concept in which customers are allowed to use a product, free of charge, for a limited time.\nWhen a software monopoly has a strong network effect, it may be more profitable for it to offer a \"free\" trial. Also, customers acquired via a \"free\" trial have a much lower customer lifetime value as opposed to regular customers, but they also respond more to marketing communications.\nSome factors that may encourage or discourage people to use \"free\" trials include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11593", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11593", "title": "Flat Earth", "text": "Archaic conception of Earth's shape\nFlat Earth is an archaic and scientifically disproven conception of the Earth's shape as a plane or disk. Many ancient cultures subscribed to a flat-Earth cosmography. The model has undergone a recent resurgence as a conspiracy theory in the 21st century.\nThe idea of a spherical Earth appeared in ancient Greek philosophy with Pythagoras (6th century BC). However, the early Greek cosmological view of a flat Earth persisted among most pre-Socratics (6th\u20135th century BC). In the early 4th century BC, Plato wrote about a spherical Earth. By about 330\u00a0BC, his former student Aristotle had provided strong empirical evidence for a spherical Earth. Knowledge of the Earth's global shape gradually began to spread beyond the Hellenistic world. By the early period of the Christian Church, the spherical view was widely held, with some notable exceptions. In contrast, ancient Chinese scholars consistently describe the Earth as flat, and this perception remained unchanged until their encounters with Jesuit missionaries in the 17th century. Muslim scholars in early Islam maintained that the Earth is flat. However, since the 9th century, Muslim scholars have tended to believe in a spherical Earth. \nIt is a historical myth that medieval Europeans generally thought the Earth was flat. This myth was created in the 17th century by Protestants to argue against Catholic teachings, and gained currency in the 19th century.\nDespite the scientific facts and obvious effects of Earth's sphericity, pseudoscientific flat-Earth conspiracy theories persist. Since the 2010s, belief in a flat Earth has increased, both as membership of modern flat Earth societies, and as unaffiliated individuals using social media. In a 2018 study reported on by \"Scientific American\", only 82% of 18- to 24-year-old American respondents agreed with the statement \"I have always believed the world is round\". However, a firm belief in a flat Earth is rare, with less than 2% acceptance in all age groups.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nBelief in flat Earth.\nNear East.\nIn early Egyptian and Mesopotamian thought, the world was portrayed as a disk floating in the ocean. A similar model is found in the Homeric account from the 8th century BC in which \"Okeanos, the personified body of water surrounding the circular surface of the Earth, is the begetter of all life and possibly of all gods.\"\nThe Pyramid Texts and Coffin Texts of ancient Egypt show a similar cosmography; Nun (the Ocean) encircled (\"dry lands\" or \"islands\").\nThe Israelites also imagined the Earth to be a disc floating on water with an arched firmament above it that separated the Earth from the heavens. The sky was a solid dome with the Sun, Moon, planets, and stars embedded in it.\nGreece.\nPoets.\nBoth Homer and Hesiod described a disc cosmography on the Shield of Achilles. This poetic tradition of an Earth-encircling (\"gaiaokhos\") sea (Oceanus) and a disc also appears in Stasinus of Cyprus, Mimnermus, Aeschylus, and Apollonius Rhodius.\nHomer's description of the disc cosmography on the shield of Achilles with the encircling ocean is repeated far later in Quintus Smyrnaeus' \"Posthomerica\" (4th century AD), which continues the narration of the Trojan War.\nPhilosophers.\nSeveral pre-Socratic philosophers believed that the world was flat: Thales (c. 550\u00a0BC) according to several sources, and Leucippus (c. 440\u00a0BC) and Democritus (c. 460\u2013370\u00a0BC) according to Aristotle.\nThales thought that the Earth floated in water like a log. It has been argued, however, that Thales actually believed in a spherical Earth. Anaximander (c. 550\u00a0BC) believed that the Earth was a short cylinder with a flat, circular top that remained stable because it was the same distance from all things. Anaximenes of Miletus believed that \"the Earth is flat and rides on air; in the same way the Sun and the Moon and the other heavenly bodies, which are all fiery, ride the air because of their flatness\". Xenophanes (c. 500\u00a0BC) thought that the Earth was flat, with its upper side touching the air, and the lower side extending without limit.\nBelief in a flat Earth continued into the 5th century BC. Anaxagoras (c. 450\u00a0BC) agreed that the Earth was flat, and his pupil Archelaus believed that the flat Earth was depressed in the middle like a saucer, to allow for the fact that the Sun does not rise and set at the same time for everyone.\nHistorians.\nHecataeus of Miletus believed that the Earth was flat and surrounded by water. Herodotus in his \"Histories\" ridiculed the belief that water encircled the world, yet most classicists agree that he still believed Earth was flat because of his descriptions of literal \"ends\" or \"edges\" of the Earth.\nNorthern Europe.\nThe ancient Norse and Germanic peoples believed in a flat-Earth cosmography with the Earth surrounded by an ocean, with the axis mundi, a world tree (Yggdrasil), or pillar (Irminsul) in the centre. In the world-encircling ocean sat a snake called Jormungandr. The Norse creation account preserved in Gylfaginning (VIII) states that during the creation of the Earth, an impassable sea was placed around it:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And Jafnh\u00e1rr said: \"Of the blood, which ran and welled forth freely out of his wounds, they made the sea, when they had formed and made firm the Earth together, and laid the sea in a ring round. about her; and it may well seem a hard thing to most men to cross over it.\"\nThe late Norse Konungs skuggsj\u00e1, on the other hand, explains Earth's shape as a sphere:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If you take a lighted candle and set it in a room, you may expect it to light up the entire interior, unless something should hinder, though the room be quite large. But if you take an apple and hang it close to the flame, so near that it is heated, the apple will darken nearly half the room or even more. However, if you hang the apple near the wall, it will not get hot; the candle will light up the whole house; and the shadow on the wall where the apple hangs will be scarcely half as large as the apple itself. From this you may infer that the Earth-circle is round like a ball and not equally near the sun at every point. But where the curved surface lies nearest the sun's path, there will the greatest heat be; and some of the lands that lie continuously under the unbroken rays cannot be inhabited.\nEast Asia.\nIn ancient China, the prevailing belief was that the Earth was flat and square, while the heavens were round, an assumption virtually unquestioned until the introduction of European astronomy in the 17th century. The English sinologist Cullen emphasizes the point that there was no concept of a round Earth in ancient Chinese astronomy:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Chinese thought on the form of the Earth remained almost unchanged from early times until the first contacts with modern science through the medium of Jesuit missionaries in the seventeenth century. While the heavens were variously described as being like an umbrella covering the Earth (the Kai Tian theory), or like a sphere surrounding it (the Hun Tian theory), or as being without substance while the heavenly bodies float freely (the Hs\u00fcan yeh theory), the Earth was at all times flat, although perhaps bulging up slightly.\nThe model of an egg was often used by Chinese astronomers such as Zhang Heng (78\u2013139\u00a0AD) to describe the heavens as spherical:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The heavens are like a hen's egg and as round as a crossbow bullet; the Earth is like the yolk of the egg, and lies in the centre.\nThis analogy with a curved egg led some modern historians, notably Joseph Needham, to conjecture that Chinese astronomers were, after all, aware of the Earth's sphericity. The egg reference, however, was rather meant to clarify the relative position of the flat Earth to the heavens:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In a passage of Zhang Heng's cosmogony not translated by Needham, Zhang himself says: \"Heaven takes its body from the Yang, so it is round and in motion. Earth takes its body from the Yin, so it is flat and quiescent\". The point of the egg analogy is simply to stress that the Earth is completely enclosed by Heaven, rather than merely covered from above as the Kai Tian describes. Chinese astronomers, many of them brilliant men by any standards, continued to think in flat-Earth terms until the seventeenth century; this surprising fact might be the starting-point for a re-examination of the apparent facility with which the idea of a spherical Earth found acceptance in fifth-century BC Greece.\nFurther examples cited by Needham supposed to demonstrate dissenting voices from the ancient Chinese consensus actually refer without exception to the Earth being square, not to it being flat. Accordingly, the 13th-century scholar Li Ye, who argued that the movements of the round heaven would be hindered by a square Earth, did not advocate a spherical Earth, but rather that its edge should be rounded off so as to be circular. However, Needham disagrees, affirming that Li Ye believed the Earth to be spherical, similar in shape to the heavens but much smaller. This was preconceived by the 4th-century scholar Yu Xi, who argued for the infinity of outer space surrounding the Earth and that the latter could be either square or round, in accordance to the shape of the heavens. When Chinese geographers of the 17th century, influenced by European cartography and astronomy, showed the Earth as a sphere that could be circumnavigated by sailing around the globe, they did so with formulaic terminology previously used by Zhang Heng to describe the spherical shape of the Sun and Moon (i.e. that they were as round as a crossbow bullet).\nAs noted in the book \"Huainanzi\", in the 2nd century BC, Chinese astronomers effectively inverted Eratosthenes' calculation of the curvature of the Earth to calculate the height of the Sun above the Earth. By assuming the Earth was flat, they arrived at a distance of (approximately ). The \"Zhoubi Suanjing\" also discusses how to determine the distance of the Sun by measuring the length of noontime shadows at different latitudes, a method similar to Eratosthenes' measurement of the circumference of the Earth, but the \"Zhoubi Suanjing\" assumes that the Earth is flat.\nAlternate or mixed theories.\nGreece: spherical Earth.\nPythagoras in the 6th century BC and Parmenides in the 5th century BC stated that the Earth is spherical, and this view spread rapidly in the Greek world. Around 330\u00a0BC, Aristotle maintained on the basis of physical theory and observational evidence that the Earth was spherical, and reported an estimate of its circumference. The Earth's circumference was first determined around 240\u00a0BC by Eratosthenes. By the 2nd century AD, Ptolemy had derived his maps from a globe and developed the system of latitude, longitude, and climes. His \"Almagest\" was written in Greek and only translated into Latin in the 11th century from Arabic translations.\nLucretius (1st century BC) opposed the concept of a spherical Earth, because he considered that an infinite universe had no center towards which heavy bodies would tend. Thus, he thought the idea of animals walking around topsy-turvy under the Earth was absurd. By the 1st century AD, Pliny the Elder was in a position to say that everyone agreed on the spherical shape of Earth, though disputes continued regarding the nature of the antipodes, and how it is possible to keep the ocean in a curved shape.\nSouth Asia.\nThe Vedic texts depict the cosmos in many ways. One of the earliest Indian cosmological texts pictures the Earth as one of a stack of flat disks.\nIn the Vedic texts, Dyaus (heaven) and Prithvi (Earth) are compared to wheels on an axle, yielding a flat model. They are also described as bowls or leather bags, yielding a concave model. According to Macdonell: \"the conception of the Earth being a disc surrounded by an ocean does not appear in the Samhitas. But it was naturally regarded as circular, being compared with a wheel (10.89) and expressly called circular (parimandala) in the \"Shatapatha Brahmana\".\"\nBy about the 5th century AD, the \"siddhanta\" astronomy texts of South Asia, particularly of Aryabhata, assume a spherical Earth as they develop mathematical methods for quantitative astronomy for calendar and time keeping.\nThe medieval Indian texts called the Puranas describe the Earth as a flat-bottomed, circular disk with concentric oceans and continents. This general scheme is present not only in the Hindu cosmologies, but also in Buddhist and Jain cosmologies of South Asia. However, some Puranas include other models. For example, the fifth canto of the \"Bhagavata Purana\", composed between 500 CE - 1000 CE, includes sections that describe the Earth both as flat and spherical.\nEarly Christian Church.\nDuring the early period of the Christian Church, the spherical view continued to be widely held, with some notable exceptions. \nUntil the mid-fourth century AD, virtually all Christian authors held that the Earth was round. Athenagoras, an eastern Christian writing around the year 175 AD, said that the Earth was spherical. Methodius (c. 290 AD), an eastern Christian writing against \"the theory of the Chaldeans and the Egyptians\" said: \"Let us first lay bare ... the theory of the Chaldeans and the Egyptians. They say that the circumference of the universe is likened to the turnings of a well-rounded globe, the Earth being a central point. They say that since its outline is spherical, ... the Earth should be the center of the universe, around which the heaven is whirling.\" Arnobius, another eastern Christian writing sometime around 305 AD, described the round Earth: \"In the first place, indeed, the world itself is neither right nor left. It has neither upper nor lower regions, nor front nor back. For whatever is round and bounded on every side by the circumference of a solid sphere, has no beginning or end ...\" Other advocates of a round Earth included Eusebius, Hilary of Poitiers, Irenaeus, Hippolytus of Rome, Firmicus Maternus, Ambrose, Jerome, Prudentius, Favonius Eulogius, and others. \nThe only exceptions to this consensus up until the mid-fourth century were Theophilus of Antioch and Lactantius, both of whom held anti-Hellenistic views and associated the round-Earth view with pagan cosmology. Lactantius, a western Christian writer and advisor to the first Christian Roman Emperor, Constantine, writing sometime between 304 and 313 AD, ridiculed the notion of \"antipodes\" and the philosophers who fancied that \"the universe is round like a ball. They also thought that heaven revolves in accordance with the motion of the heavenly bodies. ... For that reason, they constructed brass globes, as though after the figure of the universe.\" \nThe influential theologian and philosopher Saint Augustine, one of the four Great Church Fathers of the Western Church, similarly objected to the \"fable\" of antipodes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;But as to the fable that there are Antipodes, that is to say, men on the opposite side of the Earth, where the sun rises when it sets to us, men who walk with their feet opposite ours that is on no ground credible. And, indeed, it is not affirmed that this has been learned by historical knowledge, but by scientific conjecture, on the ground that the Earth is suspended within the concavity of the sky, and that it has as much room on the one side of it as on the other: hence they say that the part that is beneath must also be inhabited. But they do not remark that, although it be supposed or scientifically demonstrated that the world is of a round and spherical form, yet it does not follow that the other side of the Earth is bare of water; nor even, though it be bare, does it immediately follow that it is peopled. For Scripture, which proves the truth of its historical statements by the accomplishment of its prophecies, gives no false information; and it is too absurd to say, that some men might have taken ship and traversed the whole wide ocean, and crossed from this side of the world to the other, and that thus even the inhabitants of that distant region are descended from that one first man.\nSome historians do not view Augustine's scriptural commentaries as endorsing any particular cosmological model, endorsing instead the view that Augustine shared the common view of his contemporaries that the Earth is spherical, in line with his endorsement of science in \"De Genesi ad litteram\". C. P. E. Nothaft, responding to writers like Leo Ferrari who described Augustine as endorsing a flat Earth, says that \"...other recent writers on the subject treat Augustine's acceptance of the Earth's spherical shape as a well-established fact\".\nWhile it always remained a minority view, from the mid-fourth to the seventh centuries AD, the flat-Earth view experienced a revival, around the time when Diodorus of Tarsus founded the exegetical school known as the School of Antioch, which sought to counter what he saw as the pagan cosmology of the Greeks with a return to the traditional cosmology. The writings of Diodorus did not survive, but are reconstructed from later criticism. This revival primarily took place in the East Syriac world (with little influence on the Latin West) where it gained proponents such as Ephrem the Syrian and in the popular hexaemeral homilies of Jacob of Serugh. Chrysostom, one of the four Great Church Fathers of the Eastern Church and Archbishop of Constantinople, explicitly espoused the idea, based on scripture, that the Earth floats miraculously on the water beneath the firmament.\n\"Christian Topography\" (547) by the Alexandrian monk Cosmas Indicopleustes, who had traveled as far as Sri Lanka and the source of the Blue Nile, is now widely considered the most valuable geographical document of the early medieval age, although it received relatively little attention from contemporaries. In it, the author repeatedly expounds the doctrine that the universe consists of only two places, the Earth below the firmament and heaven above it. Carefully drawing on arguments from scripture, he describes the Earth as a rectangle, 400 days' journey long by 200 wide, surrounded by four oceans and enclosed by four massive walls which support the firmament. The spherical Earth theory is contemptuously dismissed as \"pagan\".\nSeverian, Bishop of Gabala (d. 408), wrote that the Earth is flat and the Sun does not pass under it in the night, but \"travels through the northern parts as if hidden by a wall\". Basil of Caesarea (329\u2013379) argued that the matter was theologically irrelevant.\nEurope: Early Middle Ages.\nEarly medieval Christian writers felt little urge to assume flatness of the Earth, though they had fuzzy impressions of the writings of Ptolemy and Aristotle, relying more on Pliny.\nWith the end of the Western Roman Empire, Western Europe entered the Middle Ages with great difficulties that affected the continent's intellectual production. Most scientific treatises of classical antiquity (in Greek) were unavailable, leaving only simplified summaries and compilations. In contrast, the Eastern Roman Empire did not fall, and it preserved the learning. Still, many textbooks of the Early Middle Ages supported the sphericity of the Earth in the western part of Europe.\nEurope's view of the shape of the Earth in Late Antiquity and the Early Middle Ages may be best expressed by the writings of early Christian scholars:\nBishop Isidore of Seville (560\u2013636) taught in his widely read encyclopedia, the \"Etymologies\", diverse views such as that the Earth \"resembles a wheel\" resembling Anaximander in language and the map that he provided. This was widely interpreted as referring to a disc-shaped Earth. An illustration from Isidore's \"De Natura Rerum\" shows the five zones of the Earth as adjacent circles. Some have concluded that he thought the Arctic and Antarctic zones were adjacent to each other. He did not admit the possibility of antipodes, which he took to mean people dwelling on the opposite side of the Earth, considering them legendary and noting that there was no evidence for their existence. Isidore's T and O map, which was seen as representing a small part of a spherical Earth, continued to be used by authors through the Middle Ages. At the same time, Isidore's works also gave the views of sphericity, for example, in chapter\u00a028 of \"De Natura Rerum\", Isidore claims that the Sun orbits the Earth and illuminates the other side when it is night on this side. In his other work \"Etymologies\", there are also affirmations that the sphere of the sky has Earth in its center and the sky being equally distant on all sides. Other researchers have argued these points as well. \"The work remained unsurpassed until the thirteenth century and was regarded as the summit of all knowledge. It became an essential part of European medieval culture. Soon after the invention of typography it appeared many times in print.\" However, \"The Scholastics\u00a0\u2013 later medieval philosophers, theologians, and scientists\u00a0\u2013 were helped by the Arabic translators and commentaries, but they hardly needed to struggle against a flat-Earth legacy from the early middle ages (500\u20131050). Early medieval writers often had fuzzy and imprecise impressions of both Ptolemy and Aristotle and relied more on Pliny, but they felt (with one exception), little urge to assume flatness.\"\nSt Vergilius of Salzburg (c. 700\u2013784), in the middle of the 8th century, discussed or taught some geographical or cosmographical ideas that St Boniface found sufficiently objectionable that he complained about them to Pope Zachary. The only surviving record of the incident is contained in Zachary's reply, dated 748, where he wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As for the perverse and sinful doctrine which he (Virgil) against God and his own soul has uttered\u00a0\u2013 if it shall be clearly established that he professes belief in another world and other men existing beneath the Earth, or in (another) sun and moon there, thou art to hold a council, deprive him of his sacerdotal rank, and expel him from the Church.\nSome authorities have suggested that the sphericity of the Earth was among the aspects of Vergilius's teachings that Boniface and Zachary considered objectionable. Others have considered this unlikely, and take the wording of Zachary's response to indicate at most an objection to belief in the existence of humans living in the antipodes. In any case, there is no record of any further action having been taken against Vergilius. He was later appointed bishop of Salzburg and was canonised in the 13th century.\nA possible non-literary but graphic indication that people in the Middle Ages believed that the Earth (or perhaps the world) was a sphere is the use of the orb (globus cruciger) in the regalia of many kingdoms and of the Holy Roman Empire. It is attested from the time of the Christian late-Roman emperor Theodosius II (423) throughout the Middle Ages and in western Europe, the use of a physical orb is attested since at least the time of Emperor Henry II (d. 1024). A contemporary chronicler describes the imperial orb given to Henry II by Pope Benedict VIII as shaped like a golden apple surmounted by a cross and representing the earth with its rotundity. Such a \"Reichsapfel\" was likewise used in 1191 at the coronation of emperor Henry VI. There is, however, no record of a cartographical globe in the Middle Ages before the Erdapfel of Martin Behaim from 1492. Additionally the imperial orb could also represent of the entire \"world\" or cosmos.\nA recent study of medieval concepts of the sphericity of the Earth noted that \"after the eighth century the Globe became part of the world picture of medieval Christians without much more debate.\" From the ninth century, we likewise find discussion of Eratosthenes' method for calculating the sphericality of the earth in Carolingian commentaries on Martianus Capella. By the turn of the eleventh century, Hermann of Reichenau (1013\u20131054) includes a new method for replicating Eratosthenes' measurement using an astrolabe. For the wider population, however, it is difficult to say what they may have thought of the shape of the Earth if they considered the question at all.\nEurope: High and Late Middle Ages.\nThe approximate sphericality of the Earth was universally accepted among scholastic authors of the High and Late Middle Ages. Evidence of its sphericality was discussed in standard university textbooks like John of Sacrobosco's \"On the Sphere of the World\" and flat earth theories played no role in discussions of the Earth's shape at medieval universities. The commonplace nature of this knowledge is illustrated by the highly influential theologian Thomas Aquinas (1225\u20131274), who uses it as an example of a fact that can be proved by two different sciences. \nJill Tattersall shows that in many vernacular works in 12th- and 13th-century French texts the Earth was considered \"round like a table\" rather than \"round like an apple\". She writes, \"[I]n virtually all the examples quoted\u00a0... from epics and from non-'historical' romances (that is, works of a less learned character) the actual form of words used suggests strongly a circle rather than a sphere\", though she notes that even in these works the language is ambiguous.\nPortuguese navigation down and around the coast of Africa in the latter half of the 1400s gave wide-scale observational evidence for Earth's sphericity. In these explorations, the Sun's position moved more northward the further south the explorers travelled. Its position directly overhead at noon gave evidence for crossing the equator. These apparent solar motions in detail were more consistent with north\u2013south curvature and a distant Sun, than with any flat-Earth explanation. The ultimate demonstration came when Ferdinand Magellan's expedition completed the first global circumnavigation in 1521. Antonio Pigafetta, one of the few survivors of the voyage, recorded the loss of a day in the course of the voyage, giving evidence for east\u2013west curvature.\nMiddle East: Islamic scholars.\nPrior to the introduction of Greek cosmology into the Islamic world, Muslims tended to view the Earth as flat, and Muslim traditionalists who rejected Greek philosophy continued to hold to this view later on while various theologians held opposing opinions. Beginning in the 10th century onwards, some Muslim traditionalists began to adopt the notion of a spherical Earth with the influence of Greek and Ptolemaic cosmology.\nIn Quranic cosmology, the Earth (\"al-ar\u1e0d\") was \"spread out.\" Whether or not this implies a flat Earth was debated by Muslims. Some modern historians believe the Quran saw the world as flat. On the other hand, the 12th-century commentary, the Tafsir al-Kabir (al-Razi) by Fakhr al-Din al-Razi argues that though this verse does describe a flat surface, it is limited in its application to local regions of the Earth which are roughly flat as opposed to the Earth as a whole. Others who would support a ball-shaped Earth included Ibn Hazm.\nMing Dynasty in China.\nA spherical terrestrial globe was introduced to Yuan-era Khanbaliq (i.e. Beijing) in 1267 by the Persian astronomer Jamal ad-Din, but it is not known to have made an impact on the traditional Chinese conception of the shape of the Earth. As late as 1595, an early Jesuit missionary to China, Matteo Ricci, recorded that the Ming-dynasty Chinese say: \"The Earth is flat and square, and the sky is a round canopy; they did not succeed in conceiving the possibility of the antipodes.\"\nIn the 17th century, the idea of a spherical Earth spread in China due to the influence of the Jesuits, who held high positions as astronomers at the imperial court. Matteo Ricci, in collaboration with Chinese cartographers and translator Li Zhizao, published the \"Kunyu Wanguo Quantu\" in 1602, the first Chinese world map based on European discoveries. The astronomical and geographical treatise \"Gezhicao\" () written in 1648 by Xiong Mingyu () explained that the Earth was spherical, not flat or square, and could be circumnavigated.\nMyth of flat-Earth prevalence.\nIn the 17th century, a historical myth was created that asserted that the predominant cosmological doctrine during the Middle Ages was that the Earth was flat. The myth gained currency in the 19th century. An early proponent of this myth was the American writer Washington Irving, who maintained that Christopher Columbus had to overcome the opposition of churchmen to gain sponsorship for his voyage of exploration. Later significant advocates of this view were John William Draper and Andrew Dickson White, who used it as a major element in their advocacy of the thesis that there was a long-lasting and essential conflict between science and religion. Some studies of the historical connections between science and religion have demonstrated that theories of their mutual antagonism ignore examples of their mutual support.\nSubsequent studies of medieval science have shown that most scholars in the Middle Ages, including those read by Christopher Columbus, maintained that the Earth was spherical.\nModern flat Earth beliefs.\nIn the modern era, the pseudoscientific belief in a flat Earth originated with the English writer Samuel Rowbotham with the 1849 pamphlet \"Zetetic Astronomy\". Lady Elizabeth Blount established the Universal Zetetic Society in 1893, which published journals. In 1956, Samuel Shenton set up the International Flat Earth Research Society, better known as the \"Flat Earth Society\" in Dover, England, as a direct descendant of the Universal Zetetic Society.\nIn the Internet era, the availability of communications technology and social media like YouTube, Facebook and Twitter have made it easy for individuals, famous or not, to spread disinformation and attract others to erroneous ideas, including that of the flat Earth.\nModern believers in a flat Earth face overwhelming publicly accessible evidence of Earth's sphericity. They also need to explain why governments, media outlets, schools, scientists, surveyors, airlines and other organizations accept that the world is spherical. To satisfy these tensions and maintain their beliefs, they generally embrace some form of conspiracy theory. In addition, believers tend to not trust observations they have not made themselves, and often distrust, disagree with or accuse each other of being in league with conspiracies.\nEducation.\nWhile learning from their social environment, a child's perception of their physical environment sometimes leads to a false concept about the shape of Earth and what happens beyond the horizon. Some young children think that Earth ends there and that one can fall off the edge. Education helps them gradually change their belief into a realist one of a spherical Earth. On the other hand, many children do understand that the world is round, as confirmed by interviewing what the pictures they draw actually mean. \nTo counter misinformation about the shape of the Earth and other scientific issues, the National Center for Science Education has a site for supporting teachers.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11595", "revid": "47668471", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11595", "title": "Famicom", "text": ""}
{"id": "11600", "revid": "45590384", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11600", "title": "Persian language", "text": "Western Iranian language\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nPersian, also known by its endonym Farsi or Parsi, is a Western Iranian language belonging to the Iranian branch of the Indo-Iranian subdivision of the Indo-European languages. Persian is a pluricentric language predominantly spoken and used officially within Iran, Afghanistan, and Tajikistan in three mutually intelligible standard varieties, respectively Iranian Persian (officially known as \"Persian\"), Dari Persian (officially known as \"Dari\" since 1964), and Tajiki Persian (officially known as \"Tajik\" since 1999). It is also spoken natively in the Tajik variety by a significant population within Uzbekistan, as well as within other regions with a Persianate history in the cultural sphere of Greater Iran. It is written officially within Iran and Afghanistan in the Persian alphabet, a derivative of the Arabic script, and within Tajikistan in the Tajik alphabet, a derivative of the Cyrillic script.\nModern Persian is a continuation of Middle Persian, an official language of the Sasanian Empire (224\u2013651 CE), itself a continuation of Old Persian, which was used in the Achaemenid Empire (550\u2013330 BCE). It originated in the region of Fars (Persia) in southwestern Iran. Its grammar is similar to that of many European languages.\nThroughout history, Persian was considered prestigious by various empires centered in West Asia, Central Asia, and South Asia. Old Persian is attested in Old Persian cuneiform on inscriptions from between the 6th and 4th century BC. Middle Persian is attested in Aramaic-derived scripts (Pahlavi and Manichaean) on inscriptions and in Zoroastrian and Manichaean scriptures from between the third to the tenth centuries (see Middle Persian literature). New Persian literature was first recorded in the ninth century, after the Muslim conquest of Persia, since then adopting the Perso-Arabic script.\nPersian was the first language to break through the monopoly of Arabic on writing in the Muslim world, with Persian poetry becoming a tradition in many eastern courts. It was used officially as a language of bureaucracy even by non-native speakers, such as the Ottomans in Anatolia, the Mughals in South Asia, and the Pashtuns in Afghanistan. It influenced languages spoken in neighboring regions and beyond, including other Iranian languages, the Turkic, Armenian, Georgian, &amp; Indo-Aryan languages. It also exerted some influence on Arabic, while borrowing a lot of vocabulary from it in the Middle Ages.\nSome of the world's most famous pieces of literature from the Middle Ages, such as the \"Shahnameh\" by Ferdowsi, the works of Rumi, the \"Rub\u00e1iy\u00e1t of Omar Khayy\u00e1m\", the of Nizami Ganjavi, \"The Div\u0101n\" of Hafez, \"The Conference of the Birds\" by Attar of Nishapur, and the miscellanea of \"Gulistan\" and \"Bustan\" by Saadi Shirazi, are written in Persian. Some of the prominent modern Persian poets were Nima Yooshij, Ahmad Shamlou, Simin Behbahani, Sohrab Sepehri, Rahi Mo'ayyeri, Mehdi Akhavan-Sales, and Forugh Farrokhzad.\nThere are approximately 130 million Persian speakers worldwide, including Persians, Lurs, Tajiks, Hazaras, Iranian Azeris, Iranian Kurds, Balochs, Tats, Afghan Pashtuns, and Aimaqs. The term \"Persophone\" might also be used to refer to a speaker of Persian.\nClassification.\nPersian is a member of the Western Iranian group of the Iranian languages, which make up a branch of the Indo-European languages in their Indo-Iranian subdivision. The Western Iranian languages themselves are divided into two subgroups: Southwestern Iranian languages, of which Persian is the most widely spoken, and Northwestern Iranian languages, of which Kurdish and Balochi are the most widely spoken.\nName.\nThe term \"Persian\" is an English derivation of Latin , the adjectival form of , itself deriving from Greek (), a Hellenized form of Old Persian (), which means \"Persia\" (a region in southwestern Iran, corresponding to modern-day Fars). According to the \"Oxford English Dictionary\", the term \"Persian\" as a language name is first attested in English in the mid-16th century.\n', which is the Persian word for the Persian language, has also been used widely in English in recent decades, more often to refer to Iran's standard Persian. However, the name \"Persian\" is still more widely used. The Academy of Persian Language and Literature has maintained that the endonym ' is to be avoided in foreign languages, and that \"Persian\" is the appropriate designation of the language in English, as it has the longer tradition in western languages and better expresses the role of the language as a mark of cultural and national continuity. Iranian historian and linguist Ehsan Yarshater, founder of the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Iranica\" and Columbia University's Center for Iranian Studies, mentions the same concern in an academic journal on Iranology, rejecting the use of \"\" in foreign languages.\nEtymologically, the term derives from its earlier form ( in Middle Persian), which in turn comes from the same root as the English term \"Persian\". In the same process, the Middle Persian toponym (\"Persia\") evolved into the modern name Fars. The phonemic shift from to is due to the influence of Arabic in the Middle Ages, from the lack of the phoneme in Standard Arabic.\nStandard varieties' names.\nThe standard Persian of Iran has been called, apart from \"Persian\" and \"Farsi\", by names such as \"Iranian Persian\" and \"Western Persian\", exclusively. The official language of Iran is designated simply as \"Persian\" (, ).\nThe standard Persian of Afghanistan has been officially named \"Dari\" (, ) since 1958. Also referred to as \"Afghan Persian\" in English, it is one of Afghanistan's two official languages, together with Pashto. The term \"Dari\", meaning \"of the court\", originally referred to the variety of Persian used in the court of the Sasanian Empire in capital Ctesiphon, which spread to the northeast of the empire and gradually replaced the former Iranian dialects of Parthia (Parthian).\nTajik Persian (, ), the standard Persian of Tajikistan, has been officially designated as \"Tajik\" (, ) since the time of the Soviet Union. It is the name given to the varieties of Persian spoken in Central Asia in general.\nISO codes.\nThe international language-encoding standard ISO 639-1 uses the code codice_1 for the Persian language, as its coding system is mostly based on the native-language designations. The more detailed standard ISO 639-3 uses the code codice_2 for the dialects spoken across Iran and Afghanistan. This consists of the individual languages Dari (codice_3) and Iranian Persian (codice_4). It uses codice_5 for Tajik, separately.\nHistory.\nIn general, the Iranian languages are known from three periods: namely Old, Middle, and New (Modern). These correspond to three historical eras of Iranian history; Old era being sometime around the Achaemenid Empire (i.e., 400\u2013300 BC), Middle era being the next period most officially around the Sasanian Empire, and New era being the period afterward down to present day.\nAccording to available documents, the Persian language is \"the only Iranian language\" for which close philological relationships between all of its three stages are established and so that Old, Middle, and New Persian represent one and the same language of Persian; that is, New Persian is a direct descendant of Middle and Old Persian. Gernot Windfuhr considers new Persian as an evolution of the Old Persian language and the Middle Persian language but also states that none of the known Middle Persian dialects is the direct predecessor of Modern Persian. Ludwig Paul states: \"The language of the Shahnameh should be seen as one instance of continuous historical development from Middle to New Persian.\"\nThe known history of the Persian language can be divided into the following three distinct periods:\nOld Persian.\nAs a written language, Old Persian is attested in royal Achaemenid inscriptions. The oldest known text written in Old Persian is from the Behistun Inscription, dating to the time of King Darius I (reigned 522\u2013486 BC). Examples of Old Persian have been found in what is now Iran, Romania (Gherla), Armenia, Bahrain, Iraq, Turkey, and Egypt. Old Persian is one of the earliest attested Indo-European languages.\nAccording to certain historical assumptions about the early history and origin of ancient Persians in Southwestern Iran (where Achaemenids hailed from), Old Persian was originally spoken by a tribe called \"Parsuwash\", who arrived in the Iranian Plateau early in the 1st millennium BCE and finally migrated down into the area of present-day F\u0101rs province. Their language, Old Persian, became the official language of the Achaemenid kings. Assyrian records, which in fact appear to provide the earliest evidence for ancient Iranian (Persian and Median) presence on the Iranian Plateau, give a good chronology but only an approximate geographical indication of what seem to be ancient Persians. In these records of the 9th century BCE, \"Parsuwash\" (along with \"Matai\", presumably Medians) are first mentioned in the area of Lake Urmia in the records of Shalmaneser III. The exact identity of the Parsuwash is not known for certain, but from a linguistic viewpoint the word matches Old Persian itself coming directly from the older word . Also, as Old Persian contains many words from another extinct Iranian language, Median, according to P. O. Skj\u00e6rv\u00f8 it is probable that Old Persian had already been spoken before the formation of the Achaemenid Empire and was spoken during most of the first half of the first millennium BCE. Xenophon, a Greek general serving in some of the Persian expeditions, describes many aspects of Armenian village life and hospitality in around 401 BCE, which is when Old Persian was still spoken and extensively used. He relates that the Armenian people spoke a language that to his ear sounded like the language of the Persians.\nRelated to Old Persian, but from a different branch of the Iranian language family, was Avestan, the language of the Zoroastrian liturgical texts.\nMiddle Persian.\nThe complex grammatical conjugation and declension of Old Persian yielded to the structure of Middle Persian in which the dual number disappeared, leaving only singular and plural, as did gender. Middle Persian developed the ez\u0101fe construction, expressed through \"\u012b\" (modern \"e/ye\"), to indicate some of the relations between words that have been lost with the simplification of the earlier grammatical system.\nAlthough the \"middle period\" of the Iranian languages formally begins with the fall of the Achaemenid Empire, the transition from Old to Middle Persian had probably already begun before the 4th century BC. However, Middle Persian is not actually attested until 600 years later when it appears in the Sassanid era (224\u2013651 AD) inscriptions, so any form of the language before this date cannot be described with any degree of certainty. Moreover, as a literary language, Middle Persian is not attested until much later, in the 6th or 7th century. From the 8th century onward, Middle Persian gradually began yielding to New Persian, with the middle-period form only continuing in the texts of Zoroastrianism.\nMiddle Persian is considered to be a later form of the same dialect as Old Persian. The native name of Middle Persian was \"Parsig\" or \"Parsik\", after the name of the ethnic group of the southwest, that is, \"of \"Pars\"\", Old Persian \"Parsa\", New Persian \"Fars\". This is the origin of the name \"Farsi\" as it is today used to signify New Persian. Following the collapse of the Sassanid state, \"Parsik\" came to be applied exclusively to (either Middle or New) Persian that was written in the Arabic script. From about the 9th century onward, as Middle Persian was on the threshold of becoming New Persian, the older form of the language came to be erroneously called \"Pahlavi\", which was actually but one of the \"writing systems\" used to render both Middle Persian as well as various other Middle Iranian languages. That writing system had previously been adopted by the Sassanids (who were Persians, i.e. from the southwest) from the preceding Arsacids (who were Parthians, i.e. from the northeast). While Ibn al-Muqaffa' (eighth century) still distinguished between \"Pahlavi\" (i.e. Parthian) and \"Persian\" (in Arabic text: al-Farisiyah) (i.e. Middle Persian), this distinction is not evident in Arab commentaries written after that date.\nNew Persian.\n\"New Persian\" (also referred to as Modern Persian) is conventionally divided into three stages:\nEarly New Persian remains largely intelligible to speakers of Contemporary Persian, as the morphology and, to a lesser extent, the lexicon of the language have remained relatively stable.\nEarly New Persian.\nNew Persian texts written in the Arabic script first appear in the 9th-century. The language is a direct descendant of Middle Persian, the official, religious, and literary language of the Sasanian Empire (224\u2013651). However, it is not descended from the literary form of Middle Persian (known as \"p\u0101rs\u012bg\", commonly called Pahlavi), which was spoken by the people of Fars and used in Zoroastrian religious writings. Instead, it is descended from the dialect spoken by the court of the Sasanian capital Ctesiphon and the northeastern Iranian region of Khorasan, known as Dari. The region, which comprised the present territories of northwestern Afghanistan as well as parts of Central Asia, played a leading role in the rise of New Persian. Khorasan, which was the homeland of the Parthians, was Persianized under the Sasanians. Dari Persian thus supplanted Parthian language (\"pahlav\u0101n\u012bg\"), which by the end of the Sasanian era had fallen out of use. New Persian has incorporated many foreign words, including from eastern northern and northern Iranian languages such as Sogdian and especially Parthian.\nThe transition to New Persian was already complete by the era of the three princely dynasties of Iranian origin, the Tahirid dynasty (820\u2013872), Saffarid dynasty (860\u2013903), and Samanid Empire (874\u2013999). Abbas of Merv is mentioned as being the earliest minstrel to chant verse in the New Persian tongue and after him the poems of Hanzala Badghisi were among the most famous between the Persian-speakers of the time.\nThe first significant Persian poet was Rudaki. He flourished in the 10th century, when the Samanids were at the height of their power. His reputation as a court poet and as an accomplished musician and singer has survived, although little of his poetry has been preserved. Among his lost works are versified fables collected in the \"Kalila wa Dimna\".\nThe language spread geographically from the 11th century on and was the medium through which, among others, Central Asian Turks became familiar with Islam and urban culture. New Persian was widely used as a trans-regional lingua franca, a task aided due to its relatively simple morphology, and this situation persisted until at least the 19th century. In the late Middle Ages, new Islamic literary languages were created on the Persian model: Ottoman Turkish, Chagatai Turkic, Dobhashi Bengali, and Urdu, which are regarded as \"structural daughter languages\" of Persian.\nClassical Persian.\n\"Classical Persian\" loosely refers to the standardized language of medieval Persia used in literature and poetry.\nThis is the language of the 10th to 12th centuries, which continued to be used as literary language and lingua franca under the \"Persianized\" Turko-Mongol dynasties during the 12th to 15th centuries, and under restored Persian rule during the 16th to 19th centuries.\nPersian during this time served as lingua franca of Greater Persia and of much of the Indian subcontinent.\nIt was also the official and cultural language of many Islamic dynasties, including the Samanids, Buyids, Tahirids, Ziyarids, the Mughal Empire, Timurids, Ghaznavids, Karakhanids, Seljuqs, Khwarazmians, the Sultanate of Rum, Turkmen beyliks of Anatolia, Delhi Sultanate, the Shirvanshahs, Safavids, Afsharids, Zands, Qajars, Khanate of Bukhara, Khanate of Kokand, Emirate of Bukhara, Khanate of Khiva, Ottomans, and also many Mughal successors such as the Nizam of Hyderabad.\nPersian was the only non-European language known and used by Marco Polo at the Court of Kublai Khan and in his journeys through China.\nUse in Asia Minor.\nA branch of the Seljuks, the Sultanate of Rum, took Persian language, art, and letters to Anatolia. They adopted the Persian language as the official language of the empire. The Ottomans, who can roughly be seen as their eventual successors, inherited this tradition. Persian was the official court language of the empire, and for some time, the official language of the empire. The educated and noble class of the Ottoman Empire all spoke Persian, such as Sultan Selim I, despite being Safavid Iran's archrival and a staunch opposer of Shia Islam. It was a major literary language in the empire. Some of the noted earlier Persian works during the Ottoman rule are Idris Bidlisi's \"Hasht Bihisht\", which began in 1502 and covered the reign of the first eight Ottoman rulers, and the \"Salim-Namah\", a glorification of Selim I. After a period of several centuries, Ottoman Turkish (which was highly Persianised itself) had developed toward a fully accepted language of literature, and which was even able to lexically satisfy the demands of a scientific presentation. However, the number of Persian and Arabic loanwords contained in those works increased at times up to 88%. In the Ottoman Empire, Persian was used at the royal court, for diplomacy, poetry, historiographical works, literary works, and was taught in state schools, and was also offered as an elective course or recommended for study in some \"madrasas\".\nUse in the Balkans.\nPersian learning was also widespread in the Ottoman-held Balkans (\"Rumelia\"), with a range of cities being famed for their long-standing traditions in the study of Persian and its classics, amongst them Saraybosna (modern Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina), Mostar (also in Bosnia and Herzegovina), and Vardar Yenicesi (or Yenice-i Vardar, now Giannitsa, in northern Greece).\nVardar Yenicesi differed from other localities in the Balkans insofar as that it was a town where Persian was also widely spoken. However, the Persian of Vardar Yenicesi and of the rest of the Ottoman-held Balkans was different from formal Persian both in accent and vocabulary. The difference was apparent to such a degree that the Ottomans referred to it as \"Rumelian Persian\" (\"Rumili Farsisi\"). As learned people such as students, scholars and literati often frequented Vardar Yenicesi, it soon became the site of a flourishing Persianate linguistic and literary culture. The 16th-century Ottoman A\u015f\u0131k \u00c7elebi (died 1572), who hailed from Prizren in modern-day Kosovo, was galvanized by the abundant Persian-speaking and Persian-writing communities of Vardar Yenicesi, and he referred to the city as a \"hotbed of Persian\".\nMany Ottoman Persianists who established a career in the Ottoman capital of Constantinople (modern-day Istanbul) pursued early Persian training in Saraybosna, amongst them Ahmed Sudi.\nUse in Indian subcontinent.\nThe Persian language influenced the formation of many modern languages in West Asia, Europe, Central Asia, and South Asia. Following the Turko-Persian Ghaznavid conquest of South Asia, Persian was firstly introduced in the region by Turkic Central Asians. The basis in general for the introduction of Persian language into the subcontinent was set, from its earliest days, by various Persianized Central Asian Turkic and Afghan dynasties. For five centuries prior to the British colonization, Persian was widely used as a second language in the Indian subcontinent. It took prominence as the language of culture and education in several Muslim courts on the subcontinent and became the sole \"official language\" under the Mughal emperors.\nThe Bengal Sultanate witnessed an influx of Persian scholars, lawyers, teachers, and clerics. Thousands of Persian books and manuscripts were published in Bengal. The period of the reign of Sultan Ghiyathuddin Azam Shah is described as the \"golden age of Persian literature in Bengal\". Its stature was illustrated by the Sultan's own correspondence and collaboration with the Persian poet Hafez; a poem which can be found in the \"Divan of Hafez\" today. A Bengali dialect emerged among the common Bengali Muslim folk, based on a Persian model and known as Dobhashi; meaning \"mixed language\". Dobhashi Bengali was patronised and given official status under the Sultans of Bengal, and was a popular literary form used by Bengalis during the pre-colonial period, irrespective of their religion.\nFollowing the defeat of the Hindu Shahi dynasty, classical Persian was established as a courtly language in the region during the late 10th century under Ghaznavid rule over the northwestern frontier of the subcontinent. Employed by Punjabis in literature, Persian achieved prominence in the region during the following centuries. Persian continued to act as a courtly language for various empires in Punjab through the early 19th century serving finally as the official state language of the Sikh Empire, preceding British conquest and the decline of Persian in South Asia.\nBeginning in 1843, though, English and Hindustani gradually replaced Persian in importance on the subcontinent. Evidence of Persian's historical influence there can be seen in the extent of its influence on certain languages of the Indian subcontinent. Words borrowed from Persian are still quite commonly used in certain Indo-Aryan languages, especially Hindi-Urdu (also historically known as Hindustani), Punjabi, Kashmiri, and Sindhi. There is also a small population of Zoroastrian Iranis in India, who migrated in the 19th century to escape religious persecution in Qajar Iran and speak a Dari dialect.\nContemporary Persian.\nQajar dynasty.\nIn the 19th century, under the Qajar dynasty, the dialect that is spoken in Tehran rose to prominence. There was still substantial Arabic vocabulary, but many of these words have been integrated into Persian phonology and grammar. In addition, under the Qajar rule, numerous Russian, French, and English terms entered the Persian language, especially vocabulary related to technology.\nThe first official attentions to the necessity of protecting the Persian language against foreign words, and to the standardization of Persian orthography, were under the reign of Naser ed Din Shah of the Qajar dynasty in 1871. After Naser ed Din Shah, Mozaffar ed Din Shah ordered the establishment of the first Persian association in 1903. This association officially declared that it used Persian and Arabic as acceptable sources for coining words. The ultimate goal was to prevent books from being printed with wrong use of words. According to the executive guarantee of this association, the government was responsible for wrongfully printed books. Words coined by this association, such as \"r\u0101h-\u0101han\" () for \"railway\", were printed in \"Soltani Newspaper\"; but the association was eventually closed due to inattention.\nA scientific association was founded in 1911, resulting in a dictionary called \"Words of Scientific Association\" (), which was completed later and renamed \"Katouzian Dictionary\" ().\nPahlavi dynasty.\nThe first academy for the Persian language was founded on 20 May 1935, under the name \"Academy of Iran\". It was established by the initiative of Reza Shah Pahlavi, and mainly by Hekmat e Shirazi and Mohammad Ali Foroughi, all prominent names in the nationalist movement of the time.\nThe academy was a key institution in the struggle to re-build Iran as a nation-state after the collapse of the Qajar dynasty. During the 1930s and 1940s, the academy led massive campaigns to replace the many Arabic, Russian, French, and Greek loanwords whose widespread use in Persian during the centuries preceding the foundation of the Pahlavi dynasty had created a literary language considerably different from the spoken Persian of the time. This became the basis of what is now known as \"Contemporary Standard Persian\".\nVarieties.\nThere are three standard varieties of modern Persian:\nAll three varieties are based on the classic Persian literature and its literary tradition. There are also several local dialects from Iran, Afghanistan and Tajikistan which slightly differ from the standard Persian. The Hazaragi dialect (in Afghanistan), Herati (in Western Afghanistan), Darwazi (in Afghanistan and Tajikistan), Basseri (in Southern Iran), and the Tehrani accent (in Iran, the basis of standard Iranian Persian) are examples of these dialects. Persian-speaking peoples of Iran, Afghanistan, and Tajikistan can understand one another with a relatively high degree of mutual intelligibility. Nevertheless, the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Iranica\" notes that the Iranian, Afghan, and Tajiki varieties comprise distinct branches of the Persian language, and within each branch a wide variety of local dialects exist.\nThe following are some languages closely related to Persian, or in some cases are considered dialects:\nMore distantly related branches of the Iranian language family include Kurdish and Balochi.\nThe Glottolog database proposes the following phylogenetic classification:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Tree list/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPhonology.\nIranian Persian and Tajik have six vowels; Dari has eight. Iranian Persian has twenty-three consonants, but both Dari and Tajiki have twenty-four consonants, due to the phonemic merger of and in Iranian Persian.\nVowels.\nHistorically, Persian distinguished length. Early New Persian had a series of five long vowels (, , , , and ) along with three short vowels , , and . At some point prior to the 16th century in the general area now modern Iran, and merged into , and and merged into . Thus, older contrasts such as \"sh\u0113r\" \"lion\" vs. \"sh\u012br\" \"milk\", and \"z\u016bd\" \"quick\" vs \"z\u014dr\" \"strength\" were lost. However, there are exceptions to this rule, and in some words, \"\u0113\" and \"\u014d\" are merged into the diphthongs and (which are descendants of the diphthongs and in Early New Persian), instead of merging into and . Examples of the exception can be found in words such as (bright). Numerous other instances exist.\nHowever, in Dari, the archaic distinction of and (respectively known as \"Y\u0101-ye majh\u016bl\" and \"Y\u0101-ye ma'r\u016bf\") is still preserved as well as the distinction of and (known as \"W\u0101w-e majh\u016bl\" and \"W\u0101w-e ma'r\u016bf\"). On the other hand, in standard Tajik, the length distinction has disappeared, and merged with and with . Therefore, contemporary Afghan Dari dialects are the closest to the vowel inventory of Early New Persian.\nAccording to most studies on the subject, the three vowels traditionally considered long (, , ) are currently distinguished from their short counterparts (, , ) by position of articulation rather than by length. However, there are studies that consider vowel length to be the active feature of the system, with , , and phonologically long or bimoraic and , , and phonologically short or monomoraic.\nThere are also some studies that consider quality and quantity to be both active in the Iranian system. That offers a synthetic analysis including both quality and quantity, which often suggests that Modern Persian vowels are in a transition state between the quantitative system of Classical Persian and a hypothetical future Iranian language, which will eliminate all traces of quantity and retain quality as the only active feature. The length distinction is still strictly observed by careful reciters of classic-style poetry.\nConsonants.\nNotes:\nGrammar.\nMorphology.\nSuffixes predominate Persian morphology, though there are a small number of prefixes. Verbs can express tense and aspect, and they agree with the subject in person and number. There is no grammatical gender in modern Persian, and pronouns are not marked for natural gender. In other words, in Persian, pronouns are gender-neutral. When referring to a masculine or a feminine subject, the same pronoun is used (pronounced \"ou\", \u016b).\nSyntax.\nPersian adheres mainly to subject\u2013object\u2013verb (SOV) word order. But case endings (e.g. for subject, object, etc.) expressed via suffixes may allow users to vary word order. Verbs agree with the subject in person and number. Normal declarative sentences are structured as \"(S) (PP) (O) V\": sentences have optional subjects, prepositional phrases, and objects followed by a compulsory verb. If the object is specific, the object is followed by the word \"r\u0101\" and precedes prepositional phrases: \"(S) (O + \"r\u0101\") (PP) V\".\nVocabulary.\nNative word formation.\nPersian makes extensive use of word building and combining affixes, stems, nouns, and adjectives. Persian frequently uses derivational agglutination to form new words from nouns, adjectives, and verbal stems. New words are extensively formed by compounding \u2013 two existing words combining into a new one.\nInfluences.\nWhile having a lesser influence from Arabic and other languages of Mesopotamia and its core vocabulary being of Middle Persian origin, New Persian contains a considerable number of Arabic lexical items, which were Persianized and often took a different meaning and usage than the Arabic original. Persian loanwords of Arabic origin especially include Islamic terms. The Arabic vocabulary in other Iranian, Turkic, and Indic languages is generally understood to have been copied from New Persian, not from Arabic itself.\nJohn R. Perry, in his article \"Lexical Areas and Semantic Fields of Arabic\", estimates that about 20 percent of everyday vocabulary in current Persian, and around 25 percent of the vocabulary of classical and modern Persian literature, are of Arabic origin. The text frequency of these loan words is generally lower and varies by style and topic area. It may approach 25 percent of a text in literature. According to another source, about 40% of everyday Persian literary vocabulary is of Arabic origin. Among the Arabic loan words, relatively few (14 percent) are from the semantic domain of material culture, while a larger number are from domains of intellectual and spiritual life. Most of the Arabic words used in Persian are either synonyms of native terms or could be glossed in Persian.\nThe inclusion of Mongolic and Turkic elements in the Persian language should also be mentioned, not only because of the political role a succession of Turkic dynasties played in Iranian history, but also because of the immense prestige Persian language and literature enjoyed in the wider (non-Arab) Islamic world, which was often ruled by sultans and emirs with a Turkic background. The Turkish and Mongolian vocabulary in Persian is minor in comparison to that of Arabic and these words were mainly confined to military, pastoral terms and political sector (titles, administration, etc.). New military and political titles were coined based partially on Middle Persian (e.g. for \"army\", instead of the Uzbek ; ; ; etc.) in the 20th century. Persian has likewise influenced the vocabularies of other languages, especially other Indo-European languages such as Armenian, Urdu, Bengali, and Hindi; the latter three through conquests of Persianized Central Asian Turkic and Afghan invaders; Turkic languages such as Ottoman Turkish, Chagatai, Tatar, Turkish, Turkmen, Azeri, Uzbek, and Karachay-Balkar; Caucasian languages such as Georgian, and, to a lesser extent, Avar and Lezgin; Afro-Asiatic languages like Assyrian (List of loanwords in Assyrian Neo-Aramaic) and Arabic, particularly Bahrani Arabic; and even Dravidian languages indirectly especially Malayalam, Tamil, Telugu, and Brahui; as well as Austronesian languages such as Indonesian and Malaysian Malay. Persian has also had a significant lexical influence, via Turkish, on Albanian and Serbo-Croatian, particularly as spoken in Bosnia and Herzegovina.\nUse of occasional foreign synonyms instead of Persian words can be a common practice in everyday communications as an alternative expression. In some instances in addition to the Persian vocabulary, the equivalent synonyms from multiple foreign languages can be used. For example, in Iranian colloquial Persian (not in Afghanistan or Tajikistan), the phrase \"thank you\" may be expressed using the French word (stressed, however, on the first syllable), the hybrid Persian-Arabic phrase ( being \"thankful\" in Arabic, commonly pronounced in Persian, and the verb \"am\" meaning \"I am\" in Persian), or by the pure Persian phrase .\nOrthography.\nThe vast majority of modern Iranian Persian and Dari text is written with the Arabic script. Tajiki, which is considered by some linguists to be a Persian dialect influenced by Russian and the Turkic languages of Central Asia, is written with the Cyrillic script in Tajikistan (see Tajik alphabet). There also exist several romanization systems for Persian.\nPersian alphabet.\nModern Iranian Persian and Afghan Persian are written using the Persian alphabet, which is a modified variant of the Arabic alphabet, using different pronunciation and additional letters not found in the Arabic language. After the Arab conquest of Persia, it took approximately 200 years before Persians adopted the Arabic script in place of the older alphabet. Previously, two different scripts were used, Pahlavi, used for Middle Persian, and the Avestan alphabet (in Persian, D\u012bndapirak, or Din Dabire\u2014literally: religion script), used for religious purposes, primarily for the Avestan but sometimes for Middle Persian.\nIn the modern Persian script, historically short vowels are usually not written, only the historically long ones are represented in the text, so words distinguished from each other only by short vowels are ambiguous in writing: Iranian Persian ' \"worm\", ' \"generosity\", ' \"cream\", and ' \"chrome\" are all spelled \"\" () in Persian. The reader must determine the word from context. The Arabic system of vocalization marks known as \"harakat\" is also used in Persian, although some of the symbols have different pronunciations. For example, a \"\u1e0dammah\" is pronounced , while in Iranian Persian it is pronounced . This system is not used in mainstream Persian literature; it is primarily used for teaching and in some (but not all) dictionaries.\nThere are several letters generally only used in Arabic loanwords. These letters are pronounced the same as similar Persian letters. For example, there are four functionally identical letters for (), three letters for (), two letters for (), two letters for ().\nOn the other hand, there are four letters that do not exist in Arabic .\nAdditions.\nThe Persian alphabet adds four letters to the Arabic alphabet:\nHistorically, there was also a special letter for the sound . This letter is no longer used, as the -sound changed to , e.g. archaic &gt; 'language'\nVariations.\nThe Persian alphabet also modifies some letters of the Arabic alphabet. For example, \"alef with hamza below\" ( ) changes to \"alef\" ( ); words using various hamzas get spelled with yet another kind of hamza (so that becomes ) even though the latter has been accepted in Arabic since the 1980s; and \"teh marbuta\" ( ) changes to \"heh\" ( ) or \"teh\" ( ).\nThe letters different in shape are:\nHowever, in shape and form is the traditional Arabic style that continues in the Nile Valley, namely, Egypt, Sudan, and South Sudan.\nLatin alphabet.\nThe International Organization for Standardization has published a standard for simplified transliteration of Persian into Latin, ISO 233-3, titled \"Information and documentation \u2013 Transliteration of Arabic characters into Latin characters \u2013 Part 3: Persian language \u2013 Simplified transliteration\" but the transliteration scheme is not in widespread use.\nAnother Latin alphabet, based on the New Turkic Alphabet, was used in Tajikistan in the 1920s and 1930s. The alphabet was phased out in favor of Cyrillic in the late 1930s.\nFingilish is Persian using ISO basic Latin alphabet. It is most commonly used in chat, emails, and SMS applications. The orthography is not standardized, and varies among writers and even media (for example, typing 'aa' for the phoneme is easier on computer keyboards than on cellphone keyboards, resulting in smaller usage of the combination on cellphones).\nTajik alphabet.\nThe Cyrillic script was introduced for writing the Tajik language under the Tajik Soviet Socialist Republic in the late 1930s, replacing the Latin alphabet that had been used since the October Revolution and the Persian script that had been used earlier. After 1939, materials published in Persian in the Persian script were banned in the country.\nExamples.\nThe following text is from Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11601", "revid": "34995034", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11601", "title": "Farsi (disambiguation)", "text": "Farsi () is the indigenous name or endonym for Persian. It primarily refers to the Persian language.\nFarsi may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "11603", "revid": "2308770", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11603", "title": "Frances Abington", "text": "English actress (1737\u20131815)\nFrances Abington (n\u00e9e\u00a0Barton; 1737 \u2013 4 March 1815) was an English actress who was also known for her sense of fashion. Writer and politician Horace Walpole described her as one of the finest actors of their time, and Richard Brinsley Sheridan was said to have written the part of Lady Teazle in \"The School for Scandal\" for her to perform.\nEarly life.\nShe was born Frances Barton (nicknamed \"Fanny\"), as the daughter of a private soldier. She began her career as a flower girl and a street singer. It was also rumoured that she recited Shakespeare in taverns at the age of 12, along with being a prostitute for a short period to help her family with financial problems. Later, she became a servant to a French milliner. During that time, she learnt about costume and learnt French. Her early nickname, Nosegay Fan, came from her time as a flower girl.\nCareer.\nHer first appearance on stage was at Haymarket in 1755 as Miranda in Mrs Centlivre's play, \"Busybody\". She rose to become a principal actor in October 1756 when she was cast as Lady Pliant in \"The Double Dealer\"at the Drury Lane. The play's cast also included the stars Hannah Pritchard and Kitty Clive. She also appeared in Ireland, where her Lady Townley (in \"The Provoked Husband\" by Vanbrugh and Cibber) was a success. David Garrick convinced her to return to Drury Lane, and they worked together there until his retirement in 1776.\nFrom 1759 onwards she appeared in the bills as \"Mrs Abington\", following her marriage to her music tutor, the royal trumpeter James Abington. They separated shortly after their marriage as he could not cope with her popularity. They lived separately, with Fanny paying James a small annual stipend to stay away from her. She subsequently had affairs with an Irish MP, Needham, who left her a considerable estate, and William Petty, 2nd Earl of Shelburne. The income from her estate and her stage work made her a wealthy woman.\nShe remained at the Drury Lane for 18 years, being the first to play more than 30 important characters, notably Lady Teazle (1777) in The School for Scandal.\nIn April 1772, when James Northcote saw her as Miss Notable in Cibber's \"The Lady's Last Stake\", he remarked to his brother &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I never saw a part done so excellent in all my life, for in her acting she has all the simplicity of nature and not the least tincture of the theatrical.\nHer wealth and popularity meant she influenced fashion. The press reported on her hair styles: her low hair in \"The School for Scandal\" was praised for changing the fashion. Her performance as Kitty in \"High Life Below Stairs\" put her in the foremost rank of comic actresses and made the mob cap she wore in the role fashionable. It was soon being referred to as the \"Abington Cap\" on stage and at hatters' shops across Ireland and England. \nIt was as the last character in Congreve's \"Love for Love\" that Sir Joshua Reynolds painted the best-known of his half-dozen or more portraits of her (\"illustration, left\"). In 1782 she left Drury Lane for Covent Garden. After an absence from the stage from 1790 until 1797, she reappeared, quitting finally in 1799.\nDeath.\nFrances Abington died on 4 March 1815 at her home on Pall Mall, London. She was buried at St James's Church, Piccadilly.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "11604", "revid": "14383484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11604", "title": "Free software definition", "text": ""}
{"id": "11607", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11607", "title": "Fundamtenal", "text": ""}
{"id": "11610", "revid": "17171", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11610", "title": "Fundamental tone", "text": ""}
{"id": "11614", "revid": "4899266", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11614", "title": "Fundamental dimensions/Forum", "text": ""}
{"id": "11615", "revid": "11308236", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11615", "title": "Finite field", "text": "Algebraic structure\nIn mathematics, a finite field or Galois field (so-named in honor of \u00c9variste Galois) is a field that has a finite number of elements. As with any field, a finite field is a set on which the operations of multiplication, addition, subtraction and division are defined and satisfy certain basic rules. The most common examples of finite fields are the integers mod formula_1 when formula_1 is a prime number.\nThe \"order\" of a finite field is its number of elements, which is either a prime number or a prime power. For every prime number formula_1 and every positive integer formula_4 there are fields of order formula_5. All finite fields of a given order are isomorphic.\nFinite fields are fundamental in a number of areas of mathematics and computer science, including number theory, algebraic geometry, Galois theory, finite geometry, cryptography and coding theory.\nProperties.\nA finite field is a field that is a finite set; this means that it has a finite number of elements on which multiplication, addition, subtraction and division (excluding division by zero) are defined and satisfy the field axioms.\nThe number of elements of a finite field is called its \"order\" or, sometimes, its \"size\". A finite field of order formula_6 exists if and only if formula_6 is a prime power formula_5 (where formula_1 is a prime number and formula_4 is a positive integer). In a field of order formula_5, adding formula_1 copies of any element always results in zero; that is, the characteristic of the field is formula_1.\nFor formula_14, all fields of order formula_6 are isomorphic (see \"\" below). Moreover, a field cannot contain two different finite subfields with the same order. One may therefore identify all finite fields with the same order, and they are unambiguously denoted formula_16, formula_17 or formula_18, where the letters GF stand for \"Galois field\".\nIn a finite field of order formula_6, the polynomial formula_20 has all formula_6 elements of the finite field as roots. The non-zero elements of a finite field form a multiplicative group. This group is cyclic, so all non-zero elements can be expressed as powers of a single element called a primitive element of the field. (In general there will be several primitive elements for a given field.)\nThe simplest examples of finite fields are the fields of prime order: for each prime number formula_1, the prime field of order formula_1 may be constructed as the integers modulo formula_1, formula_25.\nThe elements of the prime field of order formula_1 may be represented by integers in the range formula_27. The sum, the difference and the product are the remainder of the division by formula_1 of the result of the corresponding integer operation. The multiplicative inverse of an element may be computed by using the extended Euclidean algorithm (see \"\").\nLet formula_29 be a finite field. For any element formula_30 in formula_29 and any integer formula_32, denote by formula_33 the sum of formula_32 copies of formula_30. The least positive formula_32 such that formula_37 is the characteristic formula_1 of the field. This allows defining a multiplication formula_39 of an element formula_4 of formula_41 by an element formula_30 of formula_29 by choosing an integer representative for formula_4. This multiplication makes formula_29 into a formula_41-vector space. It follows that the number of elements of formula_29 is formula_48 for some integer formula_32.\nThe identity\nformula_50\n(sometimes called the freshman's dream) is true in a field of characteristic formula_1. This follows from the binomial theorem, as each binomial coefficient of the expansion of formula_52, except the first and the last, is a multiple of formula_1.\nBy Fermat's little theorem, if formula_1 is a prime number and formula_30 is in the field formula_41 then formula_57. This implies the equality\nformula_58\nfor polynomials over formula_41. More generally, every element in formula_60 satisfies the polynomial equation formula_61.\nAny finite field extension of a finite field is separable and simple. That is, if formula_62 is a finite field and formula_29 is a subfield of formula_62, then formula_62 is obtained from formula_29 by adjoining a single element whose minimal polynomial is separable. To use a piece of jargon, finite fields are perfect.\nA more general algebraic structure that satisfies all the other axioms of a field, but whose multiplication is not required to be commutative, is called a division ring (or sometimes \"skew field\"). By Wedderburn's little theorem, any finite division ring is commutative, and hence is a finite field.\nExistence and uniqueness.\nLet formula_67 be a prime power, and formula_29 be the splitting field of the polynomial \nformula_69\nover the prime field formula_41. This means that formula_29 is a finite field of lowest order, in which formula_72 has formula_6 distinct roots (the formal derivative of formula_72 is formula_75, implying that formula_76, which in general implies that the splitting field is a separable extension of the original). The above identity shows that the sum and the product of two roots of formula_72 are roots of formula_72, as well as the multiplicative inverse of a root of formula_72. In other words, the roots of formula_72 form a field of order formula_6, which is equal to formula_29 by the minimality of the splitting field.\nThe uniqueness up to isomorphism of splitting fields implies thus that all fields of order formula_6 are isomorphic. Also, if a field formula_29 has a field of order formula_14 as a subfield, its elements are the formula_6 roots of formula_20, and formula_29 cannot contain another subfield of order formula_6.\nIn summary, we have the following classification theorem first proved in 1893 by E.\u00a0H.\u00a0Moore:\nThe order of a finite field is a prime power. For every prime power formula_6 there are fields of order formula_6, and they are all isomorphic. In these fields, every element satisfies\nformula_92\nand the polynomial formula_93 factors as\nformula_94\nIt follows that formula_60 contains a subfield isomorphic to formula_96 if and only if formula_97 is a divisor of formula_32; in that case, this subfield is unique. In fact, the polynomial formula_99 divides formula_100 if and only if formula_97 is a divisor of formula_32.\nExplicit construction.\nNon-prime fields.\nGiven a prime power formula_67 with formula_1 prime and formula_105, the field formula_18 may be explicitly constructed in the following way. One first chooses an irreducible polynomial formula_72 in formula_108 of degree formula_32 (such an irreducible polynomial always exists). Then the quotient ring \nformula_110\nof the polynomial ring formula_108 by the principal ideal generated by formula_72 is a field of order formula_6.\nMore explicitly, the elements of formula_18 are the polynomials over formula_41 whose degree is strictly less than formula_32. The addition and the subtraction are those of polynomials over formula_41. The product of two elements is the remainder of the Euclidean division by formula_72 of the product in formula_119.\nThe multiplicative inverse of a non-zero element may be computed with the extended Euclidean algorithm; see \"\".\nHowever, with this representation, elements of formula_18 may be difficult to distinguish from the corresponding polynomials. Therefore, it is common to give a name, commonly formula_121 to the element of formula_18 that corresponds to the polynomial formula_123. So, the elements of formula_18 become polynomials in formula_121, where formula_126, and, when one encounters a polynomial in formula_121 of degree greater or equal to formula_32 (for example after a multiplication), one knows that one has to use the relation formula_126 to reduce its degree (it is what Euclidean division is doing).\nExcept in the construction of formula_130, there are several possible choices for formula_72, which produce isomorphic results. To simplify the Euclidean division, one commonly chooses for formula_72 a polynomial of the form \nformula_133\nwhich make the needed Euclidean divisions very efficient. However, for some fields, typically in characteristic formula_134, irreducible polynomials of the form formula_135 may not exist. In characteristic formula_134, if the polynomial formula_137 is reducible, it is recommended to choose formula_138 with the lowest possible formula_4 that makes the polynomial irreducible. If all these trinomials are reducible, one chooses \"pentanomials\" formula_140, as polynomials of degree greater than formula_141, with an even number of terms, are never irreducible in characteristic formula_134, having formula_141 as a root.\nA possible choice for such a polynomial is given by Conway polynomials. They ensure a certain compatibility between the representation of a field and the representations of its subfields.\nIn the next sections, we will show how the general construction method outlined above works for small finite fields.\nField with four elements.\nThe smallest non-prime field is the field with four elements, which is commonly denoted formula_130 or formula_145 It consists of the four elements formula_146 such that formula_147, formula_148, formula_149, and formula_150, for every formula_151, the other operation results being easily deduced from the distributive law. See below for the complete operation tables.\nThis may be deduced as follows from the results of the preceding section.\nOver formula_152, there is only one irreducible polynomial of degree formula_134:\nformula_154\nTherefore, for formula_130 the construction of the preceding section must involve this polynomial, and\nformula_156\nLet formula_121 denote a root of this polynomial in formula_130. This implies that\nformula_159\nand that formula_121 and formula_161 are the elements of formula_130 that are not in formula_152. The tables of the operations in formula_130 result from this, and are as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nA table for subtraction is not given, because subtraction is identical to addition, as is the case for every field of characteristic 2. To divide, multiply by the reciprocal: &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. As in any field, division by zero is undefined. From the tables, it can be seen that the additive structure of formula_130 is isomorphic to the Klein four-group, while the non-zero multiplicative structure is isomorphic to the group formula_166.\nThe map\nformula_167\nis the non-trivial field automorphism, called the Frobenius automorphism, which sends formula_121 into the second root formula_161 of the above-mentioned irreducible polynomial formula_170.\nGF(\"p\"2) for an odd prime \"p\".\nFor applying the above general construction of finite fields in the case of formula_171, one has to find an irreducible polynomial of degree 2. For formula_172, this has been done in the preceding section. If formula_1 is an odd prime, there are always irreducible polynomials of the form formula_174, with formula_175 in formula_41.\nMore precisely, the polynomial formula_174 is irreducible over formula_41 if and only if formula_175 is a quadratic non-residue modulo formula_1 (this is almost the definition of a quadratic non-residue). There are formula_181 quadratic non-residues modulo formula_1. For example, formula_134 is a quadratic non-residue for formula_184, and formula_185 is a quadratic non-residue for formula_186. If formula_187, that is formula_188, one may choose formula_189 as a quadratic non-residue, which allows us to have a very simple irreducible polynomial formula_190.\nHaving chosen a quadratic non-residue formula_175, let formula_121 be a symbolic square root of formula_175, that is, a symbol that has the property formula_194, in the same way that the complex number formula_195 is a symbolic square root of formula_196. Then, the elements of formula_171 are all the linear expressions\nformula_198\nwith formula_199 and formula_200 in formula_41. The operations on formula_171 are defined as follows (the operations between elements of formula_41 represented by Latin letters are the operations in formula_41):\nformula_205\nGF(8) and GF(27).\nThe polynomial\nformula_206\nis irreducible over formula_152 and formula_208, that is, it is irreducible modulo formula_134 and formula_185 (to show this, it suffices to show that it has no root in formula_152 nor in formula_208). It follows that the elements of formula_213 and formula_214 may be represented by expressions\nformula_215\nwhere formula_216 are elements of formula_152 or formula_208 (respectively), and formula_121 is a symbol such that \nformula_220\nThe addition, additive inverse and multiplication on formula_213 and formula_214 may thus be defined as follows; in following formulas, the operations between elements of formula_152 or formula_208, represented by Latin letters, are the operations in formula_152 or formula_208, respectively:\nformula_227\nGF(16).\nThe polynomial\nformula_228\nis irreducible over formula_152, that is, it is irreducible modulo formula_134. It follows that the elements of formula_231 may be represented by expressions\nformula_232\nwhere formula_233 are either formula_234 or formula_141 (elements of formula_152), and formula_121 is a symbol such that \nformula_238\n(that is, formula_121 is defined as a root of the given irreducible polynomial). As the characteristic of formula_152 is formula_134, each element is its additive inverse in formula_231. The addition and multiplication on formula_231 may be defined as follows; in following formulas, the operations between elements of formula_152, represented by Latin letters are the operations in formula_152.\nformula_246\nThe field formula_231 has eight primitive elements (the elements that have all nonzero elements of formula_231 as integer powers). These elements are the four roots of formula_249 and their multiplicative inverses. In particular, formula_121 is a primitive element, and the primitive elements are formula_251 with formula_97 less than and coprime with formula_253 (that is, 1, 2, 4, 7, 8, 11, 13, 14).\nMultiplicative structure.\nThe set of non-zero elements in formula_18 is an abelian group under the multiplication, of order formula_255. By Lagrange's theorem, there exists a divisor formula_4 of formula_255 such that formula_258 for every non-zero formula_30 in formula_18. As the equation formula_258 has at most formula_4 solutions in any field, formula_255 is the lowest possible value for formula_4.\nThe structure theorem of finite abelian groups implies that this multiplicative group is cyclic, that is, all non-zero elements are powers of a single element. In summary:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\"The multiplicative group of the non-zero elements in\" formula_18 \"is cyclic, i.e., there exists an element\" formula_199, \"such that the\" formula_255 \"non-zero elements of\" formula_18 \"are\" formula_269.\nSuch an element formula_199 is called a primitive element of formula_18. Unless formula_272, the primitive element is not unique. The number of primitive elements is formula_273 where formula_274 is Euler's totient function.\nThe result above implies that formula_275 for every formula_30 in formula_18. The particular case where formula_6 is prime is Fermat's little theorem.\nDiscrete logarithm.\nIf formula_199 is a primitive element in formula_18, then for any non-zero element formula_30 in formula_29, there is a unique integer formula_32 with formula_284 such that formula_285.\nThis integer formula_32 is called the discrete logarithm of formula_30 to the base formula_199.\nWhile formula_289 can be computed very quickly, for example using exponentiation by squaring, there is no known efficient algorithm for computing the inverse operation, the discrete logarithm. This has been used in various cryptographic protocols, see \"Discrete logarithm\" for details.\nWhen the nonzero elements of formula_18 are represented by their discrete logarithms, multiplication and division are easy, as they reduce to addition and subtraction modulo formula_255. However, addition amounts to computing the discrete logarithm of formula_292. The identity \nformula_293\nallows one to solve this problem by constructing the table of the discrete logarithms of formula_294, called Zech's logarithms, for formula_295 (it is convenient to define the discrete logarithm of zero as being formula_296).\nZech's logarithms are useful for large computations, such as linear algebra over medium-sized fields, that is, fields that are sufficiently large for making natural algorithms inefficient, but not too large, as one has to pre-compute a table of the same size as the order of the field.\nRoots of unity.\nEvery nonzero element of a finite field is a root of unity, as formula_297 for every nonzero element of formula_18.\nIf formula_32 is a positive integer, an formula_32th primitive root of unity is a solution of the equation formula_301 that is not a solution of the equation formula_302 for any positive integer formula_303. If formula_199 is a formula_32th primitive root of unity in a field formula_29, then formula_29 contains all the formula_32 roots of unity, which are formula_309.\nThe field formula_18 contains a formula_32th primitive root of unity if and only if formula_32 is a divisor of formula_255; if formula_32 is a divisor of formula_255, then the number of primitive formula_32th roots of unity in formula_18 is formula_318 (Euler's totient function). The number of formula_32th roots of unity in formula_18 is formula_321.\nIn a field of characteristic formula_1, every formula_323th root of unity is also a formula_32th root of unity. It follows that primitive formula_323th roots of unity never exist in a field of characteristic formula_1.\nOn the other hand, if formula_32 is coprime to formula_1, the roots of the formula_32th cyclotomic polynomial are distinct in every field of characteristic formula_1, as this polynomial is a divisor of formula_331, whose discriminant formula_332 is nonzero modulo formula_1. It follows that the formula_32th cyclotomic polynomial factors over formula_18 into distinct irreducible polynomials that have all the same degree, say formula_336, and that formula_337 is the smallest field of characteristic formula_1 that contains the formula_32th primitive roots of unity.\nWhen computing Brauer characters, one uses the map formula_340 to map eigenvalues of a representation matrix to the complex numbers. Under this mapping, the base subfield formula_41 consists of evenly spaced points around the unit circle (omitting zero).\nExample: GF(64).\nThe field formula_342 has several interesting properties that smaller fields do not share: it has two subfields such that neither is contained in the other; not all generators (elements with minimal polynomial of degree formula_343 over formula_152) are primitive elements; and the primitive elements are not all conjugate under the Galois group.\nThe order of this field being 26, and the divisors of 6 being 1, 2, 3, 6, the subfields of GF(64) are GF(2), GF(22) = GF(4), GF(23) = GF(8), and GF(64) itself. As 2 and 3 are coprime, the intersection of GF(4) and GF(8) in GF(64) is the prime field GF(2).\nThe union of GF(4) and GF(8) has thus 10 elements. The remaining 54 elements of GF(64) generate GF(64) in the sense that no other subfield contains any of them. It follows that they are roots of irreducible polynomials of degree 6 over GF(2). This implies that, over GF(2), there are exactly 9 = irreducible monic polynomials of degree 6. This may be verified by factoring \"X\"64 \u2212 \"X\" over GF(2).\nThe elements of GF(64) are primitive formula_32th roots of unity for some formula_32 dividing formula_347. As the 3rd and the 7th roots of unity belong to GF(4) and GF(8), respectively, the 54 generators are primitive \"n\"th roots of unity for some \"n\" in {9, 21, 63}. Euler's totient function shows that there are 6 primitive 9th roots of unity, formula_348 primitive formula_349st roots of unity, and formula_350 primitive 63rd roots of unity. Summing these numbers, one finds again formula_351 elements.\nBy factoring the cyclotomic polynomials over formula_152, one finds that:\nThis shows that the best choice to construct formula_342 is to define it as GF(2)[\"X\"] / (\"X\"6 + \"X\" + 1). In fact, this generator is a primitive element, and this polynomial is the irreducible polynomial that produces the easiest Euclidean division.\nFrobenius automorphism and Galois theory.\nIn this section, formula_1 is a prime number, and formula_67 is a power of formula_1.\nIn formula_18, the identity (\"x\" + \"y\")\"p\" = \"xp\" + \"yp\" implies that the map\nformula_365\nis a formula_41-linear endomorphism and a field automorphism of formula_18, which fixes every element of the subfield formula_41. It is called the Frobenius automorphism, after Ferdinand Georg Frobenius.\nDenoting by \"\u03c6k\" the composition of \"\u03c6\" with itself \"k\" times, we have \nformula_369\nIt has been shown in the preceding section that \"\u03c6\"\"n\" is the identity. For 0 &lt; \"k\" &lt; \"n\", the automorphism \"\u03c6\"\"k\" is not the identity, as, otherwise, the polynomial \nformula_370\nwould have more than \"pk\" roots.\nThere are no other GF(\"p\")-automorphisms of GF(\"q\"). In other words, GF(\"pn\") has exactly \"n\" GF(\"p\")-automorphisms, which are \nformula_371\nIn terms of Galois theory, this means that GF(\"p\"\"n\") is a Galois extension of GF(\"p\"), which has a cyclic Galois group.\nThe fact that the Frobenius map is surjective implies that every finite field is perfect.\nPolynomial factorization.\nIf \"F\" is a finite field, a non-constant monic polynomial with coefficients in \"F\" is irreducible over \"F\", if it is not the product of two non-constant monic polynomials, with coefficients in \"F\".\nAs every polynomial ring over a field is a unique factorization domain, every monic polynomial over a finite field may be factored in a unique way (up to the order of the factors) into a product of irreducible monic polynomials.\nThere are efficient algorithms for testing polynomial irreducibility and factoring polynomials over finite fields. They are a key step for factoring polynomials over the integers or the rational numbers. At least for this reason, every computer algebra system has functions for factoring polynomials over finite fields, or, at least, over finite prime fields.\nIrreducible polynomials of a given degree.\nThe polynomial\nformula_372 \nfactors into linear factors over a field of order \"q\". More precisely, this polynomial is the product of all monic polynomials of degree one over a field of order \"q\".\nThis implies that, if \"q\" = \"pn\" then \"Xq\" \u2212 \"X\" is the product of all monic irreducible polynomials over GF(\"p\"), whose degree divides \"n\". In fact, if \"P\" is an irreducible factor over GF(\"p\") of \"Xq\" \u2212 \"X\", its degree divides \"n\", as its splitting field is contained in GF(\"p\"\"n\"). Conversely, if \"P\" is an irreducible monic polynomial over GF(\"p\") of degree \"d\" dividing \"n\", it defines a field extension of degree \"d\", which is contained in GF(\"p\"\"n\"), and all roots of \"P\" belong to GF(\"p\"\"n\"), and are roots of \"Xq\" \u2212 \"X\"; thus \"P\" divides \"Xq\" \u2212 \"X\". As \"Xq\" \u2212 \"X\" does not have any multiple factor, it is thus the product of all the irreducible monic polynomials that divide it.\nThis property is used to compute the product of the irreducible factors of each degree of polynomials over GF(\"p\"); see \"Distinct degree factorization\".\nNumber of monic irreducible polynomials of a given degree over a finite field.\nThe number \"N\"(\"q\", \"n\") of monic irreducible polynomials of degree \"n\" over \nGF(\"q\") is given by\nformula_373\nwhere \"\u03bc\" is the M\u00f6bius function. This formula is an immediate consequence of the property of \"X\"\"q\" \u2212 \"X\" above and the M\u00f6bius inversion formula.\nBy the above formula, the number of irreducible (not necessarily monic) polynomials of degree \"n\" over GF(\"q\") is (\"q\" \u2212 1)\"N\"(\"q\", \"n\").\nThe exact formula implies the inequality\nformula_374\nthis is sharp if and only if \"n\" is a power of some prime.\nFor every \"q\" and every \"n\", the right hand side is positive, so there is at least one irreducible polynomial of degree \"n\" over GF(\"q\").\nApplications.\nIn cryptography, the difficulty of the discrete logarithm problem in a finite field or in an elliptic curve over a finite field is the basis of several widely used protocols, such as the Diffie\u2013Hellman protocol. For example, in 2014, a secure internet connection to Wikipedia involved the elliptic curve Diffie\u2013Hellman protocol (ECDHE) over a large finite field. In coding theory, many codes are constructed as subspaces of vector spaces over finite fields.\nFinite fields are used by many error correction codes, such as Reed\u2013Solomon error correction code or BCH code. The finite field almost always has characteristic of 2, since computer data is stored in binary. For example, a byte of data can be interpreted as an element of GF(28). One exception is PDF417 bar code, which is GF(929). Some CPUs have special instructions that can be useful for finite fields of characteristic 2, generally variations of carry-less product.\nFinite fields are widely used in number theory, as many problems over the integers may be solved by reducing them modulo one or several prime numbers. For example, the fastest known algorithms for polynomial factorization and linear algebra over the field of rational numbers proceed by reduction modulo one or several primes, and then reconstruction of the solution by using Chinese remainder theorem, Hensel lifting or the LLL algorithm.\nSimilarly many theoretical problems in number theory can be solved by considering their reductions modulo some or all prime numbers. See, for example, \"Hasse principle\". Many recent developments of algebraic geometry were motivated by the need to enlarge the power of these modular methods. Wiles' proof of Fermat's Last Theorem is an example of a deep result involving many mathematical tools, including finite fields.\nThe Weil conjectures concern the number of points on algebraic varieties over finite fields and the theory has many applications including exponential and character sum estimates.\nFinite fields have widespread application in combinatorics, two well known examples being the definition of Paley Graphs and the related construction for Hadamard Matrices. In arithmetic combinatorics finite fields and finite field models are used extensively, such as in Szemer\u00e9di's theorem on arithmetic progressions.\nExtensions.\nWedderburn's little theorem.\nA division ring is a generalization of field. Division rings are not assumed to be commutative. There are no non-commutative finite division rings: Wedderburn's little theorem states that all finite division rings are commutative, and hence are finite fields. This result holds even if we relax the associativity axiom to alternativity, that is, all finite alternative division rings are finite fields, by the Artin\u2013Zorn theorem.\nAlgebraic closure.\nA finite field formula_29 is not algebraically closed: the polynomial\nformula_376\nhas no roots in formula_29, since \"f\"\u2009(\"\u03b1\") = 1 for all formula_121 in formula_29.\nGiven a prime number p, let formula_380 be an algebraic closure of formula_381 It is not only unique up to an isomorphism, as do all algebraic closures, but contrarily to the general case, all its subfield are fixed by all its automorphisms, and it is also the algebraic closure of all finite fields of the same characteristic p.\nThis property results mainly from the fact that the elements of formula_382 are exactly the roots of formula_383 and this defines an inclusion formula_384 for formula_385 These inclusions allow writing informally formula_386 The formal validation of this notation results from the fact that the above field inclusions form a directed set of fields; Its direct limit is formula_387 which may thus be considered as \"directed union\".\nPrimitive elements in the algebraic closure.\nGiven a primitive element formula_388 of formula_389 then formula_390 is a primitive element of formula_391\nFor explicit computations, it may be useful to have a coherent choice of the primitive elements for all finite fields; that is, to choose the primitive element formula_392 of formula_393 in order that, whenever formula_394 one has formula_395 where formula_396 is the primitive element already chosen for formula_397\nSuch a construction may be obtained by Conway polynomials.\nQuasi-algebraic closure.\nAlthough finite fields are not algebraically closed, they are quasi-algebraically closed, which means that every homogeneous polynomial over a finite field has a non-trivial zero whose components are in the field if the number of its variables is more than its degree. This was a conjecture of Artin and Dickson proved by Chevalley (see \"Chevalley\u2013Warning theorem\").\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
