{"id": "19292", "revid": "36336112", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19292", "title": "History of Morocco", "text": " \nThe history of human habitation in Morocco spans since the Lower Paleolithic, with the earliest known being Jebel Irhoud. Much later Morocco was part of Iberomaurusian culture, including Taforalt. It dates from the establishment of Mauretania and other ancient Berber kingdoms, to the establishment of the Moroccan state by the Idrisid dynasty followed by other Islamic dynasties, through to the colonial and independence periods.\nArchaeological evidence has shown that the area was inhabited by hominids at least 400,000 years ago. The recorded history of Morocco begins with the Phoenician colonization of the Moroccan coast between the 8th and 6th centuries BCE, although the area was inhabited by indigenous Berbers for some two thousand years before that. In the 5th century BCE, the city-state of Carthage extended its hegemony over the coastal areas. They remained there until the late 3rd century BCE, while the hinterland was ruled by indigenous monarchs. Indigenous Berber monarchs ruled the territory from the 3rd century BCE until 40 CE, when it was annexed to the Roman Empire. In the mid-5th century CE, it was overrun by Vandals, before being recovered by the Byzantine Empire in the 6th century.\nThe region was conquered by the Muslims in the early 8th century CE, but broke away from the Umayyad Caliphate after the Berber Revolt of 740. Half a century later, the Moroccan state was established by the Idrisid dynasty. The Saadi dynasty ruled the country from 1549 to 1659, followed by the Alawis from 1667 onwards, who have since been the ruling dynasty of Morocco.\nPrehistoric Morocco.\nArchaeological excavations have demonstrated the presence of people in Morocco that were ancestral to \"Homo sapiens\", as well as the presence of early human species. The fossilized bones of a 400,000-year-old early human ancestor were discovered in Sal\u00e9 in 1971. The bones of several very early \"Homo sapiens\" were excavated at Jebel Irhoud in 1991, these were dated using modern techniques in 2017 and found to be at least 300,000 years old, making them the oldest examples of \"Homo sapiens\" discovered anywhere in the world. In 2007, small perforated seashell beads were discovered in Taforalt that are 82,000 years old, making them the earliest known evidence of personal adornment found anywhere in the world.\nIn Mesolithic times, between 20,000 and 5000 years ago, the geography of Morocco resembled a savanna more than the present arid landscape. While little is known of settlements in Morocco during that period, excavations elsewhere in the Maghreb region have suggested an abundance of game and forests that would have been hospitable to Mesolithic hunters and gatherers, such as those of the Capsian culture.\nDuring the Neolithic period, which followed the Mesolithic, the savanna was occupied by hunters and herders. The culture of these Neolithic hunters and herders flourished until the region began to desiccate after 5000 BCE as a result of climatic changes. The coastal regions of present-day Morocco in the early Neolithic shared in the Cardium pottery culture that was common to the entire Mediterranean region. Archaeological excavations have suggested that the domestication of cattle and the cultivation of crops both occurred in the region during that period. In the Chalcolithic period, or the copper age, the Beaker culture reached the north coast of Morocco.\nEarly history.\nCarthage (c. 800 \u2013 c. 300 BCE).\nThe arrival of Phoenicians on the Moroccan coast heralded many centuries of rule by foreign powers in the north of Morocco. Phoenician traders penetrated the western Mediterranean before the 8th century BCE, and soon after set up depots for salt and ore along the coast and up the rivers of the territory of present-day Morocco. Major early settlements of the Phoenicians included those at Chellah, Lixus and Mogador. Mogador is known to have been a Phoenician colony by the early 6th century BCE.\nBy the 5th century BCE, the state of Carthage had extended its hegemony across much of North Africa. Carthage developed commercial relations with the Berber tribes of the interior, and paid them an annual tribute to ensure their cooperation in the exploitation of raw materials.\nMauretania (c. 300 BCE \u2013 c. 430 CE).\nMauretania was an independent tribal Berber kingdom on the Mediterranean coast of north Africa, corresponding to northern modern-day Morocco from about the 3rd century BCE. The earliest known king of Mauretania was Baga who lived around 225 BC and possibly belonged to an older dynasty. Some of its earliest recorded history relates to Phoenician and Carthaginian settlements such as Lixus and Chellah. The Berber kings ruled inland territories overshadowing the coastal outposts of Carthage and Rome, often as satellites, allowing Roman rule to exist. It became a client of the Roman empire in 33 BCE, then a full province after Emperor Caligula had the last king, Ptolemy of Mauretania, executed (39 CE or 40).\nRome controlled the vast, ill-defined territory through alliances with the tribes rather than through military occupation, expanding its authority only to those areas that were economically useful or that could be defended without additional manpower. Hence, Roman administration never extended outside the restricted area of the northern coastal plain and valleys. This strategic region formed part of the Roman Empire, governed as Mauretania Tingitana, with the city of Volubilis as its capital.\nDuring the time of the Roman emperor Augustus, Mauretania was a vassal state, and its rulers, such as Juba II, controlled all the areas south of Volubilis. But the effective control of Roman legionaries reached as far as the area of Sala Colonia (the castra \"Exploratio Ad Mercurios\" south of Sala is the southernmost discovered up to now). Some historians believe the Roman frontier reached present-day Casablanca, known then as Anfa, which had been settled by the Romans as a port.\nDuring the reign of Juba II, Augustus founded three colonies of Roman citizens in Mauretania close to the Atlantic coast: Iulia Constantia Zilil, Iulia Valentia Banasa, and Iulia Campestris Babba. Augustus would eventually found twelve colonies in the region. During that period, the area controlled by Rome experienced significant economic development, aided by the construction of Roman roads. The area was initially not completely under the control of Rome, and only in the mid-2nd century was a limes built south of Sala extending to Volubilis. Around 278 CE the Romans moved their regional capital to Tangier and Volubilis started to lose importance.\nChristianity was introduced to the region in the 2nd century CE, and gained converts in the towns and among slaves as well as among Berber farmers. By the end of the 4th century, the Romanized areas had been Christianized, and inroads had been made among the Berber tribes, who sometimes converted en masse. Schismatic and heretical movements also developed, usually as forms of political protest. The area had a substantial Jewish population as well.\nEarly Islamic Morocco (c. 700 \u2013 c. 743).\nMuslim conquest (c. 700).\nThe Muslim conquest of the Maghreb, that started in the middle of the 7th century CE, was achieved in the early 8th century. It brought both the Arabic language and Islam to the area. Although part of the larger Islamic Empire, Morocco was initially organized as a subsidiary province of Ifriqiya, with the local governors appointed by the Muslim governor in Kairouan.\nThe indigenous Berber tribes adopted Islam, but retained their customary laws. They also paid taxes and tribute to the new Muslim administration.\nBerber Revolt (740\u2013743).\nIn 740 CE, spurred on by puritanical Kharijite agitators, the native Berber population revolted against the ruling Umayyad Caliphate. The rebellion began among the Berber tribes of western Morocco, and spread quickly across the region. Although the insurrection petered out in 742 CE before it reached the gates of Kairouan, neither the Umayyad rulers in Damascus nor their Abbasid successors managed to re-impose their rule on the areas west of Ifriqiya. Morocco passed out of Umayyad and Abbasid control, and fragmented into a collection of small, independent Berber states such as Berghwata, Sijilmassa and Nekor, in addition to Tlemcen and Tahert in what is now western Algeria. The Berbers went on to shape their own version of Islam. Some, like the Banu Ifran, retained their connection with radical puritan Islamic sects, while others, like the Berghwata, constructed a new syncretic faith.\nBarghawata (744\u20131058).\nThe Barghawatas were a confederation of Berber groups inhabiting the Atlantic coast of Morocco, who belonged to the Masmuda Berber tribal division. After allying with the Sufri Kharijite rebellion in Morocco against the Umayyads, they established an independent state (CE 744 \u2013 1058) in the area of Tamesna on the Atlantic coast between Safi and Sal\u00e9 under the leadership of Tarif al-Matghari.\nEmirate of Sijilmasa (757\u2013976).\nThe Midrarid dynasty or Banu Midrar were a Berber dynasty that ruled the Tafilalt region and founded the city of Sijilmasa in 757.\nSijilmasa was a medieval Moroccan city and trade entrep\u00f4t at the northern edge of the Sahara desert. The ruins of the town lie for along the River Ziz in the Tafilalt oasis near the town of Rissani. The town's history was marked by several successive invasions by Berber dynasties. Up until the 14th century, as the northern terminus for the western trans-Sahara trade route, it was one of the most important trade centres in the Maghreb during the Middle Ages.\nKingdom of Nekor (710\u20131019).\nThe Kingdom of Nekor was an emirate centered in the Rif area of Morocco. Its capital was initially located at Temsaman, and then moved to Nekor. The polity was founded in 710 CE by Salih I ibn Mansur through a Caliphate grant. Under his guidance, the local Berber tribes adopted Islam, but later deposed him in favor of one az-Zaydi from the Nafza tribe. They subsequently changed their mind and reappointed Ibn Mansur. His dynasty, the Ban\u016b S\u0101lih, thereafter ruled the region until 1019.\nIn 859, the kingdom became subject to a 62 ship-strong group of Vikings, who defeated a Moorish force in Nekor that had attempted to interfere with their plunderings in the area. After staying for eight days in Morocco, the Vikings went back to Spain and continued up the east coast.\nIdrisid dynasty (789\u2013974).\nThe Idrisid dynasty was a Muslim polity centered in Morocco, which ruled from 788 to 974. Named after the founder Idriss I, the great-grandchild of Hasan ibn Ali, the Idrisids are considered by historians to be the founders of the first Moroccan state.\nFounders of the Idrisid state: Idris I and Idris II.\nBy the second half of the 8th century the westernmost regions of the Maghreb, including present-day Morocco, had been effectively independent of the Umayyad Caliphate since the Khariji-led Berber revolts that started in 739\u2013740. The Abbasid Caliphate after 750 had no more success in re-establishing control over Morocco. The overthrow of eastern authority meant that Morocco was controlled by various local Berber tribes and principalities which emerged around this time, such as the Barghwata Confederacy on the Atlantic coast and the Midrarid Emirate in Sijilmasa.\nThe founder of the Idrisid dynasty was Idris ibn Abdallah (788\u2013791), who traced his ancestry back to Ali ibn Abi Talib (died 661) and his wife Fatimah, daughter of the Islamic prophet, Muhammad. He was the great-grandchild of Hasan ibn Ali. After the Battle of Fakhkh, near Mecca, between the Abbasids and supporters of the descendants of the prophet Muhammad, Idris ibn Abdallah fled to the Maghreb. He first arrived in Tangier, the most important city of Morocco at the time, and by 788 he had settled in Volubilis (known as Walili in Arabic).\nThe powerful Awraba Berbers of Volubilis took in Idris and made him their 'imam' (religious leader). The Awraba tribe had supported Kusayla in his struggle against the Ummayad armies in the 670s and 680s. By the second half of the 8th century they had settled in northern Morocco, where their leader Ishak had his base in the Roman town of Volubilis. By this time the Awraba were already Muslim, but lived in an area where most tribes were either Christian, Jewish, Khariji or pagan. The Awraba seem to have welcomed a Sharifi imam as a way to strengthen their political position. Idris I, who was very active in the political organization of the Awraba, began by asserting his authority and working toward the subjugation of the Christian and Jewish tribes. In 789 he founded a settlement south east of Volubilis, called \"Medinat Fas\". In 791 Idris I was poisoned and killed by an Abbasid agent. Even though he left no male heir, shortly after his death, his wife Lalla Kanza bint Uqba al-Awrabi, bore him his only son and successor, Idris II. Idris' loyal Arab ex-slave and companion Rashid brought up the boy and took on himself the regency of the state, on behalf of the Awraba. In 801 Rashid was killed by the Abbasids. In the following year, at the age of 11 years, Idris II was proclaimed imam by the Awraba.\nEven though he had spread his authority across much of northern Morocco, as far west as Tlemcen, Idris I had been completely dependent on the Awraba leadership. Idris II began his rule with the weakening of Awraba power by welcoming Arab settlers in Walili and by appointing two Arabs as his \"vizier\" and \"qadi\". Thus he transformed himself from a prot\u00e9g\u00e9 of the Awraba into their sovereign. The Awraba leader Ishak responded by plotting against his life with the Aghlabids of Tunisia. Idris reacted by having his former protector Ishak killed, and in 809 moved his seat of government from the Awraba dominated Walili to Fes, where he founded a new settlement named Al-'Aliya. Idris II (791\u2013828) developed the city of Fez, established earlier by his father as a Berber market town. Here he welcomed two waves of Arab immigration: one in 818 from Cordoba and another in 824 from Aghlabid Tunisia, giving Fes a more Arab character than other Maghrebi cities. When Idris II died in 828, the Idrisid state spanned from western Algeria to the Sous in southern Morocco and had become the leading state of Morocco, ahead of the principalities of Sijilmasa, Barghawata and Nekor which remained outside their control.\nThe successors of Idris II.\nThe dynasty's power would slowly decline following Idris II's death. Under his son and successor Muhammad (828\u2013836) the kingdom was divided amongst seven of his brothers, whereby eight Idrisid statelets formed in Morocco and western Algeria. Muhammad himself came to rule Fes, with only nominal power over his brothers. His brother Isa, who was given control of the coastal Tamesna regions near the Bou Regreg from his base at Chellah, quickly revolted against him. Muhammad entrusted his brother Umar, who had received the territories around the Rif, to punish Isa. Umar successfully drove Isa from power, who was forced to take refuge in Chellah, and then turned north to punish his other brother al-Qasim at Tangier because he had earlier refused to join him and Muhammad against Isa. Al-Qasim fled to Asilah and settled nearby, while Muhammad gave Umar governorship of Tangier as a reward. Upon Umar's death in September or October 835 his son Ali ibn Umar was granted all of his father's domains in turn. Muhammad himself died seven months later in the March or April 836. His son Ali ibn Muhammad inherited his position and ruled for 13 years (836\u2013849) in a competent manner, ensuring the stability of the state. After his death in 849 he was succeeded by his brother Yahya ibn Muhammad (or Yahya I), who also enjoyed a peaceful reign.\nDuring this time Islamic and Arabic culture gained a stronghold in the towns and Morocco profited from the trans-Saharan trade, which came to be dominated by Muslim (mostly Berber) traders. The city of Fes also flourished and became an important religious center. During Yahya's reign more Arab immigrants arrived and the famous mosques of al-Qarawiyyin and al-Andalusiyyin were founded. Even so, the Islamic and Arabic culture only made its influence felt in the towns, with the vast majority of Morocco's population still using the Berber languages and often adhering to Islamic heterodox and heretical doctrines. The Idrisids were principally rulers of the towns and had little power over the majority of the country's population.\nDecline of the Idrisids and rise of Zenata dominance.\nAfter the death of Yahya I in 863 he was succeeded by his less competent son, Yahya II, who divided up the Idrisid realm yet again among the extended families. Yahya II died in uncertain circumstances in 866 after fleeing his palace. After an episode of disorder in Fes his cousin Ali ibn Umar took over power. In 868, under the leadership of the Abd al-Razzaq the Berber Khariji Sufri tribes of Madyuna, Ghayata and Miknasa of the Fes region formed a common front against the Idrisids. From their base in Sefrou they were able to defeat Ali ibn Umar and occupy Fes. Fes refused to submit, however, and another Yahya, the son of al-Qasim, was able to retake the city and establish himself as the new ruler, Yahya III. Thus the ruling line had passed from the sons of Muhammad to the son of Umar and now the sons of al-Qasim.\nYahya III ruled over the entire Idrisid realm and continued to attack the Sufris. In 905 however he died in battle against another family member, Yahya ibn Idris ibn Umar (a grandson of Umar), who then took power as Yahya IV. At this point, however, the Fatimids in the east began to intervene in Morocco, hoping to expand their influence. In 917 the Miknasa and its leader Masala ibn Habus, acting on behalf of their Fatimid allies, attacked Fes and forced Yahya IV to recognize Fatimid suzerainty, before deposing him in 919 or 921. He was succeeded by his cousin Musa ibn Abul 'Afiya, who had already been given charge over the rest of the country. The Idrisid Hassan I al-Hajam, a grandson of al-Qasim, managed to wrest control of Fez from 925 but in 927 Musa returned, captured Hassan and killed him, marking the last time the Idrisids held power in Fes.\nFrom Fes, the Miknasa began pursuing the Idrisid family across Morocco. The family took refuge at the fortress of Hajar an-Nasr in northern Morocco, where the Miknasa besieged them. Soon after, however, civil war broke out among the Miknasa when Musa switched allegiance to the Umayyads of Cordoba in 931 in an attempt to gain more independence. The Fatimids sent Humayd ibn Yasal (or Hamid), the nephew of Masala ibn Habus, to confront Musa, defeating him in 933 and forcing him to fall back into line. The Idrisids took advantage of the situation to break the siege of their fortress and defeat the Mikanasa Zenata troops. Once the Fatimids were gone, however, Musa once again threw off their authority and recognized the Umayyad caliph. The Fatimids sent their general Maysur to confront him again, and this time he fled. He was pursued and killed by the Idrisids.\nAfter this Idrisids settled among the Jbala tribes in the Rif region of north-west Morocco where they partially rebuilt their power base from Hajar an-Nasr, alternately acknowledging either the Umayyads of Cordoba (under Abd ar-Rahman III) or the Fatimids as overlords. Al-Qasim al-Gannoun ibn Muhammad ruled here from 938 until 948 in the name of the Fatimids. His son and successor, Ahmad, known as Abul-'Aysh, recognized the Umayyads instead but ran afoul of them when he refused to let them occupy Tangier. He was besieged there and forced to retreat, retaining only the areas around al-Basra and Asilah while the Umayyads occupied the rest of northern Morocco. He eventually left for Al-Andalus, leaving his brother Hasan ibn al-Qasim al-Gannoun as the new leader in 954. In 958 the Fatimids sent a new general, Jawhar, to invade Morocco. His success forced the Idrisids to again accept Fatimid overlordship. Soon afterwards, however, when Jawhar and the Fatimids were busy taking control of Egypt, the Umayyads made a comeback. In 973 their general, Ghalib, invaded Morocco. The Idrisids were expelled from their territories and al-Hasan, along with many other Idrisids or their sons, were taken as hostages to Cordoba in 974. The remaining Idrisids in Morocco acknowledged Umayyad rule. Al-Hasan was later expelled from Cordoba and fled to Egypt, which was now under Fatimid rule. In 979 Buluggin ibn Ziri, the Fatimid governor of Ifriqiya (after the Fatimid Caliphs moved their capital to Cairo), returned to defeat the Umayyads and impose Fatimid overlordship in the western Maghreb again. In 985 he returned to Morocco with Fatimid support, but that same year he was defeated by another Umayyad general sent by al-Mansur and then assassinated on the way to Cordoba. This brought a final end to the Idrisid dynasty. The Umayyads kept control over northern Morocco until their caliphate's collapse in the early 11th century. Following this, Morocco was dominated by various Zenata Berber tribes. Until the rise of the Sanhaja Almoravids later in the century, the Maghrawa controlled Fes, Sijilmasa and Aghmat while the Banu Ifran ruled over Tlemcen, Sal\u00e9 (Chellah), and the Tadla region.\nDespite having fallen from power, the Idrisids nonetheless spawned many sharifian families which continued to be present for centuries to come. Some Moroccans today still claim descent from them. In the 11th century an Idrisid family descended from Umar (son of Idris II), the Hammudids were able to gain power in several cities of northern Morocco and southern Spain. In Fes and in the town of Moulay Idriss (near Volubilis), the tombs of Idris II and Idris I, respectively, eventually developed into important religious complexes and pilgrimage sites (e.g. the Zawiya of Moulay Idris II). Several prominent sharifian families in Fez traced their lineages to Idris I, and some of these played a role in maintaining or rebuilding the Zawiya of Idris II in the city.\nAlmoravid dynasty (c. 1060 \u2013 1147).\nThe Almoravid dynasty (c.1060\u20131147) originated among the Lamtuna nomadic Berber tribe belonging to the Sanhaja. They succeeded in unifying Morocco after it had been divided among several Zenata principalities in the late 10th century, and annexed the Emirate of Sijilmasa and the Barghawata (Tamesna) into their realm.\nUnder Yusuf ibn Tashfin, the Almoravids were invited by the Muslim \"taifa\" princes of Al-Andalus to defend their territories from the Christian kingdoms. Their involvement was crucial in preventing the fall of Al-Andalus. After having succeeded in repelling Christian forces in 1086, Yusuf returned to Iberia in 1090 and annexed most of the major \"taifas\".Almoravid power began to decline in the first half of the 12th century, as the dynasty was weakened after its defeat at the battle of Ourique and because of the agitation of the Almohads. The conquest of the city of Marrakesh by the Almohads in 1147 marked the fall of the dynasty. However, fragments of the Almoravids (the Banu Ghaniya) continued to struggle in the Balearic Islands and in Tunisia.\nThe Berbers of the Tamazgha in the early Middle Ages could be roughly classified into three major groups: the Zenata across the north, the Masmuda concentrated in central Morocco, and the Sanhaja, clustered in two areas: the western part of the Sahara and the hills of the eastern Maghreb. The eastern Sanhaja included the Kutama Berbers, who had been the base of the Fatimid rise in the early 10th century, and the Zirid dynasty, who ruled Ifriqiya as vassals of the Fatimids after the latter moved to Egypt in 972. The western Sanhaja were divided into several tribes: the Gazzula and the Lamta in the Draa valley and the foothills of the Anti-Atlas range; further south, encamped in the western Sahara, were the Massufa, the Lamtuna and the Banu Warith; and most southerly of all, the Gudala, in littoral Mauritania down to the borderlands of the Senegal River.\nThe western Sanhaja had been converted to Islam some time in the 9th century. They were subsequently united in the 10th century and, with the zeal of new converts, launched several campaigns against the \"Sudanese\" (pagan peoples of sub-Saharan Africa). Under their king Tinbarutan ibn Usfayshar, the Sanhaja Lamtuna erected (or captured) the citadel of Awdaghust, a critical stop on the trans-Saharan trade route. After the collapse of the Sanhaja union, Awdagust passed over to the Ghana empire; and the trans-Saharan routes were taken over by the Zenata Maghrawa of Sijilmassa. The Maghrawa also exploited this disunion to dislodge the Sanhaja Gazzula and Lamta out of their pasturelands in the Sous and Draa valleys. Around 1035, the Lamtuna chieftain Abu Abdallah Muhammad ibn Tifat (alias Tarsina), tried to reunite the Sanhaja desert tribes, but his reign lasted less than three years.\nAround 1040, Yahya ibn Ibrahim, a chieftain of the Gudala (and brother-in-law of the late Tarsina), went on pilgrimage to Mecca. On his return, he stopped by Kairouan in Ifriqiya, where he met Abu Imran al-Fasi, a native of Fes and a jurist and scholar of the Sunni Maliki school. At this time, Ifriqiya was in ferment. The Zirid ruler al-Muizz ibn Badis, was openly contemplating breaking with his Shi'ite Fatimid overlords in Cairo, and the jurists of Kairouan were agitating for him to do so. Within this heady atmosphere, Yahya and Abu Imran fell into conversation on the state of the faith in their western homelands, and Yahya expressed his disappointment at the lack of religious education and negligence of Islamic law among his southern Sanhaja people. With Abu Imran's recommendation, Yahya ibn Ibrahim made his way to the \"ribat\" of Waggag ibn Zelu in the Sous valley of southern Morocco, to seek out a Maliki teacher for his people. Waggag assigned him one of his residents, Abdallah ibn Yasin.\nAbdallah ibn Yasin was a Gazzula Berber, and probably a convert rather than a born Muslim. His name can be read as \"son of Ya Sin\" (the title of the 36th Sura of the Qur'an), suggesting he had obliterated his family past and was \"re-born\" of the Holy Book. Ibn Yasin certainly had the ardor of a puritan zealot; his creed was mainly characterized by a rigid formalism and a strict adherence to the dictates of the Qur'an, and the Orthodox tradition. (Chroniclers such as al-Bakri allege Ibn Yasin's learning was superficial.) Ibn Yasin's initial meetings with the Gudala people went poorly. As he had more ardor than depth, Ibn Yasin's arguments were disputed by his audience. He responded to questioning with charges of apostasy and handed out harsh punishments for the slightest deviations. The Gudala soon had enough and expelled him almost immediately after the death of his protector, Yahya ibn Ibrahim, sometime in the 1040s.\nIbn Yasin, however, found a more favorable reception among the neighboring Lamtuna people. Probably sensing the useful organizing power of Ibn Yasin's pious fervor, the Lamtuna chieftain Yahya ibn Umar al-Lamtuni invited the man to preach to his people. The Lamtuna leaders, however, kept Ibn Yasin on a careful leash, forging a more productive partnership between them. Invoking stories of the early life of Muhammad, Ibn Yasin preached that conquest was a necessary addendum to Islamicization, that it was not enough to merely adhere to God's law, but necessary to also destroy opposition to it. In Ibn Yasin's ideology, anything and everything outside of Islamic law could be characterized as \"opposition\". He identified tribalism, in particular, as an obstacle. He believed it was not enough to urge his audiences to put aside their blood loyalties and ethnic differences, and embrace the equality of all Muslims under the Sacred Law, it was necessary to make them do so. For the Lamtuna leadership, this new ideology dovetailed with their long desire to refound the Sanhaja union and recover their lost dominions. In the early 1050s, the Lamtuna, under the joint leadership of Yahya ibn Umar and Abdallah ibn Yasin\u2014soon calling themselves the \"al-Murabitin\" (Almoravids)\u2014set out on a campaign to bring their neighbors over to their cause.\nAlmohads (c. 1121\u20131269).\nThe Almohad Caliphate (; or or from ) was a North African Berber Muslim empire founded in present day Morocco at the 12th century. At its height, it controlled much of the Iberian Peninsula (Al Andalus) and North Africa (the Maghreb). The Almohad doctrine was founded by Ibn Tumart among the Berber Masmuda tribes, a Berber tribal confederation of the Atlas Mountains of southern Morocco. At the time, Morocco, western Algeria and Spain (al-Andalus), were under the rule of the Almoravids, a Sanhaja Berber dynasty. Around 1120, Ibn Tumart first established a Berber state in Tinmel in the Atlas Mountains.\nEarly in his life, Ibn Tumart went to Spain to pursue his studies, and thereafter to Baghdad to deepen them. In Baghdad, Ibn Tumart attached himself to the theological school of al-Ash'ari, and came under the influence of the teacher al-Ghazali. He soon developed his own system, combining the doctrines of various masters. Ibn Tumart's main principle was a strict unitarianism (\"tawhid\"), which denied the independent existence of the attributes of God as being incompatible with His unity, and therefore a polytheistic idea. Ibn Tumart represented a revolt against what he perceived as anthropomorphism in Muslim orthodoxy. His followers would become known as the \"al-Muwa\u1e25\u1e25id\u016bn\" (\"Almohads\"), meaning those who affirm the unity of God.\nAround 1124, Ibn Tumart erected the ribat of Tinmel, in the valley of the Nfis in the High Atlas, an impregnable fortified complex, which would serve both as the spiritual center and military headquarters of the Almohad movement. For the first eight years, the Almohad rebellion was limited to a guerilla war along the peaks and ravines of the High Atlas. In early 1130, the Almohads finally descended from the mountains for their first sizeable attack in the lowlands. It was a disaster. The Almohads swept aside an Almoravid column that had come out to meet them before Aghmat, and then chased their remnant all the way to Marrakesh. They laid siege to Marrakesh for forty days until, in April (or May) 1130, the Almoravids sallied from the city and crushed the Almohads in the bloody Battle of al-Buhayra (named after a large garden east of the city). The Almohads were thoroughly routed, with huge losses. Half their leadership was killed in action, and the survivors only just managed to scramble back to the mountains.Ibn Tumart died shortly after, in August 1130. That the Almohad movement did not immediately collapse after such a devastating defeat and the death of their charismatic Mahdi, is likely due to the skills of his successor, Abd al-Mu'min. Ibn Tumart's death was kept a secret for three years, a period which Almohad chroniclers described as a \"ghayba\" or \"occultation\". This period likely gave Abd al-Mu'min time to secure his position as successor to the political leadership of the movement. Although a Zenata Berber from Tagra (Algeria), and thus an alien among the Masmuda of southern Morocco, Abd al-Mu'min nonetheless saw off his principal rivals and hammered wavering tribes back to the fold. Three years after Ibn Tumart's death he was officially proclaimed \"Caliph\".\nConquests.\nAbd al-Mu'min then came forward as the lieutenant of the Mahdi Ibn Tumart. Between 1130 and his death in 1163, Abd al-Mu'min not only rooted out the Murabits (Almoravids), but extended his power over all northern Africa as far as Egypt, becoming amir of Marrakesh in 1149.\nAl-Andalus followed the fate of Africa. Between 1146 and 1173, the Almohads gradually wrested control from the Murabits over the Moorish principalities in Iberia. The Almohads transferred the capital of Muslim Iberia from C\u00f3rdoba to Seville. They founded a great mosque there; its tower, the Giralda, was erected in 1184 to mark the accession of Ya'qub I. The Almohads also built a palace there called Al-Muwarak on the site of the modern day Alc\u00e1zar of Seville.\nThe Almohad princes had a longer and more distinguished career than the Murabits. The successors of Abd al-Mumin, Abu Yaqub Yusuf (Yusuf I, ruled 1163\u20131184) and Abu Yusuf Yaqub al-Mansur (Ya\u02bbq\u016bb I, ruled 1184\u20131199), were both able men. Initially their government drove many Jewish and Christian subjects to take refuge in the growing Christian states of Portugal, Castile, and Aragon. Ultimately they became less fanatical than the Murabits, and Ya'qub al-Mansur was a highly accomplished man who wrote a good Arabic style and protected the philosopher Averroes. His title of \"al-Man\u1e63\u016br\" (\"the Victorious\") was earned by his victory over Alfonso VIII of Castile in the Battle of Alarcos (1195).\nFrom the time of Yusuf II, however, the Almohads governed their co-religionists in Iberia and central North Africa through lieutenants, their dominions outside Morocco being treated as provinces. When Almohad emirs crossed the Straits it was to lead a jihad against the Christians and then return to Morocco.\nHolding years.\nIn 1212, the Almohad Caliph Muhammad 'al-Nasir' (1199\u20131214), the successor of al-Mansur, after an initially successful advance north, was defeated by an alliance of the four Christian kings of Castile, Arag\u00f3n, Navarre, and Portugal, at the Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa in the Sierra Morena. The battle broke the Almohad advance, but the Christian powers remained too disorganized to profit from it immediately.\nBefore his death in 1213, al-Nasir appointed his young ten-year-old son as the next caliph Yusuf II \"al-Mustansir\". The Almohads passed through a period of effective regency for the young caliph, with power exercised by an oligarchy of elder family members, palace bureaucrats and leading nobles. The Almohad ministers were careful to negotiate a series of truces with the Christian kingdoms, which remained more-or-less in place for next fifteen years (the loss of Alc\u00e1cer do Sal to the Kingdom of Portugal in 1217 was an exception).\nIn early 1224, the youthful caliph died in an accident, without any heirs. The palace bureaucrats in Marrakesh, led by the \"wazir\" Uthman ibn Jam'i, quickly engineered the election of his elderly grand-uncle, Abd al-Wahid I 'al-Makhlu', as the new Almohad caliph. But the rapid appointment upset other branches of the family, notably the brothers of the late al-Nasir, who governed in al-Andalus. The challenge was immediately raised by one of them, then governor in Murcia, who declared himself Caliph Abdallah al-Adil. With the help of his brothers, he quickly seized control of al-Andalus. His chief advisor, the shadowy Abu Zayd ibn Yujjan, tapped into his contacts in Marrakesh, and secured the deposition and assassination of Abd al-Wahid I, and the expulsion of the al-Jami'i clan.\nThis coup has been characterized as the pebble that finally broke al-Andalus. It was the first internal coup among the Almohads. The Almohad clan, despite occasional disagreements, had always remained tightly knit and loyally behind dynastic precedence. Caliph al-Adil's murderous breach of dynastic and constitutional propriety marred his acceptability to other Almohad \"sheikhs\". One of the recusants was his cousin, Abd Allah al-Bayyasi (\"the Baezan\"), the Almohad governor of Ja\u00e9n, who took a handful of followers and decamped for the hills around Baeza. He set up a rebel camp and forged an alliance with the hitherto quiet Ferdinand III of Castile. Sensing his greater priority was Marrakesh, where recusant Almohad \"sheikh\"s had rallied behind Yahya, another son of al-Nasir, al-Adil paid little attention to this little band of misfits.\nReconquista.\nIn 1225, Abd Allah al-Bayyasi's band of rebels, accompanied by a large Castilian army, descended from the hills, besieging cities such as Ja\u00e9n and And\u00fajar. They raided throughout the regions of Ja\u00e9n, Cordova and Vega de Granada and, before the end of the year, al-Bayyasi had established himself in the city of Cordova. Sensing a power vacuum, both Alfonso IX of Le\u00f3n and Sancho II of Portugal opportunistically ordered raids into Andalusian territory that same year. With Almohad arms, men and cash dispatched to Morocco to help Caliph al-Adil impose himself in Marrakesh, there was little means to stop the sudden onslaught. In late 1225, with surprising ease, the Portuguese raiders reached the environs of Seville. Knowing they were outnumbered, the Almohad governors of the city refused to confront the Portuguese raiders, prompting the disgusted population of Seville to take matters into their own hands, raise a militia, and go out in the field by themselves. The result was a veritable massacre \u2013 the Portuguese men-at-arms easily mowed down the throng of poorly armed townsfolk. Thousands, perhaps as much as 20,000, were said to have been slain before the walls of Seville. A similar disaster befell a similar popular levy by Murcians at Aspe that same year. But Christian raiders had been stopped at C\u00e1ceres and Requena. Trust in the Almohad leadership was severely shaken by these events \u2013 the disasters were promptly blamed on the distractions of Caliph al-Adil and the incompetence and cowardice of his lieutenants, the successes credited to non-Almohad local leaders who rallied defenses.\nBut al-Adil's fortunes were briefly buoyed. In payment for Castilian assistance, al-Bayyasi had given Ferdinand III three strategic frontier fortresses: Ba\u00f1os de la Encina, Salvatierra (the old Order of Calatrava fortress near Ciudad Real) and Capilla. But Capilla refused to hand them over, forcing the Castilians to lay a long and difficult siege. The brave defiance of little Capilla, and the spectacle of al-Bayyasi's shipping provisions to the Castilian besiegers, shocked Andalusians and shifted sentiment back towards the Almohad caliph. A popular uprising broke out in Cordova \u2013 al-Bayyasi was killed and his head dispatched as a trophy to Marrakesh. But Caliph al-Adil did not rejoice in this victory for long \u2013 he was assassinated in Marrakesh in October 1227, by the partisans of Yahya, who was promptly acclaimed as the new Almohad caliph Yahya \"al-Mu'tasim\".\nThe Andalusian branch of the Almohads refused to accept this turn of events. Al-Adil's brother, then in Seville, proclaimed himself the new Almohad caliph Abd al-Ala Idris I 'al-Ma'mun'. He promptly purchased a truce from Ferdinand III in return for 300,000 \"maravedis\", allowing him to organize and dispatch the greater part of the Almohad army in Spain across the straits in 1228 to confront Yahya.\nThat same year, Portuguese and Leonese renewed their raids deep into Muslim territory, basically unchecked. Feeling the Almohads had failed to protect them, popular uprisings took place throughout al-Andalus. City after city deposed their hapless Almohad governors and installed local strongmen in their place. A Murcian strongman, Muhammad ibn Yusuf ibn Hud al-Judhami, who claimed descendance from the Banu Hud dynasty that had once ruled the old taifa of Saragossa, emerged as the central figure of these rebellions, systematically dislodging Almohad garrisons through central Spain. In October 1228, with Spain practically all lost, al-Ma'mun abandoned Seville, taking what little remained of the Almohad army with him to Morocco. Ibn Hud immediately dispatched emissaries to distant Baghdad to offer recognition to the Abbasid Caliph, albeit taking up for himself a quasi-caliphal title, 'al-Mutawwakil'.\nThe departure of al-Ma'mun in 1228 marked the end of the Almohad era in Spain. Ibn Hud and the other local Andalusian strongmen were unable to stem the rising flood of Christian attacks, launched almost yearly by Sancho II of Portugal, Alfonso IX of Le\u00f3n, Ferdinand III of Castile and James I of Aragon. The next twenty years saw a massive advance in the Christian reconquista \u2013 the old great Andalusian citadels fell in a grand sweep: M\u00e9rida and Badajoz in 1230 (to Leon), Mallorca in 1230 (to Aragon), Beja in 1234 (to Portugal), C\u00f3rdoba in 1236 (to Castile), Valencia in 1238 (to Aragon), Niebla-Huelva in 1238 (to Leon), Silves in 1242 (to Portugal), Murcia in 1243 (to Castile), Ja\u00e9n in 1246 (to Castile), Alicante in 1248 (to Castile), culminating in the fall of the greatest of Andalusian cities, the ex-Almohad capital of Seville, into Christian hands in 1248. Ferdinand III of Castile entered Seville as a conqueror on 22 December 1248.\nThe Andalusians were helpless before this onslaught. Ibn Hudd had attempted to check the Leonese advance early on, but most of his Andalusian army was destroyed at the battle of Alange in 1230. Ibn Hud scrambled to move remaining arms and men to save threatened or besieged Andalusian citadels, but with so many attacks at once, it was a hopeless endeavor. After Ibn Hud's death in 1238, some of the Andalusian cities, in a last-ditch effort to save themselves, offered themselves once again to the Almohads, but to no avail. The Almohads would not return.\nWith the departure of the Almohads, the Nasrid dynasty (\"Ban\u016b Na\u1e63r\", ) rose to power in Granada. After the great Christian advance of 1228\u20131248, the Emirate of Granada was practically all that remained of old al-Andalus. Some of the captured citadels (e.g. Murcia, Jaen, Niebla) were reorganized as tributary vassals for a few more years, but most were annexed by the 1260s. Granada alone would remain independent for an additional 250 years, flourishing as the new center of al-Andalus.\nCollapse in the Maghreb.\nIn their African holdings, the Almohads encouraged the establishment of Christians even in Fez, and after the Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa they occasionally entered into alliances with the kings of Castile. They were successful in expelling the garrisons placed in some of the coast towns by the Norman kings of Sicily. The history of their decline differs from that of the Almoravids, whom they had displaced. They were not assailed by a great religious movement, but lost territories, piecemeal, by the revolt of tribes and districts. Their most effective enemies were the Banu Marin (Marinids) who founded the next dynasty. The last representative of the line, Idris II, 'al-Wathiq', was reduced to the possession of Marrakesh, where he was murdered by a slave in 1269.\nMarinids dynasty (c. 1244\u20131465).\nAlthough the Marinids claimed Arab ancestry through a North Arabian tribe, they were of Berber origin. Following the arrival of the Arab Bedouins in North Africa in the middle of the eleventh century, the Marinids were obliged to leave their lands in the region of Biskra, in present-day Algeria. They first frequented the area between Sijilmasa and Figuig, present-day Morocco, at times reaching as far as the Zab, present-day Algeria. They would move seasonally from the Figuig oasis to the Moulouya River basin. Following the arrival of Arab tribes in the area in the 11th-12th centuries, the Marinids moved to the north-west of present-day Algeria, before entering \"en-masse\" into Morocco by the beginning of the 13th century.\nThe Marinids took their name from their ancestor, Marin ibn Wartajan al-Zenati.\nRise.\nAfter arriving in present-day Morocco, they initially submitted to the Almohad dynasty, which was at the time the ruling house. After successfully contributing to the Battle of Alarcos, in central Spain, the tribe started to assert itself as a political power. Starting in 1213, they began to tax farming communities of today's north-eastern Morocco (the area between Nador and Berkane). The relationship between them and the Almohads became strained and starting in 1215, there were regular outbreaks of fighting between the two parties. In 1217, they tried to occupy the eastern part of present-day Morocco, but they were expelled, pulling back and settling in the eastern Rif mountains where they remained for nearly 30 years. During their stay in the Rif, the Almohad state suffered huge blows, losing large territories to the Christians in Spain, while the Hafsids of Ifriqia broke away in 1229, followed by the Zayyanid dynasty of Tlemcen in 1235.\nBetween 1244 and 1248 the Marinids were able to take Taza, Rabat, Sal\u00e9, Meknes and Fez from the weakened Almohads. The Marinid leadership installed in Fes declared war on the Almohads, fighting with the aid of Christian mercenaries. Abu Yusuf Yaqub (1259\u20131286) captured Marrakesh in 1269.\nApogee.\nAfter the Nasrids of Granada ceded the town of Algeciras to the Marinids, Abu Yusuf went to Al-Andalus to support the ongoing struggle against the Kingdom of Castile. The Marinid dynasty then tried to extend its control to include the commercial traffic of the Strait of Gibraltar.\nIt was in this period that the Spanish Christians were first able to take the fighting to mainland present-day Morocco: in 1260 and 1267 they attempted an invasion, but both attempts were defeated. After gaining a foothold in Spain, the Marinids became active in the conflict between Muslims and Christians in Iberia. To gain absolute control of the trade in the Strait of Gibraltar, from their base at Algeciras they started the conquest of several Spanish towns: by the year 1294 they had occupied Rota, Tarifa and Gibraltar.\nIn 1276 they founded Fes Jdid, which they made their administrative and military centre. While Fes had been a prosperous city throughout the Almohad period, even becoming the largest city in the world during that time, it was in the Marinid period that Fes reached its golden age, a period which marked the beginning of an official, historical narrative for the city. It is from the Marinid period that Fes' reputation as an important intellectual centre largely dates, they established the first madrasas in the city and country. The principal monuments in the medina, the residences and public buildings, date from the Marinid period.\nDespite internal infighting, Abu Said Uthman II (r. 1310\u20131331) initiated huge construction projects across the land. Several madrasas were built, the Al-Attarine Madrasa being the most famous. The building of these madrasas were necessary to create a dependent bureaucratic class, in order to undermine the marabouts and Sharifian elements.\nThe Marinids also strongly influenced the policy of the Emirate of Granada, from which they enlarged their army in 1275. In the 13th century, the Kingdom of Castile made several incursions into their territory. In 1260, Castilian forces raided Sal\u00e9 and, in 1267, initiated a full-scale invasion, but the Marinids repelled them.\nAt the height of their power, during the rule of Abu al-Hasan Ali (r. 1331\u20131348), the Marinid army was large and disciplined. It consisted of 40,000 Zenata cavalry, while Arab nomads contributed to the cavalry and Andalusians were included as archers. The personal bodyguard of the sultan consisted of 7,000 men, and included Christian, Kurdish and Black African elements. Under Abu al-Hasan another attempt was made to reunite the Maghreb. In 1337 the Abdalwadid kingdom of Tlemcen was conquered, followed in 1347 by the defeat of the Hafsid empire in Ifriqiya, which made him master of a huge territory, which spanned from southern present-day Morocco to Tripoli. However, within the next year, a revolt of Arab tribes in southern Tunisia made them lose their eastern territories. The Marinids had already suffered a crushing defeat at the hands of a Portuguese-Castilian coalition in the Battle of R\u00edo Salado in 1340, and finally had to withdraw from Andalusia, only holding on to Algeciras until 1344.\nIn 1348 Abu al-Hasan was deposed by his son Abu Inan Faris, who tried to reconquer Algeria and Tunisia. Despite several successes, he was strangled by his own vizir in 1358, after which the dynasty began to decline.\nDecline.\nAfter the death of Abu Inan Faris in 1358, the real power lay with the viziers, while the Marinid sultans were paraded and forced to succeed each other in quick succession. The county was divided and political anarchy set in, with different viziers and foreign powers supporting different factions. In 1359 Hintata tribesmen from the High Atlas came down and occupied Marrakesh, capital of their Almohad ancestors, which they would govern independently until 1526. To the south of Marrakesh, Sufi mystics claimed autonomy, and in the 1370s Azemmour broke off under a coalition of merchants and Arab clan leaders of the Banu Sabih. To the east, the Zianid and Hafsid families reemerged and to the north, the Europeans were taking advantage of this instability by attacking the coast. Meanwhile, unruly wandering Arab Bedouin tribes increasingly spread anarchy, which accelerated the decline of the empire.\nIn the 15th century, it was hit by a financial crisis, after which the state had to stop financing the different marabouts and Sharifian families, which had previously been useful instruments in controlling different tribes. The political support of these marabouts and Sharifians halted, and it splintered into different entities. In 1399 T\u00e9touan was taken and its population was massacred and in 1415 the Portuguese captured Ceuta. After the sultan Abdalhaqq II (1421\u20131465) tried to break the power of the Wattasids, he was executed.\nMarinid rulers after 1420 came under the control of the Wattasids, who exercised a regency as Abd al-Haqq II became Sultan one year after his birth. The Wattasids however refused to give up the Regency after Abd al-Haqq came to age.\nIn 1459, Abd al-Haqq II managed a massacre of the Wattasid family, breaking their power. His reign, however, brutally ended as he was murdered during the 1465 revolt. This event saw the end of the Marinid dynasty as Muhammad ibn Ali Amrani-Joutey, leader of the Sharifs, was proclaimed Sultan in Fes. He was in turn overthrown in 1471 by Abu Abd Allah al-Sheikh Muhammad ibn Yahya, one of the two the surviving Wattasids from the 1459 massacre, who instigated the Wattasid dynasty.\nWattasid dynasty (c. 1472\u20131554).\nMorocco was in decline when the Berber Wattasids assumed power. The Wattasid family had been the autonomous governors of the eastern Rif since the late 13th century, ruling from their base in Tazouta (near present-day Nador). They had close ties to the Marinid sultans and provided many of the bureaucratic elite. While the Marinid dynasty tried to repel the Portuguese and Spanish invasions and help the kingdom of Granada to outlive the Reconquista, the Wattasids accumulated absolute power through political maneuvering. When the Marinids became aware of the extent of the conspiracy, they slaughtered the Wattasids, leaving only Abu Abd Allah al-Sheikh Muhammad ibn Yahya alive. He went on to found the Kingdom of Fez and establish the dynasty to be succeeded by his son, Mohammed al-Burtuqali, in 1504.\nThe Wattasid rulers failed in their promise to protect Morocco from foreign incursions and the Portuguese increased their presence on Morocco's coast. Mohammad al-Chaykh's son attempted to capture Asilah and Tangier in 1508, 1511 and 1515, but without success.\nIn the south, a new dynasty arose, the Saadian dynasty, which seized Marrakesh in 1524 and made it their capital. By 1537 the Saadis were in the ascendent when they defeated the Portuguese Empire at Agadir. Their military successes contrasts with the Wattasid policy of conciliation towards the Catholic kings to the north.\nAs a result, the people of Morocco tended to regard the Saadians as heroes, making it easier for them to retake the Portuguese strongholds on the coast, including Tangiers, Ceuta and Mazi\u0263en. The Saadians also attacked the Wattasids who were forced to yield to the new power. In 1554, as Wattasid towns surrendered, the Wattasid sultan, Ali Abu Hassun, briefly retook Fez. The Saadis quickly settled the matter by killing him and, as the last Wattasids fled Morocco by ship, they too were murdered by pirates. The Wattasid did little to improve general conditions in Morocco following the \"Reconquista\". While the Saadians managed to reestablish and curbed the expansionist ambitions of the kingdoms of the Iberian peninsula.\nSaadi dynasty (1549\u20131659).\nBeginning in 1549, the region was ruled by successive Arab dynasties known as the Sharifian dynasties, who claimed descent from the prophet Muhammad. The first of these polities was the Saadi dynasty, which ruled Morocco from 1549 to 1659. From 1509 to 1549, the Saadi rulers had control of only the southern areas. While still recognizing the Wattasids as Sultans until 1528, Saadians' growing power led the Wattasids to attack them and, after an indecisive battle, to recognize their rule over southern Morocco through the Treaty of Tadla.\nIn 1590, Sultan Ahmad al-Mansur sent an expedition to the Songhai Empire, which resulted in a victory and collapse of the empire, Pashalik of Timbuktu was established to take control over the territory centered on Timbuktu.\nIn 1659, Mohammed al-Hajj ibn Abu Bakr al-Dila'i, the head of the zaouia of Dila, was proclaimed sultan of Morocco after the fall of the Saadi dynasty.\nRepublic of Sal\u00e9 (1624\u20131668).\nThe republic traces its origins back to the beginning of the 17th century, with the arrival of approximately 3,000 wealthy Moriscos from Hornachos in western Spain, who anticipated the 1609 expulsion edicts ordered by Philip III of Spain. After 1609, approximately 10,000 down-and-out expelled Moriscos arrived from Spain. Cultural and language differences between the native Saletin people and the Morisco refugees led the newcomers to settle in the old medina of Rabat, on the opposite bank of the Bou Regreg.\nPirates based on the western bank thrived and expanded their operations throughout the Mediterranean and the Atlantic Ocean. In 1624, the Dutchman Jan Janszoon (also known as Murad Reis) became the \"Grand Admiral\" and President of the Corsair Republic of Sal\u00e9.\nAfter Janszoon left Sal\u00e9 in 1627, the Moriscos ceased to recognize the authority of the Sultan Zidan al-Nasir, and refused to pay his tithe on their incomes. They proclaimed a Republic, ruled by a council or \"Diwan\", a sort of government cabinet formed by 12 to 14 notable people whose members annually elected a Governor and a \"Captain General of the Fortalesa\" during the month of May. In the early years of the republic (between 1627 and 1630), the \"Diwan\" was controlled only by Hornacheros, whose grip on power was resented by the growing population of non-Hornachero Moriscos, called Andalusians. After bloody clashes in 1630, an agreement was reached: the election of a \"Qaid\" by Andalusians and a new \"Diwan\" of 16 members of whom 8 were Andalusians and 8 Hornacheros.\nIn 1641 the Zaouia of Dila, which controlled much of Morocco, imposed a religious hegemony over Sal\u00e9 and its parent republic. By the early 1660s the republic was embroiled in civil war with the zawiya, and eventually Sultan Al-Rashid of Morocco of the Alawi dynasty, which still rules Morocco into the 21st century, seized Rabat and Sal\u00e9, ending its independence. It ended up under the control of the Sultan of Morocco after 1668, when Moulay al Rashid finally vanquished the Dilaites.\nAlawi dynasty (since 1666).\nThe Alawi dynasty is the current Moroccan royal family. The name \"Alawi\" comes from the \"\u2018Al\u012b\" of \u2018Al\u012b ibn Ab\u012b \u1e6c\u0101lib, whose descendant Sharif ibn Ali became Prince of Tafilalt in 1631. His son Mulay Al-Rashid (1664\u20131672) was able to unite and pacify the country. The Alawi family claim descent from Muhammad through his daughter F\u0101\u1e6dimah az-Zahrah and her husband \u2018Al\u012b ibn Ab\u012b \u1e6c\u0101lib.\nThe Alawi kingdom was consolidated by Ismail Ibn Sharif (1672\u20131727), who began to create a unified state in the face of opposition from local tribes. Since the Alawis, in contrast to previous dynasties, did not have the support of a single Berber or Bedouin tribe, Isma'\u012bl controlled Morocco through an army of slaves. With these soldiers he reoccupied Tangiers in 1684 after the English abandoned it and drove the Spanish from Larache in 1689. The kingdom he established did not survive his death\u00a0\u2014 in the ensuing power struggles the tribes became a political and military force once again, and it was only with Muhammad III (1757\u20131790) that the kingdom was unified again. The idea of centralization was abandoned and the tribes allowed to preserve their autonomy. On 20 December 1777, Morocco became the first state to recognize the sovereignty of a newly independent United States.\nDuring the reigns of Muhammad IV (1859\u20131873) and Hassan I (1873\u20131894), the Alawis tried to foster trade links, especially with European countries and the United States. The army and administration were also modernized to consolidate control over the Berber and Bedouin tribes. In 1859, Morocco went to war with Spain. The independence of Morocco was guaranteed at the Conference of Madrid in 1880, with France also gaining significant influence over Morocco. Germany attempted to counter the growing French influence, leading to the First Moroccan Crisis of 1905\u20131906, and the Second Moroccan Crisis of 1911. Morocco became a French protectorate through the Treaty of Fez in 1912.\nEuropean influence (c. 1830 \u2013 1956).\nThe successful Portuguese efforts to control the Atlantic coast in the 15th century did not affect the interior of Morocco. After the Napoleonic Wars, North Africa became increasingly ungovernable from Istanbul by the Ottoman Empire. As a result, it became the resort of pirates under local beys. The Maghreb also had far greater known wealth than the rest of Africa, and its location near the entrance to the Mediterranean gave it strategic importance. France showed a strong interest in Morocco as early as 1830. The Alawi dynasty succeeded in maintaining the independence of Morocco in the 18th and 19th centuries, in the face of Ottoman and European encroachment.\nIn 1844, after the French conquered Algeria, the Franco-Moroccan War took place, with the bombardment of Tangiers, the Battle of Isly, and the bombardment of Mogador.\nIn 1856, Sultan Abd al-Rahman's Makhzen signed the Anglo-Moroccan treaty, which was negotiated with the British diplomat John Hay Drummond Hay. The treaty granted several rights to British subjects in Morocco, and lowered Moroccan customs tariffs to 10%. The treaty prolonged Moroccan independence while opening up the country to foreign trade, along with reducing the Makhzen's control over the Moroccan economy.\nThe Hispano-Moroccan War took place from 1859 to 1860, and the subsequent Treaty of Wad Ras led the Moroccan government to take a massive British loan larger than its national reserves to pay off its war debt to Spain.\nIn the mid 19th century, Moroccan Jews started migrating from the interior to coastal cities such as Essaouira, Mazagan, Asfi, and later Casablanca for economic opportunity, participating in trade with Europeans and the development of those cities. The Alliance Isra\u00e9lite Universelle opened its first school in T\u00e9touan in 1862.\nIn the latter part of the 19th century Morocco's instability resulted in European countries intervening to protect investments and to demand economic concessions. Sultan Hassan I called for the Madrid Conference of 1880 in response to France and Spain's abuse of the \"prot\u00e9g\u00e9\" system, but the result was an increased European presence in Morocco\u2014in the form of advisors, doctors, businessmen, adventurers, and even missionaries.\nMore than half of the Makhzen's expenditures went abroad to pay war indemnities and buy weapons, military equipment, and manufactured goods. From 1902 to 1909, Morocco's trade deficit increased 14 million francs annually, and the Moroccan rial depreciated 25% from 1896 to 1906. In June 1904, after a failed attempt to impose a flat tax, France bailed out the already indebted Makhzen with 62.5 million francs, guaranteed by a portion of customs revenue.\nIn the 1890s, the French administration and military in Algiers called for the annexation of the Touat, the Gourara and the Tidikelt, a complex that had been part of the Moroccan Empire for many centuries prior to the arrival of the French in Algeria. The first years of the 20th century saw major diplomatic efforts by European powers, especially France, to further its interests in the region.\nMorocco nominally was ruled by its sultan, the young Abd al-Aziz, through his regent, Ba Ahmed. By 1900, Morocco was the scene of multiple local wars started by pretenders to the sultanate, by bankruptcy of the treasury, and by multiple tribal revolts. The French Foreign Minister Th\u00e9ophile Delcass\u00e9 saw the opportunity to stabilize the situation and expand the French overseas empire.\nGeneral Hubert Lyautey wanted a more aggressive military policy using his French army based in Algeria. France decided to use both diplomacy and military force. The French colonial authorities would establish control over the Sultan, ruling in his name and extending French influence. The British acceded to any French designs in Morocco in the \"Entente Cordiale\" of 1904. The Germans, however, who had no established presence in the region, strongly protested against the French plan. The Kaiser's dramatic intervention in Morocco in March 1905 in support of Moroccan independence became a turning point on the road to the First World War. The international Algeciras Conference of 1906 formalized France's \"special position\" and entrusted policing of Morocco jointly to France and Spain. Germany was outmaneuvered diplomatically, and France took full control of Morocco.\nMorocco experienced a famine from 1903 to 1907, as well as insurrections led by El-Rogui (Bou Hmara) and Mulai Ahmed er Raisuni. \nFrench and Spanish protectorate (1912\u20131956).\nHafidiya.\nIn 1907, the French took the murder of \u00c9mile Mauchamp in Marrakesh as a pretext to invade Oujda in the east, as they took an uprising against their appropriation of customs revenue in Casablanca as an opportunity to bombard and invade that city in the west. Months later, there was a brief fratricidal civil war referred to as the Hafidiya, in which Abd al-Hafid, at first supported by southern aristocrats based in Marrakesh such as the Glawa and later conditionally supported by the \"ulama\" of Fes, wrested the throne from his brother Abd al-Aziz, who was supported by the French.\nThe Agadir Crisis increased tensions among the powerful European countries, and resulted in the Treaty of Fez (signed on 30 March 1912), which made Morocco a protectorate of France. In a second treaty signed by the French and Spanish heads of state, Spain was granted a Zone of influence in northern and southern Morocco on 27 November 1912. The northern part became the Spanish protectorate in Morocco, while the southern part was ruled from El Aaiun as a buffer zone between the Spanish Colony of Saguia El Hamra and Morocco. The treaty of Fez triggered the 1912 Fez riots. By the Tangier Protocol signed in December 1923, Tangier received special status and became an international zone, although, during World War II, it was occupied from 1940 to 1945 by Francoist Spain.\nThe treaties nominally assured Morocco of its legal status as a sovereign state, with the sultan as its figurehead. In practice, the sultan had no real power and the country was ruled by the colonial administration. French civil servants allied themselves with the French settlers and with their supporters in France to prevent any moves in the direction of Moroccan autonomy. As \"pacification\" proceeded, with the Zaian War and the Rif War, the French government focused on the exploitation of Morocco's mineral wealth, and particularly its phosphates; the creation of a modern transportation system with trains and buses; and the development of a modern agricultural sector geared to the French market. Tens of thousands of \"colons\", or colonists, entered Morocco and acquired large tracts of the rich agricultural land.\nMorocco was home to half a million Europeans, most of whom settled in Casablanca, where they formed almost half the population. Since the kingdom's independence in 1956, and particularly after Hassan II's 1973 Moroccanization policies, the European element has largely departed.\nThe Spanish coup of July 1936, which gave way to the Spanish Civil War, began with the \"Ej\u00e9rcito de \u00c1frica\" in Spanish occupied Morocco.\nNationalism and transnational anti-colonial resistance.\nMorocco has been a key transnational hub in the struggle against colonialism in the Middle-east region. The end of World War II that had weakened European colonial powers, the start of the US-URSS search for influence and the establishment of the United Nations in 1945 praising universal equality, represented an impetus for anti-colonial and nationalist movements in Morocco.\nThrough its special international status and the French and US presence in Tangier, the city became a hub for anti-colonial activism. Fromout Tanger, a link was established between the inside resistance and activists from other countries. By creating a transnational network of supporters and public advocates (i.e. cultural elites, politicians, public figures, academics, medias), the nationalist movement aimed to bring the Moroccan cause to the forefront of the international community debate.\nIn order to gain influence at a global level, Moroccan nationalist movements globalised their cause by seeking to unite with the pan-arabism movement and the Arab League, extending their activism networks to Cairo. Another example is Paris, that became an important European city from where cultural elites advocated for the independence cause and brought the protectorate question to the forefront of the public debate. The independence movement eventually managed to bring their national claim for independence to the UN for the first time in 1951, gaining a vote of 20 states in favour and 23 against.\nOpposition to European control.\nLed by Abd el-Krim, the independent Republic of the Rif existed from 1921 to 1926, based in the central part of the Rif (in the Spanish Protectorate), while also extending, for some months, to some parts of the tribal lands of the Ghomara, the Eastern Rif, Jbala, the Ouergha valley and the north of Taza. After proclaiming independence on 18 September 1921, the polity developed state and governing institutions such as tax collection, law enforcement and the organisation of an army. However, since 1925 the Spanish and French troops managed to quell the resistance and Abd el-Krim surrendered in May 1926.\nIn December 1934, a small group of nationalists, members of the newly formed \"Comit\u00e9 d'Action Marocaine\", or Moroccan Action Committee (CAM), proposed a Plan of Reforms that called for a return to indirect rule as envisaged by the Treaty of Fez, admission of Moroccans to government positions, and establishment of representative councils. CAM used petitions, newspaper editorials, and personal appeals to French officials to further its cause, but these proved inadequate, and the tensions created in the CAM by the failure of the plan caused it to split. The CAM was reconstituted as a nationalist political party to gain mass support for more radical demands, but the French suppressed the party in 1937.\nNationalist political parties, which subsequently arose under the French protectorate, based their arguments for Moroccan independence on declarations such as the Atlantic Charter, a joint United States-British statement that set forth, among other things, the right of all peoples to choose the form of government under which they live. The French regime also faced the opposition of the tribes\u00a0\u2014 when the Berber were required to come under the jurisdiction of French courts in 1930, it increased support for the independence movement.\nMany Moroccan Goumiers, or indigenous soldiers in the French army, assisted the Allies in both World War I and World War II. During World War II, the badly divided nationalist movement became more cohesive. However, the nationalists belief that an Allied victory would pave the way for independence was disappointed. In January 1944, the Istiqlal (Independence) Party, which subsequently provided most of the leadership for the nationalist movement, released a manifesto demanding full independence, national reunification, and a democratic constitution. The Sultan Muhammad V (1927\u20131961) had approved the manifesto before its submission to the French resident general, who answered that no basic change in the protectorate status was being considered. The general sympathy of the sultan for the nationalists became evident by the end of the war, although he still hoped to see complete independence achieved gradually. On 10 April 1947, in spite of a massacre instigated by French forces in Casablanca, Sultan Muhammad V delivered a momentous speech in Tangier appealing for independence and territorial unity of Morocco, having travelled from French Morocco and through Spanish Morocco to reach the Tangier International Zone. The \"r\u00e9sidence\", supported by French economic interests and vigorously backed by most of the \"colons\", adamantly refused to consider even reforms short of independence.\nAlthough Zionism in Morocco dates back to the early 20th century, the significant emigration of Moroccan Jews only began after the establishment of the State of Israel in the 1948 Palestine war. This emigration was organized and facilitated by Zionist groups from outside of Morocco; about 60,000 migrated through \"Cadima\" (1949\u20131956) and about 90,000 in Operation Yachin (1961\u20131964).In December 1952, a riot broke out in Casablanca over the assassination of the Tunisian labour leader Farhat Hached; this event marked a watershed in relations between Moroccan political parties and French authorities. In the aftermath of the rioting, the residency outlawed the new Moroccan Communist Party and the Istiqlal Party.\nFrance's exile of the highly respected Sultan Mohammed V to Madagascar on Eid al-Adha of 1953, and his replacement by the unpopular Mohammed Ben Aarafa, sparked active opposition to the French protectorate both from nationalists and those who saw the sultan as a religious leader. In retribution, Muhammad Zarqtuni bombed Casablanca's \"March\u00e9 Central\" in the European \"ville nouvelle\" on Christmas of that year. A month after his replacement, Allal ben Abdallah, a Moroccan nationalist attempted to assassinate the sultan on his way to the friday prayers at Great Mosque of Fes el-Jdid. Two years later, faced with a united Moroccan demand for the sultan's return and rising violence in Morocco, as well as a deteriorating situation in Algeria, the French government brought Mohammed V back to Morocco, and the following year began the negotiations that led to Moroccan independence. So, with the triumphant return of Sultan Mohammed ben Youssef, the beginning of the end of the colonial era was marked.\nIndependent Morocco (since 1956).\nIn late 1955, in the middle of what came to be known as the Revolution of the King and the People, Sultan Mohammed V successfully negotiated the gradual restoration of Moroccan independence within a framework of French-Moroccan interdependence. The sultan agreed to institute reforms that would transform Morocco into a constitutional monarchy with a democratic form of government. As the French Foreign Minister Antoine Pinay had expressed, there was a willingness to grant Morocco its independence to \"turn Morocco into a modern, democratic and sovereign state\". In February 1956, Morocco acquired limited home rule. Further negotiations for full independence culminated in the French-Moroccan Agreement signed in Paris on 22 March 1956.\nOn 7 April 1956, France officially relinquished its protectorate in Morocco. The internationalized city of Tangier was reintegrated with the signing of the Tangier Protocol on 29 October 1956. The abolition of the Spanish protectorate and the recognition of Moroccan independence by Spain were negotiated separately and made final in the Joint Declaration of April 1956. Through this agreement with Spain in 1956 and another in 1958, Moroccan control over certain Spanish-ruled areas was restored. Attempts to claim other Spanish possessions through military action were less successful.\nIn the months that followed independence, Mohammed V proceeded to build a modern governmental structure under a constitutional monarchy in which the sultan would exercise an active political role. He acted cautiously, intent on preventing the Istiqlal from consolidating its control and establishing a one-party state. He assumed the monarchy on 11 August 1957, and from that date, the country officially became known as 'The Kingdom of Morocco'.\nReign of Hassan II (1961\u20131999).\nMohammed V's son Hassan II became King of Morocco on 3 March 1961. His rule saw significant political unrest, and the ruthless government response earned the period the name \"the years of lead\". Hassan took personal control of the government as prime minister and named a new cabinet. Aided by an advisory council, he drew up a new constitution, which was approved overwhelmingly in a December 1962 referendum. Under its provisions, the king remained the central figure in the executive branch of the government, but legislative power was vested in a bicameral parliament, and an independent judiciary was guaranteed.\nIn May 1963, legislative elections took place for the first time, and the royalist coalition secured a small plurality of seats. However, following a period of political upheaval in June 1965, Hassan II assumed full legislative and executive powers under a \"state of exception,\" which remained in effect until 1970. Subsequently, a reform constitution was approved, restoring limited parliamentary government, and new elections were held. However, dissent remained, revolving around complaints of widespread corruption and malfeasance in government. In July 1971 and again in August 1972, the regime was challenged by two attempted military coups.\nAfter neighbouring Algeria's 1962 independence from France, border skirmishes in the Tindouf area of southwestern Algeria escalated in 1963 into what is known as the Sand War. The conflict ended after Organisation of African Unity mediation, with no territorial changes.\nOn 3 March 1973, Hassan II announced the policy of Moroccanization, in which state-held assets, agricultural lands, and businesses that were more than 50 percent foreign-owned\u2014and especially French-owned\u2014were transferred to political loyalists and high-ranking military officers. The Moroccanization of the economy affected thousands of businesses and the proportion of industrial businesses in Morocco that were Moroccan-owned immediately increased from 18% to 55%. 2/3 of the wealth of the Moroccanized economy was concentrated in 36 Moroccan families.\nThe patriotism engendered by Morocco's participation in the Middle East conflict and Western Sahara events contributed to Hassan's popularity. The king had dispatched Moroccan troops to the Sinai front after the outbreak of the Arab-Israeli War in October 1973. During the Yom Kippur War of October 1973, Moroccan troops were deployed to both the Golan Heights and the Sinai Peninsula. However, their main involvement was on the Syrian front, particularly in the Valley of Tears and during the Second Battle of Mount Hermon. 170 Moroccan soldiers died in combat, including Colonel Abdelkader El Allam. Soon after, the attention of the government turned to the acquisition of Western Sahara from Spain, an issue on which all major domestic parties agreed.\nFollowing years of discontent and inequality during the 1980s, on 14 December 1990, a general strike was called by two major trade unions in the country to demand an increase in the minimum wage and other measures. In Fez, this broke into protests and rioting led by university students and youths. The death of one of the students further inflamed protests, resulting in buildings being burned and looted, particularly symbols of wealth. While the official death toll was 5 people, the New York Times reported a toll of 33 people and quoted an anonymous source claiming the real death toll was likely higher. The government denied reports that the deaths were due to the intervention of security forces and armoured vehicles. Many of those arrested were later released and the government promised to investigate and raise wages, though some of these measures were dismissed by skeptical opposition parties.\nWestern Sahara conflict (1974\u20131991).\nThe Spanish enclave of Ifni in the south became part of the new state of Morocco in 1969, but other Spanish possessions in the north, including Ceuta, Melilla and Plaza de soberan\u00eda, remained under Spanish control, with Morocco viewing them as occupied territory.\nIn August 1974, Spain formally acknowledged the 1966 United Nations (UN) resolution calling for a referendum on the future status of Western Sahara and requested that a plebiscite be conducted under UN supervision. A UN visiting mission reported in October 1975 that an overwhelming majority of the Saharan people desired independence. Morocco protested the proposed referendum and took its case to the International Court of Justice at The Hague, which ruled that despite historical \"ties of allegiance\" between Morocco and the tribes of Western Sahara, there was no legal justification for departing from the UN position on self-determination. Spain, meanwhile, had declared that even in the absence of a referendum, it intended to surrender political control of Western Sahara, and Spain, Morocco, and Mauritania convened a tripartite conference to resolve the territory's future. Spain also announced that it was opening independence talks with the Algerian-backed Saharan independence movement known as the Polisario Front.\nIn early 1976, Spain ceded the administration of Western Sahara to Morocco and Mauritania. Morocco assumed control over the northern two-thirds of the territory and conceded the remaining portion in the south to Mauritania. An assembly of Saharan tribal leaders duly acknowledged Moroccan sovereignty. However, buoyed by the increasing defection of tribal chiefs to its cause, the Polisario drew up a constitution and announced the formation of the Saharawi Arab Democratic Republic (SADR), and itself formed government-in-exile.\nThe Moroccan government eventually sent a large portion of its combat forces into Western Sahara to confront the Polisario's forces, which were relatively small but well-equipped, highly mobile, and resourceful. The Polisario used Algerian bases for quick strikes against targets deep inside Morocco and Mauritania, as well as for operations in Western Sahara. In August 1979, after suffering military losses, Mauritania renounced its claim to Western Sahara and signed a peace treaty with the Polisario. In 1984, Morocco withdrew from the Organisation of African Unity due to the admission of the SADR as a member. Morocco then annexed the entire territory and, in 1985 built a 2,500-kilometer sand berm around three-quarters of Western Sahara.\nIn 1988, Morocco and the Polisario Front agreed on a United Nations (UN) peace plan, and a cease-fire and settlement plan went into effect in 1991. Even though the UN Security Council created a peacekeeping force to implement a referendum on self-determination for Western Sahara, it has yet to be held, periodic negotiations have failed, and the status of the territory remains unresolved.\nThe war against the Polisario guerrillas put severe strains on the economy, and Morocco found itself increasingly isolated diplomatically. Gradual political reforms in the 1990s culminated in the constitutional reform of 1996, which created a new bicameral legislature with expanded, although still limited, powers. Elections for the Chamber of Representatives were held in 1997, reportedly marred by irregularities.\nReign of Mohammed VI (since 1999).\nWith the death of Hassan II in 1999, the more liberal Crown Prince Sidi Mohammed took the throne, assuming the title Mohammed VI. He enacted successive reforms to modernize Morocco, and the human-rights record of the country improved markedly. One of the new king's first acts was to free approximately 8,000 political prisoners and reduce the sentences of another 30,000. He also established a commission to compensate families of missing political activists and others subjected to arbitrary detention. In 1999, the First Sahrawi Intifada took place. Internationally, Morocco has maintained strong ties to the West. It was one of the first Arab and Islamic states to denounce the 9/11 terrorist attacks on the United States.\nIn September 2002, new legislative elections were held, and the Socialist Union of Popular Forces (USFP) won a plurality. International observers regarded the elections as free and fair, noting the absence of the irregularities that had plagued the 1997 elections. In May 2003, in honor of the birth of a son, the king ordered the release of 9,000 prisoners and the reduction of 38,000 sentences. Also in 2003, Berber-language instruction was introduced in primary schools, prior to introducing it at all educational levels. In March 2000, women's groups organized demonstrations in Rabat proposing reforms to the legal status of women in the country. 200,000 to 300,000 women attended, calling for a ban on polygamy, and the introduction of civil divorce law. Although a counter-demonstration attracted 200,000 to 400,000 participants, the movement was influential on King Mohammed, and he enacted a new \"Mudawana\", or family law, in early 2004, meeting some of the demands of women's rights activists.\nIn July 2002, a crisis broke out with Spain over a small, uninhabited island lying just less than 200 meters from the Moroccan coast, named Toura or Leila by Moroccans and Perejil by Spain. After mediation by the United States, both Morocco and Spain agreed to return to the status quo, under which the island remains deserted.\nIn May 2003, Islamist suicide bombers simultaneously struck a series of sites in Casablanca, killing 45 and injuring more than 100 others. The Moroccan government responded with a crackdown against Islamist extremists, ultimately arresting several thousand, prosecuting 1,200, and sentencing about 900. Additional arrests followed in June 2004. That same month, the United States designated Morocco a major non-North Atlantic Treaty Organization ally, stating that it was in recognition of its efforts to thwart international terrorism. In May 2005, the Second Sahrawi Intifada took place. On 1 January 2006, a comprehensive bilateral free trade agreement between the United States and Morocco took effect. The agreement had been signed in 2004 along with a similar agreement with the European Union, Morocco's main trade partner.\nIn February 2011, thousands of people rallied in Rabat and other cities calling for political reform and a new constitution curbing the powers of the king. Two months later, a bombing in Marrakesh occurred, killing 17 people \u2013 mainly foreigners. It was the deadliest attack in Morocco in eight years. The Maghrebi arm of al-Qaeda denied involvement. In July 2011 King Mohammed introduced a constitutional referendum proposed in order to placate \"Arab Spring\" protests. In article 5 of the 2011 constitution, Amazigh was recognized as an official language.\nIn October 2016, large-scale protests erupted after a fish seller in al-Hoceima was crushed to death in a rubbish truck as he tried to retrieve fish confiscated by police. The protests became known as the Hirak Rif Movement. The 2016 election witnessed the victory of the Justice and Development Party (PJD), attaining a plurality of seats for a second consecutive time. On 30 January 2017, Morocco rejoined the African Union as a member state, 33 years after leaving. The 2018 consumer boycott targeted the market-dominating fuel, bottled water, and dairy brands.\nThe COVID-19 pandemic in Morocco was first confirmed on 2 March 2020. Eight days later, on 10 March 2020, Morocco recorded its first COVID-19-related death. On 10 December 2020, President Donald Trump announced that the United States would officially recognize Morocco's claims over Western Sahara as part of the Israel\u2013Morocco normalization agreement, which saw Morocco reestablishing diplomatic relations with Israel. A joint declaration between the three countries was signed on 22 December 2020.\nOn 17 May 2021, an incident occurred between the borders of Spain and Morocco, part of a diplomatic crisis between both nations. On 24 August 2021, neighbouring Algeria cut diplomatic relations with Morocco, accusing Morocco of supporting a separatist group and \"hostile actions against Algeria\". Morocco called the decision \"unjustified\".\nThe 2021 election was held on 8 September 2021, which witnessed an electoral wipeout of the PJD, having lost more than 90% of its seats and ending in eighth place. The National Rally of Independents won a plurality of seats in the elections, and Aziz Akhannouch was later named the 17th Prime Minister of Morocco. On 24 June 2022, a migration incident occurred resulting in the deaths of 23 migrants.\nOn 3 May 2023, King Mohammed VI declared Amazigh New Year as an official national holiday to be celebrated yearly.\nOn 8 September 2023, a 6.8 magnitude earthquake hit Morocco killing more than 2,800 people and injuring thousands. The epicentre of the quake was around 70\u00a0km southwest of the city of Marrakesh.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19293", "revid": "237572", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19293", "title": "Geography of Morocco", "text": " \nMorocco is the northwesternmost country which spans from the Mediterranean Sea and Atlantic Ocean on the north and the west respectively, into large mountainous areas in the interior, to the Sahara desert in the far south. Morocco is a Northern African country, located in the extreme northwest of Africa on the edge of continental Europe. The Strait of Gibraltar separates Spain from Morocco with a span of water. Morocco borders the North Atlantic Ocean to the west, and the western Mediterranean Sea to the north, and has borders with Algeria and disputed Western Sahara.\nThe terrain of Morocco is largely mountainous. The Atlas Mountains stretch from the central north to the southwest. It expands to about and is the dorsal spine of the country. To the north of the Atlas Mountains, there are the Rif Mountains, a chain that makes part of the Sierra Nevada mountain range in Andalusia, Spain. The massive range expands to about from Tangier in the west to Nador eastward.\nIn the west of the country, along the Atlantic coast, the Moroccan Plateau stretches from Tangier to Essaouira and get inward to Saiss Plains near Fez and Tansift-Alhaouz near Marrakesh. These vast plains promotes fertile agricultural lands and support 15% of the local economy.\nIn the extreme southeast of the country, the lands are arid due to their proximity to the Sahara Desert. Palm trees oasis are developed in many regions, notably in Figuig and Zagora.\nGeography statistics.\nCoordinates:\nCoordinates:\nArea:\n&lt;br&gt;\"total:\"\n446,550\u00a0km\u00b2\n&lt;br&gt;\"land:\"\n446,302\u00a0km\u00b2 (or 712,200\u00a0km\u00b2)\n&lt;br&gt;\"water:\"\n250\u00a0km\u00b2\nLand boundaries:\n&lt;br&gt;\"total:\"\n2,018.9\u00a0km\n&lt;br&gt;\"border countries:\"\nAlgeria 1 559\u00a0km, Western Sahara 444\u00a0km, Spain (Ceuta) 6.3\u00a0km, Spain (Melilla) 9.6\u00a0km\nCoastline:\n1835\u00a0km\nMaritime claims:\n&lt;br&gt;\"Territorial sea:\"\n&lt;br&gt;\"Contiguous zone:\"\n&lt;br&gt;\"Exclusive economic zone:\"\n with \n&lt;br&gt;\"Continental shelf:\"\n200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation\nClimate.\nMorocco's climate can be divided into two parts: The northwest and the southeast. In the southeast, the climate is arid and poorly populated. The northwest has a mild climate, and 95% of the Moroccan population lives in these regions.\nThe largely populated areas of the northwest of the country mostly have a Mediterranean climate, but since the country is heavily mountainous, continental and alpine influence is evident, as well as the oceanic influence along the Atlantic coastline. And finally, the semi-arid lands, that cover few regions in the northeast, the central-south, and the southwest.\nAlong the Mediterranean coast, the climate is typically Mediterranean and supports all types of typical Mediterranean vegetation. The summers are moderately hot and the winters are mild. Further away from the coast, into the Rif Mountain range, the climate starts to become more continental in character, with colder winters and hotter summers. At elevations above , the climate is alpine with warm summers and cold winters. Rainfall is much higher on the west side than it is on the east side. The average annual precipitation is between , and respectively. Snow is abundant at higher elevations.\nAlong the Atlantic coast, the climate is Mediterranean with oceanic influence. The imprint of the oceanic climate differs along the coastline from region to region. It is generally present from Asilah to Essaouira. The summers are warm to moderately hot, and winters are cooler than on the Mediterranean coast. Further away from the coastal lands, into the Atlas Mountain range, the climate starts to become more continental in character, with colder winters and hotter summers. At elevations above , the climate is typically alpine, with warm summers and cold winters. Rainfall is generally high. The average annual precipitations is between on the north, but as you move southward, the average drops by about . Snow is abundant at higher elevations. There are two ski stations, one in the middle-Atlas Mischliffen, and the other in the High-Atlas Ouka\u00efmeden.\nThe southern regions of the northwest are semi-arid. Rainfall is lower, and is between annually. Although temperature ranges generally do not change in comparison with the upper provinces, a slight increase in high averages is not to be dismissed. Largely due to the lower latitudes where they fall.\nTypical cities with such climate are Agadir and Marrakesh.\nClimate change.\nAs of 2020, Morocco has been hit with unseasonal heatwaves.\nPhysical geography.\nThe northern coast and interior are mountainous with large areas of bordering plateaus, intermontane valleys, and rich coastal plains. The northern mountains are geologically unstable and subject to earthquakes.\nMorocco occupies a strategic location along the Strait of Gibraltar, the waterway connecting the Mediterranean Sea and Atlantic Ocean.\nElevation extremes:\n&lt;br&gt;\"Lowest point:\"\nSebkha Tah \u221255 m\n&lt;br&gt;\"Highest point:\"\nToubkal mountain 4,165 m\nLongest river: Draa River (1,100\u00a0km)\nLand use and natural resources.\nNatural resources:\nPhosphates, Iron ore, Manganese, Lead, Zinc, Fish, Salt\nLand use:\n&lt;br&gt;\"Arable land:\"\n17.5%\n&lt;br&gt;\"Permanent crops:\"\n2.9%\n&lt;br&gt;\"Permanent pastures:\"\n47.1%\n&lt;br&gt;\"Forests:\"\n11.5%\n&lt;br&gt;\"Other:\"\n21.61% (2011)\nIrrigated land:\n14,850\u00a0km\u00b2 (2004)\nTotal renewable water resources:\n29\u00a0km3 (2011)\nNatural hazards:\nperiodic droughts\nEnvironment.\nCurrent environmental issues.\nLand degradation/desertification (soil erosion resulting from farming of marginal areas, overgrazing, destruction of vegetation); water supplies contaminated by raw sewage; siltation of reservoirs; oil pollution of coastal waters.\nInternational environmental agreements.\n\"Morocco is party to:\"\nBiodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution (MARPOL 73/78), Wetlands, Whaling\n&lt;br&gt;\"signed, but not ratified:\"\nEnvironmental Modification\nExtreme points.\nThis is a list of the extreme points of Morocco, the points that are farther north, east or west than any other location.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19294", "revid": "50886444", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19294", "title": "Demographics of Morocco", "text": "Demographic features of the population of Morocco include population density, ethnicity, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population. All figures are from the Haut-Commissariat au Plan of Morocco or the United Nations Demographic Yearbooks, unless otherwise indicated.\nThe population of Morocco in 2024 was 36,828,330. Moroccans are primarily of Arab and Berber origin. Socially, there are two contrasting groups of Moroccans: those living in the cities and those in the rural areas. Among the rural, several classes have formed such as landowners, peasants, and tenant farmers. Moroccans live mainly in the north and west portions of Morocco. However, they prefer living in the more fertile regions near the Mediterranean Sea.\nBetween the Nile and the Red Sea were living Arab tribes expelled from Arabia for their turbulence, Banu Hilal and Banu Sulaym, who often plundered farming areas in the Nile Valley. According to Ibn Khaldun, whole tribes set off with women, children, ancestors, animals and camping equipment. These tribes, along with others, who mass arrived in the region of Morocco in colossal numbers around the 12th-13th centuries, and later the Ma'qil in the 14th century, contributed to a more extensive ethnic, cultural, and linguistic Arabization of Morocco over time, especially beyond the major urban centres and the northern regions well into the countryside. The descendants of the original Arab settlers who continue to speak Arabic as a first language currently form the single largest population group in North Africa.\nAbout 99% of Moroccans are considered to be Sunni Muslims religiously or culturally. The numbers of the Jewish minority has decreased significantly since the creation of the State of Israel in 1948. Today there are 2,500 Moroccan Jews inside the country. Thousands of Moroccan Jews living in Europe, Israel and North America visit the country regularly. There is a small but apparently growing minority of Moroccan Christians made of local Moroccan converts (not Europeans). In 2014, most of the 86,206 foreign residents are French people, Spaniards, Algerians and sub-Saharan African students.\nPopulation size and structure.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMain populated areas.\nMost Moroccans live west and north of the Atlas Mountains, a range that insulates the country from the Sahara Desert. Casablanca is the largest city and the centre of business and industry, and has the leading seaport and airport. Rabat is the seat of government. Tangier and Nador are the two major northern seaports on the Mediterranean. Fez is a cultural, religious and industrial centre. Marrakesh and Agadir are the two major tourist centres. Oujda is the largest city of eastern Morocco. Meknes houses the military academy. Kenitra has the largest military airbase. Mohammedia has the largest oil refineries and other major industrial installations.\nStructure of the population.\nStructure of the population (Census 2004):\nAccording to 2004 census\nPopulation Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2013) (Based on the results of the 2004 Population Census.) :\nStructure of the population (Census 2014) :\nAccording to 2014 census\nPopulation Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2020) (Projections based on the results of national survey on population and health conducted between 2010 and 2011, and especially population and housing census 2014.):\nPopulation Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.I.2023):\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nVital statistics.\nSource: Haut-Commissariat au Plan (HCP)\nDemographic and Health Surveys.\nFertility Rate (TFR) (Wanted Fertility Rate) and CBR (Crude Birth Rate):\nLife expectancy.\nlife expectancy by year :\nEthnic groups.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMoroccans are primarily of Arab and Berber origin as in other neighbouring countries in the Maghreb. Arabs comprise 67% of the population of Morocco, while Berbers make up 31% and Sahrawis make up 2%. However, according to \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\", 44% of Moroccans are Arab, 24% are Arabized Berbers, 21% are Berbers, and 10% are Mauritanian Moors.\nThe Arab population of Morocco is a result of the inflow of nomadic Arab tribes from the Arabian Peninsula since the Muslim conquest of the Maghreb in the 7th century with a major wave in the 11th century. The major migration to the region by Arab tribes was in the 11th century when the tribes of Banu Hilal and Banu Sulaym, along with others, were sent by the Fatimids to defeat a Berber rebellion and then settle in the Maghreb. Between the Nile and the Red Sea were Arab tribes expelled from Arabia for their turbulence, Banu Hilal and Banu Sulaym, who often plundered farming areas in the Nile Valley. According to Ibn Khaldun, whole tribes set off with women, children, ancestors, animals and camping equipment. These tribes, who arrived in the region of Morocco around the 12th-13th centuries, and later the Ma'qil in the 14th century, contributed to a more extensive ethnic, genetic, cultural, and linguistic Arabization of Morocco over time, especially beyond the major urban centres and the northern regions which were the main sites of Arabization up to that point.\nThe Berber population mainly lives in the mountainous regions of Morocco where some preserve Berber culture, and are split into three groups; Rifians, Shilha, and Central Atlas Amazigh. The Rifians inhabit the Rif mountains, the Shilha inhabit the Anti-Atlas mountains, and the Central Atlas Amazigh inhabit the Middle Atlas mountains. The Arabized Berbers who constitute about a quarter of the population are the Berbers who were Arabized mainly as a result of the Arab nomad inflow, and have adopted Arab culture and the Arabic language as their native language, especially those who sought the protection of the Bedouin. Some parts of the population are descendants of refugees who fled Spain after the Reconquista in the 15th century. The Trans-Saharan slave trade brought a population of Sub-Saharan Africans to Morocco. After the founding of Israel and start of the Arab-Israeli conflict in 1948, many Jews felt compelled to leave Morocco especially after the anti-Jewish riots in Oujda, and many fled to Israel, Europe, and North America, and by 1967 250,000 Jews left Morocco. In a 2021 survey on 1,200 Moroccan adults, 68% were Arab, 25.6% were Berber, 3.6% were Sahrawi, and 2.7% were others.\nLanguages.\nArabic and Berber are the official languages of Morocco. The majority spoken language in Morocco is Arabic which is spoken by 92.7% of the population and includes the dialects of Moroccan Arabic (Hilalian dialects), spoken by 91.9%, and Hassaniya Arabic, spoken by 0.8%. Berber languages are spoken by 24.8% of the population in three varieties (3.2% speak Tarifit, 14.2% speak Shilha, and 7.4% speak Tamazight). According to the 2024 Moroccan census, 99.2%, or almost the entire literate population of Morocco, could read and write in Arabic, while 1.5% of the population could read and write in Berber. The census also indicated that 80.6% of Moroccans consider Arabic to be their native language, while 18.9% regard any of the various Berber languages as their mother tongue.\nFrench is an implicitly \"official language\" of government and big business, and is taught throughout school and still serves as Morocco's primary language of , economics, and scientific university education. French is also widely used in the media. Morocco is a member of La Francophonie. Berber activists have struggled since the 1960s for the recognition of their language as an official language of Morocco, which was achieved in July 2011 following the February 20th 2011 uprising. About 20,000 Moroccans in the northern part of the country speak some Spanish.\nEnglish, while still far behind French in terms of the number of proficient speakers, is rapidly becoming a foreign language of choice among educated youth and business people. It has been taught to Moroccan students after the fourth year of elementary school since the education reforms of 2002.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19295", "revid": "24871961", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19295", "title": "Politics of Morocco", "text": " \nPolitics of Morocco take place in a framework of an official parliamentary semi-constitutional islamic monarchy, whereby the prime minister of Morocco is the head of government, and of a multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the two chambers of parliament, the Assembly of Representatives of Morocco and the Assembly of Councillors. The Moroccan Constitution provides for a monarchy with a Parliament and an independent judiciary.\nOn June 17, 2011, King Mohammed VI announced a series of reforms that would transform Morocco into a constitutional monarchy.\nThe Economist Intelligence Unit rated Morocco a \"hybrid regime\" in .\nExecutive branch.\nThe constitution grants the king extensive powers; he is both the secular political leader and the \"Commander of the Faithful\" as a direct descendant of the Prophet Mohammed. He presides over the Council of Ministers; appoints the prime minister following legislative elections, and on recommendations from the latter, appoints the members of the government. While the constitution theoretically allows the king to terminate the tenure of any minister, and after consultation with the heads of the higher and lower Assemblies, to dissolve the Parliament, suspend the constitution, call for new elections, or rule by decree, the only time this happened was in 1965. The King is formally the chief of the military. Upon the death of his father Mohammed V, King Hassan II succeeded to the throne in 1961. He ruled Morocco for the next 38 years until he died in 1999. His son, the King Mohammed VI, assumed the throne in July 1999.\nFollowing the March 1998 elections, a coalition government headed by opposition socialist Abderrahmane Youssoufi and composed largely of ministers drawn from opposition parties, was formed. Prime Minister Youssoufi's government is the first government drawn primarily from opposition parties in decades, and also represents the first opportunity for a coalition of socialist, left-of-centre, and nationalist parties to be included in the government until October 2002. It was also the first time in the modern political history of the Arab world that the opposition assumed power following an election. The current government is headed by Aziz Akhannouch, who was appointed by King Mohammed VI after his party won a plurality of seats in the September 2021 general election. His cabinet was sworn in on 7 October.\nLegislative branch.\nThe House of Representatives: The House of Representatives consisted of 395 members elected by direct suffrage through a list system vote as follows:\nThe House of Councilors: The House of Councilors consists of 120 members elected according to the following regulations and procedures:\nPolitical parties and elections.\nOn 26 November 2011, the initial results of the parliamentary elections were released. The moderate Islamist party, the Justice and Development Party (PJD), was projected to win the largest number of seats. However, the electoral rules were structured such that no political party could win more than 20 percent of the seats in the parliament.\nThe Justice and Development Party (PJD) remained the largest party, winning 125 of the 395 seats in the House of Representatives, a gain of 18 seats compared to the 2011 elections. Abdelillah Benkirane was reappointed Prime Minister by the King on 10 October. The Authenticity and Modernity Party (PAM) won 102 seats, and the rest of the seats were split among smaller parties.\nIn the September 2021 general election, the moderate Islamist PJD suffered an electoral wipeout, with the liberal National Rally of Independents becoming the largest party in Parliament. Its leader, Aziz Akhannouch, subsequently formed a coalition government with the Authenticity and Modernity Party and Istiqlal Party.\nJudicial branch.\nThe highest court in the judicial structure is the Supreme Court, whose judges are appointed by the King. The Youssoufi government continued to implement a reform program to develop greater judicial independence and impartiality.\nAdministrative divisions.\nSince 2015 Morocco officially administers 12 regions: B\u00e9ni Mellal-Kh\u00e9nifra, Casablanca-Settat, Dakhla-Oued Ed-Dahab, Dr\u00e2a-Tafilalet, F\u00e8s-Mekn\u00e8s, Guelmim-Oued Noun, La\u00e2youne-Sakia El Hamra, Marrakech-Safi, Oriental, Rabat-Sal\u00e9-K\u00e9nitra, Souss-Massa and Tanger-Tetouan-Al Hoceima. The regions are administered by Walis and governors appointed by the King.\nMorocco is divided also into 13 prefectures and 62 provinces. Prefectures: Agadir-Ida Ou Tanane, Casablanca, F\u00e8s, Inezgane-A\u00eft Melloul, Marrakesh, Mekn\u00e8s, Mohammedia, Oujda-Angad, Rabat, Safi, Sal\u00e9, Skhirate-T\u00e9mara and Tangier-Assilah.\nProvinces: Al Haouz, Al Hoce\u00efma, Aousserd, Assa-Zag, Azilal, Benslimane, B\u00e9ni-Mellal, Berkane, Berrechid, Boujdour, Boulemane, Chefchaouen, Chichaoua, Chtouka A\u00eft Baha, Driouch, El Hajeb, El Jadida, El Kel\u00e2a des Sraghna, Errachidia, Es Semara, Essaouira, Fahs-Anjra, Figuig, Fquih Ben Salah, Guelmim, Guercif, Ifrane, Jerada, K\u00e9nitra, Kh\u00e9misset, Kh\u00e9nifra, Khouribga, La\u00e2youne, Larache, M\u00e9diouna, Midelt, Moulay Yacoub, Nador, Nouaceur, Ouarzazate, Oued Ed-Dahab, Ouezzane, Rehamna, Safi, Sefrou, Settat, Sidi Bennour, Sidi Ifni, Sidi Kacem, Sidi Slimane, Tan-Tan, Taounate, Taourirt, Tarfaya, Taroudannt, Tata, Taza, T\u00e9touan, Tinghir, Tiznit, Youssoufia and Zagora.\nInternational organization affiliations.\nABEDA, ACCT (associate), AfDB, AFESD, AL, AMF, AMU, EBRD, ECA, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICCt, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO (pending member), ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITF, ITU, NAM, OAS (observer), OIC, OPCW, OSCE (partner), UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UPU, WCO, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19296", "revid": "36336112", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19296", "title": "Economy of Morocco", "text": "The economy of Morocco is a market economy, governed by the law of supply and demand. \nSince 1993, in line with many Western world changes, Morocco has followed a policy of privatisation. Morocco has become a major player in African economic affairs, and is the 6th largest African economy by GDP (PPP). The World Economic Forum placed Morocco as the most competitive economy in North Africa, in its African Competitiveness Report 2014\u20132015.\nThe economic system of the country demonstrated resilience to the climate, commodity, and pandemic shocks of the early 2020s. As of 2025, Morocco had the seventh-highest GDP in the Arab world, despite not being an energy-producing country. Since the early-1980s, the Moroccan government has pursued an economic programme toward accelerating economic growth with the support of the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, and the Paris Club of creditors. From 2018, the country's currency, the Moroccan dirham, is fully convertible for current account transactions; reforms of the financial sector have been implemented; and state enterprises are being privatised.\nThe services sector accounts for just over half of the GDP. The industry sector\u2013 consisting of mining, construction and manufacturing \u2013 is an additional quarter. The sectors that recorded the highest growth are the tourism, telecommunications, and textile sectors. Morocco, however, still depends to an inordinate degree on agriculture, which accounts for around 11.1% of GDP but employs 26.4% of the Moroccan population. With a semi-arid climate, it is difficult to assure good rainfall and Morocco's GDP varies depending on the weather. Fiscal prudence has allowed for consolidation, with both the budget deficit and debt falling as a percentage of GDP. The major resources of the Moroccan economy are agriculture, phosphate minerals, and tourism. Sales of fish and seafood are important as well. Industry and mining contribute about one-third of the annual GDP. Morocco is the world's third-largest producer of phosphates (after the United States and China), and the price fluctuations of phosphates on the international market greatly influence Morocco's economy. Tourism and workers' remittances have played a critical role since independence.\nThe high cost of imports, especially of petroleum imports, is a major problem. Morocco suffers both from structural unemployment and a large external debt. The youth unemployment rate was 27.2% in 2021. About 80% of jobs are informal and the income gaps are very high. In 2022, Morocco ranked 120th out of 191 countries in the world on the Human Development Index (HDI), behind Algeria (93rd) and Tunisia (101st). It is the most unequal country in North Africa according to the NGO Oxfam.\nMacro-economic trend.\nMorocco is a fairly stable economy with continuous growth over the past half-century. Current GDP per capita grew 47% in the 1960s, reaching a peak growth of 274% in the 1970s. However, this proved unsustainable and growth scaled back sharply to just 8.2% in the 1980s and 8.9% in the 1990s.\nIn recent years, Morocco's economy has demonstrated resilience amid global challenges. Real GDP growth rebounded to 3.4% in 2023, driven by a resurgence in tourism, robust manufacturing exports (notably in the automotive and aeronautics sectors), and increased private consumption. However, agricultural output contracted due to drought conditions, which lead to a projected slowdown in overall growth to 3.2% in 2024. The IMF anticipated growth to accelerate to approximately 3.9% in 2025, supported by infrastructure projects and structural reforms.\nInflation significantly declined from a peak of 10.1% in early 2023 to an average of 1.5% in 2024, primarily due to falling food prices. In response, the central bank, Bank Al-Maghrib, reduced the key interest rate from 3.0% to 2.75% in June 2024. The IMF projected inflation to stabilize around 2% in the medium term.\nFiscal consolidation efforts led to a reduction in the budget deficit, which decreased from 5.2% of GDP in 2022 to 4.7% in 2023. Public debt was projected to gradually decline from 69.5% of GDP in 2023 to 68.2% by 2025. The current account deficit narrowed significantly to 0.6% of GDP in 2023, the lowest level since 2007, bolstered by strong tourism revenues, manufacturing exports, and remittances. Foreign direct investment also increased, particularly in sectors like green hydrogen and electric vehicle battery components.\nThe unemployment rate remained elevated at 13% in 2023, with higher rates among youth (35.8%), women (18.3%), and recent graduates (19.7%). Additionally, the poverty rate increased from 3% in 2021 to 4.9% in 2022. In terms of GDP per capita, Morocco reached $3,672 in 2023, a 6.69% increase from 2022. The IMF estimated GDP per capita (PPP) at $10,615 in 2024.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132022. Inflation below 5% is in green.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHistory.\nOver the years, Morocco implemented a series of development plans, enacted economic reforms, and encountered various challenges that have influenced its economic trajectory. From the 1960s to the present day, the country has sought to achieve sustained economic growth, reduce unemployment rates, and improve the living standards of its population.\n1960\u20131989.\nMorocco instituted a series of development plans to modernize the economy and increase production during the 1960s. Net investment under the five-year plan for 1960\u201364 was about $1.3 billion. The plan called for a growth rate of 6.2%, but by 1964 the growth rate had only reached 3%. The main emphasis of the plan was on the development and modernization of the agricultural sector. The five-year development plan for 1968\u201372 called for increased agriculture and irrigation. The development of the tourist industry also figured prominently in the plan. The objective was to attain an annual 5% growth rate in GDP; the real growth rate actually exceeded 6%.\nInvestment during the 1970s included industry and tourism development. The five-year plan for 1973\u201377 envisaged a real economic growth of 7.5% annually. Industries singled out for development included chemicals (especially phosphoric acid), phosphate production, paper products, and metal fabrication. In 1975, King Hassan II announced a 50% increase in investment targets to allow for the effects of inflation. The 1978\u201380 plan was one of stabilization and retrenchment, designed to improve Morocco's balance-of-payments position.\nThe ambitious five-year plan for 1981\u201385, estimated to cost more than $18 billion, aimed at achieving a growth rate of 6.5% annually. The plan's principal priority was to create some 900,000 new jobs and to train managers and workers in modern agricultural and industrial techniques. Other major goals were to increase production in agriculture and fisheries to make the country self-sufficient in food, and to develop energy, industry, and tourism to enable Morocco to lessen its dependence on foreign loans. The plan called for significant expansion of irrigated land, for increased public works projects such as hospitals and schools, and for economic decentralization and regional development through the construction of 25 new industrial parks outside the crowded Casablanca-K\u00e9nitra coastal area. Large industrial projects included phosphoric acid plants, sugar refineries, mines to exploit cobalt, coal, silver, lead, and copper deposits, and oil-shale development.\n1990\u20132000s.\nMoroccan economic policies brought macroeconomic stability to the country in the early 1990s but did not spur growth sufficient to reduce unemployment despite Moroccan Government's ongoing efforts to diversify the economy. Drought conditions depressed activity in the key agricultural sector, and contributed to an economic slowdown in 1999. Favourable rainfalls have led Morocco to a growth of 6% for 2000. Formidable long-term challenges included: servicing the external debt; preparing the economy for freer trade with the EU; and improving education and attracting foreign investment to improve living standards and job prospects for Morocco's youthful population.\nMacroeconomic stability coupled with relatively slow economic growth characterized the Moroccan economy over the period 2000\u20132005. The government introduced a number of important economic reforms in that period. The economy, however, remained overly dependent on the agricultural sector. Morocco's primary economic challenge was to accelerate growth in order to reduce high levels of unemployment. The government continued liberalizing the telecommunications sector in 2002, as well as the rules for oil and gas exploration. This process started with the sale of a second GSM license in 1999. The government in 2003 was using revenue from privatizations to finance increased spending. Although Morocco's economy grew in the early 2000s, it was not enough to significantly reduce poverty.\nThrough a foreign exchange rate anchor and well-managed monetary policy, Morocco held inflation rates to industrial country levels over the past decade. Inflation in 2000 and 2001 were below 2%. Despite criticism among exporters that the dirham has become badly overvalued, the current account deficit remains modest. Foreign exchange reserves were strong, with more than $7 billion in reserves at the end of 2001. The combination of strong foreign exchange reserves and active external debt management gave Morocco the capacity to service its debt. Current external debt stands at about $16.6 billion. https:// \nEconomic growth, however, has been erratic and relatively slow, partially as a result of an over-reliance on the agricultural sector. Agriculture production is extremely susceptible to rainfall levels and account for 11.1% GDP. Given that 26.4% of Morocco's population depends directly on agriculture production, droughts have a severe knock-on effect to the economy. Two successive years of drought led to a 1% incline in real GDP in 1999 and stagnation in 2000. Better rains during the 2000 to 2001 growing season led to a 6.5% growth rate in 2001. Growth in 2006 went above 9%, this was achieved by a booming real estate market.\nThe government introduced a series of structural reforms in recent years. The most promising reforms have been in the liberalization of the telecommunications sector. In 2001, the process continued with the privatization of 35% of the state operator Maroc Telecom. Morocco announced plans to sell two fixed licenses in 2002. Morocco also has liberalized rules for oil and gas exploration and has granted concessions for many public services in major cities. The tender process in Morocco is becoming increasingly transparent. Many believe, however, that the process of economic reform must be accelerated in order to reduce urban unemployment below the current rates above 20%.\nRecent developments.\nMorocco's sound economic management in recent years has yielded strong growth and investment grade status and it is weathering the negative impacts of the global crisis impressively well. Morocco is now addressing persistent social problems by reducing absolute poverty rates, investing in human capital through quality education, expanding access to drinking water, and linking rural areas to markets through investment in roads.\nMorocco faces challenges on human development outcomes despite progress over the past decade, in particular. Overall illiteracy rates and gender disparity in access to secondary education remain high and the country continues to suffer poor outcomes on infant and maternal mortality. It also needs to diversify its economy, become more competitive, and integrate further into the global economy if it is to reach higher growth levels.\nThe government has recognized this challenge and has put in place an ambitious process of legal, policy, and institutional modernization that has far-reaching political, economic, and social dimensions. It has designed and is now implementing a comprehensive set of new sector strategies that respond to the overall national vision and that target development challenges with clear, measurable goals and indicators.\nTough government reforms and steady yearly growth in the region of 4\u20135% from 2000 to 2007, including 4.9% year-on-year growth in 2003\u20132007 the Moroccan economy is much more robust than just a few years ago. Economic growth is far more diversified, with new service and industrial poles, like Casablanca and Tangier, developing. The agriculture sector is being rehabilitated, which in combination with good rainfalls led to a growth of over 20% in 2009.\n2008.\nIn a statement, released in July 2008, the IMF called Morocco \"a pillar of development in the region\" and congratulated King Mohammed VI and the Central Bank on Morocco's continued strong economic progress and effective management of monetary policy.\nMorocco's economy is expected to grow by 6.5% in 2008, according to the Moroccan finance minister. While the forecast is slightly lower than the earlier 6.8% projected growth it still remains quite an achievement considering the circumstances. GDP growth in 2007 was only 2.2% due to a poor harvest caused by prolonged periods of drought; Morocco experienced nonagricultural GDP growth of 6.6 percent in 2007. Inflation is expected to reach 2.9% in 2008 due to the rising costs of energy.\nIn an increasingly challenging global economic climate, the IMF expects continued nonagricultural expansion of the Moroccan economy.\nThe 2008 financial crisis affected the Moroccan economy in only a limited way according to the Bank Al-Maghrib.\nIn a report issued in July 2008, the IMF noted that Morocco's financial sector is sound and resilient to shocks, and that the remarkable fiscal consolidation efforts of recent years have allowed the Moroccan economy to absorb the impact of difficult international economic conditions and increasing global prices for essential commodities such as petroleum and energy.\nInternational economic experts recognize that Morocco's exemplary economic performance is beneficial not only to Moroccans, but also for the nearly 90 million people who live the Maghreb.\nMorocco is expected to close the year 2008 with a budgetary surplus ranging between MAD 3 billion and MAD3.5 billion ($348 million to $407 million), despite a difficult international context marked by a severe economic crisis. At the end of November 2008, the state's budget registered a surplus of MAD 3.2 billion ($372 million), while at the end of November 2009, the budgetary surplus is projected at MAD 6.9 billion ($803 million).\nThe diversification of the Economy includes a multi-disciplinary approach to the development of non-agricultural sector, including the creation of special sectorial zones in industry, tourism and services outsourcing. In addition, reforms to the higher educational system and business law are also planned in detail in the new program-contract signed in 2009 between the government, the banking sector and some zone-development companies. The approach also include a better sustaining of small-business development and prospection of external markets. The objective is to become an emerging industrial country of the likes of Vietnam by 2015.\nUS Ambassador to the EU noted that:\n\"Morocco stands out as a model of economic reform for the region and for other developing countries. The kind of economic progress that Morocco has made, and which the rest of the Maghreb has the potential to accomplish, is the best antidote to the new threat of terrorism in the region.\" \n2009.\nThe economy has remained insulated from the worst effects of the world crisis. Due in part to the rebounding of the agricultural sector, which had suffered from a 2007 drought, the economy expanded 5.6% in 2008, with 5.7% growth forecasted for 2009. Morocco's economy is the 61st largest in the world, according to the IMF, though its per-capita GDP is low compared to similarly ranked nations. King Mohammed VI has recently launched two national economic strategies: Plan Maroc Vert and Plan Emergence. The first seeks to create 1.5m jobs in the agriculture sector, and add around \u20ac7.65 billion to GDP through \u20ac10.8 billion of investments by 2020, while the latter will establish new industrial zones and boost training to increase efficiency. Additionally, phosphates production, which accounted for more than a third of 2008 exports, is being restructured for greater value.\nMorocco's economy is expected to achieve a 6.6% growth in the first quarter of 2009 up from 4.8% in the past quarter thanks to prospects for an agricultural campaign above the average of the past five years.\nBy the end of December 2008, rainfalls exceeded that of an ordinary year by 106%. This surplus has benefited to all agricultural regions and increased the water stored in dams destined for agriculture to 40.7%. In these conditions and taking into consideration a cereal campaign nearing 70 million quintals, the agricultural value added could increase by 22.2% in the first quarter of 2009, thus contributing 2.9% to the national economic growth.\nDue to a decrease of activity among Morocco's main commercial partners, foreign demand of goods destined towards Morocco would moderately slow down in 2009 compared to the 9% rise in 2008. This trend could continue in Q1 of 2009 with a growth rate not exceeding 2% due to a lackluster economic growth outlook and the slowdown of international trade.\n2019.\nIn June 2019, Morocco signed two agreements to obtain a loan worth $237 million from the Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development. The loan was taken to fund two investment projects.\n2020.\nOn the economic front, the shock of COVID-19 has pushed the Moroccan economy into its first recession since 1995. Economic output contracted by 15.1% in the second quarter of 2020, primarily as a result of the lockdown but also of a sharp reduction in exports caused by the pandemic's disruption to global value chains and the collapse of receipts from tourism. The shock to supply and demand, triggered by the pandemic, has been compounded by the fall in agricultural production due to a severe drought. Although activity picked up in the third and fourth quarters of 2020, the government's preliminary estimates indicate that Morocco's real GDP contracted by 7% in 2020, leading to an increase in unemployment from 9.2% to 11.9%.\nEconomic growth.\nMorocco is a fairly stable economy with continuous growth over the past half-a-century. Current GDP per capita grew 47% in the Sixties reaching a peak growth of 274% in the Seventies. However, this proved unsustainable and growth scaled back sharply to just 8.2% in the Eighties and 8.9% in the Nineties.\nReal GDP growth is expected to average 5.5% in the 2009\u201313 period, seen the prospects in the tourism and the non-agricultural industry, as demand growth in the Eurozone \u2014 Morocco's key export market and source of tourists is projected to be more subdued. Growth will be well below the 8\u201310% levels that are widely regarded as necessary to have a major impact on poverty and unemployment. Economic growth will also be intermittently hindered by the impact of periodic droughts on the rain-fed agricultural sector, the country's largest employer.\nAgriculture.\nAgriculture employs about 26.4% of Morocco's workforce. On the Atlantic coast, where there are extensive plains, olives, citrus fruits, and wine grapes are grown, largely with water supplied by artesian wells. Livestock are raised and forests yield cork, cabinet wood, and building materials. Part of the maritime population fishes for its livelihood. Agadir, Essaouira, El Jadida, and Larache are among the important fishing harbours. In the rainy sections of the northeast, barley, wheat, and other cereals can be raised without irrigation.\nMorocco produced in 2018:\nIn addition to smaller yields of other agricultural products.\nLand.\nMorocco is endowed with numerous exploitable resources. With approximately of arable land (one-seventh of which can be irrigated) and its generally temperate Mediterranean climate, Morocco's agricultural potential is matched by few other Arab or African countries. It is one of the few Arab countries that has the potential to achieve self-sufficiency in food production. In a normal year, Morocco produces two-thirds of the grains (chiefly wheat, barley, and corn [maize]) needed for domestic consumption.\nMorocco exports citrus fruits and early vegetables to the European market. Its wine industry is developed, and the production of commercial crops (cotton, sugarcane, sugar beets, and sunflowers) is expanding. Newer crops such as tea, tobacco, and soybeans have passed the experimental stage, the fertile Gharb plain being favourable for their cultivation. Morocco is actively developing its irrigation potential that ultimately will irrigate more than .\nMorocco's forestry policy seeks to restore over 600,000 hectares of forest ecosystems, battle soil erosion, control water flow, and boost forestry and tourist revenue. This is supported by the European Investment Bank's development branch, EIB Global. The EIB-financed component will reforest about 55,000 hectares, resulting in 30,200 years of temporary work and over 6,800 permanent jobs.\nDrought.\nUnreliable rainfall is a chronic problem that produces drought or sudden floods. In 1995, Morocco's worst drought in thirty years forced Morocco to import grain and adversely affected the economy. Another drought occurred in 1997, and one in 1999\u20132000. Reduced incomes due to drought caused GDP to fall by 7.6% in 1995, by 2.3% in 1997, and by 1.5% in 1999. During the years between drought, good rains brought bumper crops to market. Good rainfall in 2001 led to a 5% GDP growth rate.\nThe danger of drought is ever present and still dramatically affects the Moroccan economy, even though Moroccan decisionmakers have recently stated that the economy becomes more diversified and disconnected from rain falls. Especially, cereal yields still depend on considerable variation in annual precipitation. Cereals constitute the essential of the agricultural value added and their production is very sensitive to rain falls. More important is that cereal yields determine not only the aggregate value added in the agricultural sector but also economic growth in general. According to the Moroccan economist, Brahim MANSOURI (Fiscal Policy and Economic Growth: Egypt, Morocco and Tunisia Compared, UNECA, 2008), when drought, measured as a dummy variable computed on the basis of the rate of growth of cereal yield, endangers extremely, the growth rate of real GDP would fall by 10%.\nCannabis.\nMorocco consistently ranks among the world's largest producers and exporters of cannabis, and its cultivation and sale provide the economic base for much of northern Morocco. The cannabis is typically processed into hashish. This activity represents 0.57% of Morocco's GDP. A UN survey in 2003 estimated cannabis cultivation at about in Morocco's five northern provinces. This represented 10% of the total area and 23% of the arable lands of the surveyed territory and 1% of Morocco's total arable land.\nOn May 26, 2021, the Moroccan Parliament voted to legalise the use of cannabis for medical, as well as cosmetic and industrial purposes.\nMorocco is a party to the 1988 UN Drug Convention and in 1992 Morocco passed legislation designed to implement it and its new national strategy against drugs formulated by its National Committee on Narcotics was adopted in 2005. That same year, the International Narcotics Control Board commended the Government of Morocco for its efforts to eradicate cannabis plant cultivation on its territory, which has resulted in the total potential production of cannabis resin in the Rif region decreasing by 10% over the previous year. At the same time, the board called upon the international community to support its efforts where possible.\nSince the early 2010s, a growing debate is taking place in Morocco about the decriminalisation of cannabis. Powerful political parties are among advocates of decriminalisation, as the Istiqlal Party and the Authenticity and Modernity Party.\nFishing.\nThe fishing industry in Morocco is a leading source of revenue, accounting for 34% of agricultural and 7% of total exports. For a long time, the industry has been an economic pillar for the country. Morocco is considered the largest fish market in Africa, with an estimated total catch of 1,084,638 MT in 2001.\nIndustry.\nThe Moroccan industrial sector looks set to continue the strong growth it has enjoyed in recent years. Industrial activity recorded a 5.5% increase in 2007, a slight rise over 2006, when the sector grew by 4.7%. Added value in the sector increased by 5.6% in 2007. Overall the contribution of industrial activity to GDP fluctuates between about 25% and 35% every year, depending on the performance of the agriculture sector. The industrial sector accounted for about 21.1% of employment in 2007 and the sector is a key component of the government's effort to curb unemployment. The sector also attracts high levels of FDI and authorities have announced initiatives to improve the investment climate, with particular attention to off-shoring activities, automotive, aeronautics, electronics, food processing activities, products from the sea and textiles. Other important industrial sectors include mining, chemicals, construction materials and pharmaceuticals. The future of Morocco's industrial segment looks bright, particularly as new initiatives make it more globally competitive in a variety of sectors.\nManufacturing.\nManufacturing accounts for about one-sixth of GDP and is steadily growing in importance in the economy. Two particularly important components of Morocco's industrial makeup are processing raw materials for export and manufacturing consumer goods for the domestic market. Many operations date to the colonial period. Until the early 1980s, government involvement was dominant and the major focus was on import substitution. Since then the emphasis has shifted to privatizing state operations and attracting new private investment, including foreign sources.\nProcessing phosphate ore into fertilizers and phosphoric acid for export is a major economic activity. Food processing for export (canning fish, fresh vegetables, and fruit) as well as for domestic needs (flour milling and sugar refining) is also important, and the manufacture of textiles and clothes using domestically produced cotton and wool is a major source of foreign exchange. Morocco's iron and steel manufacturing industry is small but provides a significant share of the country's domestic needs.\nThe manufacturing sector produces light consumer goods, especially foodstuffs, beverages, textiles, matches, and metal and leather products. Heavy industry is largely limited to petroleum refining, chemical fertilizers, automobile and tractor assembly, foundry work, asphalt, and cement. Many of the processed agricultural products and consumer goods are primarily for local consumption, but Morocco exports canned fish and fruit, wine, leather goods, and textiles, as well as such traditional Moroccan handicrafts as carpets and brass, copper, silver, and wood implements.\nOwnership in the manufacturing sector is largely private. The government owns the phosphate-chemical fertilizer industry and much of the sugar-milling capacity, through either partnership or joint financing. It is also a major participant in the car and truck assembly industry and in tire manufacturing.\nAutomotives.\nThe automotive sector is already Morocco's leading export sector and has made Morocco the leading car manufacturer in Africa. Morocco's fast integration into the global economy was also facilitated by numerous free trade agreements with the United States and the European Union. These agreements contributed undoubtedly in a positive way towards the emergence of export activities in the country. \nForeign direct investment has been expanding as companies are attracted towards the favorable economic situation of the country, government support through their numerous initiatives, such as tax exemptions for the first 5 years and VAT exemptions, modern infrastructure, and a skilled workforce. \nMoreover, the automotive sector has the strongest job creation; 85.000 new jobs were created in the sector between 2014 and 2018, bringing the total jobs in the sector to 158\u2019000.\nTextiles.\nTextiles form a major industry in Morocco. The European Union is Morocco's top client in regards to textiles and clothing, with France importing 46% of hosiery, 28.5% of basic textile and 27.6% of ready-to-wear clothing from Morocco, managing director of the Moroccan Export Development Center underlined. Recalling that Morocco's textile and clothing exports totaled some $3.7 billion in 2007, Saad Benabdallah ascribed this performance to the many assets that Morocco enjoys, namely, geographical proximity, flexibility, sourcing skills and the multiple opportunities offered by Free Trade Agreements with the European Union, United States and Turkey.\nMining.\nThe mining sector is one of the pillars of Morocco's economy. It represented a turnover of US$2.7 billion in 2005, including MAD 2.17 billion in exports and 20% of energy consumption. It also employs about 39,000 people with an estimated MAD 571 million in salaries (2005). Morocco produces a number of minerals and metals, most importantly, phosphates, silver and lead.https://\nMorocco possesses 75 percent of the world's phosphate reserves. It is the world's first exporter (28% of the global market) and third producer (20% of global production). In 2005, Morocco produced 27.254 million tons of phosphates and 5.895 million tons of phosphate derivatives.https://\nServices.\nServices, including government and military expenditures, account for about one-fourth of Morocco's GDP. Government spending accounts for fully half of the service economy, despite an ongoing effort on the part of the government to sell much of its assets to private concerns. Since the mid-1980s tourism and associated services have been an increasingly significant sector of the Moroccan economy and by the late 1990s had become Morocco's largest source of foreign currency.\nDuring that time the Moroccan government committed significant resources \u2013 by way of loans and tax exemptions \u2013 to the development of the tourist industry and associated services. The government also made direct capital investments in the development of the service sector, but since the early 1990s it has begun to divest itself of these properties. Several million visitors enter Morocco yearly, most of them from Europe. Tourists also arrive from Algeria, the United States, and East Asia, mainly Japan.\nTourism.\nMorocco is a major touristic destination. Tourism is thus a major contributor to both the economic output and the current account balance, as well as a main job provider. In 2008 8 million tourists have visited Morocco. Tourist receipts in 2007 totalled US$7,55 billion. Morocco has developed an ambitious strategy, dubbed \"Vision 2010\", aimed at attracting 10 million tourists by 2010. This strategy provides for creating 160,000 beds, thus bringing the national capacity to 230,000 beds. It also aims to create some 600,000 new jobs.\nMarrakesh continues to be the market leader, but the case of Fez, showing a 20% increase of visitors in 2004, gives hope that better organisation can bring results in diversifying the sector as a whole. Like other regions, Fez has its Centre Regional du Tourisme (CRT), a local tourism body which coordinates the local industry and the authorities. Fez's plan involves a substantial restructuring of the old city and an upgrading of hotel capacity. Improved transport has brought the city into more direct contact with potential visitors. There are now direct flights from France, where previously it was necessary to change plane in Casablanca.\nThe \"Plan Azur\", is a large-scale project initiated by king Mohammed VI, is meant to internationalise Morocco. The plan provides for creating six coastal resorts for holiday-home owners and tourists: five on the Atlantic coast and one on the Mediterranean. The plan also includes other large-scale development projects such as upgrading regional airports to attract budget airlines, and building new train and road links.\nThus, Morocco achieved an 11% rise in tourism in the first five months of 2008 compared with the same period last year, it said, adding that French visitors topped the list with 927,000 followed by Spaniards (587,000) and Britons (141,000).\nMorocco, which is close to Europe, has a mix of culture and the exotic that makes it popular with Europeans buying holiday homes.\nInformation technology.\nThe IT sector generated a turnover of Dh7 billion ($910,000m) in 2007, which represented an 11% increase compared to 2006. The number of Moroccan internet subscribers in 2007 amounted to 526,080, representing an increase of 31.6% compared to the previous year and a 100% increase compared to 2005. The national penetration for internet subscription remains low, even though it increased from 0.38% in 2004 to 1.72% in 2007. Yet over 90% of subscribers have a broadband ADSL connection, which is one of the highest ratios in the world. The future of the Moroccan IT sector was laid out in Maroc 2006\u201312. The plan aims to increase the combined value of the telecoms and IT sector from Dh24 billion ($3.1 billion) in 2004 to Dh60 billion ($7.8 billion) in 2012.\nWhile the telecoms sector remains the big earner, with Dh33 billion ($4.3 billion), the IT and off shore industries should generate Dh21 billion ($2.7 billion) each by 2012. In addition, the number of employees should increase from 40,000 to 125,000. The government hopes that adding more local content to the internet will increase usage. There have also been efforts to add more computers to schools and universities. E-commerce is likely to take off in the next few years, especially as the use of credit cards is gaining more ground in Morocco. Although computer and internet use have made a great leap forward in the past five years, the IT market still finds itself in infancy and offers great potential for further development.\nRetail.\nThe retail industry represents 12.8% of Morocco's GDP and 1.2m people \u2013 13% of the total workforce \u2013 are employed in the sector. Organised retail, however, represents only a fraction of domestic trade, as shoppers rely on the country's 1151 souks, markets and approximately 700,000 independent groceries and shops. The rapid emergence of a middle class \u2013 around 30% of the population \u2013 combined with a young and increasingly urban population and a craving for international brands, is rapidly changing the ways Moroccans spend their money. Still average purchasing power remains low overall, forcing retailers to cater to a broad section of the population and to keep prices low. Despite the challenges, the retail sector has strong growth potential. The franchising segment will continue to grow, and while strong local brands are emerging, international brand names will continue to account for the biggest percentage increase in the sector's turnover. Changing consumption habits, increasing purchasing power and the growing number of tourists should boost the development of malls and luxury shopping. However, independent stores and markets should continue to account for most domestic trade in the foreseeable future.\nOffshoring.\nIn 2009 Morocco was ranked among the top thirty countries in the offshoring sector. Morocco opened its doors to offshoring in July 2006, as one component of the development initiative Plan Emergence, and has so far attracted roughly half of the French-speaking call centres that have gone offshore so far and a number of the Spanish ones. According to experts, multinational companies are attracted by Morocco's geographical and cultural proximity to Europe, in addition to its time zone. In 2007 the country had about 200 call centres, including 30 of significant size, that employ a total of over 18,000 people.\nFinance.\nIn 2007 the economic environment remained conducive to further growth of banking activity in Morocco following a very good year for the sector in 2006. In 2007 macroeconomic growth, excluding the agricultural sector, remained quite robust, providing the background for dynamic growth in banking credits. Total assets of the banking sector increased by 21.6% to MAD 654.7 billion ($85.1 billion), which is above the previous year's high annual growth rate of 18.1%. The structure of the domestic sector has remained steady in the past two years, with the landscape dominated by three major local banks. The state has started to remove itself from the domestic sector by surrendering part of its share capital in public banks. At end-2007 public capital still held controlling stakes in five banks and four financing companies. Meanwhile, foreign ownership in the local financial sector continues to grow, with foreign institutions controlling five banks and eight financing companies as well as holding significant stakes in four banks and three financing companies.\nThe financial system, though robust, has to take on excessive quantities of low risk-low return government debt at the expense of riskier, but more productive private sector lending. This crowding\u2013out of private sector investment reduces the profitability and growth incentives of the financial sector.\nFitch Ratings affirmed Morocco's long-term local and foreign issuer default ratings of \"BBB\u2212\" and \"BBB\", respectively, with a stable outlook. The credit rating agency attributed its classification in part to the \"relative resilience of Morocco's economy to the global economic downturn.\"\nInsurance.\nThe insurance sector in Morocco is witnessing dynamic growth, driven foremost by developments in life insurance, which has superseded motor insurance in the past two years as the leading segment of the market with around one-third of total premiums. Behind life and auto insurance, accident, work-related accident, fire and transport insurance were the largest contributors. Total premiums reached Dh17.7 billion ($2.3 billion) in 2007, ranking Morocco as one of the largest insurance markets in the Arab world behind Saudi Arabia and the UAE. The insurance penetration rate is 2.87% of GDP, while the insurance density is $69 per person.\nMore broadly, the Moroccan insurance sector is already consolidated, with five large players controlling the market. The sector is set to be opened up to foreign competition from 2010 onward, and the consolidation of insurance companies into larger entities should strengthen the local players to better compete with eventual competition from foreign insurers. There is also the possibility that new insurance niches such as takaful (Islamic insurance) and microinsurance products will become part of the Moroccan market in the medium-term, but they are unlikely to appear in the near future.\nMedia and advertising.\nAccording to the Moroccan Advertisers Group, Dh3.9 billion ($507 million) was spent in 2007, a near-fourfold increase on the Dh1.1 billion ($143 million) spent in 2000. There is still room for growth, as the market remains underdeveloped by international standards. Advertising expenditure represented just over 0.6% of GDP in 2007, compared with 1% in Egypt and 1.5% to 2% in EU countries. Morocco's 10 biggest advertising spenders account for about 35% of the total, with telecoms, consumer goods and services companies making up a large percentage of that amount.\nTelevision retained the lion's share of advertising expenditure, with 55% of above-the-line advertising. In a 2006 poll, GAM found that 94% of its members used outdoor advertising, although 81% companied about problems, mainly caused by quality issues and delays. The potential for expansion is huge, and while telecoms should remain the largest advertising segment, fast-growing sectors of the economy such as retail, automobile and real estate are providing advertising companies with new opportunities.\nCommunications.\nThe telecoms sector increased in value from Dh25.6 billion ($3.3 billion) in 2006 to Dh33.3 billion ($4.2 billion) in 2007. With a workforce of some 41,000 employees, the sector contributes 7% to annual GDP and is one of the country's leading recipients of foreign direct investment (FDI). Under the development plan, the sector should employ 125,000 people by 2012 and contribute 10% of GDP. With the penetration rates of 69.4% from mobile phones and 8.95% for fixed lines, the Moroccan telecoms industry is set to continue to grow. The call centre industry \u2013 partially as a result of offshore initiatives, such as Casanearshore and Rabat Technoplis \u2013 will continue to expand. However, the worldwide call centre industry is highly competitive and education is the key to success if Morocco truly intends to become a leading international player in this industry.\nTelephone system.\nIn the late 1980s and early 1990s, the government undertook a major expansion and modernization of the telecommunications system. This nearly quadrupled the number of internal telephone lines and greatly improved international communications. In 1996 the state-owned telecommunications industry was opened up to privatization by a new law that allowed private investment in the retail sector, while the state retained control of fixed assets. In 1998 the government created Maroc Telecom (Itti\u1e63\u0101l\u0101t al-Maghrib), which provides telephone, cellular, and Internet service for the country. Satellite dishes are found on the roofs of houses in even the poorest neighbourhoods, suggesting that Moroccans at every social and economic level have access to the global telecommunications network. The Internet has made steady inroads in Morocco; major institutions have direct access to it, while private individuals can connect via telecommunications \"boutiques\", a version of the cyber caf\u00e9s found in many Western countries, and through home computers.\nMorocco has a good system composed of open-wire lines, cables, and microwave radio relay links. The internet is available. The principal switching centers are Casablanca and Rabat. The national network is nearly 100% digital using fiber-optic links. An improved rural service employs microwave radio relay. The international system has seven submarine cables, three satellite earth stations, two Intelsat (over the Atlantic Ocean) and one Arabsat. There is a microwave radio relay to Gibraltar, Spain and the Western Sahara. Coaxial cables and microwave radio relays exist to Algeria. Morocco is a participant in Medarabtel and a fiber-optic cable links from Agadir to Algeria and Tunisia.\nBroadband Internet access.\nOperated by Maroc Telecom. The service started as a test in November 2002 before it was launched in October 2003. The service is offered by the subsidiary Menara. As well as Inwi (also known as Wana Co.) and Meditel that turned into Orange.\nEquity markets.\nPrivatization has stimulated activity on the Casablanca Stock Exchange (Bourse de Casablanca) notably through trade in shares of large former state-owned operation. Founded in 1929, it is one of the oldest stock exchanges in Africa, but it came into reckoning after financial reforms in 1993, making it the third largest in Africa.\nThe stock market capitalisation of listed companies in Morocco was valued at $75,495 billion in 2007 by the World Bank. That is an increase of 74% compared with the year 2005. Having weathered the global financial meltdown, the Casablanca Stock Exchange is stepping up to its central role of financing the Moroccan economy. Over the next few years, it seeks to double its number of listed companies and more than quadruple its number of investors.\nGovernment finances.\nFiscal policies.\nMorocco has made great progress toward fiscal consolidation in recent years, under the combined effect of strong revenue performance and efforts to tackle expenditure rigidities, notably the wage bill. The overall fiscal deficit shrank by more than 4 percentage points of GDP during the last four years, bringing the budget close to balance in 2007. However, the overall deficit is projected to widen to 3.5 percent of GDP in 2008, driven by the upward surge in the fiscal cost of Morocco's universal subsidy scheme following the sharp increase in world commodity and oil prices.\nFiscal policy decisions so far have been mostly discretionary, as there is no explicit goal for fiscal policy. Looking forward, the question of a possible anchor for medium-term fiscal policy is worth exploring. Morocco's low social indicators and large infrastructure needs could justify an increase in social spending and public investment. Further, some nominal tax rates remain high by international standards, possibly warranting a lowering of some rates. At the same time, the relatively high level of public debt remains a constraining factor, particularly as heightened attractiveness to investors is a key component of Morocco's strategy of deepening its integration in the global economy.\nMorocco has made major progress in recent years to increase economic growth and strengthen the economy's resilience to shocks. The gains reflect sound macroeconomic policies and sustained structural reforms, and are reflected in the gradual improvement in living standards and per capita income.\nDebt management.\nThe turnaround in the fiscal performance is particularly noteworthy. Around the start of the 21st century, Morocco's overall deficit stood at 5.3 percent of GDP, and gross total government debt amounted to three-fourths of GDP. In 2007, reflecting a strong improvement in revenue performance and moderate growth in expenditure, the budget was close to balanced. Under the combined effect of a prudent fiscal policy and sizeable privatization receipts, the total debt stock had shrunk by 20 percentage points, and now stands at a little over half of GDP. As a result, perceptions of Morocco's creditworthiness have improved.\nTaxation.\nTax revenues provide the largest part of the general budget. Taxes are levied on individuals, corporations, goods and services, and tobacco and petroleum products.\nExternal trade.\nMorocco maintains strong trade relations with the European Union (EU), which remains its largest trading partner. In 2022, 56% of Morocco's exports were directed to the EU, while 45% of its imports originated from the EU. The total trade in goods between Morocco and the EU amounted to \u20ac53.3 billion that year. Key exports to the EU included transport equipment (23.5%), machinery and appliances (21.2%), and textiles (14.3%). In 2023, Morocco's primary export destinations were Spain (22.5%), France (20.5%), Italy (5.2%), the United Kingdom (4.5%), and Germany (4.3%). On the import side, the main suppliers were Spain (15.7%), China (10.6%), France (10.6%), the United States (8.4%), and T\u00fcrkiye (5.1%).\nThe country's trade deficit narrowed by 7.3% in 2023, reaching 286 billion dirhams ($28.6 billion). This improvement was attributed to a 2.5% decrease in imports, totaling 715 billion dirhams, and a slight increase in exports to 429 billion dirhams. Notably, energy imports declined by 20.4% to 122 billion dirhams, while automotive sector exports surged by over 27% to a record 141 billion dirhams. Tourism revenues also reached new heights, increasing by 11.7% to 104 billion dirhams, supported by a record 14.5 million visitors. Remittances from Moroccans abroad contributed significantly, rising by 4% to 115 billion dirhams. However, in 2024, the trade deficit increased by 7.3% to 306.47 billion dirhams, driven by a 6.4% rise in imports to 761.45 billion dirhams and a 5.8% increase in exports to 454.97 billion dirhams. The growth in exports was mainly propelled by the aerospace sector (14.9%), phosphates and derivatives (13.1%), the automotive industry (6.3%), and the agriculture and agri-food sector (3.1%).\nThe EU-Morocco Association Agreement, signed in 1996 and effective from 2000, aims to establish a free trade area and strengthen economic ties within the framework of the Barcelona Process. Morocco has also entered into free trade agreements with the United States (effective from 2006), the Agadir Agreement with Egypt, Jordan, and Tunisia, and a free trade agreement with T\u00fcrkiye. Additionally, Morocco acceded to the Regional Convention on pan-Euro-Mediterranean preferential rules of origin in 2012, facilitating regional integration and trade.\nInvestment.\nMorocco has become an attractive destination for European investors thanks to its relocation sites \"Casashore\" and \"Rabatshore\", and to the very rapid cost escalation in Eastern Europe. The offshoring sector in Morocco is of great importance as it creates high-level jobs that are generally accompanied by an influx of Moroccan immigrants. Noting however that human resources remain the major concern for companies seeking to gain a foothold in Morocco. In this regard, it has been deemed an important decision of the Moroccan government to accelerate training in the required disciplines.\nIn a bid to promote foreign investments, Morocco in 2007 adopted a series of measures and legal provisions to simplify procedures and secure appropriate conditions for projects launching and completing. Foreign trade minister, Abdellatif Maazouz cited that these measures include financial incentives and tax exemptions provided for in the investment code and the regional investment centres established to accompany projects.\nThese measures combined with actions carried out by the Hassan II Fund for Development increased foreign investments in Morocco by $544.7 million in 2007. 20% of these investments came from Islamic countries.\nMoroccan officials have heralded a significant increase in the amount of money Moroccan expatriates are sending home. Government efforts are underway to encourage Moroccans living abroad to increase their investments at home, and to allay concerns about bureaucracy and corruption. With money sent home by Moroccan migrants reaching $5.7 billion in 2007, Morocco came in second, behind Egypt, on the recent World Bank list of the top 10 MENA remittance recipient countries. Neighbouring Algeria ($2.9 billion) came in at number five. According to the World Bank, remittances constituted 6.4% of GDP in Morocco in 2020 and amounted to more than $7.4 billion. Despite the COVID-19 pandemic, remittances from Moroccans residing abroad continued in an upward trend.\nThe European Investment Bank started making investments in Morocco in 1979, and has since invested \u20ac9.6 billion since then, including \u20ac2.5 billion since 2017.\nForeign direct investment.\nForeign Direct Investments in Morocco grew to $2.57 billion in 2007 from $2.4 billion a year earlier to position the country in the fourth rank in Africa among FDI recipients, according to the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development. Although other studies have shown much higher figures.\nExpectations for 2008 were promising noting that 72 projects were approved for a global amount of $9.28 billion. These were due to open 40,023 direct and stable job opportunities. However, keeping with the global trend, FDI dropped 29% to \u20ac2.4 billion in 2008, the first decline since 2004.\nWhile the recovery of pre-crisis levels very much hinges on the health of the global economy, Morocco has made steps towards becoming a more attractive FDI destination, according to the World Bank's Doing Business 2010 report, ranking second in North African neighbours. The majority of FDI continues to derive from the EU, specifically France. Morocco is also a source of foreign investments. In 2007, it has injected $652 million in projects abroad, which put Morocco in the third position in Africa.\nInvestment by country.\nMost of the FDIs injected in Morocco came from the European Union with France, the major economic partner of the North African kingdom, topping the list with investments worth $1.86 billion, followed by Spain ($783 million), the report said.\nThe influx of European countries in Morocco's FDI represents 73.5% of the global amount received in 2007. 19.3% of the investments came from Arab countries, whose share in Morocco's FDI showed a marked rise, as they only represented 9.9% of the entire FDIs in 2006. A number of Arab countries, mainly from the Persian Gulf region are involved in large-scale projects in Morocco, including the giant Tanger Med port on the Mediterranean. Morocco remains the preferred destination of foreign investors in the Maghreb region (Algeria, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco and Tunisia), with a total of $13.6 billion between 2001 and 2007, which puts it largely on the top of the list.\nInvestment by sector.\nIn terms of sectors, tourism has the biggest share of investment with $1.55 billion, that is 33% of the total FDIs, followed by the real estate sector and the industrial sector, with respectively $930 million and $374 million. Moroccan expatriates' share of the FDI stood at $92 million in 2007, up from $57 million in 2006, and they touch mainly the sectors of real estate, tourism and catering, according to the report.\nScience and technology.\nThe national system of scientific and technical research is guided by different elements, such as the pronouncements of the king, reports of special commissions, five-year plans, and the creation of a special programme for the support of research. The Moroccan government's Five-Year Plan for 2000\u20132004 articulated the priority lines for research. The declared objectives of this plan were to align S&amp;T research with socio-economic development priorities. Sectors declared as priority areas were: agriculture, health fisheries, drinking water, geology, mining, energy, environment, information and telecommunications technologies, and transport.\nThis approach highlighted the need for effective institutional coordination, which enabled different parties to work together around common priority socioeconomic objectives. The private sector is the least active player in research activity in Morocco. The REMINEX Corporation (Research on Mines and Exploitation) is the most prominent research performer in the private sector, and is a subsidiary of Omnium Nord Africain, the largest privately owned mining group in Morocco. The most recent figures available on the number of research staff in Morocco are those provided by the Ministry of National Education, Higher Education, Professional Training and Scientific Research in its 2002\u20132003 annual report. According to this report, Morocco had 17 390 research staff in 2002\u20132003. The majority (58%) were employed in the university sector.\nResearch institutions include the Scientific Institute, founded in 1920 in Rabat, which does fundamental research in the natural sciences, and the Scientific Institute of Maritime Fishing, founded in 1947, in Casablanca, which studies oceanography, marine biology, and topics related to development of the fishing industry. Nine universities and colleges offer degrees in basic and applied sciences. In 1987\u201397, science and engineering students accounted for 41% of college and university enrollments.\nEconomy of Western Sahara.\nFishing and phosphate mining are the main activities in Moroccan-administered Western Sahara. Fruits and vegetables are grown in the few oases, while nomadic herders keep camels, sheep and goats.\nDevelopment of the Northern Region.\nHistorically, the Casablanca-Rabat axis has been more prosperous and has received more government attention than the predominantly mountainous northern provinces and the Western Sahara region. Although the latter region has received government attention since the 1990s because of its phosphate deposits, the northern provinces, which include the Rif Mountains, home to 6 million Moroccans, had been largely neglected. The uneven development among Morocco's regions fueled a cycle of rural-urban migration that has shown no signs of slowing down.\nIn 1998, the government launched a program to develop the northern region, largely with international help. Spain had shown particular interest in the development of the region, because its underdevelopment has fueled illegal immigration and drug trafficking across the Strait of Gibraltar.\nWhen king Hassan II passed on, his son, Mohammed VI, made it his duty to develop the Northern Region, and especially its biggest city, Tangier.\nThe state-owned railway company will engage some $755 million in investment in the northern region, including building a railway line between Tangier and Tangier-Med port (43\u00a0km), improving the Tangier-Casablanca railway line and modernizing many train stations over the next few years.\nTangier.\nBefore 1956, Tangier was a city with international status. It had a great image and attracted many artists. After Morocco regained control over Tangier, this attention slacked off. Investment was low and the city lost its economic importance. But when Mohammed VI became king in 1999, he developed a plan for the economic revival of Tangier. New developments include a new airport terminal, a soccer stadium with seating for 45,000 spectators, a high-speed train line and a new highway to connect the city with Casablanca. Additionally, a new train station was constructed, called Tanger-Ville.\nThe creation of a free economic zone increased the economic output of the city significantly. It allowed Tangier to become an industrial pillar of the country. But the biggest investment was the creation of the new port Tanger-Med. It is the largest port in Africa and on the Mediterranean. The city is undergoing an economic boom. This increased the need for a commercial district, Tangier City Center, which was inaugurated in 2016. In 2012, the Renault Tanger M\u00e9diterran\u00e9e automobile plant was opened, with an annual production over 250,000 units.\nInfrastructure.\nAccording to the Global Competitiveness Report of 2019, Morocco Ranked 16th in the world in terms of Roads, 16th in Sea, 45th in Air and 64th in Railways. This gives Morocco the best infrastructure rankings in the African continent.\nModern infrastructure development, such as ports, airports, and rail links, is a top government priority. To meet the growing domestic demand, the Moroccan government invested more than $15 billion from 2010 to 2015 in upgrading its basic infrastructure.\nMorocco has one of the best road systems on the continent. Over the past 20 years, the government has built approximately 1770 kilometers of modern roads, connecting most major cities via toll expressways. The Moroccan Ministry of Equipment, Transport, Logistics, and Water aims to build an additional 3380 kilometers of expressway and 2100 kilometers of highway by 2030, at an expected cost of $9.6 billion. While focusing on linking the southern provinces notably the cities of Laayoune and Dakhla to the rest of Morocco.\nIn 2014, Morocco began the construction of the second high-speed railway system in Africa linking the cities of Tangiers and Casablanca. It was inaugurated in 2018 by the King following over a decade of planning and construction by Moroccan national railway company ONCF. It is the first phase of what is planned to eventually be a high-speed rail network in Morocco. an extension of the line to Marrakesh is already being planned.\nMorocco also has the largest port in Africa and the Mediterranean called Tanger-Med, which is ranked the 18th in the world with a handling capacity of over 9 million containers. It is situated in the Tangiers free economic zone and serves as a logistics hub for Africa and the world.\nEconomic inequality.\nThe growth pace that the Moroccan economy witnessed since the beginning of the 1998\u20132007 decade has generated significant progress in terms of national income, employment and living standards. However, the results obtained show considerable disparities in terms of the distribution of the fruit of this growth, whether between the production factors, the socio-economic groups or the urban and rural areas. In fact, the national income grew at an average annual rate of 5.5% during the 1998\u20132007 decade. This improvement in the national income however seems to be insufficient to face up to the discrepancies in terms of living standards and the scale of deficits at the social level.\nThe real income of the population registered, during the last 10 years, an annual increase of 2.5%, taking into consideration the fluctuations relating the climatic conditions, which mainly affect the most vulnerable populations and their living standards. The national survey on Moroccans' living standards shows that the part of the most well off (10% of the population) in the overall consumption expenses in 2001 reached 12 times that of the most disadvantaged population (10%). Despite the fact that these disparities tend to decrease in urban areas, these data show the importance of the efforts needed to overcome this situation.\nLabour.\nRoughly one quarter of the population is employed in agriculture, another one quarter make their living in industry, and the remainder are occupied in the trade, finance, and service sectors. Not included in these estimates is a large informal economy of street vendors, domestic workers, and other underemployed and poorly paid individuals. High unemployment is a problem; the official figure is roughly one-tenth of the workforce, but unofficial estimates are much higher, and\u2014in a pattern typical of most Middle Eastern and North African countries\u2014unemployment among university graduates holding nontechnical degrees is especially high. Several trade unions exist in the country; the largest of these, with nearly 700,000 members, is L'Union Marocaine du Travail, which is affiliated with the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions.\nUnemployment.\nMorocco's unemployment rate, long a cause for concern, has been dropping steadily in 2008, on the back of job growth in services and construction. Further institutional reforms to bolster competitiveness and financial openness are expected to help the trend to continue.\nOn the whole, the growth rate of the economy will not reduce the unemployment rate\nsignificantly, also taking account of the constant rise in the number of first entrants on the\nlabour market. The growth level of the last five years did, however, reduce urban\nunemployment from 22% in 1999 to 18.3% in 2005, and the national rate from 13.9% in 1999\nto 10.8% in 2005. The State High Planning Commission that Morocco's official unemployment rate dropped to 9.1% in Q2 2008, down from 9.6% in Q1. This leaves Morocco with some 1.03m unemployed, compared to 1.06m at the end of March. Unemployment stood at 9.8% at the end of 2007, up 0.1% from the end of 2006.\nUrban areas saw particularly strong job growth, and the services and construction sectors were the two leading drivers of job creation. Services generated some 152,000 new jobs, with the business process outsourcing (BPO) and telecoms sector proving particularly dynamic. Meanwhile, government infrastructure projects, as well as heavy private investment in real estate and tourism helped boost the construction sector, which created 80,000 new jobs in the second quarter of 2008.\nEvidently, this trend of falling unemployment rates is a positive one. Joblessness has long been a cause for serious concern in North Africa. Morocco has a lower rate than its Maghreb neighbours\u2014Tunisia has a rate of around 13.9%, and in Algeria it is around 12.3%\u2014but the issue is still a pressing one, both for economic and for social reasons. A 2006 government report suggested that the country needed a net increase of 400,000 jobs annually for the next two decades in order to provide enough employment for its people, given the underlying demographic dynamic.\nMoreover, with Spanish construction firms facing much harder times, Morocco may soon face the additional challenge of workers returning from across the Gibraltar Straits, potentially putting further pressure on the authorities to create jobs.\nWith 30.5% of Morocco's population of 34.3m aged 14 or younger, according to the CIA, job creation for youths is one of the government's major priorities. 2007 data indicate that 17.6% of those in the 15\u201324 age group are unemployed. This rises to around one third in urban areas\u2014rural communities often employ the young in agriculture, including on the family farm, as soon as they leave school, contributing to relatively high youth employment rates (lower levels of official unemployment registration are also a factor).\nEnergy.\nMorocco has very few reserves of its own and has been affected by the high oil prices of 2007 and early 2008. The country has to import 96% of its energy requirements and the national oil bill for the first quarter of 2008 was $1.1 billion\u201469% higher than for the same period in 2007. According to the International Energy Agency (IEA) report 2014, Morocco is highly dependent on imported energy with over 91% of energy supplied coming from abroad. Morocco is working to diversify its energy sources, especially to develop renewable energy, with a particular focus on wind energy. Solar power and nuclear energy are also part of the strategy, but development of the former has been slow and there has been minimal progress on the latter, aside from an announcement of collaboration with France in 2007.\nIn November 2009 Morocco announced a solar energy project worth $9 billion which officials said will account for 38 percent of the North African country's installed power generation by 2020. Funding would be from a mix of private and state capital. The ceremony was attended by U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and the Moroccan king. The project will involve five solar power generation sites across Morocco and will produce 2,000 megawatts of electricity by 2020. Germany has expressed its willingness to participate in the development of Morocco's solar energy project which the country has decided to carry out, as did the World Bank. Germany will also take part in the development of a water-desalination plant.\nThe government plans to reorganise its subsidy system, which is a heavy burden on government finances. In the short term these subsidies are helping to ease the burden but they cannot keep rising indefinitely, and sooner or later the load will have to be shared out. In the short term, national consumption per capita is expected to rise from the current level of 0.4 tonnes of oil equivalent (toe) to as much as 0.90 toe in 2030, a good indication of development, but a massive challenge as well. The input of renewable energy is a matter of particular importance.\nAccording to a 2006 estimate by the Oil and Gas Journal (OGJ), Morocco has proven oil reserves of and natural gas reserves of . Morocco may have additional hydrocarbon reserves, as many of the country's sedimentary basins have not yet been explored. The Moroccan Office of Hydrocarbons and Mining (ONHYM) has become optimistic about finding additional reserves\u2014particularly offshore\u2014following discoveries in neighboring Mauritania.\nRecent activity in Western Sahara, which is believed to contain viable hydrocarbon reserves, has been controversial. In 2001, Morocco granted exploration contracts to TotalEnergies and Kerr-McGee, angering Premier Oil and Sterling Energy, which previously had obtained licenses from the Polisario government. In 2005, the government-in-exile of the Western Sahara invited foreign companies to bid on 12 contracts for offshore exploration, with hopes of awarding production sharing contracts by the end of 2005.\nEnvironment.\nThe shift to an environment-conscious approach in Morocco has brought about scores of investment opportunities, most being in the utility and renewable energy industries. In addition to the rise in sales of photovoltaic panels, the business of wind turbines is also surging despite soaring prices on international markets because of the growing demand. To work towards a programme of sustainable development, a number of technological updates need to be made, including improvements to automobiles, the quality of energy products and increasing the number of renewable energy-producing plants. The government also needs to promote water conservation and efficiency in order to prevent further scarcity. Despite these challenges, Morocco is working to conserve and protect its environment and its efforts were recognised when its Mohammed VI Foundation for Environment won the environmental prize National Energy Globe Award in Brussels in 2007.\nWhile Morocco is already a model of water management in the MENA region, upgrades to its water system under the National Wastewater Management Programme should further improve wastewater treatment and maximise efficient water usage. Authorities are promoting better water rationalisation in agriculture, which uses 80% of water resources, by replacing existing irrigation systems with micro- irrigation and drip networks. A net energy importer, Morocco launched the National Renewable Energy and Efficiency Plan in February 2008 to develop alternative energy to meet 15% of its domestic needs and increase the use of energy-saving methods. It is expected to create more than 40,000 jobs and stimulate over \u20ac4.5 billion in investment by 2020. The National Plan for the Development of Solar Thermal Energy, formulated in 2001, aims to install 440,000 solar-powered water heaters by 2012, of which 235,000 are completed.\nIn May 2009, the World Bank approved a \u20ac121m loan to help finance the implementation of Morocco's solid-waste management programme, which targets a 90% waste disposal rate for urban areas by 2021. The government is taking measures to mitigate the harmful effects of tourism on Morocco's natural resources, while increasing incentives for a growing niche of ecotourism projects. As of January 2008, hotels with good environmental practices will receive a Green Key label as part of a programme by the Mohammed VI Foundation for the Protection of the Environment. Under a ten-year plan for the protection of natural resources, 40,000 to 50,000 ha of forests are replanted annually with indigenous palm trees.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19297", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19297", "title": "Telecommunications in Morocco", "text": "The following is an outline of communications technology in Morocco.\nTelecoms industry.\nWhile the Moroccan telecoms market remains under-saturated, its three mobile operators \u2013\u2013 both at home and abroad \u2013\u2013 have experienced robust growth in recent years. Meditel, which received a mobile licence in 2000, is the kingdom's first private operator, holding 36.69% of the market. While the company performed strongly last year, registering a 17% growth in client base (to 7.4m) over the first three quarters of 2008, it began to falter as consumer spending slowed, resulting in a 1% annual increase in turnover for Q2 2009. Meditel's focus on lower-income markets impacted their average revenue per user, which fell by 16%, but the resulting expansion of the customer base helped drive up the country's mobile penetration rate from 65.7% in 2007 to 74% in 2008. Meditel's biggest competitor is Maroc Telecom, holding 60.71% of the market. A former state monopoly now controlled by French entertainment giant Vivendi, Maroc Telecom is one of the region's fastest-growing multinational telecoms operators, actively pursuing expansion across northwest Africa, including Gabon, Mauritania and Burkina Faso. MT has announced plans to create a fibre-optic network connecting the Moroccan cities La\u00e2youne and Dakhla to Nouadhibou, which would ultimately be extended to other North African countries.\nMeditel and MT operated a duopoly until 2008, when the state regulator Agence Nationale de R\u00e9glementation des T\u00e9l\u00e9communications waved in Wana, owned by Morocco's Omnium Nord Africain. Though holding a tiny share (2.6%) of the voice market, this new player has captured a majority of the 3G market (69.11%). Total subscribers for this new technology increased 527% in 2008. In early 2009, Wana sold a 31% stake for \u20ac228m ($324m/MAD 2.85bn) to the partnership of two Kuwaiti companies, mobile operator Zain and Al Ajial Investment Fund Holding, to help finance the roll out of its 15-year 2G GSM network at the end of 2009. In August 2019, the government signed a MAD 10 billion investment deal with Maroc Telecom to improve telecom infrastructure in the country.\nTelephone system.\nsource:\nDomestic telephone system.\nMorocco has a constantly failing system composed of open-wire lines, cables, and microwave radio relay links. The internet is available but slow, and overpriced in comparison to Europe and the United States. The principal switching centers are Casablanca and Rabat. An improved rural service employs microwave radio relay.\nInternational telephone system.\nThe system has seven submarine cables, three satellite earth stations, two Intelsat (over the Atlantic Ocean) and one Arabsat. There is a microwave radio relay to Gibraltar, Spain and the Western Sahara. Coaxial cables and microwave radio relays exist to Algeria. Morocco is a participant in Medarabtel and a fiber-optic cable links from Agadir to Algeria and Tunisia.\nRadio broadcast.\nFirst radio service began in 1928 in Morocco.\nInternet.\nThe country had more than 16.3M of internet users in 2012.\nOperated by Maroc Telecom (IAM). The service started as a test in November 2002 before it was launched in October 2003 and it is one of the most technologically advanced Internet services in the African continent but the service is monopolised by IAM. The service is offered by the subsidiary Menara.The company is the best in the Moroccan market in the ADSL, optic fiber and they offers the following options:\nPersonal ADSL (All of those offers are available with a 12 months or above engagement) :\nThe installation is free, but the ADSL modem or router is not always free.\nIAM is the only ISP who operate underwater cables and national cables, the things that cause a huge monopoly in the Moroccan market, the other ISPs can always rent a part of the leader's infrastructure.\nOrange Morocco offers ADSL, optic fiber and 4G+ but their connexions is considered as the weakest in the country according to Ookla .\nINWI offers ADSL, optic fiber and 4G+ the internet provided by INWI is lower than IAM refers to Ookla but they have the largest coverage and the highest bandwidth when it comes to 4G+ referred to Network Performance which makes the IPS great for those who uses mobile data.\nMobile data prices (Without engagement) :\nThe plans are 0,5\u00a0GB (500\u00a0MB), 1\u00a0GB, 2\u00a0GB, 2,5\u00a0GB, 3\u00a0GB, 5\u00a0GB, 10\u00a0GB and 20\u00a0GB\nTo calculate the price of each plan, multiple the number of GBs by 10 and you should get the price in MAD.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19298", "revid": "49571321", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19298", "title": "Transport in Morocco", "text": "There are around of roads (national, regional and provincial) in Morocco. In addition to of highways (August 2016).\nThe Tangier\u2013Casablanca high-speed rail link marks the first stage of the ONCF's high-speed rail master plan, pursuant to which over of new railway lines will be built by 2035. The high speed train - TGV - will have a capacity of 500 passengers and will carry 8 million passengers per year. The work on the High Speed Rail project was started in September 2011. Construction of infrastructure and delivery of railway equipment will end in 2014 and the HSR will be operational by none }}.\nGovernment policy.\nWith billions of dollars committed to improving the country's infrastructure, Morocco aims to become a world player in terms of marine transport. The 2008\u20132012 investment plan aims to invest $16.3 billion and will contribute to major projects such as the combined port and industrial complex of the Tanger-Med and the construction of a high-speed train between Tangier and Casablanca. The plan will also improve and expand the existing highway system and expand the Casablanca Mohammed V International Airport. Morocco's transport sector is one of the kingdom's most dynamic, and will remain so for years to come. The improvements in infrastructure will boost other sectors and will also help the country in its goal of attracting 10 million tourists by 2010.\nRailways.\n1907\u00a0km standard gauge, 1003\u00a0km electrified with 3 kV DC.\nHigh speed lines.\nMorocco has one high-speed line with plans for several additional high-speed lines extensions.\nSince 2018, the first high-speed rail line connects Casablanca and Tangier. This line is the first of its kind on the African continent. The line was inaugurated on 15 November 2018, by King Mohammed VI of Morocco. It is called Al Boraq (\u0627\u0644\u0628\u064f\u0631\u0627\u0642) in reference to the mythical creature that transported the Islamic prophets. On 26 November 2018, it was launched. This high-speed line allows a 323-kilometer-long (201\u00a0mi) high-speed rail service.the service is operated by the ONCF. \nThe high-speed line required over a decade of planning and construction. Work by ONCF began in September 2011 on a first section from Tangier to Kenitra. \nThe current high-speed line Tangier-Kenitra under construction was impacted by delays resulting from issues about land acquisitions because this operation was performed by different provincial governors, in order to avoid such delays on the next high-speed rail Marrakech-Essaouira, the national railway company ONCF was given the green light to start the land acquisition and expropriation procedure.\nThere are plans for extensions on two core lines: a first one from Tangier in the north via Marrakesh to Agadir in the south, and a second from Casablanca on the Atlantic to Oujda on the Algerian border. If all of these plans are approved soon enough, building the 1,500 kilometres of tracks may last until 2035 to complete at a cost of around 100 billion dirhams ($10 billion).\nProposed high speed extensions.\nPotential speed gains are large, with travel time from Casablanca to Marrakesh down from 3 hours to 1:20, and from the capital Rabat to Tangier from 4:30 to 1:30.\nThe second High-Speed Rail (HSR) which is planned to be built after Tangier-Kenitra is the HSR Marrakech-Essaouira (180\u00a0km) followed by a new HSR Rabat-Meknes (130\u00a0km). The last high-speed lines will connect these two old empire cities to the Atlantique coast in less than one hour instead of two hours now.\nIn December 2024, Morocco secured $14 billion in investments to expand Morocco's high speed rail. The goal of the project is to increase the high speed rail coverage of 320km to over 1280km by 2040, this would significantly enhance the country's connectivity, reduce travel times, and contribute to a greener, more sustainable transport system. \nhigh-speed rail linking Kenitra to Marrakech via Casablanca Airport is being currently constructed. Journeys to Marrakech will only take 2 hours 45 minutes by 2029, down from 7 hours. Another line connecting Marrakech to Agadir could be ready as soon as mid-2025.\nOther routes.\nA railway connecting Nador to the existing network at Taourirt was finished in 2010, after it had been under construction since 2007.\nRoads.\nAs of 2006 there were around 57625 kilometres of roads (national, regional and provincial) in Morocco, and an additional 1808 kilometers of highways (August 2016).\nPrincipal national roads:\nMerchant marine.\nTotal: 35 ships (\u00a0GT or over) by type:\nForeign-owned: 14 (France 13, Germany 1) (2007)\nIntercity bus companies.\nBus service in Morocco offers access almost to every corner of the country. There's a big choice of carriers at bus stations, among them:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19299", "revid": "37371155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19299", "title": "Royal Moroccan Armed Forces", "text": "Combined military forces of Morocco\nThe Royal Moroccan Armed Forces () are the military forces of Morocco. They consist of the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, the Royal Gendarmerie, and the Royal Guard.\nThe Royal Moroccan Armed Forces have experience in counter-insurgency, desert warfare and combined air-land operations. Further experience has come from participating in peace-keeping operations.\nHistory.\nThe oldest \"Moroccan\" military forces are those of the Mauri Berber Kingdoms from around 225 BCE. The Moroccan army has existed continuously since 1088 during the rising of Almoravid Empire in the 11th century. During the protectorates period (1912\u20131955), large numbers of Moroccans were recruited for service in the Goumiers and Regulars regiments of the Moroccan Army of Morocco (French: \"Arm\u00e9e de Maroc\"). Many served during World War I. During World War II more than 500,000 Moroccan troops (including goumier auxiliaries) served with the Allied forces in North Africa, Italy, France, Germany and Austria. The two world conflicts saw Moroccan units earning the nickname of \"Todesschwalben\" (death swallows) by German soldiers as they showed particular toughness on the battlefield. After the end of World War II, Moroccan troops formed part of the French Far East Expeditionary Corps engaged in the First Indochina War from 1946 to 1954.\nThe Spanish Army also made extensive use of Moroccan troops recruited in the Spanish Protectorate, during both the Rif War of 1921\u201326 and the Spanish Civil War of 1936\u201339. Moroccan \"Regulares\", together with the Spanish Legion, made up Spain's elite Spanish Army of Africa. A para-military gendarmerie, known as the \"Mehal-la Jalifianas\" and modelled on the French goumieres, was employed within the Spanish Zone.\nThe Royal Armed Forces were created on 14 May 1956, after the Franco-spanish Protectorate was dissolved in 1955. 140,000 Moroccan personnel from the French protectoral army and 90,000 from the Spanish protectoral army Forces transferred into the newly formed armed forces, this number was augmented by approximately 15,000 former guerrillas from the \"Army of Liberation\", About 2,000 French and Spanish officers and NCOs remained in Morocco on short term contracts until the training programs at the military academies of St-Cyr, Toledo and Dar al Bayda produced sufficient numbers of Moroccan commissioned officers. Four years later, the Royal Moroccan Navy was established in 1960.\nThe Moroccan military's first engagement as an independent country in the 20th century was the Ifni War, followed by the Rif revolt, and then the border war of 1963 with Algeria, In the early 1960s, Moroccan troops were sent to the Congo as part of the first multifunctional UN peacekeeping operation ONUC, The Royal Moroccan Armed Forces fought on the Golan front during the Yom Kippur War of 1973 (mostly in the battle for Quneitra) and intervened decisively in the 1977 conflict known as Shaba I to save Zaire's regime. After Shaba II, Morocco was part of the Inter-African Force deployed on the Zaire border, contributing about 1,500 troops. The Royal Moroccan Armed Forces also took a symbolic part in the Gulf War among other Arab armies.\nBetween 1975 and 1991, the Moroccan Armed Forces fought a 16-year war against the POLISARIO, an Algerian backed rebel national liberation movement seeking the independence of Western Sahara from Morocco. From the mid-1980s on, Morocco largely managed to keep POLISARIO troops at bay by building a huge sand wall, staffed by an army roughly the same size as the entire Sahrawi population, enclosing the Southern Provinces within it. The enclosure contained most of the economically useful parts of Western Sahara, including Bou Craa, El-Aaiun, and Smara. The Moroccan army destroyed all the posts created by the Polisario and won decisively the majority of battles, but artillery strikes and sniping attacks by the guerrillas continued, and Morocco was economically and politically strained by the war.\nIn the 1990s, Moroccan troops went to Angola with the three UN Angola Verifications Missions, UNAVEM I, UNAVEM II, and UNAVEM III. They were also in Somalia, with UNOSOM I, the U.S.-led Unified Task Force (UNITAF), known by its U.S. codename of 'Restore Hope' and the follow-on UNOSOM II, They saw fighting during the Battle of Mogadishu to rescue a U.S. anti-militia assault force. Other peace support involvement during the 1990s included United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC) in Cambodia, and the missions in the former Yugoslavia: IFOR, SFOR, and KFOR.\nOn 14 July 1999, the Moroccan Armed Forces took part in the Bastille Day parade on the Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es, which was exceptional for a non-French armed forces, at the invitation of then French President Jacques Chirac.\nBranches.\nThe modern Moroccan military is composed of the following branches:\nThe Royal Army.\nThe Royal Moroccan Army is the branch of the Royal Moroccan Armed Forces responsible for land-based military operations. The army is about 375,000 troops strong, In case of war or a state of siege, an additional force of 250,000 Reservists and paramilitary forces, including 50,000 regulars of the Royal Moroccan Gendarmerie and 70,000 Auxiliary Forces come under the Ministry of Defense command. The Moroccan Army helped with the annexation of Western Sahara which is disputed. \nRoyal Guard.\nThe Moroccan Royal Guard is officially part of the Royal Moroccan Army, However, it is under the direct operational control of the Royal Military Household of His Majesty the King, The sole duty of the guard is to provide for the security and safety of the King and royal family of Morocco with 3,500 personnel.\nThe Royal Air Force.\nThe Royal Moroccan Air Force is the air force branch of the Moroccan Armed Forces, It employs 13,000 personnel and is equipped with more than 300 aircraft. In the 21st century, the Royal Moroccan Air Force started a progressive modernization program of its aging fleet and its technical and operational capacities.\nThe Royal Navy.\nThe Royal Navy is the branch of the Moroccan Armed Forces responsible of conducting naval operations, 7,800 personnel strong Its mission includes the protection of Moroccan territory and sovereignty, as well as the control of Morocco's Exclusive Economic Zone. Given Morocco's significant coastline (2,952\u00a0km) and strategic position overseeing the strait of Gibraltar, it (with Spain and the United Kingdom) is deeply involved in the security of this important international waterway.\nRoyal Gendarmerie.\nThe Moroccan Royal Gendarmerie is the Gendarmerie body of Morocco. The legislation which founded the Royal Moroccan Gendarmerie describes it as a public force designed to guarantee public security and public order and the implementation of laws. This legislation text attaches the Gendarmerie to the Royal Moroccan Army, then constituting a military force in its structure, administration and command forms. It consists of officers and NCOs.\nHistory of participation in peacekeeping operations.\nCongo 1960\u20131961.\nCongo United Nations Operation in the Congo\nBy 20 July 1960 Morocco had deployed 1,250 troops in Congo.\nSomalia 1992\u20131994.\nSomalia UNOSOM I, UNITAF, UNOSOM II\nBosnia and Herzegovina 1996\u20132007.\nBosnia and Herzegovina IFOR, SFOR, EUFOR Althea\nKosovo 1998-1999.\nKosovo Kosovo War\nMorocco has deployed one company of soldiers to contribute in the NATO-led international peacekeeping force which was responsible for establishing a secure environment in Kosovo.\nHaiti 2004\u20132006.\nHaiti MINUSTAH\nIn 2004, Morocco provided an infantry company as part of a joint Spanish-Moroccan battalion, which was deployed in Fort Libert\u00e9, in the north-eastern part of Haiti. Disagreements between the United Nations and the Spanish government led to Spain\u00b4s withdrawal from the mission, leaving the Moroccans in charge of a much larger area than what was initially designed. The last Moroccan troops left Haiti in 2006, and the area was covered by a battalion from Uruguay, which already had another unit in the South of the country. About six Moroccan Army officers served in the mission HQ during this period.\nDemocratic Republic of the Congo since 1999.\nMorocco has deployed 6 observers, one mechanised infantry battalion and one field hospital to participate in the United Nations Security Council efforts to monitor the peace process of the Second Congo War.\nIvory Coast since 2004.\nIvory Coast UNOCI\nMorocco has deployed one infantry battalion to participate in the UNOCI peacekeeping mission whose objective is \"to facilitate the implementation by the Ivorian parties of the peace agreement signed by them in January 2003\" (which aimed to end the Ivorian Civil War). The two main Ivorian parties here are the Ivorian Government forces who control the south of the country, and the New Forces (former rebels), who control the north. The UNOCI mission aims to control a \"zone of confidence\" across the centre of the country separating the two parties.\nCentral African Republic since 2013.\nCentral African Republic BINUCA, MINUSCA\nThe Moroccan Royal Armed Forces has sent a contingent of 777 Moroccan soldiers on December 25, 2013 for the Central African Republic to be deployed in the UN Integrated Peace building Office (BINUCA). Moroccan authorities also said they stand ready to support the Central African Republic in its path toward peace and stability.\nMotto.\nThe Royal Moroccan Armed Forces motto, which graces every military base, banner, and ship, is: God, The Homeland, and The King.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19300", "revid": "51043825", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19300", "title": "Foreign relations of Morocco", "text": " \nMorocco is a member of the United Nations and belongs to the African Union, Arab League, Arab Maghreb Union (UMA), Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), the Non-Aligned Movement and the Community of Sahel-Saharan States (CEN-SAD). Morocco's relationships vary greatly between African, Arab, United States, United Kingdom, Australia, and Western states. Morocco has had strong ties with the West in order to gain economic and political benefits. France and Spain remain the primary trade partners, as well as the primary creditors and foreign investors in Morocco. From the total foreign investments in Morocco, the European Union invests approximately 73.5%, whereas the Arab world invests only 19.3%. As of 2009, many countries from the Persian Gulf and Maghreb regions are also becoming more involved in large-scale development projects in Morocco.\nForeign relations have had a significant impact on economic and social development in Morocco. Certain evidence of foreign influence is through the many development projects, loans, investments, and free trade agreements that Morocco has with other countries. Some free trade agreements include the Euro-Mediterranean free trade area agreement with the European Union; the Greater Arab Free Trade Area with Egypt, Jordan, and Tunisia; as well as the US-Morocco Free Trade Agreement with the United States. An example of recent foreign influence is through loan agreements. Morocco signed three loan agreements with the French Development Agency (AFD) in 2009, totalling up to 155 million euros. These were for the purpose of reforming the education system, rural roads and rehabilitation, as well as infrastructure projects.\nFactors influencing foreign relations.\nRole of political organization.\nPolicies associated with foreign relations are determined by King Mohamed VI, as well as his advisors, despite the fact that Morocco has a constitutional monarchy. Morocco has had a history of monarchical rule. For example, the previous king, Hassan II of Morocco, suspended parliament in 1965 and ruled directly for two years. This was in response to the discovery of a plot on the king's life, of which a political party, UNFP, was accused of orchestrating. Foreign relations with Western countries became strained as a result of this. Portraying Morocco as a democratic state became important if Morocco wished to receive loans and investments from foreign powers.\nRole of colonialism.\nMorocco's current relations with some countries are related to its colonial history. Morocco was secretly partitioned by Spain and France and in 1912 the Moroccan territory was made into French and Spanish protectorates. After achieving independence in 1956, Morocco still has a strong relationship with its former colonizers. Spain and France are currently the largest exporting and importing partners to Morocco. French is still popularly spoken and remains the second language in Morocco whilst Spanish is also widespread, particularly in the northern regions. France now is home to more than a million Moroccans legally residing in the country. This is the largest Moroccan population in a foreign country, followed next by Spain. These former colonizers remain influential in economic matters, such as development projects, investments, trade, and loans.\nRole of free market.\nRelations with foreign powers, especially with the West, have also been strengthened as Morocco has liberalized its economy and implemented major economic reforms. In 1993 there was major privatization and markets were opened up to foreign powers. Morocco now is focusing more on promoting foreign direct investments. In 2007, Morocco adopted the Hassan II Fund for Development, which are measures that simplify procedures to make the process easier and more financially beneficial for foreign investors. This was done with financial incentives, as well as tax exemptions. These policies make it beneficial for other countries to have relations with Morocco so that they can take advantage of their goods. Morocco's exports are mainly agriculture, and it is one of the largest exporters of phosphate in the world. In addition, Morocco has rich fishing waters, a tourist industry, and a small manufacturing sector.\nRole of foreign policy support.\nMorocco also gains financial support from countries that it assists. For example, Morocco has had a long history of supporting the United States and it has received financial support as a result. Moroccan troops were involved in Bosnia as well as in Somalia, during the operation Desert Storm. Morocco also was among the first Arab and Islamic states to denounce the September 11 attacks and declare solidarity with the American people in the war against terror. It has contributed to UN peacekeeping efforts on the continent. In 1998, the U.S. Secretary of Defense, William Cohen, said that Morocco and the U.S. have \"mutual concerns over transnational terrorism\" as well as interests in \"the effort to control the spread of weapons of mass destruction\". In recognition of its support for the war on terror, in June 2004 U.S. President George W. Bush designated Morocco as a major non-NATO ally. \nAnother case of mutual foreign policy interests is with Saudi Arabia. Ties between these countries were strengthened when Morocco sent troops to help Saudi Arabia during the 1992 Gulf War. This was perceived as a \"gesture to support Western and Arab allies\". Morocco's relationship to countries in the Middle East and its contribution to the Palestinian cause have created stronger relations between these countries.\nRole of immigration.\nAnother factor determining relations is how much immigration the country receives from Morocco. The beginning of major migration to Europe began during the colonial era (1912 to 1956). During World War I and II, France had an urgent need for manpower, which led to the recruitment of tens of thousands of Moroccan men to work in factories, mines, and in the army. Another increase in immigration from Morocco to France was during the Algerian war of independence. France stopped recruiting workers from Algeria and instead accepted more Moroccan factory and mine labourers. Immigration increased even further from 1962 to 1972 when economic growth in Europe occurred, which led to a greater demand for low-skilled labour. At this time, Morocco signed major labour recruitment agreements with European countries, such as France, West Germany, Belgium, and the Netherlands. This led to a more diverse spread of emigration, which until this time was focused primarily on the country of France.\nMorocco's perceived identity plays a role in its relations with other countries. Numerous countries have strong relations with Morocco because of its history of being a Western ally. For example, Morocco has the longest friendship treaties with the United States. This is important for US interests because Morocco is a stable, democratizing, and liberalizing MENA &amp; Muslim nation. Geopolitical benefits are evident because ties to Morocco means that an ally is established in Africa, in the Maghreb region. Morocco's identity as a Muslim state has also strengthened ties with the Persian Gulf countries as a result of 9/11 and the \"war on terror\". This has resulted in Arab countries, including members of the GCC (Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Oman, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates), choosing to invest more in Morocco. Many countries in the Maghreb region also invest in Morocco because of perceived similarities in identity.\nMaghreb and Africa.\nMorocco is very active in Maghreb and African affairs. The Arab Maghreb Union is made up of Morocco, Algeria, Libya, Mauritania, and Tunisia. Although it was long not a member of the African Union (formerly the Organisation of African Unity) since November 12, 1984\u2014following the admission of the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic as the government of Western Sahara\u2014Morocco remained involved in developing the regional economy, as the city of Casablanca contains North Africa's busiest port and serves as the country's economic center. Morocco rejoined the African Union on 30 January 2017, following a change in AU leadership. There are significant ties with West African and Sahel countries and Morocco maintains good relationships with Senegal, Gabon and Burkina Faso.\nPositions on Western Sahara conflict.\nThe following lists contain the following states and entities:\nSome states are listed in both lists, for example when a state is supportive of the \"right of self-determination\" including the option of autonomy under Morocco sovereignty. Some states change their opinion frequently, or give separate announcements of support for both Morocco and the Polisario Front/SADR.\nSome of the states announcing support of the \"right of self-determination\" in addition already recognize the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic. Not all of the states that have canceled relations with or withdrawn recognition of SADR have announced support for the Moroccan claim.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Morocco maintains diplomatic relations with:\nBilateral relations.\nAsia.\nMorocco's stance is supporting the search for peace in the Middle East, encouraging Israeli\u2013Palestinian negotiations and urging moderation on both sides.\nMorocco maintains close relations with Saudi Arabia and the Persian Gulf states, which have provided Morocco with substantial amounts of financial assistance. Morocco was the first Arab state to condemn Iraq's invasion of Kuwait and sent troops to help defend Saudi Arabia. Morocco also was among the first Arab and Islamic states to denounce the September 11 attacks in the United States and declare solidarity with the American people in the war against terrorism. It has contributed to United Nations peacekeeping efforts on the continent. In recognition of its support for the war on terrorism, in June 2004 U.S. President George W. Bush designated Morocco as a major non-NATO ally.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19301", "revid": "46652772", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19301", "title": "Mozambique", "text": "Country in Southeastern Africa\nMozambique, officially the Republic of Mozambique, is a country located in Southeast Africa bordered by the Indian Ocean to the east, Tanzania to the north, Malawi and Zambia to the northwest, Zimbabwe to the west, and Eswatini and South Africa to the south and southwest. The sovereign state is separated from the Comoros, Mayotte, and Madagascar through the Mozambique Channel to the east. The capital and largest city is Maputo.\nBetween the 7th and 11th centuries, a series of Swahili port towns developed in the area, which contributed to the development of a distinct Swahili culture and dialect. In the late medieval period, these towns were frequented by traders from Somalia, Ethiopia, Egypt, Arabia, Persia, and India. The voyage of Vasco da Gama in 1498 marked the arrival of the Portuguese, who began a gradual process of colonisation and settlement in 1505. After over four centuries of Portuguese rule, Mozambique gained independence in 1975, becoming the People's Republic of Mozambique shortly thereafter. After only two years of independence, the country descended into an intense and protracted civil war lasting from 1977 to 1992. In 1994, Mozambique held its first multiparty elections and has since remained a relatively stable presidential republic, although it still faces a low-intensity insurgency mainly in the furthest regions from the southern capital and where Islam is dominant.\nMozambique is endowed with rich and extensive natural resources. The country's economy is based chiefly on fishery\u2014mostly molluscs, crustaceans and echinoderms\u2014and agriculture with a growing industry of food and beverages, chemical manufacturing, aluminium and oil. The tourism sector is expanding. Mozambique's GDP grew significantly after 2001, but since 2014/15, both a significant decrease in household real consumption and a sharp rise in economic inequality have been observed. The nation remains one of the poorest and most underdeveloped countries in the world, ranking low in GDP per capita, human development, measures of inequality and average life expectancy.\nThe country's population of around 34,777,605 as of 2024 estimates (a 2.96% increase from 2023) consists of more than 2,000 ethnic groups and is composed overwhelmingly of Bantu peoples. However, the only official language in Mozambique is Portuguese, which is spoken in urban areas as a first or second language by most, and generally as a lingua franca between younger Mozambicans with access to formal education. The most important local languages include Tsonga, Makhuwa, Sena, Chichewa, and Swahili. Glottolog lists 46 languages spoken in the country, of which one is a signed language (Mozambican Sign Language/\"L\u00edngua de sinais de Mo\u00e7ambique\"). The most popular religion in Mozambique is Christianity, with significant minorities following Islam and African traditional religions.\nEtymology.\nThe country was named Mo\u00e7ambique by the Portuguese after the Island of Mozambique, derived from either Mussa Bin Bique, \"Musa Al Big,\" \"Mossa Al Bique\", \"Mussa Ben Mbiki\" or \"Mussa Ibn Malik\", an Arab trader who first visited the island and later lived there and was still alive when Vasco da Gama called at the island in 1498. The island-town was the capital of the Portuguese colony until 1898, when it was moved south to Louren\u00e7o Marques (now Maputo).\nHistory.\nBantu migrations.\nBantu-speaking peoples migrated into Mozambique as early as the 4th century BC. It is believed between the 1st and 5th centuries AD, waves of migration from the west and north went through the Zambezi River valley and then gradually into the plateau and coastal areas of Southern Africa. They established agricultural communities or societies based on herding cattle. They brought with them the technology for smelting and smithing iron.\nSwahili Coast.\nFrom the late first millennium AD, vast Indian Ocean trade networks extended as far south as present day Vilankulo, as evidenced by the ancient port town of Chibuene. Beginning in the 9th century, a growing involvement in Indian Ocean trade led to the development of numerous port towns along the entire East African coast, including modern day Mozambique. Largely autonomous, these towns broadly participated in the incipient Swahili culture. Islam was often adopted by urban elites, facilitating trade. In Mozambique, Sofala, Angoche, and Mozambique Island were regional powers by the 15th century.\nThe towns traded with merchants from both the African interior and the broader Indian Ocean world. Particularly important were the gold and ivory caravan routes. Inland states like the Kingdom of Zimbabwe and Kingdom of Mutapa provided the coveted gold and ivory, which were then exchanged up the coast to larger port cities like Kilwa and Mombasa.\nPortuguese Mozambique (1498\u20131975).\nThe Island of Mozambique, after which the country is named, is a small coral island at the mouth of Mossuril Bay on the Nacala coast of northern Mozambique, and was first explored by Europeans in the late 15th century.\nWhen Portuguese explorers reached Mozambique in 1498, Arab-trading settlements had existed along the coast and outlying islands for several centuries. From about 1500, Portuguese trading posts and forts displaced the Arabic commercial and military hegemony, becoming regular ports of call on the new European sea route to the east, the first steps in what was to become a process of colonisation.\nThe voyage of Vasco da Gama around the Cape of Good Hope in 1498 marked the Portuguese entry into trade, politics, and society of the region. The Portuguese gained control of the Island of Mozambique and the port city of Sofala in the early 16th century, and by the 1530s, small groups of Portuguese traders and prospectors seeking gold penetrated the interior regions. Here they set up garrisons and trading posts at Sena and Tete on the Zambezi and tried to gain exclusive control over the gold trade.\nIn the central part of the Mozambique territory, the Portuguese attempted to legitimise and consolidate their trade and settlement positions through the creation of \"prazos\". These land grants tied emigrants to their settlements, and inland Mozambique was largely left to be administered by \"prazeiros\", the grant holders, while central authorities in Portugal concentrated their direct exercise of power on, in their view, the more important Portuguese possessions in Asia and the Americas. Slavery in Mozambique pre-dated European-contact. African rulers and chiefs dealt in enslaved people, first with Arab Muslim traders, who sent the enslaved to Middle East Asia cities and plantations, and later with Portuguese and other European traders. In a continuation of the trade, slaves were supplied by warring local African rulers, who raided enemy tribes and sold their captives to the \"prazeiros\". The authority of the \"prazeiros\" was exercised and upheld amongst the local population by armies of these enslaved men, whose members became known as \"Chikunda\". Continuing emigration from Portugal occurred at comparatively low levels until late in the nineteenth century, promoting \"Africanisation\". While \"prazos\" were originally intended to be held solely by Portuguese colonists, through intermarriage and the relative isolation of \"prazeiros\" from ongoing Portuguese influences, the \"prazos\" became African-Portuguese or African-Indian.\nAlthough Portuguese influence gradually expanded, its power was limited and exercised through individual settlers and officials who were granted extensive autonomy. The Portuguese were able to wrest much of the coastal trade from Arab Muslims between 1500 and 1700, but, with the Arab Muslim seizure of Portugal's key foothold at Fort Jesus on Mombasa Island (now in Kenya) in 1698, the pendulum began to swing in the other direction. As a result, investment lagged while Lisbon devoted itself to the more lucrative trade with India and the Far East and to the colonisation of Brazil.\nThe Mazrui and Omani Arabs reclaimed much of the Indian Ocean trade, forcing the Portuguese to retreat south. Many \"prazos\" had declined by the mid-19th century, but several of them survived. During the 19th century other European powers, particularly the British (British South Africa Company) and the French (Madagascar), became increasingly involved in the trade and politics of the region around the Portuguese East African territories.\nBy the early 20th century the Portuguese had shifted the administration of much of Mozambique to large private companies, like the Mozambique Company, the Zambezia Company and the Niassa Company, controlled and financed mostly by British financiers such as Solomon Joel, which established railroad lines to their neighbouring colonies (South Africa and Rhodesia). Although slavery had been legally abolished in Mozambique, at the end of the 19th century the chartered companies enacted a forced labour policy and supplied cheap\u2014often forced\u2014African labour to the mines and plantations of the nearby British colonies and South Africa. The Zambezia Company, the most profitable chartered company, took over several smaller \"prazeiro\" holdings and established military outposts to protect its property. The chartered companies built roads and ports to bring their goods to market including a railroad linking present-day Zimbabwe with the Mozambican port of Beira.\nDue to their unsatisfactory performance and the shift, under the corporatist \"Estado Novo\" regime of Oliveira Salazar, toward stronger state control of the Portuguese Empire's economy, the companies' concessions were not renewed when they ran out. This was what happened in 1942 with the Mozambique Company, which, however, continued to operate in the agricultural and commercial sectors as a corporation, and had already happened in 1929 with the termination of the Niassa Company's concession. In 1951, the Portuguese overseas colonies in Africa were rebranded as Overseas Provinces of Portugal.\nThe Mueda massacre of 16 June 1960 resulted in the death of Makonde protestors, which provoked the struggle of independence from Portuguese rule of Mozambique.\nMozambican War of Independence (1964\u20131975).\nAs communist and anti-colonial ideologies spread out across Africa, many clandestine political movements were established in support of Mozambican independence. These movements claimed that since policies and development plans were primarily designed by the ruling authorities for the benefit of Mozambique's Portuguese population, little attention was paid to Mozambique's tribal integration and the development of its native communities. According to the official guerrilla statements, this affected a majority of the indigenous population who suffered both state-sponsored discrimination and enormous social pressure. As a response to the guerrilla movement, the Portuguese government from the 1960s and principally the early 1970s initiated gradual changes with new socioeconomic developments and egalitarian policies.\nThe Front for the Liberation of Mozambique (FRELIMO) initiated a guerrilla campaign against Portuguese rule in September 1964. This conflict\u2014along with the two others already initiated in the other Portuguese colonies of Angola and Portuguese Guinea\u2014became part of the so-called Portuguese Colonial War (1961\u20131974). From a military standpoint, the Portuguese regular army maintained control of the population centres while the guerrilla forces sought to undermine their influence in rural and tribal areas in the north and west. As part of their response to FRELIMO, the Portuguese government began to pay more attention to creating favourable conditions for social development and economic growth.\nIndependence (1975).\nFRELIMO took control of the territory after ten years of sporadic warfare, as well as Portugal's own return to democracy after the fall of the authoritarian \"Estado Novo\" regime in the Carnation Revolution of April 1974 and the failed coup of 25 November 1975. Within a year, most of the 250,000 Portuguese in Mozambique had left\u2014some expelled by the government of the nearly independent territory, some left the country to avoid possible reprisals from the unstable government\u2014and Mozambique became independent from Portugal on 25 June 1975. A law had been passed on the initiative of the relatively unknown Armando Guebuza of the FRELIMO party, ordering the Portuguese to leave the country in 24 hours with only of luggage. Unable to salvage any of their assets, most of them returned to Portugal penniless.\nMozambican Civil War (1977\u20131992).\nThe new government under President Samora Machel established a one-party state based on Marxist principles. It received diplomatic and some military support from Cuba and the Soviet Union and proceeded to crack down on opposition. Starting shortly after independence, the country was plagued from 1977 to 1992 by a long and violent civil war between the opposition forces of anti-communist Mozambican National Resistance (RENAMO) rebel militias and the FRELIMO regime. This conflict characterised the first decades of Mozambican independence, combined with sabotage from the neighbouring states of Rhodesia and South Africa, ineffective policies, failed central planning, and the resulting economic collapse. This period was also marked by the exodus of Portuguese nationals and Mozambicans of Portuguese heritage, a collapsed infrastructure, lack of investment in productive assets, and government nationalisation of privately owned industries, as well as widespread famine.\nDuring most of the civil war, the FRELIMO-formed central government was unable to exercise effective control outside urban areas, many of which were cut off from the capital. RENAMO-controlled areas included up to 50% of the rural areas in several provinces, and it is reported that health services of any kind were isolated from assistance for years in those areas. The problem worsened when the government cut back spending on health care. The war was marked by mass human rights violations from both sides of the conflict, with both RENAMO and FRELIMO contributing to the chaos through the use of terror and indiscriminate targeting of civilians. The central government executed tens of thousands of people while trying to extend its control throughout the country and sent many people to \"re-education camps\" where thousands died.\nDuring the war, RENAMO proposed a peace agreement based on the secession of RENAMO-controlled northern and western territories as the independent \"Republic of Rombesia\", but FRELIMO refused, insisting on the undivided sovereignty of the entire country. An estimated one million Mozambicans perished during the civil war, 1.7\u00a0million took refuge in neighbouring states, and several million more were internally displaced. The FRELIMO regime also gave shelter and support to South African (African National Congress) and Zimbabwean (Zimbabwe African National Union) rebel movements, while the governments of Rhodesia and later Apartheid South Africa backed RENAMO in the civil war. Between 300,000 and 600,000 people died of famine during the war.\nOn 19 October 1986, Machel was on his way back from an international meeting in Zambia when his plane crashed in the Lebombo Mountains near Mbuzini in South Africa. President Machel and thirty-three others died, including ministers and officials of the Mozambique government. The United Nations' Soviet delegation issued a minority report contending that their expertise and experience had been undermined by the South Africans. Representatives of the Soviet Union advanced the theory that the plane had been intentionally diverted by a false navigational beacon signal, using a technology provided by military intelligence operatives of the South African government.\nMachel's successor Joaquim Chissano implemented sweeping changes in the country, starting reforms such as changing from Marxism to capitalism and began peace talks with RENAMO. The new constitution enacted in 1990 provided for a multi-party political system, a market-based economy, and free elections. That same year, Mozambique abolished the people's republic as the country's official name. The civil war ended in October 1992 with the Rome General Peace Accords, first brokered by the Christian Council of Mozambique (Council of Protestant Churches) and then taken over by Community of Sant'Egidio. Peace returned to Mozambique, under the supervision of the peacekeeping force of the United Nations.\nDemocratic era (1993\u2013present).\nMozambique held elections in 1994, which were accepted by most political parties as free and fair although still contested by many nationals and observers alike. FRELIMO won, under Joaquim Chissano, while RENAMO, led by Afonso Dhlakama, ran as the official opposition. In 1995, Mozambique joined the Commonwealth of Nations, becoming, at the time, the only member nation that had never been part of the British Empire.\nBy mid-1995, over 1.7\u00a0million refugees who had sought asylum in neighbouring countries had returned to Mozambique, part of the largest repatriation witnessed in sub-Saharan Africa. An additional four million internally displaced persons had returned to their homes. In December 1999, Mozambique held elections for a second time since the civil war, which were again won by FRELIMO. RENAMO accused FRELIMO of fraud and threatened to return to civil war but backed down after taking the matter to the Supreme Court and losing.\nIn early 2000, a cyclone caused widespread flooding, killing hundreds and devastating the already precarious infrastructure. There were widespread suspicions that foreign aid resources had been diverted by powerful leaders of FRELIMO. Carlos Cardoso, a journalist investigating these allegations, was murdered, and his death was never satisfactorily explained.\nIndicating in 2001 that he would not run for a third term, Chissano criticised leaders who stayed on longer than he had, which was generally seen as a reference to Zambian President Frederick Chiluba and Zimbabwean President Robert Mugabe. Presidential and National Assembly elections took place on 1\u20132 December 2004. FRELIMO candidate Armando Guebuza won with 64% of the popular vote, and Dhlakama received 32% of the popular vote. FRELIMO won 160 seats in Parliament, with a coalition of RENAMO and several small parties winning the 90 remaining seats. Guebuza was inaugurated as the President of Mozambique on 2 February 2005 and served two five-year terms. His successor, Filipe Nyusi, became the fourth President of Mozambique on 15 January 2015.\nFrom 2013 to 2019, a low-intensity insurgency by RENAMO occurred, mainly in the country's central and northern regions. On 5 September 2014, Guebuza and Dhlakama signed the Accord on Cessation of Hostilities, which brought the military hostilities to a halt and allowed both parties to concentrate on the general elections to be held in October 2014. However, after the general elections, a new political crisis emerged. RENAMO did not recognise the validity of the election results and demanded the control of six provinces \u2013 Nampula, Niassa, Tete, Zambezia, Sofala, and Manica \u2013 where they claimed to have won a majority. About 12,000 refugees fled to Malawi. The UNHCR, Doctors Without Borders, and Human Rights Watch reported that government forces had torched villages and carried out summary executions and sexual abuses.\nIn October 2019, President Filipe Nyusi was re-elected after a landslide victory in general election. FRELIMO won 184 seats, RENAMO got 60 seats and the MDM party received the remaining 6 seats in the National Assembly. Opposition did not accept the results because of allegations of fraud and irregularities. FRELIMO secured two-thirds majority in parliament which allowed FRELIMO to re-adjust the constitution without needing the agreement of the opposition.\nSince 2017, the country has faced an ongoing insurgency by Islamist groups. In September 2020, ISIL insurgents captured and briefly occupied Vamizi Island in the Indian Ocean. In March 2021, dozens of civilians were killed and 35,000 others were displaced after Islamist rebels seized the city of Palma. In December 2021, nearly 4,000 Mozambicans fled their villages after an intensification of jihadist attacks in Niassa.\nGeography.\nAt , Mozambique is the world's 35th-largest country. Mozambique is located on the southeast coast of Africa and is bound by Eswatini to the south, South Africa to the southwest, Zimbabwe to the west, Zambia and Malawi to the northwest, Tanzania to the north and the Indian Ocean to the east. Mozambique lies between latitudes 10\u00b0 and 27\u00b0S, and longitudes 30\u00b0 and 41\u00b0E.\nThe country is divided into two topographical regions by the Zambezi River. To the north of the Zambezi, the narrow coastal strip gives way to inland hills and low plateaus. Rugged highlands are further west; they include the Niassa highlands, Namuli or Shire highlands, Angonia highlands, Tete highlands and the Makonde plateau, covered with miombo woodlands. To the south of the Zambezi, the lowlands are broader with the Mashonaland plateau and Lebombo Mountains located in the deep south.\nThe country is drained by five principal rivers and several smaller ones, the Zambezi river being the largest and most important. The country has four notable lakes: Lake Niassa (or Malawi), Lake Chiuta, Cahora Bassa and Lake Shirwa, all in the north. The major cities are Maputo, Beira, Nampula, Tete, Quelimane, Chimoio, Pemba, Inhambane, Xai-Xai and Lichinga.\nClimate.\nMozambique has a tropical climate with two seasons: a wet season from October to March and a dry season from April to September. Climatic conditions, however, vary depending on altitude. Rainfall is heavy along the coast and decreases in the north and south. Annual precipitation varies from depending on the region, with an average of . Cyclones are common during the wet season. Average temperature ranges in Maputo are from in July and from in February.\nIn 2019 Mozambique suffered floods and destruction from the devastating cyclones Idai and Kenneth, the first time two cyclones had struck the nation in a single season.\nIn February and March 2023, Tropical Cyclone Freddy hit Mozambique twice before dissipating. The resulting flooding caused significant infrastructure damage, with more than 22,000 houses affected, 60 health units flooded, and 1,265 km of roads damaged. Tens of thousands of hectares of crops were also affected during the flooding.\nWildlife.\nThere are known to be 740 bird species in Mozambique, including 20 globally threatened species and two introduced species, and over 200 mammal species endemic to Mozambique, including the critically endangered Selous' zebra, Vincent's bush squirrel and 13 other endangered or vulnerable species.\nProtected areas include thirteen forest reserves, seven national parks, six nature reserves, three frontier conservation areas and three wildlife or game reserves.\nGovernment and politics.\nThe Constitution of Mozambique stipulates that the President of the Republic functions as the head of state, head of government, commander-in-chief of the armed forces, and as a symbol of national unity. They are directly elected for a five-year term via run-off voting. The prime minister is appointed by the president. Their functions include convening and chairing the council of ministers (cabinet), advising the president, assisting the president in governing the country, and coordinating the functions of the other ministers.\nThe Assembly of the Republic has 250 members, each elected for five-year terms by proportional representation. The judiciary comprises a Supreme Court and provincial, district, and municipal courts.\nMozambique operates a small, functioning military that handles all aspects of domestic national defence, the Mozambique Defence Armed Forces.\nAdministrative divisions.\nMozambique is divided into ten provinces (\"provincias\") and one capital city (\"cidade capital\") with provincial status. The provinces are subdivided into 129 districts (\"distritos\"). The districts are further divided into 405 \"\"postos administrativos\" (administrative posts, headed by \"secret\u00e1rios\") and then into \"localidades\" (localities), the lowest geographical level of the central state administration. There are 53 \"munic\u00edpios\"\" (municipalities).\nForeign relations.\nWhile allegiances dating back to the liberation struggle remain relevant, Mozambique's foreign policy has become increasingly pragmatic. The twin pillars of Mozambique's foreign policy are maintenance of good relations with its neighbours and maintenance and expansion of ties to development partners.\nDuring the 1970s and the early 1980s, Mozambique's foreign policy was inextricably linked to the struggles for majority rule in Rhodesia and South Africa as well as superpower competition and the Cold War. Mozambique's decision to enforce UN sanctions against Rhodesia and deny that country access to the sea led Ian Smith's government to undertake overt and covert actions to oppose the country. Although the change of government in Zimbabwe in 1980 removed this threat, the government of South Africa continued to destabilise Mozambique. Mozambique also belonged to the Frontline States. The 1984 Nkomati Accord, while failing in its goal of ending South African support to RENAMO, opened initial diplomatic contacts between the Mozambican and South African governments. This process gained momentum with South Africa's elimination of apartheid, which culminated in the establishment of full diplomatic relations in October 1993. While relations with neighbouring Zimbabwe, Malawi, Zambia and Tanzania show occasional strains, Mozambique's ties to these countries remain strong.\nIn the years immediately following its independence, Mozambique benefited from considerable assistance from European countries. The Soviet Union and its allies became Mozambique's primary economic, military and political supporters, and its foreign policy reflected this linkage. This began to change in 1983; in 1984 Mozambique joined the World Bank and International Monetary Fund. Western aid by the Scandinavian countries of Sweden, Norway, Denmark and Iceland quickly replaced Soviet support. Finland and the Netherlands are becoming increasingly important sources of development assistance. Italy also maintains a profile in Mozambique as a result of its key role during the peace process. Relations with Portugal, the former colonial power, continue to be important because Portuguese investors play a visible role in Mozambique's economy.\nMozambique is a member of the Non-Aligned Movement and ranks among the moderate members of the African bloc in the United Nations and other international organisations. Mozambique also belongs to the African Union and the Southern African Development Community. In 1994, the government became a full member of the Organisation of the Islamic Conference, in part to broaden its base of international support but also to please the country's sizeable Muslim population. Similarly, in 1995 Mozambique joined its Anglophone neighbours in the Commonwealth of Nations. At the time it was the only nation to have joined the Commonwealth that was never part of the British Empire. In the same year, Mozambique became a founding member and the first president of the Community of Portuguese Language Countries and maintains close ties with other Portuguese-speaking countries.\nHuman rights.\nSame-sex sexual activity has been legal since 2015. However, discrimination against LGBT people in Mozambique is widespread.\nEconomy.\nMozambique is one of the poorest and most underdeveloped countries in the world, even though between 1994 and 2006 its average annual GDP growth was approximately 8%. Since 2014/15 household real consumption has decreased significantly and a sharp rise in economic inequality has been observed. The IMF classifies Mozambique as a heavily indebted poor country. In a 2006 survey, three-quarters of Mozambicans said that in the past five years their economic position had remained the same or become worse.\nMozambique's official currency is the metical (in October 2023, US$1 was roughly equivalent to 64 meticals). The U.S. dollar, South African rand, and the euro are widely accepted and used in business transactions. The minimum legal salary is around US$60 per month. Mozambique is a member of the Southern African Development Community (SADC). The SADC free trade protocol is aimed at making the Southern African region more competitive by eliminating tariffs and other trade barriers. The World Bank in 2007 talked of Mozambique's 'blistering pace of economic growth'. A joint donor-government study in early 2007 said 'Mozambique is generally considered an aid success story.'\nRebounding growth.\nThe resettlement of civil war refugees and successful economic reform have led to a high growth rate: the country enjoyed a remarkable recovery, achieving an average annual rate of economic growth of 8% between 1996 and 2006 and between 6\u20137% from 2006 to 2011. Rapid expansion in the future hinges on several major foreign investment projects, continued economic reform, and the revival of the agriculture, transportation, and tourism sectors. In 2013 about 80% of the population was employed in agriculture, the majority of whom were engaged in small-scale subsistence farming which still suffered from inadequate infrastructure, commercial networks, and investment. However, in 2012, more than 90% of Mozambique's arable land was still uncultivated.\nIn 2013, a BBC article reported that starting in 2009, there was increased Portuguese immigration to Mozambique due to the poor economic situation in Portugal.\nEconomic reforms.\nMore than 1,200 mostly small state-owned enterprises have been privatised. Preparations for privatisation and/or sector liberalisation were made for the remaining parastatal enterprises, including telecommunications, energy, ports, and railways. The government frequently selected a strategic foreign investor when privatising a parastatal. Additionally, customs duties have been reduced, and customs management has been streamlined and reformed. The government introduced a value-added tax in 1999 as part of its efforts to increase domestic revenues.\nCorruption.\nMozambique's economy has been shaken by numerous corruption scandals. In July 2011, the government proposed new anti-corruption laws to criminalise embezzlement, influence peddling and graft, following numerous instances of the theft of public money. This has been endorsed by the country's Council of Ministers. Mozambique convicted two former ministers for graft. Mozambique was ranked 116 of 178 countries in anti-graft watchdog Transparency International's index of global corruption. According to a USAID report written in 2005, \"the scale and scope of corruption in Mozambique are cause for alarm.\"\nIn 2012, the government of Inhambane province uncovered the misappropriation of public funds by the director of the Provincial Anti-Drugs Office, Calisto Alberto Tomo. He was found to have colluded with the accountant in the Anti-Drugs Office, Recalda Guambe, to steal over 260,000 meticais between 2008 and 2010. The government of Mozambique has taken steps to address the problem of corruption, and some positive developments can be observed, such as the passages of several anti-corruption bills in 2012.\nNatural resources.\nIn 2010\u20132011, Anadarko Petroleum and Eni discovered the Mamba South gas field, with estimated reserves of 4,200\u00a0billion cubic metres (150\u00a0trillion cubic feet) of natural gas in the Rovuma Basin, off the coast of northern Cabo Delgado Province. Once developed, this could make Mozambique one of the largest producers of liquefied natural gas in the world. In January 2017, 3 firms were selected by the government for the natural gas development projects in the Rovuma gas basin. GL Africa Energy (UK) was awarded one of the tenders. It plans to build and operate a 250 MW gas-powered plant. Production was scheduled to start in 2018. Mozambique is now scheduled to begin exporting LNG globally in 2024. In 2019, developments in the Rovuma Basin, referred to as The Mozambique LNG Project, raised $19\u00a0billion from a consortium of investors to finally bring this LNG to market. The majority of the project and its associated operations have been awarded to the company, TotalEnergies.\nTourism.\nThe country's natural environment, wildlife, and historic heritage provide opportunities for beach, cultural, and eco-tourism. Mozambique has a great potential for growth in its gross domestic product (GDP).\nThe north beaches with clean water are suitable for tourism, especially those that are very far from urban centres, such the Quirimbas Islands and the Bazaruto archipelago. The Inhambane Province attracts international divers because of the marine biodiversity and the presence of whale sharks and manta rays. There are several national parks, including Gorongosa National Park.\nTransport.\nThere are over of roads, but much of the network is unpaved. Like its Commonwealth neighbours, traffic circulates on the left, in spite of having not been colonised by the British. There is an international airport at Maputo, 21 other paved airports, and over 100 airstrips with unpaved runways. There are 3,750\u00a0km of navigable inland waterways. There are rail links serving principal cities and connecting the country with Malawi, Zimbabwe and South Africa. \nThe Mozambican railway system developed over more than a century from three different ports on the coast that served as terminals for separate lines to the hinterland. The railroads were major targets during the Mozambican Civil War, were sabotaged by RENAMO, and are being rehabilitated. A parastatal authority, \"Portos e Caminhos de Ferro de Mo\u00e7ambique\" (Mozambique Ports and Railways), oversees the railway system and its connected ports, but management has been largely outsourced. Each line has its own development corridor.\nAs of 2005[ [update]] there were 3,123\u00a0km of railway track, consisting of 2,983\u00a0km of gauge, compatible with neighbouring rail systems, and a 140\u00a0km line of gauge, the Gaza Railway. The central Beira\u2013Bulawayo railway and Sena railway route links the port of Beira to the landlocked countries of Malawi, Zambia and Zimbabwe. To the north of this the port of Nacala is also linked by Nacala rail to Malawi, and to the south the port of Maputo is connected by the Limpopo rail, the Goba rail and the Ressano Garcia rail to Zimbabwe, Eswatini and South Africa. These networks interconnect only via neighbouring countries. A new route for coal haulage between Tete and Beira was planned to come into service by 2010, and in August 2010, Mozambique and Botswana signed a memorandum of understanding to develop a 1,100\u00a0km railway through Zimbabwe, to carry coal from Serule in Botswana to a deepwater port at Techobanine Point. Newer rolling stock has been supplied by the Indian Golden Rock workshop using Centre Buffer Couplers and air brakes.\nWater supply and sanitation.\nWater supply and sanitation in Mozambique is characterised by low levels of access to an improved water source (estimated to be 51% in 2011), low levels of access to adequate sanitation (estimated to be 25% in 2011) and mostly poor service quality. In 2007 the government defined a strategy for water supply and sanitation in rural areas, where 62% of the population lives. In urban areas, water is supplied by informal small-scale providers and by formal providers.\nBeginning in 1998, Mozambique reformed the formal part of the urban water supply sector through the creation of an independent regulatory agency called CRA, an asset-holding company called FIPAG and a public-private partnership (PPP) with a company called Aguas de Mo\u00e7ambique. The PPP covered those areas of the capital and of four other cities that had access to formal water supply systems. However, the PPP ended when the management contracts for four cities expired in 2008 and when the foreign partner of the company that serves the capital under a lease contract withdrew in 2010, claiming heavy losses. While urban water supply has received considerable policy attention, the government has no strategy for urban sanitation yet. External donors finance about 87.4% of all public investments in the sector.\nDemographics.\nThe north-central provinces of Zambezia and Nampula are the most populous, with about 45% of the population. The estimated four million Makua are the dominant group in the northern part of the country; the Sena and Shona (mostly Ndau and Manyika) are prominent in the Zambezi valley, and the Tsonga people dominate southern Mozambique. Other groups include Makonde, Yao, Swahili, Tonga, Chopi, and Nguni (including Zulu). Bantu people comprise 97.8% of the population, with the rest made up of Portuguese ancestry, Euro-Africans (\"mesti\u00e7o\" people of mixed Bantu and Portuguese ancestry), and Indians. Roughly 45,000 people of Indian descent reside in Mozambique.\nDuring Portuguese colonial rule, a large minority of people of Portuguese descent lived permanently in almost all areas of the country, and Mozambicans with Portuguese heritage at the time of independence numbered about 360,000. Many of these left the country after independence from Portugal in 1975. There are various estimates for the size of Mozambique's Chinese community, ranging from 7,000 to 12,000 as of 2007[ [update]].\nAccording to a 2011 survey, the total fertility rate was 5.9 children per woman, with 6.6 in rural areas and 4.5 in urban areas.\nLargest cities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLanguages.\nPortuguese is the official and most widely spoken language of the nation, spoken by 50.3% of the population.\nAdditionally, around 50% of Maputo speaks Portuguese as a native language. \nThe Bantu languages that are indigenous to the country vary greatly in their groupings and in some cases are rather poorly appreciated and documented. Apart from its lingua franca uses in the north of the country, Swahili is spoken in a small area of the coast next to the Tanzanian border; south of this, towards Mo\u00e7ambique Island, Kimwani, regarded as a dialect of Swahili, is used. Immediately inland of the Swahili area, Makonde is used, separated farther inland by a small strip of Makhuwa-speaking territory from an area where Yao or ChiYao is used. Makonde and Yao belong to a different group, Yao being very close to the Mwera language of the Rondo Plateau area in Tanzania. Prepositions appear in these languages as locative prefixes prefixed to the noun and declined according to their own noun-class. Some Nyanja is used at the coast of Lake Malawi, as well as on the other side of the Lake.\nSomewhat different from all of these are the languages of the eMakhuwa group, with a loss of initial k-, which means that many nouns begin with a vowel: for example, \"epula\" = \"rain\". There is eMakhuwa proper, with the related eLomwe and eChuwabo, with a small eKoti-speaking area at the coast. In an area straddling the lower Zambezi, Sena, which belongs to the same group as Nyanja, is spoken, with areas speaking the related CiNyungwe and CiSenga further upriver.\nA large Shona-speaking area extends between the Zimbabwe border and the sea: this was formerly known as the Ndau variety but now uses the orthography of the Standard Shona of Zimbabwe. Apparently similar to Shona, but lacking the tone patterns of the Shona language, and regarded by its speakers as quite separate, is CiBalke, also called Rue or Barwe, used in a small area near the Zimbabwe border. South of this area are languages of the Tsonga group. XiTswa or Tswa occurs at the coast and inland, XiTsonga or Tsonga straddles the area around the Limpopo River, including such local dialects as XiHlanganu, XiN'walungu, XiBila, XiHlengwe, and XiDzonga. This language area extends into neighbouring South Africa. Still related to these, but distinct, are GiTonga, BiTonga, and CiCopi or Chopi, spoken north of the mouth of the Limpopo, and XiRonga or Ronga, spoken in the immediate region around Maputo. The languages in this group are, judging by the short vocabularies, very vaguely similar to Zulu, but obviously not in the same immediate group. There are small Swazi- and Zulu-speaking areas in Mozambique immediately next to the Swaziland and KwaZulu-Natal borders.\nReligion.\nThe 2007 census found that Christians made up 59.2% of Mozambique's population, Muslims comprised 18.9% of the population, 7.3% of the people held other beliefs, mainly animism, and 13.9% had no religious beliefs. A more recent government survey conducted by the Demographic and Health Surveys program in 2015 indicated that Catholicism had increased to 30.5% of the population, Muslims constituted 19.3%, and various Protestant groups a total of 44%. According to 2018 estimates from the United States Commission on International Religious Freedom, 28% of the population is Catholic, 18% are Muslim (mostly Sunni), 15% are Zionist Christians, 12% are Protestants, 7% are members of other religious groups, and 18% have no religion.\nThe Catholic Church has established twelve dioceses (Beira, Chimoio, Guru\u00e9, Inhambane, Lichinga, Maputo, Nacala, Nampula, Pemba, Quelimane, Tete, and Xai-Xai; archdioceses are Beira, Maputo and Nampula). Statistics for the dioceses range from a low 5.8% Catholics in the population in the Diocese of Chimoio, to 32.50% in Quelimane diocese (Anuario catolico de Mocambique). Among the main Protestant denominations are Igreja Uni\u00e3o Baptista de Mo\u00e7ambique, the Assembleias de Deus, the Seventh-day Adventists, the Anglican Church of Southern Africa, the Igreja do Evangelho Completo de Deus, the Igreja Metodista Unida, the Igreja Presbiteriana de Mo\u00e7ambique, the Igrejas de Cristo and the Assembleia Evang\u00e9lica de Deus. The work of Methodism in Mozambique started in 1890. Erwin Richards began a Methodist mission at Chicuque in Inhambane Province. The Igreja Metodista Unida em Mo\u00e7ambique (United Methodist Church in Mozambique) observed the 100th anniversary of Methodist presence in Mozambique in 1990. President Chissano praised the work and role of the UMC to more than 10,000 people who attended the ceremony. The United Methodist Church has tripled in size in Mozambique since 1998. There are more than 150,000 members in more than 180 congregations of the 24 districts. New pastors are ordained each year. New churches are chartered each year in each Annual Conference (north and south).\nThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has established a growing presence. It first began sending missionaries to Mozambique in 1999, and, as of April 2015, has more than 7,943 members. The Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith has been present in Mozambique since the early 1950s but did not openly identify itself in those years because of the strong influence of the Catholic Church which did not recognise it officially as a world religion. The independence in 1975 saw the entrance of new pioneers. In total, there are about 3,000 declared Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds as of 2010[ [update]]. Muslims are particularly present in the north of the country. They are organised in several \"tariqa\" or brotherhoods. Two national organisations also exist\u2014the \"Conselho Isl\u00e2mico de Mo\u00e7ambique\" and the \"Congresso Isl\u00e2mico de Mo\u00e7ambique\". There are also important Pakistani, Indian associations as well as some Shia communities. There is a very small but thriving Jewish community in Maputo.\nHealth.\nThe fertility rate is at about 5.5 births per woman. Public expenditure on health was at 2.7% of the GDP in 2004, whereas private expenditure on health was at 1.3% in the same year. Health expenditure per capita was 42 US$ (PPP) in 2004. In the early 21st century there were 3 physicians per 100,000 people in the country. Infant mortality was at 100 per 1,000 births in 2005. The 2010 maternal mortality rate per 100,000 births for Mozambique is 550. This is compared with 598.8 in 2008 and 385 in 1990. The under 5 mortality rate, per 1,000 births is 147 and the neonatal mortality as a percentage of under 5s mortality is 29. In Mozambique the number of midwives per 1,000 live births is 3 and the lifetime risk of death for pregnant women 1 in 37.\nThe official HIV prevalence in 2011 was 11.5% of the population aged between 15 and 49 years. In the southern parts of Mozambique\u2014Maputo and Gaza provinces as well as the city of Maputo\u2014the official figures are more than twice as high as the national average. In 2011 the health authorities estimated about 1.7\u00a0million Mozambicans were HIV-positive, of whom 600,000 were in need of anti-retroviral treatment. As of December 2011, 240,000 were receiving such treatment, increasing to 416,000 in March 2014 according to the health authorities.\nMozambique has been experiencing high levels of acute food insecurity for years.\nEducation.\nPortuguese is the primary language of instruction in all Mozambican schools. All Mozambicans are required by law to attend school through the primary level; however, a lot of children do not go to primary school because they have to work for their families' subsistence farms for a living. In 2007, one million children still did not go to school, most of them from poor rural families, and almost half of all teachers were unqualified. Girls enrollment increased from 3 million in 2002 to 4.1\u00a0million in 2006 while the completion rate increased from 31,000 to 90,000, which testified a very poor completion rate.\nAfter grade 7, pupils must take standardised national exams to enter secondary school, which runs from eighth to 10th grade. Space in Mozambican universities is extremely limited; thus most pupils who complete pre-university school do not immediately proceed on to university studies. Many go to work as teachers or are unemployed. There are also institutes that give more vocational training, specialising in agricultural, technical or pedagogical studies, which students may attend after grade 10 in lieu of a pre-university school. After independence from Portugal in 1975, a number of Mozambican pupils continued to be admitted every year at Portuguese high schools, polytechnical institutes and universities, through bilateral agreements between the Portuguese government and the Mozambican government.\nAccording to 2010 estimates, the literacy rate was 56.1% (70.8% male and 42.8% female). By 2015, this had increased to 58.8% (73.3% male and 45.4% female).\nCulture.\nMozambique was ruled by Portugal, and they share a main language (Portuguese) and main religion (Roman Catholicism). But since most of the people of Mozambique are Bantus, most of the culture is native; for Bantus living in urban areas, there is some Portuguese influence. Mozambican culture also influences the Portuguese culture.\nArts.\nThe Makonde are known for their wood carving and elaborate masks, which are commonly used in traditional dances. There are two different kinds of wood carvings: shetani, (evil spirits), which are mostly carved in heavy ebony, tall, and elegantly curved with symbols and nonrepresentational faces; and ujamaa, which are totem-type carvings which illustrate lifelike faces of people and various figures. These sculptures are usually referred to as \"family trees\" because they tell stories of many generations.\nDuring the last years of the colonial period, Mozambican art reflected the oppression by the colonial power and became a symbol of resistance. After independence in 1975, modern art came into a new phase. The two best known and most influential contemporary Mozambican artists are the painter Malangatana Ngwenya and the sculptor Alberto Chissano. A lot of the post-independence art during the 1980s and 1990s reflect the political struggle, civil war, suffering, starvation, and struggle.\nDances are usually intricate, highly developed traditions throughout Mozambique. There are many different kinds of dances from tribe to tribe which are usually ritualistic in nature. The Chopi, for instance, act out battles dressed in animal skins. The men of Makua dress in colourful outfits and masks while dancing on stilts around the village for hours. Groups of women in the northern part of the country perform a traditional dance called \"tufo\", to celebrate Islamic holidays.\nMusic.\nThe music of Mozambique serves many purposes, ranging from religious expression to traditional ceremonies. Musical instruments are usually handmade. Some of the instruments used in Mozambican musical expression include drums made of wood and animal skin; the \"lupembe\", a woodwind instrument made from animal horns or wood; and the marimba, which is a kind of xylophone native to Mozambique and other parts of Africa. The marimba is a popular instrument with the Chopi of the south-central coast, who are famous for their musical skill and dance.\nMedia.\nMozambican media is heavily influenced by the government. Newspapers have relatively low circulation rates because of high newspaper prices and low literacy rates. Among the most highly circulated newspapers are state-controlled dailies, such as \"Noticias\" and \"Di\u00e1rio de Mo\u00e7ambique\", and the weekly \"Domingo\". Their circulation is mostly confined to Maputo. Most funding and advertising revenue is given to pro-government newspapers.\nRadio programmes are the most influential form of media in the country because of ease of access. State-owned radio stations are more popular than privately owned media. This is exemplified by the government radio station, R\u00e1dio Mo\u00e7ambique, the most popular station in the country. It was established shortly after Mozambique's independence. The television stations watched by Mozambicans are STV, TIM, and TVM. Through cable and satellite, viewers can access tens of other African, Asian, Brazilian, and European channels.\nCuisine.\nWith a nearly 500-year presence in the country, the Portuguese have greatly influenced Mozambique's cuisine. Staples and crops such as cassava (a starchy root of Brazilian origin) and cashew nuts (also of Brazilian origin, though Mozambique was once the largest producer of these nuts), and \"p\u00e3ozinho\" (pronounced , Portuguese-style buns), were brought in by the Portuguese. The use of spices and seasonings such as bay leaves, chili peppers, fresh coriander, garlic, onions, paprika, red sweet peppers, and wine were introduced by the Portuguese, as were maize, potatoes, rice, and sugarcane. \"espetada\", the popular \"inteiro com piripiri\" (whole chicken in piri-piri sauce), \"prego\" (steak roll), \"pudim\" (pudding), and \"riss\u00f3is\" (battered shrimp) are all Portuguese dishes commonly eaten in present-day Mozambique.\nSport.\nFootball () is the most popular sport in Mozambique. The national team is the Mozambique national football team. Track and field and basketball are also avidly followed in the country. Roller hockey is popular, and the best result for the national team was when they came in fourth at the 2011 FIRS Roller Hockey World Cup. The women's beach volleyball team finished 2nd at the 2018\u20132020 CAVB Beach Volleyball Continental Cup. The Mozambique national cricket team represents the nation in international cricket.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nGovernment:\nGeneral information:\nTourism:\nHealth:"}
{"id": "19302", "revid": "1319550049", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19302", "title": "History of Mozambique", "text": "Mozambique was a Portuguese colony, overseas province and later a member state of Portugal. It gained independence from Portugal in 1975.\nPre-colonial history.\nPrehistoric Mozambique.\nIn 2007 Julio Mercader, of the University of Calgary, recovered dozens of 100,000-year-old stone tools from a deep limestone cave (Ngalue) near Lake Niassa in Mozambique showing that wild sorghum, the ancestor of the chief cereal consumed today in sub-Saharan Africa for flours, bread, porridges, and alcoholic beverages, was being consumed by \"Homo sapiens\" along with African wine palm, the false banana, pigeon peas, wild oranges, and the African \"potato.\" This is the earliest direct evidence of humans using pre-domesticated cereals anywhere in the world.\nThe first inhabitants of what is now Mozambique were the San hunters and gatherers, ancestors of the Khoisani peoples. Between 400BC-400AD waves of Bantu-speaking peoples migrated from the north through the Zambezi River valley and then gradually into the plateau and coastal areas. The Bantu were farmers and iron workers.\nIntercultural contact.\nWhen Vasco da Gama, exploring for Portugal, reached the coast of Mozambique in 1498, Arab trading settlements had existed along the coast and outlying islands for several centuries, and political control of the coast was in the hands of a string of local sultans. Muslims had actually lived in the region for quite some time; the famous Arab historian and geographer, Al-Masudi, reported Muslims amongst Africans in the land of Sofala in 947 (modern day Mozambique, itself a derivative of the name of the Sheikh who ruled the area at the time when the Portuguese arrived, Mussa Bin Bique). Most of the local people had embraced Islam. The region lay at the southernmost end of a traditional trading world that encompassed the Red Sea, the Hadhramaut coast of Arabia and the Indian coast, described in the 1st-century coasting guide that is called the Periplus of the Erythraean Sea.\nPortuguese Mozambique (1498\u20131975).\nFrom about 1500, Portuguese trading posts and forts displaced the Arabic commercial and military hegemony, becoming regular ports of call on the new European sea route to the east.\nThe voyage of Vasco da Gama around the Cape of Good Hope in 1498 marked the Portuguese entry into trade, politics, and society of the region. The Portuguese gained control of the Island of Mozambique and the port city of Sofala in the early 16th century, and by the 1530s, small groups of Portuguese traders and prospectors seeking gold penetrated the interior regions, where they set up garrisons and trading posts at Sena and Tete on the River Zambezi and tried to gain exclusive control over the gold trade.\nThe Portuguese attempted to legitimise and consolidate their trade and settlement positions through the creation of \"prazos\" (land grants) tied to Portuguese settlement and administration. While \"prazos\" were originally developed to be held by Portuguese, through intermarriage they became African Portuguese or African Indian centres defended by large African slave armies known as \"Chikunda\". Historically within Mozambique there was slavery. Human beings were bought and sold by African tribal chiefs, Arab Muslim traders and Portuguese and other European traders as well. Many Mozambican slaves were supplied by tribal chiefs who raided warring tribes and sold their captives to the \"prazeiros\".\nAlthough Portuguese influence gradually expanded, its power was limited and exercised through individual settlers and officials who were granted extensive autonomy. The Portuguese were able to wrest much of the coastal trade from Arab Muslims between 1500 and 1700, but, with the Arab Muslim seizure of Portugal's key foothold at Fort Jesus on Mombasa Island (now in Kenya) in 1698, the pendulum began to swing in the other direction. As a result, investment lagged while Lisbon devoted itself to the more lucrative trade with India and the Far East and to the colonisation of Brazil.\nDuring these wars, the Mazrui and Omani Arabs reclaimed much of the Indian Ocean trade, forcing the Portuguese to retreat south. Many \"prazos\" had declined by the mid-19th century, but several of them survived. During the 19th century other European powers, particularly the British (British South Africa Company) and the French (Madagascar), became increasingly involved in the trade and politics of the region around the Portuguese East African territories.\nBy the early 20th century the Portuguese had shifted the administration of much of Mozambique to large private companies, like the Mozambique Company, the Zambezia Company and the Niassa Company, controlled and financed mostly by the British, which established railroad lines to their neighbouring colonies (South Africa and Rhodesia). Although slavery had been legally abolished in Mozambique, at the end of the 19th century the Chartered companies enacted a forced labor policy and supplied cheap\u2014often forced\u2014African labour to the mines and plantations of the nearby British colonies and South Africa. The Zambezia Company, the most profitable chartered company, took over a number of smaller \"prazeiro\" holdings, and established military outposts to protect its property. The chartered companies built roads and ports to bring their goods to market including a railroad linking present day Zimbabwe with the Mozambican port of Beira.\nDue to their unsatisfactory performance and the shift, under the corporatist Estado Novo regime of Oliveira Salazar, towards a stronger Portuguese control of Portuguese Empire's economy, the companies' concessions were not renewed when they ran out. This was what happened in 1942 with the Mozambique Company, which however continued to operate in the agricultural and commercial sectors as a corporation, and had already happened in 1929 with the termination of the Niassa Company's concession. In 1951, the Portuguese overseas colonies in Africa were rebranded as Overseas Provinces of Portugal.\nMozambican War of Independence (1964\u20131974).\nAs communist and anti-colonial ideologies spread out across Africa, many clandestine political movements were established in support of Mozambican independence. These movements claimed that since policies and development plans were primarily designed by the ruling authorities for the benefit of Mozambique's Portuguese population, little attention was paid to Mozambique's tribal integration and the development of its native communities.\nThis affected a majority of the indigenous population who suffered both state-sponsored discrimination and enormous social pressure. \nThe Front for the Liberation of Mozambique (FRELIMO) initiated a guerrilla campaign against Portuguese rule in September 1964. This conflict\u2014along with the two others already initiated in the other Portuguese colonies of Angola and Portuguese Guinea\u2014became part of the so-called Portuguese Colonial War (1961\u20131974). From a military standpoint, the Portuguese regular army maintained control of the population centres while the guerrilla forces sought to undermine their influence in rural and tribal areas in the north and west. As part of their response to FRELIMO, the Portuguese government began to pay more attention to creating favourable conditions for social development and economic growth.\nIndependence (1975).\nAfter 10 years of sporadic warfare and Portugal's return to democracy through a leftist military coup in Lisbon, which replaced Portugal's Estado Novo regime with a military junta (the Carnation Revolution of April 1974), FRELIMO took control of the territory. Within a year, most of the 250,000 Portuguese in Mozambique had left\u2014some expelled by the government of the nearly independent territory, some fleeing in fear\u2014and Mozambique became independent from Portugal on 25 June 1975. A law had been passed on the initiative of the then relatively unknown Armando Guebuza of the FRELIMO party ordering the Portuguese to leave the country in 24 hours with only 20 kilograms (44 pounds) of luggage. Unable to salvage any of their assets, most of them returned to Portugal penniless.\nCivil War (1977\u20131992).\nFormed in 1975, Mozambican National Resistance, an anti-communist group sponsored by the Rhodesian Intelligence Service, and the apartheid government in South Africa, launched a series of attacks on transport routes, schools and health clinics, and the country descended into civil war. In the United States, the CIA and conservatives lobbied for support to RENAMO, which was strongly resisted by the State Department, which would \"not recognize or negotiate with RENAMO\". \nIn 1984, Mozambique negotiated the Nkomati Accord with P. W. Botha and the South African government, in which Mozambique was to expel the African National Congress in exchange for South Africa stopping support of Renamo. At first both sides complied but it soon became evident that infringements were taking place on both sides and the war continued. In 1986, Mozambican President Samora Machel died in an air crash in South African territory. Although unproven, many suspect the South African government of responsibility for his death. Machel was replaced by Joaquim Chissano as president. The war was marked by huge human rights violations by both RENAMO and FRELIMO.\nWith support for RENAMO from South Africa drying up, in 1990 the first direct talks between the FRELIMO government and Renamo were held. In November 1990 a new constitution was adopted. Mozambique was now a multiparty state, with periodic elections, and guaranteed democratic rights. On 4 October 1992, the Rome General Peace Accords, negotiated by the Community of Sant'Egidio with the support of the United Nations, were signed in Rome between President Chissano and RENAMO leader Afonso Dhlakama, which formally took effect on the October 15, 1992. A UN Peacekeeping Force (ONUMOZ) oversaw a two-year transition to democracy. The last ONUMOZ contingents departed in early 1995.\nDemocratic era (1994\u2013present).\nMozambique held elections in 1994, which were accepted by most parties as free and fair while still contested by many nationals and observers alike. FRELIMO won, under Joaquim Chissano, while RENAMO, led by Afonso Dhlakama, ran as the official opposition. \nIn 1995, Mozambique joined the Commonwealth of Nations, becoming, at the time, the only member nation that had never been part of the British Empire.\nBy mid-1995, over 1.7 million refugees who had sought asylum in neighboring countries had returned to Mozambique, part of the largest repatriation witnessed in sub-Saharan Africa. An additional four million internally displaced persons had returned to their homes.\nIn December 1999, Mozambique held elections for a second time since the civil war, which were again won by FRELIMO. RENAMO accused FRELIMO of fraud, and threatened to return to civil war, but backed down after taking the matter to the Supreme Court and losing.\nIn early 2000 a cyclone caused widespread flooding in the country, killing hundreds and devastating the already precarious infrastructure. There were widespread suspicions that foreign aid resources have been diverted by powerful leaders of FRELIMO. Carlos Cardoso, a journalist investigating these allegations, was murdered but his death was not satisfactorily explained.\nIndicating in 2001 that he would not run for a third term, Chissano criticized leaders who stayed on longer than he had, which was generally seen as a reference to Zambian president Frederick Chiluba, who at the time was considering a third term, and Zimbabwean president Robert Mugabe, then in his fourth term. Presidential and National Assembly elections took place on December 1\u20132, 2004. FRELIMO candidate Armando Guebuza won with 64% of the popular vote. His opponent, Afonso Dhlakama of RENAMO, received 32% of the popular vote. FRELIMO won 160 seats in Parliament. A coalition of RENAMO and several small parties won the 90 remaining seats. Armando Guebuza was inaugurated as the President of Mozambique on February 2, 2005.\nMuch of the economic recovery which has followed the end of the Mozambican Civil War (1977\u20131992) is being led by investors and tourists from neighbour South Africa and from East Asia. A number of returning Portuguese nationals have also invested in the country as well as some Italian organizations. Coal and gas have grown to become large sectors. The income per capita tripled over twenty years since the civil war.\nMozambique was declared to be free of land mines in 2015, following a 22-year effort to remove explosive devices planted during the War of Independence and Civil War.\nThe candidate of the ruling Mozambican Liberation Front's (Frelimo) Filipe Nyusi has been the President of Mozambique since January 2015 after winning the election in October 2014.\nPresident Filipe Nyusi was re-elected after a landslide victory in the 2019 general elections. Frelimo won 184 seats, Renamo got 60 seats and the MDM party received the remaining six in the National Assembly. The opposition did not accept the results because of allegations of fraud and irregularities. Frelimo secured two-thirds majority in parliament which allowed Frelimo to re-adjust the constitution without needing the agreement of the opposition.\nIn October 2024 the ruling FRELIMO party, which has increasingly become marked with growing concerns of authoritarianism and impunity amid the controversies surrounding the 2023 local elections and the 2019 general election, was declared the winner of the general election, with its leader, Daniel Chapo, proclaimed as president-elect. This was disputed by Ven\u00e2ncio Mondlane, with his party PODEMOS claiming Mondlane had received 53% of the vote using data from their poll observers. The result was also questioned by the Episcopal Conference of Mozambique and the European Union, while deadly protests broke out over the election results, with at least 250 deaths, mostly demonstrators being killed by police and army forces.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19303", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19303", "title": "Geography of Mozambique", "text": " \nThe geography of Mozambique consists mostly of coastal lowlands with uplands in its centre and high plateaus in the northwest. There are also mountains in the western portion. The country is located on the east coast of southern Africa, directly west of the island of Madagascar. Mozambique has a tropical climate with two seasons, a wet season from October to March and a dry season from April to September.\nPhysical features.\nThe coast.\nThe coastline extends from 26\u00b0 52\u2032 S. to 10\u00b0 40\u2032 S., and from south to north makes a double curve with a general trend outward to the east. It has a length of .\nThe southern coastline is characterized by sandy beaches backed by coastal dunes. The dunes can reach up to in height, and older dunes are vegetated. Behind the coastal dunes are lagoons, including river estuaries, closed saline lagoons, and salt lakes. Some north of the South African frontier is the deep indentation of Maputo Bay (formerly Delagoa Bay). The land then turns outward to Cape Correntes, a little north of which is Inhambane Bay. Bending westward again and passing the Bazaruto Archipelago of several small islands, of which the chief is Bazaruto.\nMozambique's central coast, from Bazaruto Island north to Angoche Island, is known as the Bight of Sofala or Sofala Bay. It is also known as the Swamp Coast, and is characterized by extensive mangrove swamps and coastal wetlands. As in the south, the coastline is generally low, and harbours are few and poor. Beira is the principal seaport on the central coast, with rail and highway links to the interior.\nThe bay has an area of . The continental shelf is up to wide at Beira, and is Mozambique's most important marine fishery. Several large rivers, including the Save, Pungwe, and Zambezi, create coastal estuaries and river deltas, of which the Zambezi delta is the largest. North of the Zambezi, the small coralline islands of the Primeiras and Segundas Archipelago lie parallel to the coast.\nThe northern coast is much indented, abounding in rocky headlands and rugged cliffs, with an almost continuous fringe of islands. On one of these islands is Mozambique, and immediately north of that port is Conducia Bay. Somewhat farther north are two large bays, Fernao Veloso Bay and Memba Bay. Nacala on Fernao Veloso Bay is the principal seaport on the northern coast, with a rail link to Malawi and the coalfields of northwestern Mozambique. North of Fernao Veloso and Memba bays is Pemba Bay, where there is commodious anchorage for heavy draught vessels. North of Pemba Bay the Quirimbas Islands lie offshore, and numerous bays and estuaries indent the coast. Cape Delgado, the northernmost point on Mozambique's coast, is part of the delta of the Ruvuma River, which forms Mozambique's border with Tanzania.\nThe northern coast is part of the East African coral coast, a marine ecoregion that extends along the coasts of northern Mozambique, Tanzania, and Kenya. Along the northern coast the Mozambique Current, which flows south between Madagascar and the continent is close to the coast and scours out all the softer material, while at the same time the corals are building in deep waters.\nA recent global remote sensing analysis suggested that there were 2,029km\u00b2 of tidal flats in Mozambique, making it the 16th ranked country in terms of how much tidal flat occurs there.\nOrography.\nOrographically the backbone of the country is the mountain chain which forms the eastern escarpment of the continental plateau. It does not present a uniformly abrupt descent to the plains, but in places, as in the lower Zambezi district, slopes gradually to the coast. The Lebombo Mountains, behind Delagoa Bay, nowhere exceed in height. The Manica Plateau, farther north between the Save and Zambezi rivers, is higher, rising towards the Eastern Highlands along the border with Zimbabwe. Monte Binga (), on the border with Zimbabwe, is Mozambique's highest peak. Mount Gorongosa () lies north-east of the Manica Plateau, and is, like it, of granitic formation. Gorongosa, rising isolated with precipitous outer slopes, has been likened in its aspect to a frowning citadel. East of Gorongosa a graben valley extends from the Zambezi to Pungwe Bay, the southern extension of the African Rift Valley. The Cheringoma Plateau lies east of the graben, sloping gently towards the coast.\nThe chief mountain range lies north of the Zambezi, and east of Lake Chilwa, namely, the Namuli Mountains, in which Namuli Peak rises to , and Molisani, Mruli and Mresi attain altitudes of These mountains are covered with magnificent forests. Farther north the river basins are divided by well-marked ranges with heights of and over. Near the south-east shore of Lake Malawi there is a high range () with an abrupt descent to the lake \u2014 some in . The country between Malawi and Ibo is remarkable for the number of fantastically-shaped granite peaks, or inselbergs, which rise from the plateau. \nThe plateau lands west of the escarpment are of moderate elevation \u2014 perhaps averaging . It is, however, only along the Zambezi and north of that river that Mozambique's territory reaches to the continental plateau. This northern plain has been categorised by the World Wildlife Fund as part of the Eastern miombo woodlands ecoregion.\nRivers.\nBesides the Zambezi, the most considerable river in Mozambique is the Limpopo which enters the Indian Ocean about north of Maputo Bay. The other Mozambican rivers with considerable drainage areas are the Komati, Save, Buzi, and Pungwe south of the Zambezi, and the Licungo (Likungo), Ligonha, L\u00fario, Montepuez (Montepuesi or Mtepwesi), Messalo (or Msalu), and Ruvuma (or Rovuma) with its affluent the Lugenda (or Lujenda), north of the Zambezi.\nThe Save (or Sabi) rises in Zimbabwe at an elevation of over , and after flowing south for over turns east and pierces the mountains some from the coast, being joined near the Zimbabwe-Mozambique frontier by the Lundi. Cataracts entirely prevent navigation above this point.\nBelow the Lundi confluence the bed of the Save becomes considerably broader, varying from . In the rainy season the Save is a large stream and even in the \"dries\" it can be navigated from its mouth by shallow draught steamers for over . Its general direction through Mozambique is east by north. At its mouth it forms a delta in extent.\nThe Buzi () and Pungwe () are streams north of and similar in character to the Save. They both rise in the Manica Highlands and enter the ocean in a large estuary, their mouths apart. The lower reaches of both streams are navigable, the Buzi for , the Pungwe for about . The port of Beira is at the mouth of the Pungwe.\nOf the north-Zambezi streams the Licungo, rising in the hills south-east of Lake Chilwa, flows south and enters the ocean not far north of Quelimane. The L\u00fario, rising in the Namuli Mountains, flows north-east, having a course of some . The Montepurez and the Messalo drain the country between the L\u00fario and Ruvuma basins. Their banks are in general well-defined and the wet season rise seems fairly constant.\nSomali Plate.\nGeologists have divided the Phanerozoic era of Mozambique's geology into the Karoo and post-Karoo era. This terminology is mostly used pertaining to studies of the structural and stratigraphic composition of rocks in the Zambezi valley. Mozambique entirely lies within the Somali Plate.\nClimate.\nMozambique has a tropical climate with two seasons, a wet season from October to March and a dry season from April to September. Climatic conditions vary depending on altitude. Rainfall is heavy along the coast and decreases in the north and south. \nAnnual precipitation varies from depending on the region with an average of . Cyclones are also common during the wet season. Average temperature ranges in Maputo are from in July to in February.\n*Total: \n**\"country rank in the world:\" 35th\n* Land: 786,380 km\u00b2\n*Water: 13,000 km\u00b2\n* Australia comparative: approximately the size of New South Wales\n* Canada comparative: slightly less than twice the size of Newfoundland and Labrador\n* United States comparative: slightly less than three times the size of Colorado\n* EU comparative: slightly less than larger than Spain\nFacts.\nCapital\nMajor Cities\nOther Cities\nLand boundaries:\n\"total:\" 4,571 km\n&lt;br&gt;\"border countries:\"\nMalawi 1,569 km, South Africa 491 km, Eswatini 105\u00a0km, Tanzania 756\u00a0km, Zambia 419\u00a0km, Zimbabwe 1,231\u00a0km\nCoastline:\n2,470 km\nMaritime claims:\n&lt;br&gt;\"territorial sea:\"\n&lt;br&gt;\"exclusive economic zone:\"\n and \nElevation extremes:\n&lt;br&gt;\"lowest point:\"\nIndian Ocean 0 m\n&lt;br&gt;\"highest point:\"\nMonte Binga 2 436 m\nNatural resources:\ncoal, titanium, natural gas, hydropower, tantalum, graphite\nLand use:\n&lt;br&gt;\"arable land:\"\n6.51% (2011), 5.43% (2005 est.), 3.98% (1998 est.)\n&lt;br&gt;\"permanent crops:\"\n0.25% (2011), 0.29% (2005 est.), 0.29% (1998 est.)\n&lt;br&gt;\"other:\"\n93.24% (2011), 94.28% (2005 est.), 95.73% (1998 est.)\nIrrigated land:\n (2003)\nTotal renewable water resources:\n217.1 km3 (2011)\nNatural hazards:\nsevere droughts; devastating cyclones and floods occur in central and southern provinces\nEnvironment \u2014 current issues:\na long civil war and recurrent drought in the hinterlands have resulted in increased migration of the population to urban and coastal areas with adverse environmental consequences; desertification; pollution of surface and coastal waters; elephant poaching for ivory is a problem\nEnvironment \u2014 international agreements:\n&lt;br&gt;\"party to:\"\nBiodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands\nEcoregions\nExtreme points.\nThis is a list of the extreme points of Mozambique, the points that are farther north, south, east or west than any other location.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19304", "revid": "49784051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19304", "title": "Demographics of Mozambique", "text": "The demographics of Mozambique describes the condition and overview of Mozambique's peoples. Demographic topics include basic education, health, and population statistics as well as identified racial and religious affiliations.\nPopulation.\nAccording to the 2022 revision of the world factbook the total population was 31,693,239 in 2022. The proportion of children below the age of 14 in 2020 was 45.57%, 51.5% was between 15 and 65 years of age, while 2.93% was 65 years or older. A population census took place in 2017, and the preliminary results indicate a population of 28 861 863 inhabitants.\nPopulation Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2020) (Data refer to national projections based on 2007 census.):\nVital statistics.\nRegistration of vital events is in Mozambique not complete. The website Our World in Data prepared the following estimates based on statistics from the Population Department of the United Nations.\nAlso, according to a 2011 survey, the total fertility rate was 5.9 children per woman, with 6.6 in rural areas and 4.5 in urban areas.\nDemographic and Health Surveys.\nTotal Fertility Rate (TFR) (Wanted Fertility Rate) and Crude Birth Rate (CBR):\nFertility data by province (DHS Program):\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nEthnic groups.\nMozambique's major ethnic groups encompass numerous subgroups with diverse languages, dialects, cultures, and histories. Many are linked to similar ethnic groups living in inland countries.\nThe estimated 4 million Makua are the largest ethnic group of the country and are dominant in the northern part of the country\u00a0\u2014 the Sena and Shona (mostly Ndau and Manyika) are prominent in the Zambezi valley, and the Shangaan (Tsonga) dominate in southern Mozambique. Other groups include Makonde, Yao, Swahili, Tonga, Chopi, and Nguni (including Zulu). The country is also home to a growing number of white residents, most with Portuguese ancestry. During colonial rule, European residents hailed from every Mozambican province, and at the time of independence the total population was estimated at around 360,000. Most vacated the region after independence in 1975, emigrating to Portugal as \"retornados\". There is also a larger \"mesti\u00e7o\" minority with mixed African and Portuguese heritage. The remaining non-Blacks in Mozambique are primarily Indian Asiatics, who have arrived from Pakistan, Portuguese India, and numerous Arab countries. There are various estimates for the size of Mozambique's Chinese community, ranging from 1,500 to 12,000 as of 2007[ [update]].\nLanguages.\nPortuguese is the official and most widely spoken language of the nation, but in 2017 only 47.4% of Mozambique's population speak Portuguese as either their first or second language, and only 16.6% speak Portuguese as their first language. Arabs, Chinese, and Indians speak their own languages (Indians from Portuguese India speak any of the Portuguese Creoles of their origin) aside from Portuguese as their second language. Most educated Mozambicans speak English, which is used in schools and business as second or third language.\nCulture.\nDespite the influence of Islamic coastal traders and European colonizers, the people of Mozambique have largely retained an indigenous culture based on smallscale agriculture. Mozambique's most highly developed art forms have been wood sculpture, for which the Makonde in northern Mozambique are particularly renowned, and dance. The middle and upper classes continue to be heavily influenced by the Portuguese colonial and linguistic heritage.\nEducation and health.\nUnder Portugal, educational opportunities for poor Mozambicans were limited; 93% of the Bantu population was illiterate, and many could not speak Portuguese. In fact, most of today's political leaders were educated in missionary schools. After independence, the government placed a high priority on expanding education, which reduced the illiteracy rate to about two-thirds as primary school enrollment increased. Unfortunately, in recent years school construction and teacher training enrollments have not kept up with population increases. With post-war enrollments reaching all-time highs, the quality of education has suffered. As a member of Commonwealth of Nations, most urban Mozambicans are required to learn English starting high-school.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAttribution:"}
{"id": "19305", "revid": "22939902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19305", "title": "Politics of Mozambique", "text": " \nPolitics in Mozambique takes place in a framework of a semi-presidential representative democratic republic, whereby the President of Mozambique is head of state and head of government in a multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the Assembly of the Republic.\nThe Economist Intelligence Unit rated Mozambique an \"authoritarian regime\" in .\nPolitical history before the introduction of democracy.\nThe last 25 years of Mozambique's history have encapsulated the political developments of the entire 20th century. Portuguese colonialism collapsed in 1974 after a decade of armed struggle, initially led by American-educated Eduardo Mondlane, who was assassinated in 1969. When independence was proclaimed in 1975, the leaders of FRELIMO's military campaign rapidly established a one-party state allied to the Soviet bloc, eliminating political pluralism, religious educational institutions, and the role of traditional authorities.\nMozambique's Portuguese population were ordered to leave the country within 24 hours, an order which was given by Armando Guebuza. Panicked Portuguese left the country via plane, road and sea and had to leave behind all their assets, returning to Portugal where they became destitute and fell under the ridicule of the European Portuguese who saw their rehabilitation as a burden on the country's meager resources. They became known as the \"retornados\" or refugees. Many Portuguese took their own lives.\nThe new government gave shelter and support to South African (ANC) and Zimbabwean (ZANU-PF) guerrilla movements while the governments of apartheid South Africa and Rhodesia fostered and financed an armed rebel movement in central Mozambique called the Mozambican National Resistance (RENAMO). Civil war, sabotage from neighbouring states, and economic collapse characterised the first decade of Mozambican independence. Also marking this period were the mass exodus of Portuguese nationals, weak infrastructure, nationalisation, and economic mismanagement. During most of the civil war the government was unable to exercise effective control outside of urban areas, many of which were cut off from the capital. An estimated one million Mozambicans perished during the civil war, 1.7 million took refuge in neighbouring states, and several million more were internally displaced. In the third FRELIMO party congress in 1983, President Samora Machel conceded the failure of socialism and the need for major political and economic reforms. His death, along with several advisers, in a suspicious plane crash in 1986 interrupted progress.\nHis successor, Joaquim Chissano, continued the reforms and began peace talks with RENAMO. The new constitution enacted in 1990 provided for a multi-party political system, market-based economy, and free elections. The civil war ended in October 1992 with the Rome General Peace Accords.\nBy mid-1995 the over 1.7 million Mozambican refugees who had sought asylum in neighbouring Malawi, Zimbabwe, Swaziland, Zambia, Tanzania, and South Africa as a result of war and drought had returned, as part of the largest repatriation witnessed in Sub-Saharan Africa. Additionally, a further estimated 4 million internally displaced returned to their areas of origin.\nUnder supervision of the ONUMOZ peacekeeping force of the United Nations, peace returned to Mozambique. In 1994 the country held its first democratic elections. Joaquim Chissano was elected president with 53% of the vote, and a 250-member National Assembly was voted in with 129 FRELIMO deputies, 112 RENAMO deputies, and 9 representatives of three smaller parties that formed the Democratic Union (UD).\nExecutive branch.\nThe Constitution of Mozambique stipulates that the President of the Republic functions as the head of state, head of government, commander-in-chief of the armed forces, and as a symbol of national unity. He is directly elected for a five-year term via run-off voting; if no candidate receives more than half of the votes cast in the first round of voting, a second round of voting will be held in which only the two candidates who received the highest number of votes in the first round will participate, and whichever of the candidates obtains a majority of votes in the second round will thus be elected president. The Prime Minister is appointed by the President. His functions include convening and chairing the Council of Ministers (cabinet), advising the President, assisting the President in governing the country, and coordinating the functions of the other Ministers.\nLegislative branch.\nThe Assembly of the Republic (\"Assembleia da Rep\u00fablica\") has 250 members, elected for a five-year term by proportional representation.\nPolitical parties and elections.\nIn 1994 the country held its first democratic elections. Joaquim Chissano was elected President with 53% of the vote, and a 250-member National Assembly was voted in with 129 FRELIMO deputies, 112 RENAMO deputies, and 9 representatives of three smaller parties that formed the Democratic Union (UD). Since its formation in 1994, the National Assembly has made progress in becoming a body increasingly more independent of the executive. By 1999, more than one-half (53%) of the legislation passed originated in the Assembly.\nAfter some delays, in 1998 the country held its first local elections to provide for local representation and some budgetary authority at the municipal level. The principal opposition party, RENAMO, boycotted the local elections, citing flaws in the registration process. Independent slates contested the elections and won seats in municipal assemblies. Turnout was very low.\nIn the aftermath of the 1998 local elections, the government resolved to make more accommodations to the opposition's procedural concerns for the second round of multiparty national elections in 1999. Working through the National Assembly, the electoral law was rewritten and passed by consensus in December 1998. Financed largely by international donors, a very successful voter registration was conducted from July to September 1999, providing voter registration cards to 85% of the potential electorate (more than 7 million voters).\nThe second general elections were held 3\u20135 December 1999, with high voter turnout. International and domestic observers agreed that the voting process was well organised and went smoothly. Both the opposition and observers subsequently cited flaws in the tabulation process that, had they not occurred, might have changed the outcome. In the end, however, international and domestic observers concluded that the close result of the vote reflected the will of the people.\nPresident Chissano won the presidency with a margin of 4% points over the RENAMO-Electoral Union coalition candidate, Afonso Dhlakama, and began his 5-year term in January 2000. FRELIMO increased its majority in the National Assembly with 133 out of 250 seats. RENAMO-UE coalition won 116 seats, one went independent, and no third parties are represented.\nThe opposition coalition did not accept the National Election Commission's results of the presidential vote and filed a formal complaint to the Supreme Court. One month after the voting, the court dismissed the opposition's challenge and validated the election results. The opposition did not file a complaint about the results of the legislative vote.\nThe second local elections, involving 33 municipalities with some 2.4 million registered voters, took place in November 2003. This was the first time that FRELIMO, RENAMO-UE, and independent parties competed without significant boycotts. The 24% turnout was well above the 15% turnout in the first municipal elections. FRELIMO won 28 mayoral positions and the majority in 29 municipal assemblies, while RENAMO won 5 mayoral positions and the majority in 4 municipal assemblies. The voting was conducted in an orderly fashion without violent incidents. However, the period immediately after the elections was marked by objections about voter and candidate registration and vote tabulation, as well as calls for greater transparency.\nIn May 2004, the government approved a new general elections law that contained innovations based on the experience of the 2003 municipal elections.\nPresidential and National Assembly elections took place on 1\u20132 December 2004. FRELIMO candidate Armando Guebuza won with 64% of the popular vote. His opponent, Afonso Dhlakama of RENAMO, received 32% of the popular vote. FRELIMO won 160 seats in Parliament. A coalition of RENAMO and several small parties won the 90 remaining seats. Armando Guebuza was inaugurated as the President of Mozambique on 2 February 2005.\nThe candidate of the ruling Mozambican Liberation Front's (Frelimo) Filipe Nyusi has been the President of Mozambique since January 2015 after winning the election in October 2014. In October 2019, President Filipe Nyusi was re-elected after a landslide victory in general election. Frelimo won 184 seats, Renamo got 60 seats and the MDM party received the remaining six in the National Assembly. Opposition did not accept the results because of allegations of fraud and irregularities. Frelimo secured two-thirds majority in parliament which allowed Frelimo to re-adjust the constitution without needing the agreement of the opposition.\nJudicial branch.\nThe judiciary comprises a Supreme Court and provincial, district, and municipal courts.\nAdministrative divisions.\nMozambique is divided in 10 provinces (provincias, singular - provincia); Cabo Delgado, Gaza, Inhambane, Manica, Maputo, Nampula, Niassa, Sofala, Tete, Zambezia\nInternational organisation participation.\nMozambique is a member of ACP, AfDB, the Commonwealth, CPLP, ECA, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICCt (signatory), ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO (correspondent), ITU, MONUC, NAM, OAU, OIC, OPCW, SADC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNMISET, UPU, WCO, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO and WTrO.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19307", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19307", "title": "Telecommunications in Mozambique", "text": " \nTelecommunications in Mozambique include radio, television, fixed and mobile telephones, and the Internet.\nInternet.\nMozambique has a comparatively low Internet penetration rate with only 4.8% of the population having access to the Internet compared to 16% for Africa as a whole.\nTelecommunication de Mozambique (TDM), Mozambique's national fixed-line operator, offers ADSL Internet access for home and business customers. In early 2014 packages ranged from 512\u00a0kbit/s with a 6\u00a0GByte cap for MTN750 (~US$21) to 4\u00a0Mbit/s with a 43\u00a0GByte cap for MTN4300 (~US$118).\nThe three mobile operators, Movitel, mCel and Vodacom, also offer 3G Internet access.\nMozambique was the first African country to offer broadband wireless services using WiMax.\nWith the introduction of the SEACOM submarine cable in July 2009 and the EASSY submarine cable in July 2010, Mozambique now has access to less expensive international connectivity and is no longer reliant on VSAT or neighbor South Africa for Internet transit services.\nInternet censorship and surveillance.\nThere are no government restrictions on access to the Internet, however, opposition party members report government intelligence agents monitor e-mail.\nThe constitution and law provide for freedom of speech and the press, and the government generally respects these rights in practice. Individuals can generally criticize the government publicly or privately without reprisal. Some individuals express a fear that the government monitors their private telephone and e-mail communications. Many journalists practice self-censorship.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19308", "revid": "3427741", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19308", "title": "Transport in Mozambique", "text": " \nModes of transport in Mozambique include rail, road, water, and air. There are rail links serving principal cities and connecting the country with Malawi, Zimbabwe and South Africa. There are over 30,000 km of roads, but much of the network is unpaved. \nOn the Indian Ocean coast are several large seaports, including Nacala, Beira and Maputo, with further ports being developed. There are 3,750 km of navigable inland waterways. There is an international airport at Maputo, 21 other paved airports, and over 100 with unpaved runways.\nRailways.\nThe Mozambican railway system developed over more than a century from three different ports on the Indian Ocean that serve as terminals for separate lines to the hinterland. The railroads were major targets during the Mozambican Civil War, were sabotaged by RENAMO, and are being rehabilitated. A parastatal authority, \"Portos e Caminhos de Ferro de Mo\u00e7ambique\" (abbreviated CFM; in English Mozambique Ports and Railways), oversees the railway system of Mozambique and its connected ports, but management has been largely outsourced. Each line has its own development corridor.\nAs of 2005[ [update]] there are 3,123\u00a0km of railway track, consisting of 2,983\u00a0km of gauge, compatible with neighboring rail systems, and a 140\u00a0km line of gauge, the Gaza Railway. The central Beira-Bulawayo railway and Sena railway route links the port of Beira to the landlocked countries of Malawi, Zambia and Zimbabwe. To the north of this the port of Nacala is also linked by Nacala rail to Malawi, and to the south the port of Maputo is connected by the Limpopo rail, the Goba rail and the Ressano Garcia rail to Zimbabwe, Eswatini and South Africa.. These networks interconnect only via neighbouring countries. A new route for coal haulage between Tete and Beira was planned to come into service by 2010, and in August 2010, Mozambique and Botswana signed a memorandum of understanding to develop a 1,100\u00a0km railway through Zimbabwe, to carry coal from Serule in Botswana to a deepwater port at Techobanine Point in Mozambique.\nNewer rolling stock has been supplied by the Indian Golden Rock and BLW, Varanasi workshop using Centre Buffer Couplers (AAR couplers) and air brakes.\nRoads and highways.\nMozambique's inter-city roads are classified as a national or primary road (\"estrada nacional\" or \"estrada prim\u00e1ria\"), or as regional \u2013 secondary or tertiary \u2013 roads (\"estradas secund\u00e1rias\" and \"estradas terci\u00e1reas\"). National roads are given the prefix \"N\" or \"EN\" followed by a one- or two-digit number. The numbers generally increase from the south of the country to the north. Regional roads are given the prefix \"R\", followed by a three-digit number.\nIn 2008 the total length of Mozambique's road network was 32,500 km. The primary and secondary road networks were less than 5000 km each. The tertiary network was 12,700 km. Unclassified or local roads (\"estradas vicinais\") were estimated at 6,700 km, and urban roads at 3,300 km.\nThe national highway network includes 14 routes:\nWaterways.\nThere are 3,750\u00a0km of navigable waterways.\nSea transport.\nPorts and harbours.\nSeaports on the Indian Ocean coast include:\nMerchant marine.\nAs of 2002[ [update]] the merchant marine fleet consisted of three cargo ships of 1,000 gt or over, totaling 4,125 gt/\u00a0tonnes deadweight (DWT). Two of these were Belgian-owned ships registered in Mozambique as a flag of convenience.\nAirports.\nAs of 2006[ [update]] there were 158 airports in total, 22 of them having paved runways. The main airport in the country is Maputo International Airport, which is also the hub of Mozambique's flag carrier, LAM Mozambique Airlines.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19309", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19309", "title": "Mozambique Defence Armed Forces", "text": "National armed forces of Mozambique\nThe Mozambique Defence Armed Forces (, FADM) are the national armed forces of Mozambique. They include the General Staff of the Armed Forces and three branches of service: Army, Air Force and Navy.\nThe FADM were formed in mid August 1994, by the integration of the For\u00e7as Armadas de Mo\u00e7ambique/FPLM with the military wing of RENAMO, following the end of the civil war.\nHistory.\nCoelho et al write:\n\"Independence in June 1975 was preceded by a nine-month transition period in which Frelimo took control of a transitional cabinet where ..it held six of the nine ministries.\" The previous For\u00e7as Populares de Liberta\u00e7\u00e3o de Mo\u00e7ambique (FPLM), the armed wing of FRELIMO, became the For\u00e7as Armadas de Mo\u00e7ambique but retained the FPLM title, becoming \"FAM/FPLM\". From 1975 to the successful conclusions of the Rome negotiations in 1992, former liberation war leader Alberto Joaquim Chipande served as Minister of National Defence. The same year, Sebasti\u00e3o Mabote was appointed as chief of the armed forces.\nUnder the previous FAM, in 1982, ten provincial semi-autonomous military commands were created; the provincial commanders also acted as second in commands of the provincial government. Coelho et al write:\n\"the 1st Brigade and the 6th Tank Brigade were located in Maputo; the 2nd Brigade was in Mapai and, together with 8th Brigade based in Chokwe, assured protection of the south; the 3rd Brigade was in Chimoio and the 5th in Beira; the 4th Brigade was placed in Tete, and the 7th in Cuamba, assuring a military presence in Niassa, Cabo Delgado, Zambezia and Nampula, and particularly in the Nacala corridor..\"\nThroughout the 1980s the FRELIMO government and its armed forces, the For\u00e7as Armadas de Mo\u00e7ambique/FPLM, fought the rebel Mozambican National Resistance (RENAMO), which received support by South Africa. \nIn June 1987, there was a senior military reshuffle. Colonel-General Sebasti\u00e3o Mabote, Chief of the General Staff, was replaced by previous Chief of the Air Force Lieutenant-General Antonio Hama Thai, who was also appointed Deputy Minister of Defence. Thai had distinguished himself in an offensive against Renamo in Zamb\u00e9zia. Major-General Tob\u00edas Dai was given a deputy position to Thai in the new position of Commander of the Armed Forces, while Manuel Gimo Caetano was promoted to Commander of the Navy; Major-General Domingos Dondo became Commander of the Frontier Guards; and Colonel Jo\u00e3o Bernado Honwana became Commander of the air force.\nThe Mozambican Civil War only ended in 1992. Robinson writes by early 1993 that:\nIn the meantime the break-down of discipline within the Mozambican armed forces was escalating, driven by desperation and sheer desire to end the war, to the extent that government soldiers were looting warehouses, hijacking food convoys and ambushing traffic throughout the country. In March members of the Presidential Guard even occupied their barracks and took their commander hostage. \nThe Mozambique Defence Armed Forces were formed in mid-August 1994 after peace negotiations in Rome had produced the General Peace Agreement (GPA, AGP in Portuguese). The new armed forces were formed by integrating those soldiers of the former government For\u00e7as Armadas de Mo\u00e7ambique/FPLM and those among the RENAMO rebels who wished to stay in uniform. They were formed through a commission, the \"Comiss\u00e3o Conjunta para a Forma\u00e7\u00e3o das For\u00e7as Armadas de Defesa e Seguran\u00e7a de Mo\u00e7ambique\" (CCFADM), chaired by the United Nations Operation in Mozambique (ONUMOZ).\nTwo generals were appointed to lead the new forces, one from FRELIMO, Lieutenant General Lagos Lidimo, who was named Chief of the Defence Force and Major General Mateus Ngonhamo from RENAMO as Vice-Chief of the Defence Force. The former Chief of the Army of the \"For\u00e7as Armadas de Mo\u00e7ambique,\" Lieutenant General Antonio Hama Thai, was retired.\nThe first three infantry battalions were stationed at Chokwe, Cuamba, and Quelimane.\nOn 20 March 2008, Reuters reported that President Guebuza had dismissed the Chief and Vice Chief of the Defence Force, Lieutenant General Lagos Lidimo (FRELIMO) and Lieutenant General Mateus Ngonhamo (RENAMO), replacing them with Brigadier General Paulino Macaringue as Chief of Defence Force and Major General Ol\u00edmpio Cambora as Vice-Chief of Defence Force.\nFilipe Nyussi took office as Minister of Defense on 27 March 2008, succeeding Tobias Joaquim Dai. Nyussi's appointment came almost exactly one year after a fire and resulting explosions of munitions at the Malhazine armoury in Maputo killed more than 100 people and destroyed 14,000 homes. A government-appointed investigative commission concluded that negligence played a role in the disaster, and Dai \"was blamed by many for failing to act on time to prevent the loss of life\". Although no official reason was given for Dai's removal, it may have been a \"delayed reaction\" to the Malhazine disaster.\nIn April 2010 it was announced that \"the People's Republic of China donated to the FADM material for agriculture worth 4 million euros, including trucks, tractors, agricultural implements, mowers and motorbikes in the framework of bilateral cooperation in the military. Under a protocol of cooperation in the military field, the Government of China will also provide support to the Ministry of Defence of Mozambique with about 1 million euros for the areas of training and logistics. The protocol for granting aid to the Armed Forces for the Defence of Mozambique (FADM) was signed by Defense Minister of Mozambique, Filipe Nyusi, and the charge d'affaires of the Chinese embassy in Maputo, Lee Tongli.\"\nMozambique has also been involved in many peacekeeping operations in Burundi (232 personnel), Comoros, Democratic Republic of the Congo, East Timor and Sudan. They have also actively participated in joint military operations such Blue Hungwe in Zimbabwe in 1997 and Blue Crane in South Africa in 1999.\nLand Forces.\nThe Mozambican Army was formed in 1976 from three conventional battalions, two of which were trained in Tanzania and a third of which was trained in Zambia. Army officer candidates were initially trained in Maputo by Chinese military instructors. In March 1977, following Mozambique's Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation with the Soviet Union, officer candidates became eligible for training in various Warsaw Pact member states. The Soviet military mission in Mozambique assisted in raising a new army composed of five infantry brigades and an armored brigade. At the height of the civil war, this was gradually increased to eight infantry brigades, an armored brigade, and a counter-insurgency brigade modeled after the Zimbabwean 5th Brigade.\nThe preexisting FAM was abolished after the end of the civil war under the auspices of the Joint Commission for the Formation of the Mozambican Defence Force (CCFADM), which included advisers from Portugal, France, and the United Kingdom. The CCFADM recommended that former army personnel and an equal number of demobilised RENAMO insurgents be integrated into a single force numbering about 30,000. Due to logistics problems and budgetary constraints, however, the army only numbered about 12,195 in 1995. Force levels rarely fluctuated between 1995 and the mid-2000s due to the army's limited resources and low budget priority.\nIn 2016, the Mozambican Army consisted of 10,000 troops organised into three special forces battalions, seven light infantry battalions, two engineer battalions, two artillery battalions, and a single logistics battalion.\nAs of 2017, the serving chief of the army was Major General Eug\u00e8nio Dias Da Silva.\nEquipment.\nBetween 1977 and 1989, the Mozambican Army was lavishly supplied with Soviet weapons, as well as a Soviet-supervised technical programme to oversee their logistics needs and maintenance. Following the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, along with the resulting departure of Soviet technical staff, much of this equipment was rendered inoperable. The bulk of the army's hardware remained vested in this ageing and increasingly obsolescent Soviet equipment throughout the 2000s, and serviceability rates have remained low. In 2016, less than 10% of the army's artillery and armoured vehicles were operational.\nNavy.\nThere are about 200 personnel in the navy. In September 2004 it was reported that the South African Navy was to donate two of its Namacurra class harbour patrol boat to the Mozambique Navy. The boats were refitted by the naval dockyard at Simon's Town and equipped with outboard motors and navigation equipment donated by the French Navy. The French Navy \"Durance\" class command and replenishment oiler \"Marne\" (A360) was to deliver the boats to Maputo en route to its ALINDIEN operational area in the Indian Ocean after a refit in Cape Town.\nIn 2013, the French shipyard CMN Group confirmed a major order by Mozambique, including 6 patrol vessels &amp; interceptors (HSI32).\nOn 29 July 2019 in the first ever visit by an Defence Minister of India Rajnath Singh donated 2 L&amp;T class Fast interceptor boats to the Navy. A team from Indian Coast Guard will also be stationed to train the crew, support for maintenance and operation of the two boats. \nIn January 2022, two Solas Marine fast interceptor boat were transferred from Indian Navy to Mozambique on board . Mozambique Navy personnel were given training to operate the new interceptor boats. On 8 November 2024, the Indian Navy gifted another two Fast Interceptor Crafts of the same class to Mozambique. They were delivered via . The Fast Interceptor Craft are capable of reaching speeds of and equipped with machine guns and bullet-resistant cabins. They will enhance Mozambique's capability to address maritime threats.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19310", "revid": "38927932", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19310", "title": "Foreign relations of Mozambique", "text": "While alliances dating back to the Mozambican War of Independence remain relevant, Mozambique's foreign policy has become increasingly pragmatic. The twin pillars of the policy are maintenance of good relations with its neighbors and maintenance and expansion of ties to development partners.\nHistory.\nDuring the 1970s and early 1980s, Mozambique's foreign policy was inextricably linked to the struggles for majority rule in Rhodesia and South Africa as well as superpower competition and the Cold War. Mozambique's decision to enforce United Nations sanctions against Rhodesia and support Rhodesian guerrillas led Ian Smith's regime to undertake overt and covert actions to destabilize the country. Although the change of government in Zimbabwe in 1980 removed this threat, the apartheid regime in South Africa continued to finance the destabilization of Mozambique.\nThe 1984 Nkomati Accord, while failing in its goal of ending South African support to RENAMO, opened initial diplomatic contacts between the Mozambican and South African governments. This process gained momentum with South Africa's elimination of apartheid, which culminated in the establishment of full diplomatic relations in October 1993. While relations with neighboring Zimbabwe, Malawi, Zambia, and Tanzania show occasional strains, Mozambique's ties to these countries remain strong.\nIn the years immediately following its independence, Mozambique benefited from considerable assistance from some western countries, notably the Scandinavians. The Soviet Union and its allies, however, became Mozambique's primary economic, military, and political supporters and its foreign policy reflected this linkage. This began to change in 1983; in 1984 Mozambique joined the World Bank and International Monetary Fund. Western aid quickly replaced Soviet support, with the Scandinavians, Finland, the United States, the Netherlands, and the European Union becoming increasingly important sources of development assistance. Italy also maintains a profile in Mozambique as a result of its key role during the peace process. Relations with Portugal, the former colonial power, are complex and of some importance as Portuguese investors play a visible role in Mozambique's economy.\nMozambique is a member of the Non-Aligned Movement and ranks among the moderate members of the African Bloc in the United Nations and other international organizations. Mozambique also belongs to the Organisation of African Unity/African Union and the Southern African Development Community. In 1994, the Government became a full member of the Organisation of the Islamic Conference (now the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation), in part to broaden its base of international support but also to please the country's sizeable Muslim population. Similarly, in early 1996 Mozambique joined its Anglophone neighbors in the Commonwealth. In the same year, Mozambique became a founding member and the first President of the Community of Portuguese Language Countries (CPLP), and maintains close ties with other Lusophone states. The country is also a member of the Port Management Association of Eastern and Southern Africa (PMAESA).\nIllicit drugs:\nSouthern African transit point for South Asian hashish, South Asian heroin, and South American cocaine probably destined for the European and South African markets; producer of cannabis (for local consumption) and methaqualone (for export to South Africa); corruption and poor regulatory capability makes the banking system vulnerable to money laundering, but the lack of a well-developed financial infrastructure limits the country's utility as a money-laundering center.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Mozambique maintains diplomatic relations with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19311", "revid": "46051904", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19311", "title": "Memes", "text": ""}
{"id": "19312", "revid": "43969826", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19312", "title": "Meme", "text": "Cultural idea which spreads through imitation\nA meme (; ) is an idea, behavior, or style that spreads by means of imitation from person to person within a culture and often carries symbolic meaning representing a particular phenomenon or theme. A meme acts as a unit for carrying cultural ideas, symbols, or practices, that can be transmitted from one mind to another through writing, speech, gestures, rituals, or other imitable phenomena with a mimicked theme. Supporters of the concept regard memes as cultural analogues to genes in that they self-replicate, mutate, and respond to selective pressures. In popular language, a meme may refer to an Internet meme, typically an image, that is remixed, copied, and circulated in a shared cultural experience online.\nProponents theorize that memes are a viral phenomenon that may evolve by natural selection in a manner analogous to that of biological evolution. Memes do this through processes analogous to those of variation, mutation, competition, and inheritance, each of which influences a meme's reproductive success. Memes spread through the behavior that they generate in their hosts. Memes that propagate less prolifically may become extinct, while others may survive, spread, and (for better or for worse) mutate. Memes that replicate most effectively enjoy more success, and some may replicate effectively even when they prove to be detrimental to the welfare of their hosts.\nA field of study called \"memetics\" arose in the 1990s to explore the concepts and transmission of memes in terms of an evolutionary model. Criticism from a variety of fronts has challenged the notion that academic study can examine memes empirically. However, developments in neuroimaging may make empirical study possible. Some commentators in the social sciences question the idea that one can meaningfully categorize culture in terms of discrete units, and are especially critical of the biological nature of the theory's underpinnings. Others have argued that this use of the term is the result of a misunderstanding of the original proposal.\nThe word \"meme\" itself is a neologism coined by Richard Dawkins, originating from his 1976 book \"The Selfish Gene\". Dawkins's own position is somewhat ambiguous. He welcomed N. K. Humphrey's suggestion that \"memes should be considered as living structures, not just metaphorically\", and proposed to regard memes as \"physically residing in the brain\". Although Dawkins said his original intentions had been simpler, he approved Humphrey's opinion and he endorsed Susan Blackmore's 1999 project to give a scientific theory of memes, complete with predictions and empirical support.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"meme\" is a shortening (modeled on \"gene\") of \"mimeme\", which comes from Ancient Greek (; ), meaning 'imitated thing', itself from (, 'to imitate'), from (, 'mime').\nThe word was coined by British evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins in \"The Selfish Gene\" (1976) as a concept for discussion of evolutionary principles in explaining the spread of ideas and cultural phenomena. Examples of memes given in Dawkins' book include melodies, catchphrases, fashion, and the technology of building arches.\nOrigins.\nEarly formulations.\nAlthough Richard Dawkins invented the term \"meme\" and developed meme theory, he has not claimed that the idea was entirely novel, and there have been other expressions for similar ideas in the past.\nFor instance, the possibility that ideas were subject to the same pressures of evolution as were biological attributes was discussed in the time of Charles Darwin. T. H. Huxley (1880) claimed that \"The struggle for existence holds as much in the intellectual as in the physical world. A theory is a species of thinking, and its right to exist is coextensive with its power of resisting extinction by its rivals.\" G. K. Chesterton (1922) observed the similarity between intellectual systems and living organisms, noting that a certain degree of complexity, rather than being a hindrance, is a necessity for continued survival.\nIn 1904, Richard Semon published \"Die Mneme\" (which appeared in English in 1924 as \"The Mneme\"). The term \"mneme\" was also used in Maurice Maeterlinck's \"The Life of the White Ant\" (1926), with some parallels to Dawkins's concept. Kenneth Pike had, in 1954, coined the related terms \"emic\" and \"etic\", generalizing the linguistic units of phoneme, morpheme, grapheme, lexeme, and tagmeme (as set out by Leonard Bloomfield), distinguishing insider and outside views of communicative behavior.\nDawkins.\nThe word \"meme\" originated with Richard Dawkins' 1976 book \"The Selfish Gene\".\nDawkins cites as inspiration the work of geneticist L. L. Cavalli-Sforza, anthropologist F. T. Cloak, and ethologist J. M. Cullen. Dawkins wrote that evolution depended not on the particular chemical basis of genetics, but only on the existence of a self-replicating unit of transmission\u2014in the case of biological evolution, the gene. For Dawkins, the meme exemplified another self-replicating unit with potential significance in explaining human behavior and cultural evolution.\nDawkins used the term to refer to any cultural entity that an observer might consider a replicator. He hypothesized that one could view many cultural entities as replicators, and pointed to melodies, fashions and learned skills as examples. Memes generally replicate through exposure to humans, who have evolved as efficient copiers of information and behavior. Because humans do not always copy memes perfectly, and because they may refine, combine or otherwise modify them with other memes to create new memes, they can change over time. Dawkins likened the process by which memes survive and change through the evolution of culture to the natural selection of genes in biological evolution.\nDawkins noted that in a society with culture a person need not have biological descendants to remain influential in the actions of individuals thousands of years after their death:But if you contribute to the world's culture, if you have a good idea...it may live on, intact, long after your genes have dissolved in the common pool. Socrates may or may not have a gene or two alive in the world today, as G.C. Williams has remarked, but who cares? The meme-complexes of Socrates, Leonardo, Copernicus and Marconi are still going strong.\nIn that context, Dawkins defined the \"meme\" as a unit of cultural transmission, or a unit of imitation and replication, but later definitions would vary. The lack of a consistent, rigorous, and precise understanding of what typically makes up one unit of cultural transmission remains a problem in debates about memetics. In contrast, the concept of genetics gained concrete evidence with the discovery of the biological functions of DNA. Meme transmission requires a physical medium, such as photons, sound waves, touch, taste, or smell because memes can be transmitted only through the senses.\nAfter Dawkins: Role of physical media.\nInitially, Dawkins did not seriously give context to the material of memetics. He considered a meme to be an idea, and thus a mental concept. However, from Dawkins' initial conception, it is how a medium might function in relation to the meme which has garnered the most attention. For example, David Hull suggested that while memes might exist as Dawkins conceives of them, he finds it important to suggest that instead of determining them as idea \"replicators\" (i.e. mind-determinant influences) one might notice that the medium itself has an influence in the meme's evolutionary outcomes. Thus, he refers to the medium as an \"interactor\" to avoid this determinism. Alternatively, Daniel Dennett suggests that the medium and the idea are not distinct in that memes only exist because of their medium. Dennett argued this in order to remain consistent with his denial of qualia and the notion of materially deterministic evolution which was consistent with Dawkins' account. A particularly more divergent theory is that of Limor Shifman, a communication and media scholar of \"Internet memetics\". She argues that any memetic argument which claims the distinction between the meme and the meme-vehicle (i.e. the meme's medium) are empirically observable is mistaken from the offset. Shifman claims to be following a similar theoretical direction as Susan Blackmore; however, her attention to the media surrounding Internet culture has enabled Internet memetic research to depart in empirical interests from previous memetic goals. Regardless of Internet Memetic's divergence in theoretical interests, it plays a significant role in theorizing and empirically investigating the connection between cultural ideologies, behaviors, and their mediation processes.\nMemetic lifecycle: transmission, retention.\nMemes, analogously to genes, vary in their aptitude to replicate; successful memes remain and spread, whereas unfit ones stall and are forgotten. Thus, memes that prove more effective at replicating and surviving are selected in the meme pool.\nMemes first need retention. The longer a meme stays in its hosts, the higher its chances of propagation are. When a host uses a meme, the meme's life is extended. The reuse of the neural space hosting a certain meme's copy to host different memes is the greatest threat to that meme's copy. A meme that increases the longevity of its hosts will generally survive longer. On the contrary, a meme that shortens the longevity of its hosts will tend to disappear faster. However, as hosts are mortal, retention is not sufficient to perpetuate a meme in the long term; memes also need transmission.\nLife-forms can transmit information both vertically (from parent to child, via replication of genes) and horizontally (through viruses and other means).\nMemes can replicate vertically or horizontally within a single biological generation. They may also lie dormant for long periods of time.\nMemes reproduce by copying from a nervous system to another one, either by communication or imitation. Imitation often involves the copying of an observed behavior of another individual. Communication may be direct or indirect, where memes transmit from one individual to another through a copy recorded in an inanimate source, such as a book or a musical score. Adam McNamara has suggested that memes can be thereby classified as either internal or external memes (i-memes or e-memes).\nSome commentators have likened the transmission of memes to the spread of contagions. Social contagions such as fads, hysteria, copycat crime, and copycat suicide exemplify memes seen as the contagious imitation of ideas. Observers distinguish the contagious imitation of memes from instinctively contagious phenomena such as yawning and laughing, which they consider innate (rather than socially learned) behaviors.\nAaron Lynch described seven general patterns of meme transmission, or \"thought contagion\":\nMemes as discrete units.\nDawkins initially defined \"meme\" as a noun that \"conveys the idea of a unit of cultural transmission, or a unit of \"imitation\"\". John S. Wilkins retained the notion of meme as a kernel of cultural imitation while emphasizing the meme's evolutionary aspect, defining the meme as \"the least unit of sociocultural information relative to a selection process that has favorable or unfavorable selection bias that exceeds its endogenous tendency to change\". The meme as a unit provides a convenient means of discussing \"a piece of thought copied from person to person\", regardless of whether that thought contains others inside it, or forms part of a larger meme. A meme could consist of a single word, or a meme could consist of the entire speech in which that word first occurred. This forms an analogy to the idea of a gene as a single unit of self-replicating information found on the self-replicating chromosome.\nWhile the identification of memes as \"units\" conveys their nature to replicate as discrete, indivisible entities, it does not imply that thoughts somehow become quantized or that \"atomic\" ideas exist that cannot be dissected into smaller pieces. A meme has no given size. Susan Blackmore writes that melodies from Beethoven's symphonies are commonly used to illustrate the difficulty involved in delimiting memes as discrete units. She notes that while the first four notes of Beethoven's Fifth Symphony () form a meme widely replicated as an independent unit, one can regard the entire symphony as a single meme as well.\nThe inability to pin an idea or cultural feature to quantifiable key units is widely acknowledged as a problem for memetics. It has been argued however that the traces of memetic processing can be quantified utilizing neuroimaging techniques which measure changes in the \"connectivity profiles between brain regions\". Blackmore meets such criticism by stating that memes compare with genes in this respect: that while a gene has no particular size, nor can we ascribe every phenotypic feature directly to a particular gene, it has value because it encapsulates that key unit of inherited expression subject to evolutionary pressures. To illustrate, she notes evolution selects for the gene for features such as eye color; it does not select for the individual nucleotide in a strand of DNA. Memes play a comparable role in understanding the evolution of imitated behaviors.\n\"Genes, Mind, and Culture: The Coevolutionary Process\" (1981) by Charles J. Lumsden and E. O. Wilson proposes the theory that genes and culture co-evolve, and that the fundamental biological units of culture must correspond to neuronal networks that function as nodes of semantic memory. Lumsden and Wilson coined their own word, \"culturgen\", which did not catch on. Coauthor Wilson later acknowledged the term \"meme\" as the best label for the fundamental unit of cultural inheritance in his 1998 book \"\", which elaborates upon the fundamental role of memes in unifying the natural and social sciences.\nAt present, the existence of discrete cultural units which satisfy memetic theory has been challenged in a variety of ways. What is critical from this perspective is that in denying memetics unitary status is to deny a particularly fundamental part of Dawkins' original argument. In particular, denying memes are a unit, or are explainable in some clear unitary structure denies the cultural analogy that inspired Dawkins to define them. If memes are not describable as unitary, memes are not accountable within a neo-Darwinian model of evolutionary culture.\nWithin cultural anthropology, materialist approaches are skeptical of such units. In particular, Dan Sperber argues that memes are not unitary in the sense that there are no two instances of exactly the same cultural idea, all that can be argued is that there is material mimicry of an idea. Thus every instance of a \"meme\" would not be a true evolutionary unit of replication.\nDan Deacon, Kalevi Kull separately argued memes are degenerate Signs in that they offer only a partial explanation of the triadic in Charles Sanders Peirce's semiotic theory: a sign (a reference to an object), an object (the thing being referred to), and an interpretant (the interpreting actor of a sign). They argue the meme unit is a sign which only is defined by its replication ability. Accordingly, in the broadest sense, the objects of copying are memes, whereas the objects of translation and interpretation are signs. Later, Sara Cannizzaro more fully develops out this semiotic relation in order to reframe memes as being a kind of semiotic activity, however she too denies that memes are units, referring to them as \"sign systems\" instead.\nIn Limor Shifman's account of Internet memetics, she also denies memetics as being unitary. She argues memes are not unitary, however many assume they are because many previous memetic researchers confounded memes with the cultural interest in \"virals\": singular informational objects which spread with a particular rate and veracity such as a video or a picture. As such, Shifman argues that Dawkins' original notion of meme is closer to what communication and information studies consider digitally viral replication.\nEvolutionary influences on memes.\nDawkins noted the three conditions that must exist for evolution to occur:\nDawkins emphasizes that the process of evolution naturally occurs whenever these conditions co-exist, and that evolution does not apply only to organic elements such as genes. He regards memes as also having the properties necessary for evolution, and thus sees meme evolution as not simply analogous to genetic evolution, but as a real phenomenon subject to the laws of natural selection. Dawkins noted that as various ideas pass from one generation to the next, they may either enhance or detract from the survival of the people who obtain those ideas, or influence the survival of the ideas themselves. For example, a certain culture may develop unique designs and methods of tool-making that give it a competitive advantage over another culture. Each tool-design thus acts somewhat similarly to a biological gene in that some populations have it and others do not, and the meme's function directly affects the presence of the design in future generations. In keeping with the thesis that in evolution one can regard organisms simply as suitable \"hosts\" for reproducing genes, Dawkins argues that one can view people as \"hosts\" for replicating memes. Consequently, a successful meme may or may not need to provide any benefit to its host.\nUnlike genetic evolution, memetic evolution can show both Darwinian and Lamarckian traits. Cultural memes will have the characteristic of Lamarckian inheritance when a host aspires to replicate the given meme through inference rather than by exactly copying it. Take for example the case of the transmission of a simple skill such as hammering a nail, a skill that a learner imitates from watching a demonstration without necessarily imitating every discrete movement modeled by the teacher in the demonstration, stroke for stroke. Susan Blackmore distinguishes the difference between the two modes of inheritance in the evolution of memes, characterizing the Darwinian mode as \"copying the instructions\" and the Lamarckian as \"copying the product\".\nClusters of memes, or \"memeplexes\" (also known as \"meme complexes\" or as \"memecomplexes\"), such as cultural or political doctrines and systems, may also play a part in the acceptance of new memes. Memeplexes comprise groups of memes that replicate together and coadapt. Memes that fit within a successful memeplex may gain acceptance by \"piggybacking\" on the success of the memeplex.\nAs an example, John D. Gottsch discusses the transmission, mutation and selection of religious memeplexes and the theistic memes contained. Theistic memes discussed include the \"prohibition of aberrant sexual practices such as incest, adultery, homosexuality, bestiality, castration, and religious prostitution\", which may have increased vertical transmission of the parent religious memeplex. Similar memes are thereby included in the majority of religious memeplexes, and harden over time; they become an \"inviolable canon\" or set of dogmas, eventually finding their way into secular law. This could also be referred to as the propagation of a taboo.\nMemetics.\nMemetics is the name of the field of science that studies memes and their evolution and culture spread. While the term \"meme\" appeared in various forms in German and Austrian texts near the turn of the 20th century, Dawkin's unrelated use of the term in The Selfish Gene marked its emergence into mainstream study. Based on the Dawkin's framing of a meme as a cultural analogue to a gene, meme theory originated as an attempt to apply biological evolutionary principles to cultural information transfer and cultural evolution. Thus, memetics attempts to apply conventional scientific methods (such as those used in population genetics and epidemiology) to explain existing patterns and transmission of cultural ideas.\nCriticism of meme theory.\nPrincipal criticisms of memetics include the claim that memetics ignores established advances in other fields of cultural study, such as sociology, cultural anthropology, cognitive psychology, and social psychology. Questions remain whether or not the meme concept counts as a validly disprovable scientific theory. This view regards memetics as a theory in its infancy: a protoscience to proponents, or a pseudoscience to some detractors.\nOne frequent criticism of meme theory looks at the perceived gap in the gene/meme analogy. For example, Luis Benitez-Bribiesca points to the lack of a \"code script\" for memes (analogous to the DNA of genes), and to the excessive instability of the meme mutation mechanism (that of an idea going from one brain to another), which would lead to a low replication accuracy and a high mutation rate, rendering the evolutionary process chaotic. In his book \"Darwin's Dangerous Idea\", Daniel C. Dennett points to the existence of self-regulating correction mechanisms (vaguely resembling those of gene transcription) enabled by the redundancy and other properties of most meme expression languages which stabilize information transfer. Dennett notes that spiritual narratives, including music and dance forms, can survive in full detail across any number of generations even in cultures with oral tradition only. In contrast, when applying only meme theory, memes for which stable copying methods are available will inevitably get selected for survival more often than those which can only have unstable mutations (such as the noted music and dance forms), which, according to meme theory, should have resulted in those forms of cultural expression going extinct.\nA second common criticism of meme theory views it as a reductionist and inadequate version of more accepted anthropological theories. Kim Sterelny and Paul Griffiths noted the cumulative evolution of genes depends on biological selection-pressures neither too great nor too small in relation to mutation-rates, while pointing out there is no reason to think that the same balance will exist in the selection pressures on memes. Semiotic theorists such as Terrence Deacon and Kalevi Kull regard the concept of a meme as a primitivized or degenerate concept of a sign, containing only a sign's basic ability to be copied, but lacks other core elements of the sign concept such as translation and interpretation. Evolutionary biologist Ernst Mayr similarly disapproved of Dawkins's gene-based view of meme, asserting it to be an \"unnecessary synonym\" for a concept, reasoning that concepts are not restricted to an individual or a generation, may persist for long periods of time, and may evolve.\nApplications.\nOpinions differ as to how best to apply the concept of memes within a \"proper\" disciplinary framework. One view sees memes as providing a useful philosophical perspective with which to examine cultural evolution. Proponents of this view (such as Susan Blackmore and Daniel Dennett) argue that considering cultural developments from a meme's-eye view\u2014\"as if\" memes themselves respond to pressure to maximise their own replication and survival\u2014can lead to useful insights and yield valuable predictions into how culture develops over time. Others such as Bruce Edmonds and Robert Aunger have focused on the need to provide an empirical grounding for memetics to become a useful and respected scientific discipline.\nA third approach, described by Joseph Poulshock, as \"radical memetics\" seeks to place memes at the centre of a materialistic theory of mind and of personal identity.\nProminent researchers in evolutionary psychology and anthropology, including Scott Atran, Dan Sperber, Pascal Boyer, John Tooby and others, argue the possibility of incompatibility between modularity of mind and memetics. In their view, minds structure certain communicable aspects of the ideas produced, and these communicable aspects generally trigger or elicit ideas in other minds through inference (to relatively rich structures generated from often low-fidelity input) and not high-fidelity replication or imitation. Atran discusses communication involving religious beliefs as a case in point. In one set of experiments he asked religious people to write down on a piece of paper the meanings of the Ten Commandments. Despite the subjects' own expectations of consensus, interpretations of the commandments showed wide ranges of variation, with little evidence of consensus. In another experiment, subjects with autism and subjects without autism interpreted ideological and religious sayings (for example, \"Let a thousand flowers bloom\" or \"To everything there is a season\"). People with autism showed a significant tendency to closely paraphrase and repeat content from the original statement (for example: \"Don't cut flowers before they bloom\"). Controls tended to infer a wider range of cultural meanings with little replicated content (for example: \"Go with the flow\" or \"Everyone should have equal opportunity\"). Only the subjects with autism\u2014who lack the degree of inferential capacity normally associated with aspects of theory of mind\u2014came close to functioning as \"meme machines\".\nIn his book \"The Robot's Rebellion\", Keith Stanovich uses the memes and memeplex concepts to describe a program of cognitive reform that he refers to as a \"rebellion\". Specifically, Stanovich argues that the use of memes as a descriptor for cultural units is beneficial because it serves to emphasize transmission and acquisition properties that parallel the study of epidemiology. These properties make salient the sometimes parasitic nature of acquired memes, and as a result individuals should be motivated to reflectively acquire memes using what he calls a \"Neurathian bootstrap\" process.\nMemetic explanations of racism.\nIn \"Cultural Software: A Theory of Ideology\", Jack Balkin argued that memetic processes can explain many of the most familiar features of ideological thought. His theory of \"cultural software\" maintained that memes form narratives, social networks, metaphoric and metonymic models, and a variety of different mental structures. Balkin maintains that the same structures used to generate ideas about free speech or free markets also serve to generate racistic beliefs. To Balkin, whether memes become harmful or maladaptive depends on the environmental context in which they exist rather than in any special source or manner to their origination. Balkin describes racist beliefs as \"fantasy\" memes that become harmful or unjust \"ideologies\" when diverse peoples come together, as through trade or competition.\nReligion.\nRichard Dawkins called for a re-analysis of religion in terms of the evolution of self-replicating ideas \"apart from\" any resulting biological advantages they might bestow.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As an enthusiastic Darwinian, I have been dissatisfied with explanations that my fellow-enthusiasts have offered for human behaviour. They have tried to look for 'biological advantages' in various attributes of human civilization. For instance, tribal religion has been seen as a mechanism for solidifying group identity, valuable for a pack-hunting species whose individuals rely on cooperation to catch large and fast prey. Frequently the evolutionary preconception in terms of which such theories are framed is implicitly group-selectionist, but it is possible to rephrase the theories in terms of orthodox gene selection.\u2014\u200a\nHe argued that the role of key replicator in cultural evolution belongs not to genes, but to memes replicating thought from person to person by means of imitation. These replicators respond to selective pressures that may or may not affect biological reproduction or survival.\nIn her book \"The Meme Machine\", Susan Blackmore regards religions as particularly tenacious memes. Many of the features common to the most widely practiced religions provide built-in advantages in an evolutionary context, she writes. For example, religions that preach of the value of faith over evidence from everyday experience or reason inoculate societies against many of the most basic tools people commonly use to evaluate their ideas. By linking altruism with religious affiliation, religious memes can proliferate more quickly because people perceive that they can reap societal as well as personal rewards. The longevity of religious memes improves with their documentation in revered religious texts.\nAaron Lynch attributed the robustness of religious memes in human culture to the fact that such memes incorporate multiple modes of meme transmission. Religious memes pass down the generations from parent to child and across a single generation through the meme-exchange of proselytism. Most people will hold the religion taught them by their parents throughout their life. Many religions feature adversarial elements, punishing apostasy, for instance, or demonizing infidels. In \"Thought Contagion\" Lynch identifies the memes of transmission in Christianity as especially powerful in scope. Believers view the conversion of non-believers both as a religious duty and as an act of altruism. The promise of heaven to believers and threat of hell to non-believers provide a strong incentive for members to retain their belief. Lynch asserts that belief in the Crucifixion of Jesus in Christianity amplifies each of its other replication advantages through the indebtedness believers have to their Savior for sacrifice on the cross. The image of the crucifixion recurs in religious sacraments, and the proliferation of symbols of the cross in homes and churches potently reinforces the wide array of Christian memes.\nAlthough religious memes have proliferated in human cultures, the modern scientific community has been relatively resistant to religious belief. Robertson (2007) reasoned that if evolution is accelerated in conditions of propagative difficulty, then we would expect to encounter variations of religious memes, established in general populations, addressed to scientific communities. Using a memetic approach, Robertson deconstructed two attempts to privilege religiously held spirituality in scientific discourse. Advantages of a memetic approach as compared to more traditional \"modernization\" and \"supply side\" theses in understanding the evolution and propagation of religion were explored.\nArchitectural memes.\nIn \"A Theory of Architecture\", Nikos Salingaros speaks of memes as \"freely propagating clusters of information\" which can be beneficial or harmful. He contrasts memes to patterns and true knowledge, characterizing memes as \"greatly simplified versions of patterns\" and as \"unreasoned matching to some visual or mnemonic prototype\". Taking reference to Dawkins, Salingaros emphasizes that they can be transmitted due to their own communicative properties, that \"the simpler they are, the faster they can proliferate\", and that the most successful memes \"come with a great psychological appeal\".\nArchitectural memes, according to Salingaros, can have destructive power: \"Images portrayed in architectural magazines representing buildings that could not possibly accommodate everyday uses become fixed in our memory, so we reproduce them unconsciously.\" He lists various architectural memes that circulated since the 1920s and which, in his view, have led to contemporary architecture becoming quite decoupled from human needs. They lack connection and meaning, thereby preventing \"the creation of true connections necessary to our understanding of the world\". He sees them as no different from antipatterns in software design\u2014as solutions that are false but are re-utilized nonetheless.\nInternet culture.\nAn \"Internet meme\" is a concept that spreads rapidly from person to person via the Internet. Memes can spread from person to person via social networks, blogs, direct email, or news sources. Sending memes as a form of affection is known as pebbling.\nIn 2013, Dawkins characterized an Internet meme as one deliberately altered by human creativity, distinguished from his original idea involving mutation \"by random change and a form of Darwinian selection\".\nInternet memes are an example of Dawkins' meme theory at work in the sense of how they so rapidly mirror current cultural events and become a part of how the time period is defined. Limor Shifman uses the example of the 'Gangnam Style' Music video by South Korean pop-star, Psy that went viral in 2012. Shifman cites examples of how the meme mutated itself into the cultural sphere, mixing with other things going on at the time such as the 2012 U.S. presidential election, which led to the creation of Mitt Romney Style, a parody of the original Gangnam style, intended to be a jab at the 2012 Republican presidential candidate, Mitt Romney.\nMeme stocks.\nMeme stocks, a particular subset of Internet memes in general, are listed companies lauded for the social media buzz they create, rather than their operating performance. Meme stocks find themselves surging in popularity after gaining the interest of individuals or groups through the internet. r/wallstreetbets, a subreddit where participants discuss stock and option trading, and the financial services company Robinhood Markets, became notable in 2021 for their involvement on the popularization and enhancement of meme stocks. One of the most commonly recognized instances of a meme stock is GameStop, whose stocks saw a sudden increase after a Reddit-led idea to invest in 2021.\nPolitics.\nIn the United States the presidential campaigns have utilized memes on the Internet in the last three cycles. Disinformation has been charged by political contestants with memes being a concern of the complaints.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19314", "revid": "1319471643", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19314", "title": "Monroe", "text": "Monroe or Monroes may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\n \"For fictional characters, see Monroe (given name) and Monroe (surname).\"\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "19315", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19315", "title": "Maupassant", "text": ""}
{"id": "19316", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19316", "title": "Maugham", "text": "Maugham is a surname most commonly associated with the English literary family. The name is a variant of Malham, Malgham, and Malghum. Families with the name originate from the area surrounding Malham and Kirkby Malham.\nWell-known persons with this surname include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Surname listThis page lists people with the surname . "}
{"id": "19317", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19317", "title": "Marylin Monroe", "text": ""}
{"id": "19318", "revid": "36346239", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19318", "title": "Marilyn Monroe", "text": "American actress and model (1926\u20131962)\nMarilyn Monroe ( ; born Norma Jeane Mortenson; June 1, 1926\u00a0\u2013 August 4, 1962) was an American actress and model. Known for playing comic \"blonde bombshell\" characters, she became one of the most popular sex symbols of the 1950s and early 1960s, as well as an emblem of the era's sexual revolution. She was a top-billed actress for a decade, and her films grossed $200\u00a0million (equivalent to $ billion in 2024) by her death in 1962.\nBorn in Los Angeles, Monroe spent most of her childhood in foster homes and an orphanage before marrying James Dougherty at the age of 16. She was working in a factory during World War II when she met a photographer from the First Motion Picture Unit and began a successful pin-up modeling career, which led to short-lived film contracts with 20th Century Fox and Columbia Pictures. After roles as a freelancer, she began a longer contract with Fox in 1951, becoming a popular actress with roles in several comedies, including \"As Young as You Feel\" and \"Monkey Business\", and in the dramas \"Clash by Night\" and \"Don't Bother to Knock\". Monroe faced a scandal when it was revealed that she had posed for nude photographs prior to fame, but the story resulted in increased interest in her films.\nMonroe became one of the most marketable Hollywood stars in 1953. She had leading roles in the film noir \"Niagara\", which overtly relied on her sex appeal, and the comedies \"Gentlemen Prefer Blondes\" and \"How to Marry a Millionaire\", which established her star image as a \"dumb blonde\". The same year, her nude images were used as the centerfold and cover of the first issue of \"Playboy\". Monroe played a significant role in the creation and management of her public image, but felt disappointed when typecast and underpaid by the studio. She was briefly suspended in early 1954 for refusing a film project but returned to star in \"The Seven Year Itch\" (1955), one of the biggest box office successes of her career.\nWhen the studio was still reluctant to change Monroe's contract, she founded her own film production company in 1954 with her friend Milton Greene. She dedicated 1955 to building the company and began studying method acting under Lee Strasberg at the Actors Studio. Later that year, Fox awarded her a new contract, which gave her more control and a larger salary. Her subsequent roles included a critically acclaimed performance in \"Bus Stop\" (1956) and her first independent production in \"The Prince and the Showgirl\" (1957), for which she received a BAFTA nomination, and won the David di Donatello Award for Best Actress. She won a Golden Globe for her role in \"Some Like It Hot\" (1959), a critical and commercial success. Her last completed film was the drama \"The Misfits\" (1961).\nMonroe's troubled private life received much attention. Her marriages to retired baseball star Joe DiMaggio and to playwright Arthur Miller were highly publicized; both ended in divorce. On August 4, 1962, Monroe died at age 36 of an overdose of barbiturates at her Los Angeles home. Her death was ruled a probable suicide. Monroe remains a pop culture icon, with the American Film Institute ranking her as the sixth-greatest female screen legend from the Golden Age of Hollywood.\nLife and career.\n1926\u20131943: Childhood and first marriage.\nMonroe was born Norma Jeane Mortenson on June 1, 1926, at Los Angeles General Hospital in the neighborhood of Boyle Heights, Los Angeles, California, United States. Her mother, Gladys Pearl Baker (n\u00e9e Monroe), was born in Piedras Negras, Coahuila, Mexico, into a poor Midwestern family who migrated to California at the turn of the century. At the age of 14, Gladys had married John Newton Baker, an abusive man nine years her senior. They had two children together, Robert and Berniece. Gladys successfully filed for divorce and sole custody of her two oldest in 1923, but Baker kidnapped the children soon after and moved with them to his native Kentucky. Monroe first learned about her sister when she was 12 years old, and met her for the first time in her late teens.\nFollowing the divorce, Gladys worked as a film negative cutter at Consolidated Film Industries. In 1924, she married Martin Edward Mortensen, but the union lasted only a few months, although they did not legally divorce until four years later. Gladys named Mortensen (misspelled \"Mortenson\") as Monroe's father in the birth certificate, but most of Monroe's biographers agree that this was unlikely as their separation had taken place well before she became pregnant. According to biographers Fred Guiles and Lois Banner, her father was likely Charles Stanley Gifford, Gladys's superior at RKO Studios, with whom she had an affair in 1925. This was supported by a comparison conducted in 2022 between Monroe's DNA and that of one of Gifford's descendants.\nAlthough Gladys was mentally and financially unprepared for a child, Monroe's early childhood was stable and happy. Gladys placed Monroe with evangelical Christian foster parents Albert and Ida Bolender in the suburban town of Hawthorne. Gladys also lived there for six months until she was forced to move back to the city for employment. She then began visiting Monroe on weekends. In the summer of 1933, Gladys bought a small house in Hollywood with a loan from the Home Owners' Loan Corporation and moved Monroe in with her. They shared the house with lodgers, actors George and Maude Atkinson and their daughter, Nellie. In January 1934, Gladys had a mental breakdown and was diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia. After several months in a rest home, she was committed to the Metropolitan State Hospital. She spent the rest of her life in and out of hospitals and was rarely in contact with Monroe. Monroe became a ward of the state; Gladys's friend Grace Goddard took responsibility over the affairs of the former and Monroe.\nFor the next 16 months, Monroe continued living with the Atkinsons and may have been sexually abused during this time. Always a shy girl, she developed a stutter and became withdrawn. In the summer of 1935, she briefly stayed with Grace and the latter's husband, Erwin \"Doc\" Goddard, and two other families. In September 1935, Grace placed Monroe in the Los Angeles Orphans Home. The orphanage was \"a model institution\" and was described in positive terms by her peers, but Monroe felt abandoned. Encouraged by the orphanage staff, who thought that Monroe would be happier living in a family, Grace became her legal guardian in 1936 but did not take her out of the orphanage until the summer of 1937. Monroe's second stay with the Goddards lasted only a few months because Doc allegedly molested her. She then lived for brief periods with her relatives and Grace's friends and relatives in Los Angeles and Compton.\nMonroe's childhood experiences first made her want to become an actress: I didn't like the world around me because it was kind of grim ... When I heard that this was acting, I said that's what I want to be ... Some of my foster families used to send me to the movies to get me out of the house and there I'd sit all day and way into the night. Up in front, there with the screen so big, a little kid all alone, and I loved it.\nMonroe found a more permanent home in September 1938, when she began living with Grace's aunt Ana Lower in Sawtelle. Monroe was enrolled at Emerson Junior High School and went to weekly Christian Science services with Lower. She excelled in writing and contributed to the school newspaper, but was otherwise a mediocre student. Owing to the elderly Lower's health problems, Monroe returned to live with the Goddards in Van Nuys in about early 1941. That same year, she began attending Van Nuys High School.\nIn 1942, the company that employed Doc relocated him to West Virginia. California child protection laws prevented the Goddards from taking Monroe out of state, and she faced having to return to the orphanage. To avoid this, it was decided that she leave high school and marry their neighbor, factory worker James Dougherty, who was five years her senior. The marriage took place just after her 16th birthday on June 19, 1942. Monroe found herself and Dougherty mismatched, and later said she was \"dying of boredom\" during the marriage. In 1943, Dougherty enlisted in the Merchant Marine and was stationed on Santa Catalina Island, where Monroe moved with him.\n1944\u20131948: Modeling, divorce, and first film roles.\nIn April 1944, Dougherty was shipped out to the Pacific, where he remained for most of the next two years. After Dougherty left, Monroe moved in with Dougherty's parents and began a job at the Radioplane Company, a munitions factory in Van Nuys, to help the war effort. In late 1944, she met photographer David Conover, then working in the U.S. Army Air Forces' First Motion Picture Unit, who had been sent to the factory to shoot morale-boosting pictures of female workers. Although none of her pictures were used, she quit working at the factory in January 1945 and began modeling for Conover and his friends. Defying her deployed husband and his disapproving mother, she moved on her own and signed a contract with the Blue Book Model Agency in August 1945.\nThe agency deemed Monroe's figure more suitable for pin-up than high fashion modeling, and she was featured mostly in advertisements and men's magazines. She straightened her naturally curly brown hair and dyed it platinum blonde. According to Emmeline Snively, the agency's owner, Monroe quickly became one of its most ambitious and hard-working models; by early 1946, she had appeared on 33 magazine covers for publications such as \"Pageant\", \"U.S. Camera\", \"Laff\", and \"Peek\". As a model, Monroe occasionally used the pseudonym Jean Norman.\nThrough Snively, Monroe signed a contract with an acting agency in June 1946. After an unsuccessful interview at Paramount Pictures, she was given a screen-test by Ben Lyon, a 20th Century-Fox executive. Head executive Darryl F. Zanuck was unenthusiastic about it, but he gave her a standard six-month contract to avoid her being signed by rival studio RKO Pictures. Monroe's contract began in August 1946, and she and Lyon selected the stage name \"Marilyn Monroe\". The first name was picked by Lyon, who was reminded of Broadway star Marilyn Miller; the surname was Monroe's mother's maiden name. In September 1946, she divorced Dougherty, who had been opposed to her career.\nMonroe spent her first six months at Fox learning acting, singing, and dancing, and observing the film-making process. Her contract was renewed in February 1947, and she was given her first film roles, bit parts in \"Dangerous Years\" (1947) and \"Scudda Hoo! Scudda Hay!\" (1948). The studio also enrolled her in the Actors' Laboratory Theatre, an acting school teaching the techniques of the Group Theatre; she later stated that it was \"my first taste of what real acting in a real drama could be, and I was hooked\". Despite her enthusiasm, her teachers thought her too shy and insecure to have a future in acting, and Fox did not renew her contract in August 1947. She returned to modeling while also doing occasional odd jobs at film studios, such as working as a dancing \"pacer\" behind the scenes to keep the leads on point at musical sets.\nMonroe was determined to make it as an actress, and continued studying at the Actors' Lab. She had a small role in the play \"Glamour Preferred\" at the Bliss-Hayden Theater, but it ended after a couple of performances. To network, she frequented producers' offices, befriended gossip columnist Sidney Skolsky, and entertained influential male guests at studio functions, a practice she had begun at Fox. She also became a friend and occasional sex partner of Fox executive Joseph M. Schenck, who persuaded his friend Harry Cohn, the head executive of Columbia Pictures, to sign her in March 1948.\nAt Columbia, Monroe's look was modeled after Rita Hayworth and her hair was bleached platinum blonde. She began working with the studio's head drama coach, Natasha Lytess, who would remain her mentor until 1955. Her only film at the studio was the low-budget musical \"Ladies of the Chorus\" (1948), in which she had her first starring role as a chorus girl courted by a wealthy man. She also screen-tested for the lead role in \"Born Yesterday\" (1950), but her contract was not renewed in September 1948. \"Ladies of the Chorus\" was released the following month and was not a success.\n1949\u20131952: Breakthrough years.\nWhen her contract at Columbia ended, Monroe returned again to modeling. She shot a commercial for Pabst beer and posed for artistic nude photographs by Tom Kelley for John Baumgarth calendars, using the name 'Mona Monroe'. Monroe had previously posed topless or clad in a bikini for other artists including Earl Moran, and felt comfortable with nudity. Shortly after leaving Columbia, she also met and became the prot\u00e9g\u00e9e and mistress of Johnny Hyde, the vice president of the William Morris Agency.\nThrough Hyde, Monroe landed small roles in several films, including two critically acclaimed works. The first was Joseph Mankiewicz's drama \"All About Eve\" (1950), which received 14 Academy Award nominations. The film's star Bette Davis later praised Monroe's performance, saying, \"Definitely, no question, I knew she was going to make it. She was a very ambitious girl, [and] knew what she wanted [and was] very serious about it...I thought she had talent.\" The second film was John Huston's noir \"The Asphalt Jungle\" (1950). Despite her screen time being only a few minutes, Monroe gained a mention in \"Photoplay\" and according to biographer Donald Spoto \"moved effectively from movie model to serious actress\".\nIn December 1950, Hyde negotiated a seven-year contract for Monroe with 20th Century-Fox. According to its terms, Fox could opt not to renew the contract after each year. Hyde died of a heart attack only days later, which left Monroe devastated. In 1951, Monroe had supporting roles in three moderately successful Fox comedies: \"As Young as You Feel\", \"Love Nest\", and \"Let's Make It Legal\". According to Spoto all three films featured her \"essentially [as] a sexy ornament\", but she received some praise from critics: Bosley Crowther of \"The New York Times\" described her as \"superb\" in \"As Young As You Feel\" and Ezra Goodman of the \"Los Angeles Daily News\" called her \"one of the brightest up-and-coming [actresses]\" for \"Love Nest\".\nHer popularity with audiences was also growing: she received several thousand fan letters a week, and was declared \"Miss Cheesecake of 1951\" by the army newspaper \"Stars and Stripes\", reflecting the preferences of soldiers in the Korean War. In February 1952, the Hollywood Foreign Press Association named Monroe the \"best young box office personality\". In her private life, Monroe had a short relationship with director Elia Kazan and also briefly dated several other men, including director Nicholas Ray and actors Yul Brynner and Peter Lawford. In early 1952, she began a highly publicized romance with retired New York Yankees baseball star Joe DiMaggio, one of the most famous sports personalities of the era.\nMonroe found herself at the center of a scandal in March 1952, when she revealed publicly that she had posed for a nude calendar in 1949. The studio had learned about the photos and that she was publicly rumored to be the model some weeks prior, and together with Monroe decided that to prevent damaging her career it was best to admit to them while stressing that she had been broke at the time. The strategy gained her public sympathy and increased interest in her films, for which she was now receiving top billing. In the wake of the scandal, Monroe was featured on the cover of \"Life\" magazine as the \"Talk of Hollywood\", and gossip columnist Hedda Hopper declared her the \"cheesecake queen\" turned \"box office smash\". Three of Monroe's films\u2014\"Clash by Night\", \"Don't Bother to Knock\" and \"We're Not Married!\"\u2014were released soon after to capitalize on the public interest.\nDespite her newfound popularity as a sex symbol, Monroe also wished to showcase more of her acting range. She had begun taking acting classes with Michael Chekhov and mime Lotte Goslar soon after beginning the Fox contract, and \"Clash by Night\" and \"Don't Bother to Knock\" showed her in different roles. In the former, a drama starring Barbara Stanwyck and directed by Fritz Lang, she played a fish cannery worker; to prepare, she spent time in a fish cannery in Monterey. She received positive reviews for her performance: \"The Hollywood Reporter\" stated that \"she deserves starring status with her excellent interpretation\", and \"Variety\" wrote that she \"has an ease of delivery which makes her a cinch for popularity\". The latter was a thriller in which Monroe starred as a mentally disturbed babysitter and which Zanuck used to test her abilities in a heavier dramatic role. It received mixed reviews from critics, with Crowther deeming her too inexperienced for the difficult role, and \"Variety\" blaming the script for the film's problems.\nMonroe's three other films in 1952 continued with her typecasting in comedic roles that highlighted her sex appeal. In \"We're Not Married!\", her role as a beauty pageant contestant was created solely to \"present Marilyn in two bathing suits\", according to its writer Nunnally Johnson. In Howard Hawks's \"Monkey Business\", in which she acted opposite Cary Grant, she played a secretary who is a \"dumb, childish blonde, innocently unaware of the havoc her sexiness causes around her\". In \"O. Henry's Full House\", with Charles Laughton she appeared in a passing vignette as a nineteenth-century street walker. Monroe added to her reputation as a new sex symbol with publicity stunts that year: she wore a revealing dress when acting as Grand Marshal at the Miss America Pageant parade, and told gossip columnist Earl Wilson that she usually wore no underwear. By the end of the year, gossip columnist Florabel Muir named Monroe the \"it girl\" of 1952.\nDuring this period, Monroe gained a reputation for being difficult to work with, which would worsen as her career progressed. She was often late or did not show up at all, did not remember her lines, and would demand several re-takes before she was satisfied with her performance. Her dependence on her acting coaches\u2014Natasha Lytess and then Paula Strasberg\u2014also irritated directors. Monroe's problems have been attributed to a combination of perfectionism, low self-esteem, and stage fright. She disliked her lack of control on film sets and never experienced similar problems during photo shoots, in which she had more say over her performance and could be more spontaneous instead of following a script. To alleviate her anxiety and chronic insomnia, she began to use barbiturates, amphetamines, and alcohol, which also exacerbated her problems, although she did not become severely addicted until 1956. According to Sarah Churchwell, some of Monroe's behavior, especially later in her career, was also in response to the condescension and sexism of her male co-stars and directors. Biographer Lois Banner said that she was bullied by many of her directors.\n1953: Rising star.\nMonroe starred in three movies that were released in 1953 and emerged as a major sex symbol and one of Hollywood's most bankable performers. The first was the Technicolor film noir \"Niagara\", in which she played a \"femme fatale\" scheming to murder her husband, played by Joseph Cotten. By then, Monroe and her make-up artist Allan \"Whitey\" Snyder had developed her \"trademark\" make-up look: dark arched brows, pale skin, \"glistening\" red lips and a beauty mark. According to Sarah Churchwell, \"Niagara\" was one of the most overtly sexual films of Monroe's career. In some scenes, Monroe's body was covered only by a sheet or a towel, considered shocking by contemporary audiences. \"Niagara\"'s most famous scene is a 30-second long shot behind Monroe where she is seen walking with her hips swaying, which was used heavily in the film's marketing.\nWhen \"Niagara\" was released in January 1953, women's clubs protested it as immoral, but it proved popular with audiences. While \"Variety\" deemed it \"clich\u00e9d\" and \"morbid\", \"The New York Times\" commented that \"the falls and Miss Monroe are something to see\", as although Monroe may not be \"the perfect actress at this point ... she can be seductive\u2014even when she walks\".\nMonroe continued to attract attention by wearing revealing outfits, most famously at the \"Photoplay\" Awards in January 1953, where she won the \"Fastest Rising Star\" award. A pleated \"sunburst\" waist-tight, deep d\u00e9collet\u00e9 gold lam\u00e9 dress designed by William Travilla for \"Gentlemen Prefer Blondes\", but barely seen at all in the film, was to become a sensation. Prompted by such imagery, veteran star Joan Crawford publicly called the behavior \"unbecoming an actress and a lady\".\nWhile \"Niagara\" made Monroe a sex symbol and established her \"look\", her second film of 1953, the satirical musical comedy \"Gentlemen Prefer Blondes\", cemented her screen persona as a \"dumb blonde\". Based on Anita Loos' novel and its Broadway version, the film focuses on two \"gold-digging\" showgirls played by Monroe and Jane Russell. Monroe's role was originally intended for Betty Grable, who had been 20th Century-Fox's most popular \"blonde bombshell\" in the 1940s; Monroe was fast eclipsing her as a star who could appeal to both male and female audiences. As part of the film's publicity campaign, she and Russell pressed their hand and footprints in wet concrete outside Grauman's Chinese Theatre in June. \"Gentlemen Prefer Blondes\" was released shortly after and became one of the biggest box office successes of the year. Crowther of \"The New York Times\" and William Brogdon of \"Variety\" both commented favorably on Monroe, especially noting her performance of \"Diamonds Are a Girl's Best Friend\"; according to the latter, she demonstrated the \"ability to sex a song as well as point up the eye values of a scene by her presence\". \nIn September, Monroe made her television debut in the \"Jack Benny Show\", playing Jack's fantasy woman in the episode \"Honolulu Trip\". She co-starred with Grable and Lauren Bacall in her third movie of the year, \"How to Marry a Millionaire\", released in November. It featured Monroe as a na\u00efve model who teams up with her friends to find rich husbands, repeating the successful formula of \"Gentlemen Prefer Blondes\". It was the second film ever released in CinemaScope, a widescreen format that Fox hoped would draw audiences back to theaters as television was beginning to cause losses to film studios. Despite mixed reviews, the film was Monroe's biggest box office success at that point in her career.\nMonroe was listed in the annual Top Ten Money Making Stars Poll in both 1953 and 1954, and according to Fox historian Aubrey Solomon became the studio's \"greatest asset\" alongside CinemaScope. Monroe's position as a leading sex symbol was confirmed in December 1953, when Hugh Hefner featured her on the cover and as centerfold in the first issue of \"Playboy\"; Monroe did not consent to the publication. The cover image was a photograph taken of her at the Miss America Pageant parade in 1952, and the centerfold featured one of her 1949 nude photographs.\n1954\u20131955: Conflicts with 20th Century-Fox and marriage to Joe DiMaggio.\nMonroe had become one of 20th Century-Fox's biggest stars, but her contract had not changed since 1950, so that she was paid far less than other stars of her stature and could not choose her projects. Her attempts to appear in films that would not focus on her as a pin-up had been thwarted by the studio head executive, Darryl F. Zanuck, who had a strong personal dislike of her and did not think she would earn the studio as much revenue in other types of roles. Under pressure from the studio's owner, Spyros Skouras, Zanuck had also decided that Fox should focus exclusively on entertainment to maximize profits and canceled the production of any \"serious films\". In January 1954, he suspended Monroe when she refused to begin shooting yet another musical comedy, \"The Girl in Pink Tights\". \nThis was front-page news, and Monroe immediately took action to counter negative publicity. She and DiMaggio, who had been dating for two years, were married at the San Francisco City Hall on January 14, 1954. Fifteen days later, they flew to Japan, combining a \"honeymoon\" with his business trip. From Tokyo, she traveled to Korea, where she participated in a USO show, singing for over 60,000 U.S. Marines over a four-day period. After returning to the U.S., she was awarded \"Photoplay\"'s \"Most Popular Female Star\" prize. Monroe settled with Fox in March, with the promise of a new contract, a bonus of $100,000, and a starring role in the film adaptation of the Broadway success \"The Seven Year Itch\".\nIn April 1954, Otto Preminger's western \"River of No Return\", the last film that Monroe had filmed prior to the suspension, was released. She called it a \"Z-grade cowboy movie in which the acting finished second to the scenery and the CinemaScope process\", but it was popular with audiences. The first film she made after the suspension was the musical \"There's No Business Like Show Business\", which she strongly disliked but the studio required her to do for dropping \"The Girl in Pink Tights\". It was unsuccessful upon its release in late 1954, with Monroe's performance considered vulgar by many critics.\nIn September 1954, Monroe began filming Billy Wilder's comedy \"The Seven Year Itch\", starring opposite Tom Ewell as a woman who becomes the object of her married neighbor's sexual fantasies. Although the film was shot in Hollywood, the studio decided to generate advance publicity by staging the filming of a scene in which Monroe is standing on a subway grate with the air blowing up the skirt of her white dress on Lexington Avenue in Manhattan. The shoot lasted for several hours and attracted nearly 2,000 spectators. The \"subway grate scene\" became one of Monroe's most famous, and \"The Seven Year Itch\" became one of the biggest commercial successes of the year after its release in June 1955.\nThe publicity stunt placed Monroe on international front pages, and it also marked the end of her marriage to DiMaggio. The union had been troubled from the start by his jealousy and controlling attitude; he was also physically abusive. After returning from NYC to Hollywood in October 1954, Monroe filed for divorce, after only nine months of marriage.\nAfter filming for \"The Seven Year Itch\" wrapped up in November 1954, Monroe left Hollywood for the East Coast, where she and photographer Milton Greene founded their own production company, Marilyn Monroe Productions (MMP)\u2014an action that has later been called \"instrumental\" in the collapse of the studio system. Monroe stated that she was \"tired of the same old sex roles\" and asserted that she was no longer under contract to Fox, as it had not fulfilled its duties, such as paying her the promised bonus. This began a year-long legal battle between her and Fox in January 1955. The press largely ridiculed Monroe, and she was parodied in the Broadway play \"Will Success Spoil Rock Hunter?\" (1955), in which her lookalike Jayne Mansfield played a dumb actress who starts her own production company.\nAfter founding MMP, Monroe moved to Manhattan and spent 1955 studying acting. She took classes with Constance Collier and attended workshops on method acting at the Actors Studio, run by Lee Strasberg. She grew close to Strasberg and his wife Paula, receiving private lessons at their home due to her shyness, and soon became a family member. She replaced her old acting coach, Natasha Lytess, with Paula; the Strasbergs remained an important influence for the rest of her career. Monroe also started undergoing psychoanalysis, as Strasberg believed that an actor must confront their emotional traumas and use them in their performances.\nMonroe continued her relationship with DiMaggio despite the ongoing divorce process; she also briefly dated actor Marlon Brando. According to Brando, they maintained an intermittent relationship until she died. She began a more serious affair with playwright Arthur Miller. Their relationship became increasingly serious after October 1955, when Monroe's divorce was finalized and Miller left his wife Mary Slattery. The studio urged her to end it, as Miller was being investigated by the FBI for allegations of communism and had been subpoenaed by the House Un-American Activities Committee, but Monroe refused. The relationship led to the FBI opening a file on her. After years of investigation, the FBI found no evidence linking Marilyn Monroe to the Communist Party of the United States, concluding, \"Subject's views are very positively and concisely leftist; however, if she is being actively used by the Communist Party, it is not general knowledge among those working with the movement in Los Angeles.\" \nBy the end of the year, Monroe and Fox signed a new seven-year contract, as MMP would not be able to finance films alone, and the studio was eager to have Monroe working for them again. Fox would pay her $400,000 to make four films, and granted her the right to choose her own projects, directors and cinematographers. She would also be free to make one film with MMP per each completed film for Fox.\n1956\u20131959: Critical acclaim and marriage to Arthur Miller.\nMonroe began 1956 by announcing her win over 20th Century-Fox. On February 23, 1956, she legally changed her name to \"Marilyn Monroe\". The press wrote favorably about her decision to fight the studio; \"Time\" called her a \"shrewd businesswoman\" and \"Look\" predicted that the win would be \"an example of the individual against the herd for years to come\". In contrast, Monroe's relationship with Miller prompted some negative comments, such as Walter Winchell's statement that \"America's best-known blonde moving picture star is now the darling of the left-wing intelligentsia.\"\nIn March, Monroe began filming the drama \"Bus Stop\", her first film under the new contract. She played Ch\u00e9rie, a saloon singer whose dreams of stardom are complicated by a na\u00efve cowboy who falls in love with her. For the role, she learned an Ozark accent, chose costumes and makeup that lacked the glamor of her earlier films, and provided deliberately mediocre singing and dancing. Broadway director Joshua Logan agreed to direct, despite initially doubting Monroe's acting abilities and knowing of her difficult reputation. The filming took place in Idaho and Arizona, with Monroe \"technically in charge\" as the head of MMP, occasionally making decisions on cinematography and with Logan adapting to her chronic lateness and perfectionism. The experience changed Logan's opinion of Monroe, and he later compared her to Charlie Chaplin in her ability to blend comedy and tragedy.On June 29, 1956, Monroe and Miller were married in a four-minute civil ceremony at the Westchester County Court in White Plains, New York; two days later they had a Jewish ceremony at the home of Kay Brown, Miller's literary agent, in Waccabuc, New York. With the marriage, Monroe converted to Judaism, which led Egypt to ban all of her films. Due to Monroe's status as a sex symbol and Miller's image as an intellectual, the media saw the union as a mismatch, as evidenced by \"Variety\"'s headline, \"Egghead Weds Hourglass\".\n\"Bus Stop\" was released in August 1956 and became a critical and commercial success. \"The Saturday Review of Literature\" wrote that Monroe's performance \"effectively dispels once and for all the notion that she is merely a glamour personality\" and Crowther proclaimed: \"Hold on to your chairs, everybody, and get set for a rattling surprise. Marilyn Monroe has finally proved herself an actress.\" She also received a Golden Globe nomination for Best Actress in a Leading Role - Musical or Comedy for her performance.\nIn August, Monroe also began filming MMP's first independent production, \"The Prince and the Showgirl\", at Pinewood Studios in England. Based on a 1953 stage play by Terence Rattigan, it was to be directed and co-produced by, and to co-star, Laurence Olivier. The production was complicated by conflicts between him and Monroe. Olivier, who had also directed and starred in the stage play, angered her with the patronizing statement \"All you have to do is be sexy\", and with his demand she replicate Vivien Leigh's stage interpretation of the character. He also disliked the constant presence of Paula Strasberg, Monroe's acting coach, on set. In retaliation, Monroe became uncooperative and began to deliberately arrive late, later saying, \"if you don't respect your artists, they can't work well.\"\nMonroe also experienced other problems during the production. Her dependence on pharmaceuticals escalated and, according to Spoto, she had a miscarriage. She and Greene also argued over how MMP should be run. Despite the difficulties, filming was completed on schedule by the end of 1956. \"The Prince and the Showgirl\" was released to mixed reviews in June 1957 and proved unpopular with American audiences. It was better received in Europe, where she was awarded the Italian David di Donatello and the French Crystal Star awards and nominated for a BAFTA.\nAfter returning from England, Monroe took an 18-month hiatus to concentrate on family life. She and Miller split their time between NYC, Connecticut and Long Island. She had an ectopic pregnancy in mid-1957, and a miscarriage a year later; these problems were most likely linked to her endometriosis. Monroe was also briefly hospitalized due to a barbiturate overdose. As she and Greene could not settle their disagreements over MMP, Monroe bought his share of the company.\nMonroe returned to Hollywood in July 1958 to act opposite Jack Lemmon and Tony Curtis in Billy Wilder's comedy on gender roles, \"Some Like It Hot\". She considered the role of Sugar Kane another \"dumb blonde\", but accepted it due to Miller's encouragement and the offer of 10% of the film's profits on top of her standard pay. The film's difficult production has since become \"legendary\". Monroe demanded dozens of retakes, and did not remember her lines or act as directed\u2014Curtis famously said that kissing her was \"like kissing Hitler\" due to the number of retakes. Monroe privately likened the production to a sinking ship and commented on her co-stars and director saying \"[but] why should I worry, I have no phallic symbol to lose.\" Many of the problems stemmed from her and Wilder\u2014who also had a reputation for being difficult\u2014disagreeing on how she should play the role. She angered him by asking to alter many of her scenes, which in turn made her stage fright worse, and it is suggested that she deliberately ruined several scenes to act them her way.\nIn the end, Wilder was happy with Monroe's performance, saying: \"Anyone can remember lines, but it takes a real artist to come on the set and not know her lines and yet give the performance she did!\" \"Some Like It Hot\" was a critical and commercial success when it was released in March 1959. Monroe's performance earned her a Golden Globe for Best Actress in a Leading Role - Musical or Comedy, and prompted \"Variety\" to call her \"a comedienne with that combination of sex appeal and timing that just can't be beat\". It has been voted one of the best films ever made in polls by the BBC, the American Film Institute, and \"Sight &amp; Sound\".\n1960\u20131962: Career setbacks and personal difficulties.\nAfter \"Some Like It Hot\", Monroe took another hiatus until late 1959, when she starred in the musical comedy \"Let's Make Love\". She chose George Cukor to direct and Miller rewrote some of the script, which she considered weak. She accepted the part solely because she was behind on her contract with Fox. The film's production was delayed by her frequent absences from the set. During the shoot, Monroe had an affair with co-star Yves Montand that was widely reported by the press and used in the film's publicity campaign. \"Let's Make Love\" was unsuccessful upon its release in September 1960. Crowther described Monroe as appearing \"rather untidy\" and \"lacking ... the old Monroe dynamism\", and Hedda Hopper called the film \"the most vulgar picture she's ever done\". Truman Capote lobbied for Monroe to play Holly Golightly in a film adaptation of \"Breakfast at Tiffany's\", but the role went to Audrey Hepburn as its producers feared that Monroe would complicate the production.\nThe last film Monroe completed was John Huston's \"The Misfits\" (1961), which Miller had written to provide her with a dramatic role. She played Roslyn, who has just received a quickie divorce in Reno, Nevada, and befriends three aging cowboys, played by Clark Gable, Eli Wallach and Montgomery Clift. The filming in the Nevada desert between July and November 1960 was difficult. Monroe and Miller's marriage was effectively over, and he began a relationship with on-set photographer Inge Morath. Monroe resented that he had based Roslyn partly on herself and thought the character inferior to the male roles. She also struggled with Miller's habit of rewriting scenes the night before filming. Her health was also failing: she was in pain from gallstones, and her drug addiction was so severe that her makeup usually had to be applied while she was still asleep under the influence of barbiturates. In August, filming was halted for her to spend a week in a hospital detox. Despite her problems, Huston said that when Monroe was acting, she \"was not pretending to an emotion. It was the real thing. She would go deep down within herself and find it and bring it up into consciousness.\"\nMonroe and Miller separated after filming ended, and she obtained a Mexican divorce in January 1961. \"The Misfits\" was released the following month, failing at the box office. Its reviews were mixed, with \"Variety\" complaining of frequently \"choppy\" character development, and Bosley Crowther calling Monroe \"completely blank and unfathomable\" and writing that \"unfortunately for the film's structure, everything turns upon her\". It has received more favorable reviews in the 21st century. Geoff Andrew of the British Film Institute has called it a classic, Huston scholar Tony Tracy called Monroe's performance the \"most mature interpretation of her career\", and Geoffrey McNab of \"The Independent\" praised her \"extraordinary\" portrayal of the character's \"power of empathy\".\nMonroe was next to star in a television adaptation of W. Somerset Maugham's \"Rain\" for NBC, but the project fell through as the network did not want to hire her choice of director, Lee Strasberg. She did not film any new projects in 1961 but instead focused on her health. She had surgery for her endometriosis and gall bladder problems, and underwent four weeks of hospital treatment for depression. She first admitted herself to the Payne Whitney Psychiatric Clinic, but was erroneously placed on a ward meant for people with psychosis, where she was locked in a padded cell and not allowed to move to a more suitable ward or leave the hospital. After three days she was able to move to the more suitable Columbia University Medical Center with the help of her ex-husband Joe DiMaggio, with whom she rekindled a friendship. In later 1961, she dated Frank Sinatra for several months, and returned to live in California, where she purchased a house at 12305 Fifth Helena Drive in Brentwood, Los Angeles.\nMonroe returned to the public eye in the spring of 1962. She received a \"World Film Favorite\" at the 19th Golden Globe Awards and began to shoot a film for Fox, \"Something's Got to Give\", a remake of \"My Favorite Wife\" (1940). It was to be co-produced by MMP, directed by George Cukor and to co-star Dean Martin and Cyd Charisse. Days before filming began, Monroe caught sinusitis. Despite medical advice to postpone the production, Fox began it as planned in late April.\nMonroe was too sick to work for most of the next six weeks, but despite confirmations by multiple doctors, the studio pressured her by alleging publicly that she was faking it. On May 19, she took a break to sing \"Happy Birthday, Mr. President\" on stage at President John F. Kennedy's early birthday celebration at Madison Square Garden in New York. She drew attention with her costume: a beige, skintight dress covered in rhinestones, which made her appear as if she were nude. Monroe's trip to New York caused even more irritation for Fox executives, who had wanted her to cancel it.\nMonroe next filmed a scene for \"Something's Got to Give\" in which she swam naked in a swimming pool. To generate advance publicity, the press was invited to take photographs; these were later published in \"Life\". This was the first time that a major star had posed nude at the height of their career. When she was again on sick leave for several days, Fox decided that it could not afford to have another film running behind schedule when it was already struggling with the rising costs of \"Cleopatra\" (1963). On June 7, Fox fired Monroe and sued her for $750,000 in damages. She was replaced by Lee Remick, but after Martin refused to make the film with anyone other than Monroe, Fox sued him as well and shut down the production. The studio blamed Monroe for the film's demise and began spreading negative publicity about her, even alleging that she was mentally disturbed.\nFox soon regretted its decision and reopened negotiations with Monroe later in June; a settlement about a new contract, including recommencing \"Something's Got to Give\" and a starring role in the black comedy \"What a Way to Go!\" (1964), was reached later that summer. She was also planning on starring in a biopic of Jean Harlow. To repair her public image, Monroe engaged in several publicity ventures, including interviews for \"Life\" and \"Cosmopolitan\" and her first photo shoot for \"Vogue\". For \"Vogue\", she and photographer Bert Stern collaborated for two series of photographs over three days, one a standard fashion editorial and another of her posing nude, which were published posthumously with the title \"The Last Sitting\".\nDeath and funeral.\nDuring her final months, Monroe lived at 12305 Fifth Helena Drive in the Brentwood neighborhood of Los Angeles. Her housekeeper Eunice Murray was staying overnight at the home on the evening of August\u00a04, 1962. Murray woke at 3:00a.m. on August 5 and sensed that something was wrong. She saw light from under Monroe's bedroom door but was unable to get a response and found the door locked. Murray then called Monroe's psychiatrist Ralph Greenson, who arrived at the house shortly after and broke into the bedroom through a window. He found a nude Monroe dead in her bed, covered by a sheet, with her hand clamped around a telephone receiver. Monroe's physician, Hyman Engelberg, arrived at around 3:50a.m. and pronounced her dead. At 4:25a.m., the Los Angeles Police Department was notified.\nMonroe died between 8:30\u00a0p.m. and 10:30p.m. on August\u00a04; the toxicology report showed that the cause of death was acute barbiturate poisoning. She had 8\u00a0mg% (milligrams per 100 milliliters of solution) chloral hydrate and 4.5\u00a0mg% of pentobarbital (Nembutal) in her blood, and 13\u00a0mg% of pentobarbital in her liver. Empty medicine bottles were found next to her bed. The possibility that Monroe had accidentally overdosed was ruled out because the dosages found in her body were several times the lethal limit.\nThe Los Angeles County Coroners Office was assisted in their investigation by the Los Angeles Suicide Prevention Team, who had expert knowledge on suicide. Monroe's doctors stated that she had been \"prone to severe fears and frequent depressions\" with \"abrupt and unpredictable mood changes\", and had overdosed several times in the past, possibly intentionally. From these facts and the lack of any indication of foul play, deputy coroner Thomas Noguchi classified her death as a probable suicide. \nMonroe's sudden death was front-page news in the United States and Europe. According to historian Lois Banner, \"it's said that the suicide rate in Los Angeles doubled the month after she died; the circulation rate of most newspapers expanded that month\", and the \"Chicago Tribune\" reported that they had received hundreds of phone calls from members of the public requesting information about her death. French artist Jean Cocteau commented that her death \"should serve as a terrible lesson to all those whose chief occupation consists of spying on and tormenting film stars\", her former co-star Laurence Olivier deemed her \"the complete victim of ballyhoo and sensation\", and \"Bus Stop\" director Joshua Logan said that she was \"one of the most unappreciated people in the world\".\nMonroe's funeral, held at the Westwood Village Memorial Park Cemetery on August\u00a08, was private and attended by only her closest associates. The service was arranged by DiMaggio, Miracle, and Monroe's business manager Inez Melson. DiMaggio was the only one of her ex-husbands to attend. He barred most of Hollywood from attending and believed that they held a responsibility for her death. Hundreds of spectators crowded the streets around the cemetery. Monroe was later entombed at the Corridor of Memories.\nIn the following decades, several conspiracy theories, including murder and accidental overdose, have been introduced to contradict suicide as the cause of Monroe's death. The speculation that Monroe had been murdered first gained mainstream attention with the publication of Norman Mailer's \"\" in 1973, and in the following years became widespread enough for the Los Angeles County District Attorney John Van de Kamp to conduct a \"threshold investigation\" in 1982 to see whether a criminal investigation should be opened. No evidence of foul play was found.\nScreen persona and reception.\nThe 1940s had been the heyday for actresses who were perceived as tough and smart\u2014such as Katharine Hepburn and Barbara Stanwyck\u2014who had appealed to women-dominated audiences during the war years. 20th Century-Fox wanted Monroe to be a star of the new decade who would draw men to movie theaters, and saw her as a replacement for the aging Betty Grable, their most popular \"blonde bombshell\" of the 1940s. According to film scholar Richard Dyer, Monroe's star image was crafted mostly for the male gaze.\nFrom the beginning, Monroe played a significant part in the creation of her public image, and towards the end of her career exerted almost full control over it. She devised many of her publicity strategies, cultivated friendships with gossip columnists such as Sidney Skolsky and Louella Parsons, and controlled the use of her images. In addition to Grable, she was often compared to another well-known blonde, 1930s film star Jean Harlow. The comparison was prompted partly by Monroe, who named Harlow as her childhood idol, wanted to play her in a biopic, and even employed Harlow's hair stylist to color her hair.\nMonroe's screen persona focused on her blonde hair and the stereotypes that were associated with it, especially dumbness, na\u00efvet\u00e9, sexual availability and artificiality. She often used a breathy, childish voice in her films, and in interviews gave the impression that everything she said was \"utterly innocent and uncalculated\", parodying herself with double entendres that came to be known as \"Monroeisms\". For example, when she was asked what she had on in the 1949 nude photo shoot, she replied, \"I had the radio on\".\nIn her films, Monroe usually played \"the girl\", who is defined solely by her gender. Her roles were almost always chorus girls, secretaries, or models: occupations where \"the woman is on show, there for the pleasure of men.\" Monroe began her career as a pin-up model, and was noted for her hourglass figure. She was often positioned in film scenes so that her curvy silhouette was on display, and frequently posed like a pin-up in publicity photos. Her distinctive, hip-swinging walk also drew attention to her body and earned her the nickname \"the girl with the horizontal walk\".\nMonroe often wore white to emphasize her blondness and drew attention by wearing revealing outfits that showed off her figure. Her publicity stunts often revolved around her clothing either being shockingly revealing or even malfunctioning, such as when a shoulder strap of her dress snapped during a press conference. In press stories, Monroe was portrayed as the embodiment of the American Dream, a girl who had risen from a miserable childhood to Hollywood stardom. Stories of her time spent in foster families and an orphanage were exaggerated and even partly fabricated. Film scholar Thomas Harris wrote that her working-class roots and lack of family made her appear more sexually available, \"the ideal playmate\", in contrast to her contemporary, Grace Kelly, who was also marketed as an attractive blonde, but due to her upper-class background was seen as a sophisticated actress, unattainable for the majority of male viewers.\nAlthough Monroe's screen persona as a dim-witted but sexually attractive blonde was a carefully crafted act, audiences and film critics believed it to be her real personality. This became a hindrance when she wanted to pursue other kinds of roles, or to be respected as a businesswoman. The academic Sarah Churchwell studied narratives about Monroe and wrote:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The biggest myth is that she was dumb. The second is that she was fragile. The third is that she couldn't act. She was far from dumb, although she was not formally educated, and she was very sensitive about that. But she was very smart indeed\u2014and very tough. She had to be both to beat the Hollywood studio system in the 1950s. [...] The dumb blonde was a role\u2014she was an actress, for heaven's sake! Such a good actress that no one now believes she was anything but what she portrayed on screen.\nBiographer Lois Banner writes that Monroe often subtly parodied her sex symbol status in her films and public appearances, and that \"the 'Marilyn Monroe' character she created was a brilliant archetype, who stands between Mae West and Madonna in the tradition of twentieth-century gender tricksters.\" Monroe herself stated that she was influenced by West, learning \"a few tricks from her\u2014that impression of laughing at, or mocking, her own sexuality\". She studied comedy in classes by mime and dancer Lotte Goslar, famous for her comic stage performances, and Goslar also instructed her on film sets. In \"Gentlemen Prefer Blondes\", one of the films in which she played an archetypal dumb blonde, Monroe had the sentence \"I can be smart when it's important, but most men don't like it\" added to her character's lines.\nAccording to Dyer, Monroe became \"virtually a household name for sex\" in the 1950s and \"her image has to be situated in the flux of ideas about morality and sexuality that characterised the Fifties in America\", such as Freudian ideas about sex, the Kinsey report (1953), and Betty Friedan's \"The Feminine Mystique\" (1963). By appearing vulnerable and unaware of her sex appeal, Monroe was the first sex symbol to present sex as natural and without danger, in contrast to the 1940s \"femmes fatales\". Spoto likewise describes her as the embodiment of \"the postwar ideal of the American girl, soft, transparently needy, worshipful of men, na\u00efve, offering sex without demands\", which is echoed in Molly Haskell's statement that \"she was the Fifties fiction, the lie that a woman had no sexual needs, that she is there to cater to, or enhance, a man's needs.\" Monroe's contemporary Norman Mailer wrote that \"Marilyn suggested sex might be difficult and dangerous with others, but ice cream with her\", while Groucho Marx characterized her as \"Mae West, Theda Bara, and Bo Peep all rolled into one\". According to Haskell, due to her sex symbol status, Monroe was less popular with women than with men, as they \"couldn't identify with her and didn't support her\", although this would change after her death.\nDyer has also argued that Monroe's blonde hair became her defining feature because it made her \"racially unambiguous\" and exclusively white just as the civil rights movement was beginning, and that she should be seen as emblematic of racism in twentieth-century popular culture. Banner agreed that it may not be a coincidence that Monroe launched a trend of platinum blonde actresses during the civil rights movement, but has also criticized Dyer, pointing out that in her highly publicized private life, Monroe associated with people who were seen as \"white ethnics\", such as Joe DiMaggio (Italian-American) and Arthur Miller (Jewish). According to Banner, she sometimes challenged prevailing racial norms in her publicity photographs; for example, in an image featured in \"Look\" in 1951, she was shown in revealing clothes while practicing with African-American singing coach Phil Moore.\nMonroe was perceived as a specifically American star, \"a national institution as well known as hot dogs, apple pie, or baseball\" according to \"Photoplay\". Banner calls her the symbol of populuxe, a star whose joyful and glamorous public image \"helped the nation cope with its paranoia in the 1950s about the Cold War, the atom bomb, and the totalitarian communist Soviet Union\". Historian Fiona Handyside writes that the French female audiences associated whiteness/blondness with American modernity and cleanliness, and so Monroe came to symbolize a modern, \"liberated\" woman whose life takes place in the public sphere. Film historian Laura Mulvey has written of her as an endorsement for American consumer culture:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If America was to export the democracy of glamour into post-war, impoverished Europe, the movies could be its shop window\u00a0... Marilyn Monroe, with her all American attributes and streamlined sexuality, came to epitomise in a single image this complex interface of the economic, the political, and the erotic. By the mid-1950s, she stood for a brand of classless glamour, available to anyone using American cosmetics, nylons and peroxide.\nTwentieth Century-Fox further profited from Monroe's popularity by cultivating several lookalike actresses, such as Jayne Mansfield and Sheree North. Other studios also attempted to create their own Monroes: Universal Pictures with Mamie Van Doren, Columbia Pictures with Kim Novak, and The Rank Organisation with Diana Dors.\nIn a profile, Truman Capote quoted Monroe's acting teacher, Constance Collier: She is a beautiful child. I don't mean that in the obvious way\u2014the perhaps too obvious way. I don't think she's an actress at all, not in any traditional sense. What she has\u2014this presence, this luminosity, this flickering intelligence\u2014could never surface on the stage. It's so fragile and subtle, it can only be caught by the camera. It's like a hummingbird in flight: only a camera can freeze the poetry of it.Monroe admired several political figures, especially Abraham Lincoln, whom she respected for his connection to ordinary people and democratic principles, even describing him as a paternal figure. Civil rights were of great importance to her; in a letter to Arthur Miller's son, she recounted questioning Robert F. Kennedy at a dinner about his department's plans regarding civil rights, emphasizing that these were the kinds of questions young Americans wanted answered and addressed. Monroe was registered as a Democrat and admired party members including John F. Kennedy, Robert F. Kennedy and William O. Douglas. She also donated $1,000 to the Democratic Party by purchasing a ticket for the \"Happy Birthday, Mr. President\" event.\nSelected filmography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLegacy.\nAccording to \"The Guide to United States Popular Culture\", \"as an icon of American popular culture, Monroe's few rivals in popularity include Elvis Presley and Mickey Mouse... no other star has ever inspired such a wide range of emotions\u2014from lust to pity, from envy to remorse.\" Art historian Gail Levin stated that Monroe may have been \"the most photographed person of the 20th century\", and The American Film Institute has named her the sixth greatest female screen legend in American film history. The Smithsonian Institution has included her on their list of \"100 Most Significant Americans of All Time\", and both \"Variety\" and VH1 have placed her in the top ten in their rankings of the greatest popular culture icons of the twentieth century.\nHundreds of books have been written about Monroe. She has been the subject of numerous films, plays, operas, and songs, and has influenced artists and entertainers such as Andy Warhol and Madonna. She also remains a valuable brand: her image and name have been licensed for hundreds of products, and she has been featured in advertising for brands such as Max Factor, Chanel, Mercedes-Benz, and Absolut Vodka.\nMonroe's enduring popularity is tied to her conflicted public image. On the one hand, she remains a sex symbol, beauty icon and one of the most famous stars of classical Hollywood cinema. On the other, she is also remembered for her troubled private life, unstable childhood, struggle for professional respect, as well as her death and the conspiracy theories that surrounded it. She has been written about by scholars and journalists who are interested in gender and feminism; these writers include Gloria Steinem, Jacqueline Rose, Molly Haskell, Sarah Churchwell, and Lois Banner. Some, such as Steinem, have viewed her as a victim of the studio system. Others, such as Haskell, Rose, and Churchwell, have instead stressed Monroe's proactive role in her career and in the creation of her public persona.\nOwing to the contrast between her stardom and troubled private life, Monroe is closely linked to broader discussions about modern phenomena such as mass media, fame, and consumer culture. According to academic Susanne Hamscha, Monroe has continued relevance to ongoing discussions about modern society, and she is \"never completely situated in one time or place\" but has become \"a surface on which narratives of American culture can be (re)constructed\". Similarly, Banner has called Monroe the \"eternal shapeshifter\" who is re-created by \"each generation, even each individual... to their own specifications\".\nMonroe remains a cultural icon, but critics are divided on her legacy as an actress. David Thomson called her body of work \"insubstantial\" and Pauline Kael wrote that she \"used her lack of an actress's skills to amuse the public. She had the wit or crassness or desperation to turn cheesecake into acting\u2014and vice versa; she did what others had the 'good taste' not to do\". In contrast, Peter Bradshaw wrote that Monroe was a talented comedian who \"understood how comedy achieved its effects\", and Roger Ebert wrote that \"Monroe's eccentricities and neuroses on sets became notorious, but studios put up with her long after any other actress would have been blackballed because what they got back on the screen was magical\". Jonathan Rosenbaum stated that \"she subtly subverted the sexist content of her material\" and that \"the difficulty some people have discerning Monroe's intelligence as an actress seems rooted in the ideology of a repressive era, when super feminine women weren't supposed to be smart\". In 2024, the Los Angeles City Council approved Monroe's house being designated as a Historic Cultural Monument.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19319", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19319", "title": "Myelin", "text": "Fatty substance insulating nerve cell axons\nMyelin ( ) is a lipid-rich material that in most vertebrates surrounds the axons of neurons to insulate them and increase the rate at which electrical impulses (called action potentials) pass along the axon. The myelinated axon can be likened to an electrical wire (the axon) with insulating material (myelin) around it. However, unlike the plastic covering on an electrical wire, myelin does not form a single long sheath over the entire length of the axon. Myelin ensheaths part of an axon known as an internodal segment, in multiple myelin layers of a tightly regulated internodal length.\nThe ensheathed segments are separated at regular short unmyelinated intervals, called nodes of Ranvier. Each node of Ranvier is around one micrometre long. Nodes of Ranvier enable a much faster rate of conduction known as saltatory conduction where the action potential recharges at each node to jump over to the next node, and so on until it reaches the axon terminal. At the terminal the action potential provokes the release of neurotransmitters across the synapse, which bind to receptors on the post-synaptic cell such as another neuron, myocyte or secretory cell.\nMyelin is made by specialized non-neuronal glial cells, that provide insulation, and nutritional and homeostatic support, along the length of the axon. In the central nervous system, myelination is formed by glial cells called oligodendrocytes, each of which sends out cellular extensions known as foot processes to myelinate multiple nearby axons. In the peripheral nervous system, myelin is formed by Schwann cells, which myelinate only a section of an axon. In the CNS, axons carry electrical signals from one nerve cell body to another.\nThe \"insulating\" function for myelin is essential for efficient motor function (i.e. movement such as walking), sensory function (e.g. sight, hearing, smell, the feeling of touch or pain) and cognition (e.g. acquiring and recalling knowledge), as demonstrated by the consequence of disorders that affect myelination, such as the genetically determined leukodystrophies; the acquired inflammatory demyelinating disease, multiple sclerosis; and the inflammatory demyelinating peripheral neuropathies. Due to its high prevalence, multiple sclerosis, which specifically affects the central nervous system, is the best known demyelinating disorder.\nHistory.\nMyelin was first described as white matter fibres in 1717 by Vesalius, and first named as \"myelin\" by Rudolf Virchow in 1854. Over a century later, following the development of electron microscopy, its glial cell origin, and its ultrastructure became apparent.\nComposition.\nMyelin is found in all vertebrates except the jawless fish. Myelin in the central nervous system (CNS) differs slightly in composition and configuration from myelin in the peripheral nervous system (PNS), but both perform the same functions of insulation and nutritional support. Being rich in lipid, myelin appears white, hence its earlier name of white matter of the CNS. Both CNS white matter tracts such as the corpus callosum, and corticospinal tract, and PNS nerves such as the sciatic nerve, and the auditory nerve, which also appear white, comprise thousands to millions of axons, largely aligned in parallel. In the corpus callosum there are more than 200 million axons. Blood vessels provide the route for oxygen and energy substrates such as glucose to reach these fibre tracts, which also contain other cell types including astrocytes and microglia in the CNS and macrophages in the PNS.\nIn terms of total mass, myelin comprises approximately 40% water; the dry mass comprises between 60% and 75% lipid and between 15% and 25% protein. Protein content includes myelin basic protein (MBP), which is abundant in the CNS where it plays a critical, non-redundant role in formation of compact myelin; myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG), which is specific to the CNS; and proteolipid protein (PLP), which is the most abundant protein in CNS myelin, but only a minor component of PNS myelin. In the PNS, myelin protein zero (MPZ or P0) has a similar role to that of PLP in the CNS in that it is involved in holding together the multiple concentric layers of glial cell membrane that constitute the myelin sheath. The primary lipid of myelin is a glycolipid called galactocerebroside. The intertwining hydrocarbon chains of sphingomyelin strengthen the myelin sheath. Cholesterol is an essential lipid component of myelin, without which myelin fails to form.\nMyelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG) is a critical protein in the formation and maintenance of myelin sheaths. MAG is localized on the inner membrane of the myelin sheath and interacts with axonal membrane proteins to attach the myelin sheath to the axon. Mutations to the MAG gene are implicated in demyelination diseases such as multiple sclerosis.\nFunction.\nThe main purpose of myelin is to increase the speed at which electrical impulses (known as action potentials) propagate along the myelinated fiber. In unmyelinated fibers, action potentials travel as continuous waves, but, in myelinated fibers, they \"hop\" or propagate by saltatory conduction. The latter is markedly faster than the former, at least for axons over a certain diameter. Myelin decreases capacitance and increases electrical resistance across the axonal membrane (the axolemma). It has been suggested that myelin permits larger body size by maintaining agile communication between distant body parts.\nMyelinated fibers lack voltage-gated sodium channels along the myelinated internodes, exposing them only at the nodes of Ranvier. Here, they are highly abundant and densely packed. Positively charged sodium ions can enter the axon through these voltage-gated channels, leading to depolarisation of the membrane potential at the node of Ranvier. The resting membrane potential is then rapidly restored due to positively charged potassium ions leaving the axon through potassium channels. The sodium ions inside the axon then diffuse rapidly through the axoplasm (axonal cytoplasm), to the adjacent myelinated internode and ultimately to the next (distal) node of Ranvier, triggering the opening of the voltage gated sodium channels and entry of sodium ions at this site. Although the sodium ions diffuse through the axoplasm rapidly, diffusion is decremental by nature, thus nodes of Ranvier have to be (relatively) closely spaced, to secure action potential propagation. The action potential \"recharges\" at consecutive nodes of Ranvier as the axolemmal membrane potential depolarises to approximately +35 mV. Along the myelinated internode, energy-dependent sodium/potassium pumps pump the sodium ions back out of the axon and potassium ions back into the axon to restore the balance of ions between the intracellular (inside the cell, i.e. axon in this case) and extracellular (outside the cell) fluids.\nWhilst the role of myelin as an \"axonal insulator\" is well-established, other functions of myelinating cells are less well known or only recently established. The myelinating cell \"sculpts\" the underlying axon by promoting the phosphorylation of neurofilaments, thus increasing the diameter or thickness of the axon at the internodal regions; helps cluster molecules on the axolemma (such as voltage-gated sodium channels) at the node of Ranvier; and modulates the transport of cytoskeletal structures and organelles such as mitochondria, along the axon. In 2012, evidence came to light to support a role for the myelinating cell in \"feeding\" the axon. In other words, the myelinating cell seems to act as a local \"fueling station\" for the axon, which uses a great deal of energy to restore the normal balance of ions between it and its environment, following the generation of action potentials.\nWhen a peripheral nerve fiber is severed, the myelin sheath provides a track along which regrowth can occur. However, the myelin layer does not ensure a perfect regeneration of the nerve fiber. Some regenerated nerve fibers do not find the correct muscle fibers, and some damaged motor neurons of the peripheral nervous system die without regrowth. Damage to the myelin sheath and nerve fiber is often associated with increased functional insufficiency.\nUnmyelinated fibers and myelinated axons of the mammalian central nervous system do not regenerate.\nDevelopment.\nThe process of generating myelin is called myelination or \"myelinogenesis\". In the CNS, oligodendrocyte progenitor cells differentiate into mature oligodendrocytes, which form myelin. In humans, myelination begins early in the third trimester which starts at around week 26 of gestational age. The signal for myelination comes from the axon; axons larger than 1\u20132 \u03bcms become myelinated. The length of the internode is determined by the size of the axonal diameter. During infancy, myelination progresses rapidly, with increasing numbers of axons acquiring myelin sheaths. This corresponds with the development of cognitive and motor skills, including language comprehension, speech acquisition, crawling and walking. Myelination continues through adolescence and early adulthood and although largely complete at this time, myelin sheaths can be added in grey matter regions such as the cerebral cortex, throughout life.\nNot all axons are myelinated. For example, in the PNS, a large proportion of axons are unmyelinated. Instead, they are ensheathed by non-myelinating Schwann cells known as Remak SCs and arranged in Remak bundles. In the CNS, non-myelinated axons (or intermittently myelinated axons, meaning axons with long non-myelinated regions between myelinated segments) intermingle with myelinated ones and are entwined, at least partially, by the processes of another type of glial cell the astrocyte.\nClinical significance.\nDemyelination.\nDemyelination is the loss of the myelin sheath insulating the nerves, and is the hallmark of some neurodegenerative autoimmune diseases, including multiple sclerosis, acute disseminated encephalomyelitis, neuromyelitis optica, transverse myelitis, chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy, Guillain\u2013Barr\u00e9 syndrome, central pontine myelinosis, inherited demyelinating diseases such as leukodystrophy, and Charcot\u2013Marie\u2013Tooth disease. People with pernicious anaemia can also develop nerve damage if the condition is not diagnosed quickly. Subacute combined degeneration of spinal cord secondary to pernicious anaemia can lead to slight peripheral nerve damage to severe damage to the central nervous system, affecting speech, balance, and cognitive awareness. When myelin degrades, conduction of signals along the nerve can be impaired or lost, and the nerve eventually withers. A more serious case of myelin deterioration is called Canavan disease.\nThe immune system may play a role in demyelination associated with such diseases, including inflammation causing demyelination by overproduction of cytokines via upregulation of tumor necrosis factor or interferon. MRI evidence that docosahexaenoic acid DHA ethyl ester improves myelination in generalized peroxisomal disorders.\nSymptoms.\nDemyelination results in diverse symptoms determined by the functions of the affected neurons. It disrupts signals between the brain and other parts of the body; symptoms differ from patient to patient, and have different presentations upon clinical observation and in laboratory studies.\nTypical symptoms include blurriness in the central visual field that affects only one eye, may be accompanied by pain upon eye movement, double vision, loss of vision/hearing, odd sensation in legs, arms, chest, or face, such as tingling or numbness (neuropathy), weakness of arms or legs, cognitive disruption, including speech impairment and memory loss, heat sensitivity (symptoms worsen or reappear upon exposure to heat, such as a hot shower), loss of dexterity, difficulty coordinating movement or balance disorder, difficulty controlling bowel movements or urination, fatigue, and tinnitus.\nMyelin repair.\nResearch to repair damaged myelin sheaths is ongoing. Techniques include surgically implanting oligodendrocyte precursor cells in the central nervous system and inducing myelin repair with certain antibodies. While results in mice have been encouraging (via stem cell transplantation), whether this technique can be effective in replacing myelin loss in humans is still unknown. Cholinergic treatments, such as acetylcholinesterase inhibitors (AChEIs), may have beneficial effects on myelination, myelin repair, and myelin integrity. Increasing cholinergic stimulation also may act through subtle trophic effects on brain developmental processes and particularly on oligodendrocytes and the lifelong myelination process they support. Increasing oligodendrocyte cholinergic stimulation, AChEIs, and other cholinergic treatments, such as nicotine, possibly could promote myelination during development and myelin repair in older age. Glycogen synthase kinase 3\u03b2 inhibitors such as lithium chloride have been found to promote myelination in mice with damaged facial nerves. Cholesterol is a necessary nutrient for the myelin sheath, along with vitamin B12.\nDysmyelination.\nDysmyelination is characterized by a defective structure and function of myelin sheaths; unlike demyelination, it does not produce lesions. Such defective sheaths often arise from genetic mutations affecting the biosynthesis and formation of myelin. The shiverer mouse represents one animal model of dysmyelination. Human diseases where dysmyelination has been implicated include leukodystrophies (Pelizaeus\u2013Merzbacher disease, Canavan disease, phenylketonuria) and schizophrenia.\nInvertebrates.\nFunctionally equivalent myelin-like sheaths are found in several invertebrate taxa, including oligochaete annelids, and crustacean taxa such as penaeids, palaemonids, and calanoids. These myelin-like sheaths share several structural features with the sheaths found in vertebrates including multiplicity of membranes, condensation of membrane, and nodes. However, the nodes in vertebrates are annular; i.e. they encircle the axon. In contrast, nodes found in the sheaths of invertebrates are either annular or fenestrated; i.e. they are restricted to \"spots\". It is found on the median giant fiber of the earthworm (\"Lumbricus terrestris L.\"), which is myelinated with openings on the dorsal side. The fastest recorded conduction speed (across both vertebrates and invertebrates) is found in the ensheathed axons of the Kuruma shrimp, an invertebrate, ranging between 90 and 200\u00a0m/s. This is obtained by neurons 10 \u03bcm in diameter and covered by a 10 \u03bcm thick myelin. (cf. 100\u2013120\u00a0m/s for the fastest myelinated vertebrate axon).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19320", "revid": "50392189", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19320", "title": "Mebyon Kernow", "text": "Political party in Cornwall\nMebyon Kernow \u2013 The Party for Cornwall (, MK; Cornish for \"Sons of Cornwall\") is a Cornish nationalist, centre-left political party in Cornwall, in southwestern Britain. It currently has three elected councillors on Cornwall Council, and several town and parish councillors across Cornwall.\nInfluenced by the growth of Cornish nationalism in the first half of the twentieth century, Mebyon Kernow formed as a pressure group in 1951. Helena Charles was its first chair, while the novelist Daphne du Maurier was another early member. In 1953 Charles won a seat on a local council, but lost it in 1955. Support for MK grew in the 1960s in opposition to growing migration into Cornwall from parts of England. In the 1970s, MK became a fully-fledged political party, and since then it has fielded candidates in elections to the House of Commons and the European Parliament, as well as local government in Cornwall. Infighting during the 1980s decimated the party but it revived in the 1990s.\nIdeologically positioned on the centre-left of British politics, the central tenet of Mebyon Kernow's platform is Cornish nationalism. It emphasises a distinct Cornish identity, including the Cornish language and elements of Cornish culture. It campaigns for devolution to Cornwall in the form of a Cornish Assembly. Economically, it is social democratic, calling for continued public ownership of education and healthcare and the renationalisation of railways. It also calls for greater environmental protection and for the UK to rejoin the European Union.\nThe party is a member of the European Free Alliance and has close links with Plaid Cymru, the Scottish National Party and the Breton Democratic Union.\nSeveral former Cornish MPs have been supporters of MK, including Andrew George (Liberal Democrat), Peter Bessell (Liberal Party), John Pardoe (Liberal Party), David Mudd (Conservative), and David Penhaligon (Liberal Party). George was himself a member of MK in his youth.\nHistory.\nFounding (1950s).\nIn the half-century preceding its foundation, Cornish identity had been strengthened by the Celtic Revival, especially by the revival of the Cornish language. Cornish politics was dominated by the Liberal Party and the Conservative Party, with the Labour Party a distant third in the Duchy, in part because of Cornwall's declining tin-mining industry. Both the Liberal Party and the Labour Party had courted Cornish nationalism in their local campaigns, with both parties portraying \"a distinctly Cornish image\"; in turn, this meant that Cornish nationalism was from its inception associated with centre-left politics. Many of MK's initial supporters came from the Liberal Party, which had endorsed Home Rule for Ireland. Early members of MK cited their absence from Cornwall during their university years and the war as instrumental in the formation of their Cornish identity. A catalyst for the party's foundation was the Celtic Congress of 1950, held at the Royal Institution of Cornwall in Truro, which facilitated the exchange of ideas between Cornish nationalists and other Celtic groups.\nMK was founded as a pressure group on 6 January 1951. At the party's inaugural meeting, held at the Oates Temperance Hotel in Redruth, thirteen people were present and a further seven sent their apologies. Helena Charles was elected as the organisation's first chair. MK adopted the following objectives:\nBy September 1951 they had officially come to a stance of supporting self-government for Cornwall, when the fourth objective was replaced with: \"To further the acceptance of the Celtic character of Cornwall and its right to self-government in domestic affairs in a Federated United Kingdom.\"\nIn its early years, MK engaged in cultural activities, such as producing Cornish calendars and sending a birthday prayer in Cornish to the Duke of Cornwall. It highlighted the high proportion of executives in local government which were not Cornish and campaigned against inward migration to Cornwall from the rest of the United Kingdom. From 1952, the party was supported by \"New Cornwall\", a magazine which was edited by Charles until 1956. MK's agenda received support from the Liberal Party, whose candidates endorsed Home Rule for Cornwall. MK won its first seat in local government in 1953, when Charles won a seat on Redruth-Camborne Urban District Council, under the slogan of 'A Square Deal for the Cornish'. Charles lost her seat in 1955.\nFollowing infighting between senior members who were frustrated at her radical separatism, in contrast to the passive culturalism of the broader Cultural nationalist movement, and following frustration at the party's dispersed and unenthusiastic membership, Charles resigned as Chairman of MK in 1956. Charles was replaced by Major Cecil Beer, a former civil servant who sought to reunify the Cornish nationalist movement. Beer's three years as chairman of MK provided \"a period of quiet but steady growth\", in which MK increased its membership and focussed on cultural rather than political issues. Party meetings largely focussed on \"calendars, Christmas cards, serviettes, Cornish language classes and proposals for things like the Cornish kilt.\"\nDaphne du Maurier, the well-known novelist, was an early member of MK. From its founding until the 1980s, the party was divided between proponents of ethnic nationalism and proponents of civic nationalism.\nGrowth (1960s\u20131970s).\nThroughout the 1950s and 1960s, MK was in essence a small political pressure group rather than a true political party, with members being able to join other political parties as well. In February 1960, Beer was succeeded by Robert Dunstone as Chairman of MK. By March 1962, the party had seventy members, of which thirty were attending the party's infrequent meetings.\nUnder Dunstone, the party followed a policy of \"patient, persistent, and polite lobbying\", the standard for which was set by its reaction to proposed railway closures in 1962, which included public meetings, letters of protest and the formation of a transport sub-committee of the party. MK campaigned for the establishment of a Cornish University, a Cornish Industrial Board, and the repatriation of Heligoland Frisians whose land was used by the British government as a bombing range in the mid-1950s. It published numerous policy papers to support its positions.\nMK gained popularity in the 1960s, when it campaigned against 'overspill' housing developments in Cornwall to accommodate incomers from Greater London. MK's opposition prompted opponents to label the party as racialist; the party denied the allegations and responded with \"What Cornishmen Can Do\", a pamphlet published in September 1968 which proposed more investment in natural resources, food processing and technological industries, as well as a Cornish University, tidal barrages and more support for small farmers. Partly due to its opposition to overspill, by 1965, the party numbered 700 members, rising to 1,000 by early 1968. In April 1967, Colin Murley was elected for MK onto Cornwall County Council for the seat of St Day &amp; Lanner; he had stood on an anti-overspill platform. MK members also sat as independent councillors on the district council. The party grew to become the leading champion for Cornish nationalism.\nOn St. Piran's Day in 1968, the first edition of \"Cornish Nation\" was published; this is the party's magazine. In the same year, Leonard Truran succeeded Dunstone as Chairman of MK; Dunstone then became the party's first Honorary President.\nBy the 1970s the group developed into a more coherent and unified organisation. At the annual conference in October 1967, party members voted for a resolution to contest elections to the House of Commons, marking a turning point in MK's transition from a pressure group into a political party. The decision meant that councillors, prospective parliamentary candidates and MPs who held dual party membership began to disassociate themselves from MK. Despite the decision, a faction in MK remained frustrated at the continuing possibility of dual party membership, the wide range of views on Cornish nationalism in the party and MK's slow transition into a political party; this dissident faction formed the Cornish National Party in July 1969. The CNP's members were expelled from MK, but the CNP had disappointing election results in the 1970 county council elections, leading most CNP members to rejoin MK by the mid-1970s.\nIn the 1970 election, Richard Jenkin, who would succeed Truran as Chairman of MK in 1973, won 2% of the vote in the Falmouth &amp; Camborne constituency. James Whetter stood for MK in the Truro constituency in the general elections of February and October 1974, achieving 1.5% and 0.7% of the vote respectively. The party contested the constituencies of St Ives and Falmouth &amp; Camborne in both the 1979 and 1983 elections. MK also contested the 1979 European Parliament election, winning 5.9% of the vote in the constituency of Cornwall &amp; West Plymouth.\nFollowing Dunstone's death in 1973, E.G. Retallack Hooper was elected the party's Honorary President; Hooper was a former Grand Bard of the Gorseth Kernow who had been a founding member of MK and was a prolific Cornish language writer and journalist.\nThe CNP's formation highlighted deep fissures in MK between its constitutionalist and separatist wings; these were exacerbated by continuing inward migration to Cornwall, leading to a 26% increase in its population in the two decades to 1981. The \"Cornish Nation\" gave increasingly sympathetic coverage of Irish republicanism; MK warned of civil unrest in Cornwall and the extermination of the Cornish national identity if overspill continued; and its members talked openly of plans to install a shadow government \"in the name of the Cornish people in the event of civil breakdown\". A motion to restrict party membership to those who were Cornish by \"family trees going back through several centuries\" was defeated in 1973; and a September 1974 issue of the \"Cornish Nation\" describing Michael Gaughan, an IRA hunger striker, as a \"Celtic hero\" was widely criticised in the press and rebuked by the party. MK's divisions came to a head in May 1975, when a motion to depose the party's leadership and integrate the party with the Revived Stannary Parliament, which had newly reopened in 1974, was narrowly defeated. On 28 May 1975, Whetter, who had led the defeated motion, resigned his membership of MK to form a second Cornish Nationalist Party, which campaigned for full Cornish independence on a pro-European platform. This second CNP also had disappointing electoral results and has not contested elections since 1985.\nDuring the 1970s, MK held rallies in support of Cornwall's fishing industry and against regional unemployment and nuclear waste; in the 1980s, these rallies were aggravated by the policies of the incumbent Thatcher government. Following the 1975 split, the party was re-energised by an influx of new, younger members, which also pushed MK more firmly away from its separatist wing. Citing concerns about its effect on Cornwall's fishing industry, the party opposed the Common Market; MK only began to endorse the UK's membership of the EEC in the 1980s.\nDecline (1980s).\nThe party declined in the 1980s and was close to collapse by 1990. In 1980, renewed infighting over the party's structure led to a spate of resignations which received media attention; this included the resignation of Truran, who had served as party secretary after Jenkin had replaced him as Chairman of MK in 1973. Leading the infighting was a new, youthful leftist faction of MK, which sought to define the party's policies on defence, the monarchy and public ownership, bringing the party away from its traditional nationalist focus. While the infighting consolidated MK's economic stance as left-of-centre, the party's everchanging positions confused voters and presided over the decline of its magazines, including the \"Cornish Nation\". In 1983, Jenkin was replaced by Julyan Drew as the party leader; Drew was succeeded by Pedyr Prior in 1985 and Loveday Carlyon in 1986.\nAt the 1983 general election, MK achieved 1.2% of the vote in both Falmouth &amp; Camborne and St Ives, reduced from 3% and 4% respectively in the previous election. It contested neither the 1984 European Parliament election nor the 1987 general election; it received 1.9% of the vote in Cornwall &amp; West Plymouth in the 1989 European Parliament election. During this period, the party focussed on its opposition to the creation of a South West England region and the construction of a nuclear station at Luxulyan; this latter campaign culminated in the formation of the Cornish Anti-Nuclear Alliance, which drew over 2,000 attendees to its first rallies in Truro in July 1980. MK's vociferous response to the planned building of 40,000 new homes in Cornwall, manifested in the formation in 1987 of the Cornish Alternatives to the Structure Plan, gained high-profile notability in Cornwall. MK also campaigned against tourism-centred economic development and the poll tax. Nevertheless, public support for action was far lower than the previous decade and MK regressed into a pressure group.\nIn 1988, MK established the Campaign for a Cornish Constituency, which won the support of Cornwall County Council, all the district authorities, several Cornish organisations and three of Cornwall's five MPs. The campaign was well-publicised, attained national attention, and collected over 3,000 signatures in three months. The campaign called for an exclusively-Cornish European Parliament constituency and was founded on MK's long-standing opposition to amalgamating public boards and companies in Cornwall and Devon, a process which had steadily increased during the decade.\nRelaunch (1990s).\nIn 1989, Carlyon resigned as MK's leader, leading to a review of the party's long-term strategy. Being close to collapse, in April 1990, the party's London branch convened a general meeting of all party members to consider whether the party should disband; it was agreed that the party would continue. Loveday Jenkin, daughter of Richard Jenkin, was promptly elected MK's leader. At this time, Truran, who had become a leading light in the Social Democratic Party in Falmouth &amp; Camborne since he had left the party in 1980, rejoined MK, re-energising the party. Nevertheless, MK did not contest the 1992 general election, focusing its efforts on lobbying for an exclusively-Cornish European Parliament constituency, a Cornish unitary authority, and the recognition of Cornwall as a European region.\nDespite a promising local election result in 1993, obtaining an average of 17.5% per candidate in local government elections, MK's vote share declined further to 1.5% of the vote in the 1994 European Parliament election, in the new constituency of Cornwall &amp; West Plymouth. Jenkin, who stood as the party's candidate, campaigned on a platform opposing out-of-town developments and a second Tamar crossing, and calling for greater Cornish representation in Europe.\nIn 1996, MK published 'Cornwall 2000 \u2013 The Way Ahead', its most detailed manifesto to date. The party fought the 1997 general election on its 18,000 words and delivered over 300,000 leaflets during the campaign; however, it polled merely 1,906 votes across four constituencies. MK activists were heavily involved in the 500th-anniversary commemorations of the Cornish Rebellion of 1497; these included a march from St. Keverne to Blackheath retracing the steps of the rebels, following which the participants demanded a Cornish Development Agency, an exclusively-Cornish seat in the European Parliament, a university campus in Cornwall and a Cornish curriculum for Cornish schools. The renewed interest in Cornish nationalism from this march led a group in MK to leave the party and form the An Gof National Party, another short-lived splinter group.\nOn 4 October 1997, at the Mebyon Kernow National Conference, Jenkin was replaced by Dick Cole as the leader of MK. One of Cole's earliest actions as leader was to launch the Cornish Millennium Convention on 8 March 1998, coinciding with protests at the closure of South Crofty, Cornwall's last working tin mine. However, the Convention's launch was eclipsed by the formation of Cornish Solidarity, a pressure group involved in direct action which grew from the South Crofty protests and had similar aims as MK. At the party's annual conference in 1998, Richard Jenkin was elected to succeed the late Hooper as Honorary President of MK.\nIn 1999, over 95% of members voted in favour of relaunching MK as Mebyon Kernow \u2013 the Party for Cornwall in order to distance itself from the ethnic nationalist 'Sons of Cornwall' label; the name change was adopted. Mebyon Kernow stood 25 candidates in the 1999 local elections in Cornwall, its highest number ever. The party did not contest the 1999 European Parliament election, given the size of the new South West England constituency and the large prerequisite \u00a35,000 deposit. It contested the 2001 general election, winning 3,199 votes across three constituencies.\nCornish Assembly Campaign.\nOn 5 March 2000, MK launched a petition for a Cornish Assembly. This was modelled from the \"Declaration for a Cornish Assembly\", which stated that:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Cornwall is a distinct region. It has a clearly defined economic, administrative and social profile. Cornwall's unique identity reflects its Celtic character, culture and environment. We declare that the people of Cornwall will be best served in their future governance by a Cornish regional assembly. We therefore commit ourselves to setting up the Cornish Constitutional Convention with the intention of achieving a devolved Cornish Assembly.\u2014\u200a\nThree months later the Cornish Constitutional Convention was held with the objective of establishing a devolved Assembly. Within fifteen months, Mebyon Kernow's petition attracted the signatures of over 50,000 people calling for a referendum on a Cornish Assembly, which was a little over 10% of the total Cornish electorate. A delegation including Cole, Andrew George, then the Liberal Democrat MP for St Ives, and representatives of the Convention presented the Declaration to 10 Downing Street on 12 December 2001.\nEarly 21st century (2001\u20132009).\nAhead of the 2004 European Parliament election, MK reached an electoral partnership with the Green Party of England and Wales. MK agreed not to stand its own candidates in the European election; in return, the Green Party would back MK candidates at the 2005 general election. In this latter election, MK did not contest George's seat of St Ives; in return, the Greens did not contest other seats in Cornwall. The electoral partnership was not renewed for the 2009 European Parliament election.\nIn August 2008 MK deputy leader, Conan Jenkin, expressed Mebyon Kernow's support for a proposed legal challenge by Cornwall 2000 over the UK Government's exclusion of the Cornish from the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities. Cornwall 2000 need to show that they have exhausted all domestic legal avenues by having the case summarily dismissed by the High Court, the Appeal Court and the House of Lords, before the case can be put to the European Court of Human Rights. MK requested the support of all of its members for this legal action. However the fund failed to meet the required target of \u00a3100,000 by the end of December 2008, having received just over \u00a333,000 in pledges, and the plan was abandoned.\nUnitary authority (2009\u2013present).\nIn 2009, the former Cornwall County Council was replaced by the unitary authority of Cornwall Council. In the first election to the new body, three MK candidates were elected: Andrew Long (Callington), Stuart Cullimore (Camborne South) and Dick Cole (St Enoder). In August 2010, an independent councillor, Neil Plummer (Stithians), joined the MK group, citing his increasing disillusionment with the independent group. In November 2011, former chair of the party Loveday Jenkin was elected in a by-election in Wendron. In September 2012, Tamsin Williams (Penzance Central) defected to MK from the Liberal Democrats, increasing MK's number of councillors on Cornwall Council to six.\nMebyon Kernow contested every seat in Cornwall in the 2010 general election.\nIn 2011, the party gained some prominence owing to the Devonwall affair; this was the proposal of a parliamentary constituency which would have been partly in Cornwall and partly in Devon. The Parliamentary Voting System and Constituencies Bill sought to equalise the size of constituencies in the United Kingdom. An amendment to the bill by Lord Teverson would have ensured that \"all parts of Cornwall and the Isles of Scilly must be included in constituencies that are wholly in Cornwall and the Isles of Scilly\"; this amendment was defeated by 250 to 221 votes in the House of Lords with 95% of Conservative and Liberal Democrat peers rejecting it. MK \"accused the coalition government of treating Cornwall with \"absolute contempt\" as a result of this, stating that Prime Minister David Cameron and Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg had \"devised the bill to breach the territorial integrity of Cornwall\", and that it broke election promises from their parties to protect Cornish interests. Cameron replied to concerns by stating that \"it's the Tamar, not the Amazon, for Heaven's sake\"; his controversial remark was widely ridiculed in Cornwall. MK welcomed the later rejection of the parliamentary constituency boundary review, which in turn prevented the introduction of a cross-border Devonwall constituency for the 2015 and 2017 general elections.\nIn the 2013 Cornwall Council election, the party was reduced to three seats. Williams did not seek re-election and MK lost her seat; MK did not win any of the newly-redrawn seats in Camborne; and Plummer unsuccessfully contested Lanner &amp; Stithians as an independent. Only Cole and Jenkin held their seats; the party also gained a seat in Penwithick &amp; Boscoppa. It held these seats and gained no further seats at the 2017 Cornwall Council election.\nMK decided not to stand candidates in the 2014 European elections, claiming the system was skewed against them winning seats. MK contested all six Cornish constituencies in the 2015 general election. It complained against not being granted a party election broadcast: under current guidelines, it would need to stand in eighty-three constituencies outside of Cornwall in order to qualify for a broadcast.\nAhead of the 2016 referendum on the issue, MK endorsed the United Kingdom's continued membership of the European Union. On 23 June 2016, Cornwall voted to leave the European Union by 56.5%. Following the vote, MK reiterated its promise to campaign for a devolved Cornish Assembly.\nMK declined to stand candidates in the snap 2017 general election, citing a lack of financing and resources. It also did not stand candidates in the 2019 European Parliament election, but its leadership endorsed the Green Party because of their historic cooperation, support for a Cornish Assembly and other similar policies.\nAt a policy forum on 22 June 2018, Mebyon Kernow launched an updated version of its campaign publication titled \"Towards a National Assembly of Cornwall.\"\nMebyon Kernow chose not to field any candidates in the 2024 general election. After the election, the party called on Cornwall's new MPs to \"unite and take this opportunity ... to demand meaningful devolution\".\nIdeology and policies.\nMK is an advocate of Cornish nationalism, seeing Cornwall as a separate nation rather than an English county. It emphasises Cornwall's distinct Celtic culture and language, as well as its border along the River Tamar, which has largely remained unchanged since 936 AD. The party's leaders identify as both Cornish and British but Cornish first. It rejects that Cornwall is a region of the United Kingdom or a county of England, preferring the label of 'duchy'. It advocates a National Curriculum for Cornwall, increased investment in the Cornish language, and a full inquiry into Cornwall's constitutional relationship with the United Kingdom.\nThe party advocates the establishment of a \"fully devolved, democratically elected\" Cornish National Assembly, established by \"a dedicated, stand-alone, bespoke Act of Parliament.\" This would be complemented by a Cornish Civil Service. It accuses the civil service and government of \"deep-seated prejudice\" against Cornwall. as part of their devolution commitments, MK seek devolved powers over health services establishing a \u201cCornish NHS\u201d.\nOn economic policy, MK is left-of-centre. It rejects \"austerity politics, deregulation and support for trade treaties such as TTIP.\" It is committed against poverty and social deprivation; it advocates free and equal access to education, health and welfare services. It advocates tackling tax avoidance. It opposes the privatisation of the NHS and would renationalise railways and utilities. The party regularly highlights problems with the Cornish economy: Cornwall has lower wages and higher unemployment than the rest of the United Kingdom.\nThe party is environmentalist, advocating strong environmental safeguards and a \"Green New Deal for Cornwall\" aimed at creating jobs in the environmental sectors. It is pushing for a zero-waste strategy, which they believe will lead to \"radical reduction of waste\". It supports increasing planning restrictions to reverse the building of second homes in Cornwall, As well as a commitment to lower \"more sustainable\" housing building targets. It would scrap the Trident nuclear programme. It supports debt forgiveness for third world countries and supports the UN target of committing 0.7% of the UK's GDP as foreign aid.\nThe party would introduce proportional representation to UK elections through the Single Transferable Vote and would abolish the House of Lords.\nMK supported the UK's membership of the European Union. It endorsed a referendum on the final Brexit deal.\nCornwall is part of the South West Regional Assembly and the South West Regional Development Agency (SWRDA) administrates economic development, housing and strategic planning. MK claims that the area covered is an artificially imposed large region and not natural. Mebyon Kernow wants to break up the SWRDA into small county areas and implement a Cornish Regional Development Agency.\nThe party supports making Saint Piran's day, the day of Cornwall's patron saint, which falls on 5 March, a public holiday. It also advocates the establishment of a Cornish University.\nThe party has resisted proposals to reduce the number of councillors in Cornwall.\nMebyon Kernow is a member of the European Free Alliance. The party has close links with Plaid Cymru, with Plaid's Blaenau Gwent branch being 'twinned' with Mebyon Kernow's Falmouth and Camborne branch.\nOrganisation.\nMK is run on a day-to-day basis by a 20-member National Executive, which includes the leadership team, policy spokespersons, and local party representatives. Dick Cole is the current leader. The party's youth wing for under-30s is known as Kernow Rydh.\nElectoral performance.\nMK has never won a parliamentary election to the House of Commons, nor has it ever won a seat in the European Parliament.\nCornwall Council.\nMK has been represented on Cornwall Council since its inception in 2009.\n2009 election.\nIn April 2009 MK leader Dick Cole announced his resignation from his job as an archaeologist with the new Cornwall Council to become the full-time leader of Mebyon Kernow and to stand for election to the Council. He had previously worked for Cornwall County Council for 14 years, but it is not permitted for employees of Councils to stand for election to a council they work for.\nOn 12 May 2009, Dick Cole announced that thirty-three candidates would be standing for the party at the Cornwall Council elections on 4 June 2009. This was the largest number of candidates that the party had ever fielded in a round of elections to a principal council or councils. Under the new arrangements, 123 members were to be elected to the new unitary Cornwall Council, in the place of the 82 councillors on the outgoing Cornwall County Council and another 249 on the six district councils within its area, all abolished.\nHaving contested thirty-three of the 123 seats on the authority, Mebyon Kernow won three, or 2.4 per cent of the total. Andrew Long was elected to represent Callington with 54% of the votes. Stuart Cullimore was elected to represent Camborne South with 28% of the votes and Dick Cole was elected to represent St Enoder with 78% of the votes\n2021 election.\nIn the 2021 election, Mebyon Kernow fielded 19 candidates. They gained a seat despite the number of seats on the council being reduced to 87, polling 5% overall.\nTown and parish councils.\nMebyon Kernow is also represented in numerous town and parish councils across Cornwall. In 2022, Zoe Fox, a Mebyon Kernow councillor, became Mayor of Camborne. In 2024, their Parish representation stood at 24 councillors, their highest number to that date.\n2025 Local Election.\nIn the 2025 Local Election Mebyon Kernow fielded candidates for both Cornwall Council as well as Town and parish councils, with a total of 27 councillors elected to Town and parish and on 1st May https://. Reece Weatherburn would be go on to be elected as Deputy Mayor of Camborne with being elected Paul Andrew Deputy Mayor of Helston https://.On Cornwall Council Andrew Long was elected to represent Callington &amp; St Dominic with 42% of the votes well Loveday Jenkin was elected to Crowan, Sithney &amp; Wendron with 47% of the votes and Dick Cole was elected to represent St Dennis &amp; St Enoder with 58% of the votes.\nUK general elections.\nIn the 2010 general election, Mebyon Kernow fielded candidates in each of the six constituencies in Cornwall. Their best result was in the St Austell &amp; Newquay seat, where they came fourth, with 4.2% of the votes, up 4% from the previous election. The other main parties spent more on their election campaigns. MK also blamed bad results on a tactical voting campaign whereby Labour voters in Cornwall were urged to vote Liberal Democrat to stop the Conservatives from getting in. Overall they gained 1.9% of votes cast. All Mebyon Kernow candidates lost their deposits.\nEuropean Parliament elections.\nIn 1979, in the first elections to the European Parliament, Mebyon Kernow's candidate Richard Jenkin was able to attract more than five per cent of the vote in the Cornwall seat.\nIn April 2009 Mebyon Kernow announced that its list of candidates for the 'South West Region' seat in the European Parliament would comprise their six prospective parliamentary candidates for Westminster. The candidates were: Dick Cole (St Austell &amp; Newquay), Conan Jenkin (Truro &amp; Falmouth), Loveday Jenkin (Camborne &amp; Redruth), Simon Reed (St Ives), Glenn Renshaw (South East Cornwall), Joanie Willett (North Cornwall). Mebyon Kernow had also committed itself to continue the fight for a \"Cornwall only\" Euro-constituency, to promote Cornwall in Europe.\nMebyon Kernow polled 14,922 votes in the 2009 European elections (11,534 votes in Cornwall, no seats, 7 per cent of the vote in Cornwall) putting them ahead of the Labour Party in Cornwall.\nSince 2009, MK has not stood candidates in European Parliament elections, given the difficulties of winning a seat in a constituency encompassing electorates outside Cornwall.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19321", "revid": "45789152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19321", "title": "Mental process", "text": ""}
{"id": "19322", "revid": "30571117", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19322", "title": "Mesozoic", "text": "Second era of the Phanerozoic Eon\nThe Mesozoic Era is the era of Earth's geological history, lasting from about https:// Cenozoic, comprising the Triassic, Jurassic and Cretaceous Periods. It is characterized by the dominance of archosaurian reptiles such as the dinosaurs, and of gymnosperms such as cycads, ginkgoaceae and araucarian conifers; a hot greenhouse climate; and the tectonic break-up of Pangaea. The Mesozoic is the middle of the three eras since complex life evolved: the Paleozoic, the Mesozoic, and the Cenozoic.\nThe era began in the wake of the Permian\u2013Triassic extinction event, the largest mass extinction in Earth's history, and ended with the Cretaceous\u2013Paleogene extinction event, another mass extinction whose victims included the non-avian dinosaurs, pterosaurs, mosasaurs, and plesiosaurs. The Mesozoic was a time of significant tectonic, climatic, and evolutionary activity. The supercontinent Pangaea began to break apart into separate landmasses. The climate of the Mesozoic was varied, alternating between warming and cooling periods. Overall, however, the Earth was hotter than it is today. \nDinosaurs first appeared in the Mid-Triassic, and became the dominant terrestrial vertebrates in the Late Triassic or Early Jurassic, occupying this position for about 150 or 135\u00a0million years until their demise at the end of the Cretaceous. Archaic birds appeared in the Jurassic, having evolved from a branch of theropod dinosaurs, then true toothless birds appeared in the Cretaceous. The first mammals also appeared during the Mesozoic, but would remain small\u2014less than 15\u00a0kg (33\u00a0lb)\u2014until the Cenozoic. Flowering plants appeared in the Early Cretaceous and would rapidly diversify through the end of the era, replacing conifers and other gymnosperms (\"sensu lato\"), such as ginkgoales, cycads and bennettitales as the dominant group of plants.\nNaming.\nThe phrase \"Age of Reptiles\" was introduced by the 19th century paleontologist Gideon Mantell who viewed it as dominated by diapsids such as \"Iguanodon\", \"Megalosaurus\", \"Plesiosaurus\", and \"Pterodactylus\".\nThe current name was proposed in 1840 by the British geologist John Phillips (1800\u20131874). \"Mesozoic\" literally means 'middle life', deriving from the Greek prefix ( 'between') and ( 'animal, living being'). In this way, the Mesozoic is comparable to the Cenozoic (lit.\u2009'new life') and Paleozoic ('old life') eras as well as the Proterozoic ('earlier life') Eon.\nThe Mesozoic Era was originally described as the \"secondary\" era, following the \"primary\" (Paleozoic), and preceding the Tertiary.\nGeologic periods.\nFollowing the Paleozoic, the Mesozoic extended roughly 186\u00a0million years, from https:// Cenozoic when the Cenozoic Era began. This time frame is separated into three geologic periods. From oldest to youngest:\nThe lower boundary of the Mesozoic is set by the Permian\u2013Triassic extinction event, during which it has been estimated that up to 90\u201396% of marine species became extinct although those approximations have been brought into question with some paleontologists estimating the actual numbers as low as 81%. It is also known as the \"Great Dying\" because it is considered the largest mass extinction in the Earth's history. The upper boundary of the Mesozoic is set at the Cretaceous\u2013Paleogene extinction event (or K\u2013Pg extinction event), which may have been caused by an asteroid impactor that created Chicxulub Crater on the Yucat\u00e1n Peninsula. Towards the Late Cretaceous, large volcanic eruptions are also believed to have contributed to the Cretaceous\u2013Paleogene extinction event. Approximately 50% of all genera became extinct, including all of the non-avian dinosaurs.\nTriassic.\nThe Triassic ranges roughly from 252\u00a0million to 201\u00a0million years ago, preceding the Jurassic Period. The period is bracketed between the Permian\u2013Triassic extinction event and the Triassic\u2013Jurassic extinction event, two of the \"big five\", and it is divided into three major epochs: Early, Middle, and Late Triassic.\nThe Early Triassic, about 252 to 247\u00a0million years ago, was dominated by deserts in the interior of the Pangaea supercontinent. The Earth had just witnessed a massive die-off in which 95% of all life became extinct, and the most common vertebrate life on land were \"Lystrosaurus\", labyrinthodonts, and \"Euparkeria\" along with many other creatures that managed to survive the Permian extinction. Temnospondyls reached peak diversity during the early Triassic. \nThe Middle Triassic, from 247 to 237\u00a0million years ago, featured the beginnings of the breakup of Pangaea and the opening of the Tethys Ocean. Ecosystems had recovered from the Permian extinction. Algae, sponge, corals, and crustaceans all had recovered, and new aquatic reptiles evolved, such as ichthyosaurs and nothosaurs. On land, pine forests flourished, as did groups of insects such as mosquitoes and fruit flies. Reptiles began to get bigger and bigger, and the first crocodilians and dinosaurs evolved, which sparked competition with the large amphibians that had previously ruled the freshwater world, respectively mammal-like reptiles on land.\nFollowing the bloom of the Middle Triassic, the Late Triassic, from 237 to 201\u00a0million years ago, featured frequent heat spells and moderate precipitation (10\u201320 inches per year). The recent warming led to a boom of dinosaurian evolution on land as the continents began to separate from each other (Nyasasaurus from 243 to 210\u00a0million years ago, approximately 235\u201330 ma, some of them separated into Sauropodomorphs, Theropods and Herrerasaurids), as well as the first pterosaurs. During the Late Triassic, some advanced cynodonts gave rise to the first Mammaliaformes. All this climatic change, however, resulted in a large die-out known as the Triassic\u2013Jurassic extinction event, in which many archosaurs (excluding pterosaurs, dinosaurs and crocodylomorphs), most synapsids, and almost all large amphibians became extinct, as well as 34% of marine life, in the Earth's fourth mass extinction event. The cause is debatable; flood basalt eruptions at the Central Atlantic magmatic province is cited as one possible cause.\nJurassic.\nThe Jurassic ranges from 200\u00a0million years to 145\u00a0million years ago and features three major epochs: The Early Jurassic, the Middle Jurassic, and the Late Jurassic.\nThe Early Jurassic spans from 200 to 175\u00a0million years ago. The climate was tropical and much more humid than the Triassic, as a result of the large seas appearing between the land masses. In the oceans, plesiosaurs, ichthyosaurs and ammonites were abundant. On land, dinosaurs and other archosaurs staked their claim as the dominant race, with theropods such as \"Dilophosaurus\" at the top of the food chain. The first true crocodiles evolved, pushing the large amphibians to near extinction. All-in-all, archosaurs rose to rule the world. Meanwhile, the first true mammals evolved, remaining relatively small, but spreading widely; the Jurassic \"Castorocauda\", for example, had adaptations for swimming, digging and catching fish. \"Fruitafossor\", from the late Jurassic Period about 150\u00a0million years ago, was about the size of a chipmunk, and its teeth, forelimbs and back suggest that it dug open the nests of social insects (probably termites, as ants had not yet appeared) ; \"Volaticotherium\" was able to glide for short distances, such as modern flying squirrels. The first multituberculates such as \"Rugosodon\" evolved.\nThe Middle Jurassic spans from 175 to 163\u00a0million years ago. During this epoch, dinosaurs flourished as huge herds of sauropods, such as \"Brachiosaurus\" and \"Diplodocus\", filled the fern prairies, chased by many new predators such as \"Allosaurus\". Conifer forests made up a large portion of the forests. In the oceans, plesiosaurs were quite common, and ichthyosaurs flourished. This epoch was the peak of the reptiles. \nThe Late Jurassic spans from 163 to 145\u00a0million years ago. During this epoch, the first avialans, such as \"Archaeopteryx\", evolved from small coelurosaurian dinosaurs. The increase in sea levels opened up the Atlantic seaway, which has grown continually larger until today. The further separation of the continents gave opportunity for the diversification of new dinosaurs.\nCretaceous.\nThe Cretaceous is the longest period of the Mesozoic, but has only two epochs: Early and Late Cretaceous. \nThe Early Cretaceous spans from 145 to 100\u00a0million years ago. The Early Cretaceous saw the expansion of seaways and a decline in diversity of sauropods, stegosaurs, and other high-browsing groups, with sauropods particularly scarce in North America. Seasons came back into effect and the poles got seasonally colder, but some dinosaurs still inhabited the polar forests year round, such as \"Leaellynasaura\" and \"Muttaburrasaurus\". The poles were too cold for crocodiles, and became the last stronghold for large amphibians such as \"Koolasuchus\". Pterosaurs got larger as genera such as \"Tapejara\" and \"Ornithocheirus\" evolved. Mammals continued to expand their range: eutriconodonts produced fairly large, wolverine-like predators such as \"Repenomamus\" and \"Gobiconodon\", early therians began to expand into metatherians and eutherians, and cimolodont multituberculates went on to become common in the fossil record.\nThe Late Cretaceous spans from 100 to 66\u00a0million years ago. The Late Cretaceous featured a cooling trend that would continue in the Cenozoic Era. Eventually, tropics were restricted to the equator and areas beyond the tropic lines experienced extreme seasonal changes in weather. Dinosaurs still thrived, as new taxa such as \"Tyrannosaurus\", \"Ankylosaurus\", \"Triceratops\" and hadrosaurs dominated the food web. In the oceans, mosasaurs ruled, filling the role of the ichthyosaurs, which, after declining, had disappeared in the Cenomanian-Turonian boundary event. Though pliosaurs had gone extinct in the same event, long-necked plesiosaurs such as \"Elasmosaurus\" continued to thrive. Flowering plants, possibly appearing as far back as the Triassic, became truly dominant for the first time. Pterosaurs in the Late Cretaceous declined for poorly understood reasons, though this might be due to tendencies of the fossil record, as their diversity seems to be much higher than previously thought. Birds became increasingly common and diversified into a variety of enantiornithe and ornithurine forms. Though mostly small, marine hesperornithes became relatively large and flightless, adapted to life in the open sea. Metatherians and primitive eutherian also became common and even produced large and specialised genera such as \"Didelphodon\" and \"Schowalteria\". Still, the dominant mammals were multituberculates, cimolodonts in the north and gondwanatheres in the south. At the end of the Cretaceous, the Deccan Traps and other volcanic eruptions were poisoning the atmosphere. As this continued, it is thought that a large meteor smashed into Earth 66\u00a0million years ago, creating the Chicxulub Crater in an event known as the K-Pg Extinction (formerly K-T), the fifth and most recent mass extinction event, in which 75% of life became extinct, including all non-avian dinosaurs.\nPaleogeography and tectonics.\nCompared to the vigorous convergent plate mountain-building of the late Paleozoic, Mesozoic tectonic deformation was comparatively mild. The sole major Mesozoic orogeny occurred in what is now the Arctic, creating the Innuitian orogeny, the Brooks Range, the Verkhoyansk and Cherskiy Ranges in Siberia, and the Khingan Mountains in Manchuria.\nThis orogeny was related to the opening of the Arctic Ocean and suturing of the North China and Siberian cratons to Asia. In contrast, the era featured the dramatic rifting of the supercontinent Pangaea, which gradually split into a northern continent, Laurasia, and a southern continent, Gondwana. This created the passive continental margin that characterizes most of the Atlantic coastline (such as along the U.S. East Coast) today.\nBy the end of the era, the continents had rifted into nearly their present forms, though not their present positions. Laurasia became North America and Eurasia, while Gondwana split into South America, Africa, Australia, Antarctica and the Indian subcontinent, which collided with the Asian plate during the Cenozoic, giving rise to the Himalayas.\nClimate.\nThe Triassic was generally dry, a trend that began in the late Carboniferous, and highly seasonal, especially in the interior of Pangaea. Low sea levels may have also exacerbated temperature extremes. With its high specific heat capacity, water acts as a temperature-stabilizing heat reservoir, and land areas near large bodies of water\u2014especially oceans\u2014experience less variation in temperature. Because much of Pangaea's land was distant from its shores, temperatures fluctuated greatly, and the interior probably included expansive deserts. Abundant red beds and evaporites such as halite support these conclusions, but some evidence suggests the generally dry climate of the Triassic was punctuated by episodes of increased rainfall. The most important humid episodes were the Carnian Pluvial Event and one in the Rhaetian, a few million years before the Triassic\u2013Jurassic extinction event.\nSea levels began to rise during the Jurassic, probably caused by an increase in seafloor spreading. The formation of new crust beneath the surface displaced ocean waters by as much as above today's sea level, flooding coastal areas. Furthermore, Pangaea began to rift into smaller divisions, creating new shoreline around the Tethys Ocean. Temperatures continued to increase, then began to stabilize. Humidity also increased with the proximity of water, and deserts retreated.\nThe climate of the Cretaceous is less certain and more widely disputed. Probably, higher levels of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere are thought to have almost eliminated the north\u2013south temperature gradient: temperatures were about the same across the planet, and about 10\u00b0C higher than today. The circulation of oxygen to the deep ocean may also have been disrupted, preventing the decomposition of large volumes of organic matter, which was eventually deposited as \"black shale\".\nDifferent studies have come to different conclusions about the amount of oxygen in the atmosphere during different parts of the Mesozoic, with some concluding oxygen levels were lower than the current level (about 21%) throughout the Mesozoic, some concluding they were lower in the Triassic and part of the Jurassic but higher in the Cretaceous, and some concluding they were higher throughout most or all of the Triassic, Jurassic and Cretaceous.\nLife.\nFlora.\nThe dominant land plant species of the time were gymnosperms, which are vascular, cone-bearing, non-flowering plants such as conifers that produce seeds without a coating. This contrasts with the earth's current flora, in which the dominant land plants in terms of number of species are angiosperms. The earliest members of the genus \"Ginkgo\" first appeared during the Middle Jurassic. This genus is represented today by a single species, \"Ginkgo biloba\". Modern conifer groups began to radiate during the Jurassic. Bennettitales, an extinct group of gymnosperms with foliage superficially resembling that of cycads gained a global distribution during the Late Triassic, and represented one of the most common groups of Mesozoic seed plants.\nFlowering plants radiated during the early Cretaceous, first in the tropics, but the even temperature gradient allowed them to spread toward the poles throughout the period. By the end of the Cretaceous, angiosperms dominated tree floras in many areas, although some evidence suggests that biomass was still dominated by cycads and ferns until after the Cretaceous\u2013Paleogene extinction. Some plant species had distributions that were markedly different from succeeding periods; for example, the Schizeales, a fern order, were skewed to the Northern Hemisphere in the Mesozoic, but are now better represented in the Southern Hemisphere.\nFauna.\nThe extinction of nearly all animal species at the end of the Permian Period allowed for the radiation of many new lifeforms. In particular, the extinction of the large herbivorous pareiasaurs and carnivorous gorgonopsians left those ecological niches empty. Some were filled by the surviving cynodonts and dicynodonts, the latter of which subsequently became extinct.\nRecent research indicates that it took much longer for the reestablishment of complex ecosystems with high biodiversity, complex food webs, and specialized animals in a variety of niches, beginning in the mid-Triassic 4 million to 6 million years after the extinction, and not fully proliferated until 30 million years after the extinction. During the Triassic, terrestrial herbivores avoided competition through significant niche partitioning by generally occupying highly distinct guilds. Animal life was then dominated by various archosaurs: dinosaurs, pterosaurs, and aquatic reptiles such as ichthyosaurs, plesiosaurs, and mosasaurs.\nThe climatic changes of the late Jurassic and Cretaceous favored further adaptive radiation. The Jurassic was the height of archosaur diversity, and the first birds and eutherian mammals also appeared. Some have argued that insects diversified in symbiosis with angiosperms, because insect anatomy, especially the mouth parts, seems particularly well-suited for flowering plants. However, all major insect mouth parts preceded angiosperms, and insect diversification actually slowed when they arrived, so their anatomy originally must have been suited for some other purpose.\nMicrobiota.\nAt the dawn of the Mesozoic, ocean plankton communities transitioned from ones dominated by green archaeplastidans to ones dominated by endosymbiotic algae with red-algal-derived plastids. This transition is speculated to have been caused by an increasing paucity of many trace metals in the Mesozoic ocean.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19323", "revid": "43832727", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19323", "title": "Middle East", "text": "Transcontinental geopolitical region\nThe Middle East is a geopolitical region encompassing the Arabian Peninsula, Egypt, Iran, Iraq, the Levant, and Turkey.\nThe term came into widespread usage by Western European nations in the early 20th century as a replacement of the term Near East (both were in contrast to the Far East). The term \"Middle East\" has led to some confusion over its changing definitions. Since the late 20th century, it has been criticized as being too Eurocentric. The region includes the vast majority of the territories included in the closely associated definition of West Asia, but without the South Caucasus. It also includes all of Egypt (not just the Sinai region) and all of Turkey (including East Thrace).\nMost Middle Eastern countries (13 out of 18) are part of the Arab world. The three most populous countries in the region are Egypt, Iran, and Turkey, while Saudi Arabia is the largest Middle Eastern country by area. The history of the Middle East dates back to ancient times, and it was long considered the \"cradle of civilization\". The geopolitical importance of the region has been recognized and competed for during millennia. The Abrahamic religions (Christianity, Islam, and Judaism) have their origins in the Middle East. Arabs constitute the main ethnic group in the region, followed by Turks, Persians, Kurds, Jews, and Assyrians.\nThe Middle East generally has a hot, arid climate, especially in the Arabian and Egyptian regions. Several major rivers provide irrigation to support agriculture in limited areas here, such as the Nile Delta in Egypt, the Tigris and Euphrates watersheds of Mesopotamia, and the basin of the Jordan River that spans most of the Levant. These regions are collectively known as the Fertile Crescent, and comprise the core of what historians had long referred to as the cradle of civilization; multiple regions of the world have since been classified as also having developed independent, original civilizations.\nConversely, the Levantine coast and most of Turkey have relatively temperate climates typical of the Mediterranean, with dry summers and cool, wet winters. Most of the countries that border the Persian Gulf have vast reserves of petroleum. Monarchs of the Arabian Peninsula in particular have benefitted economically from petroleum exports. Because of the arid climate and dependence on the fossil fuel industry, the Middle East is both a major contributor to climate change and a region that is expected to be severely adversely affected by it.\nOther concepts of the region exist, including the broader Middle East and North Africa (MENA), which includes states of the Maghreb and the Sudan. The term the \"Greater Middle East\" also includes Afghanistan, Mauritania, Pakistan, as well as parts of East Africa, and sometimes Central Asia and the South Caucasus.\nTerminology.\nThe term \"Middle East\" may have originated in the 1850s in the British India Office. However, it became more widely known when United States naval strategist Alfred Thayer Mahan used the term in 1902 to \"designate the area between Arabia and India\".\nDuring this time the British and Russian empires were vying for influence in Central Asia, a rivalry that would become known as the Great Game. Mahan realized not only the strategic importance of the region, but also of its center, the Persian Gulf. He labeled the area surrounding the Persian Gulf as the Middle East. He said that, beyond Egypt's Suez Canal, the Gulf was the most important passage for Britain to control in order to keep the Russians from advancing towards British India. Mahan first used the term in his article \"The Persian Gulf and International Relations\", published in September 1902 in the \"National Review\", a British journal.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Middle East, if I may adopt a term which I have not seen, will some day need its Malta, as well as its Gibraltar; it does not follow that either will be in the Persian Gulf. Naval force has the quality of mobility which carries with it the privilege of temporary absences; but it needs to find on every scene of operation established bases of refit, of supply, and in case of disaster, of security. The British Navy should have the facility to concentrate in force if occasion arise, about Aden, India, and the Persian Gulf.\nMahan's article was reprinted in \"The Times\" and followed in October by a 20-article series entitled \"The Middle Eastern Question\", written by Sir Ignatius Valentine Chirol. During this series, Sir Ignatius expanded the definition of \"Middle East\" to include \"those regions of Asia which extend to the borders of India or command the approaches to India.\" After the series ended in 1903, \"The Times\" removed quotation marks from subsequent uses of the term.\nUntil World War II, it was customary to refer to areas centered on Turkey and the eastern shore of the Mediterranean as the \"Near East\", while the \"Far East\" centered on China, India and Japan. The Middle East was then defined as the area from Mesopotamia to Burma; namely, the area between the Near East and the Far East. This area broadly corresponds to South Asia.\nIn the late 1930s, the British established the Middle East Command, which was based in Cairo, for its military forces in the region. After that time, the term \"Middle East\" gained broader usage in Europe and the United States. Following World War II, for example, the Middle East Institute was founded in Washington, D.C. in 1946.\nThe corresponding adjective is \"Middle Eastern\" and the derived noun is \"Middle Easterner\".\nWhile non-Eurocentric terms such as \"Southwest Asia\" or \"Swasia\" have been sparsely used, the classification of the African country, Egypt, among those counted in the Middle East challenges the usefulness of using such terms.\nUsage and criticism.\nThe description \"Middle\" has also led to some confusion over changing definitions. Before the First World War, \"Near East\" was used in English to refer to the Balkans and the Ottoman Empire, while \"Middle East\" referred to the Caucasus, Persia, and Arabian lands, and sometimes Afghanistan, India and others. In contrast, \"Far East\" referred to the countries of East Asia (e.g. China, Japan, and Korea).\nWith the collapse of the Ottoman Empire in 1918, \"Near East\" largely fell out of common use in English, while \"Middle East\" came to be applied to the emerging independent countries of the Islamic world. However, the usage \"Near East\" was retained by a variety of academic disciplines, including archaeology and ancient history. In their usage, the term describes an area identical to the term \"Middle East\", which is not used by these disciplines (see ancient Near East).\nThe first official use of the term \"Middle East\" by the United States government was in the 1957 Eisenhower Doctrine, which pertained to the Suez Crisis. Secretary of State John Foster Dulles defined the Middle East as \"the area lying between and including Libya on the west and Pakistan on the east, Syria and Iraq on the North and the Arabian peninsula to the south, plus the Sudan and Ethiopia.\" In 1958, the State Department explained that the terms \"Near East\" and \"Middle East\" were interchangeable, and defined the region as including only Egypt, Syria, Israel, Lebanon, Jordan, Iraq, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Bahrain, and Qatar.\nSince the late 20th century, scholars and journalists from the region, such as journalist Louay Khraish and historian Hassan Hanafi have criticized the use of \"Middle East\" as a Eurocentric and colonialist term.\nThe Associated Press Stylebook of 2004 says that Near East formerly referred to the farther west countries while Middle East referred to the eastern ones, but that now they are synonymous. It instructs:\nUse \"Middle East\" unless \"Near East\" is used by a source in a story. \"Mideast\" is also acceptable, but \"Middle East\" is preferred.\nTranslations.\nEuropean languages have adopted terms similar to \"Near East\" and \"Middle East\". Since these are based on a relative description, the meanings depend on the country and are generally different from the English terms. In German the term \"\" (Near East) is still in common use (nowadays the term \"Mittlerer Osten\" is more and more common in press texts translated from English sources, albeit having a distinct meaning).\nIn the four Slavic languages, Russian or \"Blizhniy Vostok\", Bulgarian , Polish ' or Croatian ' (terms meaning \"Near East\" are the only appropriate ones for the region).\nHowever, some European languages do have \"Middle East\" equivalents, such as French , Swedish , Spanish , Greek is \u039c\u03ad\u03c3\u03b7 \u0391\u03bd\u03b1\u03c4\u03bf\u03bb\u03ae (\"Mesi Anatoli\"), and Italian .\nPerhaps because of the political influence of the United States and Europe, and the prominence of Western press, the Arabic equivalent of \"Middle East\" (Arabic: \u0627\u0644\u0634\u0631\u0642 \u0627\u0644\u0623\u0648\u0633\u0637 \"ash-Sharq al-Awsa\u1e6d\") has become standard usage in the mainstream Arabic press. It comprises the same meaning as the term \"Middle East\" in North American and Western European usage. The designation, \"Mashriq\", also from the Arabic root for \"East\", also denotes a variously defined region around the Levant, the eastern part of the Arabic-speaking world (as opposed to the \"Maghreb\", the western part). Even though the term originated in the West, countries of the Middle East that use languages other than Arabic also use that term in translation. For instance, the Persian equivalent for Middle East is \u062e\u0627\u0648\u0631\u0645\u06cc\u0627\u0646\u0647 (\"Kh\u0101var-e miy\u0101neh\"), the Hebrew is \u05d4\u05de\u05d6\u05e8\u05d7 \u05d4\u05ea\u05d9\u05db\u05d5\u05df (\"hamizrach hatikhon\"), and the Turkish is Orta Do\u011fu.\nCountries and territory.\nCountries and territory usually considered within the Middle East.\nTraditionally included within the Middle East are Arabia, Asia Minor, East Thrace, Egypt, Iran, the Levant, Mesopotamia, and the Socotra Archipelago. The region includes 17 UN-recognized countries and one British Overseas Territory.\n\nOther definitions of the Middle East.\nVarious concepts are often paralleled to the Middle East, most notably the Near East, Fertile Crescent, and Levant. These are geographical concepts, which refer to large sections of the modern-day Middle East, with the Near East being the closest to the Middle East in its geographical meaning. Due to it primarily being Arabic speaking, the Maghreb region of North Africa is sometimes included.\n\"Greater Middle East\" is a political term coined by the second Bush administration in the first decade of the 21st century to denote various countries, pertaining to the Muslim world, specifically Afghanistan, Iran, Pakistan, and Turkey. Various Central Asian countries are sometimes also included.\nHistory.\nThe Middle East lies at the juncture of Africa and Eurasia and of the Indian Ocean and the Mediterranean Sea (see also: Indo-Mediterranean). It is the birthplace and spiritual center of religions such as Christianity, Islam, Judaism, Manichaeism, Yezidi, Druze, Yarsan, and Mandeanism, and in Iran, Mithraism, Zoroastrianism, Manicheanism, and the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith. Throughout its history the Middle East has been a major center of world affairs; a strategically, economically, politically, culturally, and religiously sensitive area. The region is one of the regions where agriculture was independently discovered, and from the Middle East it was spread, during the Neolithic, to different regions of the world such as Europe, the Indus Valley and Eastern Africa.\nPrior to the formation of civilizations, advanced cultures formed all over the Middle East during the Stone Age. The search for agricultural lands by agriculturalists, and pastoral lands by herdsmen meant different migrations took place within the region and shaped its ethnic and demographic makeup.\nThe Middle East is widely and most famously known as the cradle of civilization. The world's earliest civilizations, Mesopotamia (Sumer, Akkad, Assyria and Babylonia), ancient Egypt and Kish in the Levant, all originated in the Fertile Crescent and Nile Valley regions of the ancient Near East. These were followed by the Hittite, Greek, Hurrian and Urartian civilisations of Asia Minor; Elam, Persia and Median civilizations in Iran, as well as the civilizations of the Levant (such as Ebla, Mari, Nagar, Ugarit, Canaan, Aramea, Mitanni, Phoenicia and Israel) and the Arabian Peninsula (Magan, Sheba, Ubar). The Near East was first largely unified under the Neo Assyrian Empire, then the Achaemenid Empire followed later by the Macedonian Empire and after this to some degree by the Iranian empires (namely the Parthian and Sassanid Empires), the Roman Empire and Byzantine Empire. The region served as the intellectual and economic center of the Roman Empire and played an exceptionally important role due to its periphery on the Sassanid Empire. Thus, the Romans stationed up to five or six of their legions in the region for the sole purpose of defending it from Sassanid and Bedouin raids and invasions.\nFrom the 4th century CE onwards, the Middle East became the center of the two main powers at the time, the Byzantine Empire and the Sassanid Empire. However, it would be the later Islamic Caliphates of the Middle Ages, or Islamic Golden Age which began with the Islamic conquest of the region in the 7th century AD, that would first unify the entire Middle East as a distinct region and create the dominant Islamic Arab ethnic identity that largely (but not exclusively) persists today. The 4 caliphates that dominated the Middle East for more than 600 years were the Rashidun Caliphate, the Umayyad caliphate, the Abbasid caliphate and the Fatimid caliphate. Additionally, the Mongols would come to dominate the region, the Kingdom of Armenia would incorporate parts of the region to their domain, the Seljuks would rule the region and spread Turko-Persian culture, and the Franks would found the Crusader states that would stand for roughly two centuries. Josiah Russell estimates the population of what he calls \"Islamic territory\" as roughly 12.5 million in 1000 \u2013 Anatolia 8 million, Syria 2 million, and Egypt 1.5 million.\nFrom the 16th century onward, the Middle East came to be dominated, once again, by two main powers: the Ottoman Empire and the Safavid dynasty.\nThe modern Middle East began after World War I, when the Ottoman Empire, which was allied with the Central Powers, was defeated by the Allies and partitioned into a number of separate nations, initially under British and French Mandates. Other defining events in this transformation included the establishment of Israel in 1948 and the eventual departure of European powers, notably Britain and France by the end of the 1960s. They were supplanted in some part by the rising influence of the United States from the 1970s onwards.\nIn the 20th century, the region's significant stocks of crude oil gave it new strategic and economic importance. Mass production of oil began around 1945, with Saudi Arabia, Iran, Kuwait, Iraq, and the United Arab Emirates having large quantities of oil. Estimated oil reserves, especially in Saudi Arabia and Iran, are some of the highest in the world, and the international oil cartel OPEC is dominated by Middle Eastern countries.\nDuring the Cold War, the Middle East was a theater of ideological struggle between the two superpowers and their allies: NATO and the United States on one side, and the Soviet Union and Warsaw Pact on the other, as they competed to influence regional allies. Besides the political reasons there was also the \"ideological conflict\" between the two systems. Moreover, as Louise Fawcett argues, among many important areas of contention, or perhaps more accurately of anxiety, were, first, the desires of the superpowers to gain strategic advantage in the region, second, the fact that the region contained some two-thirds of the world's oil reserves in a context where oil was becoming increasingly vital to the economy of the Western world [...] Within this contextual framework, the United States sought to divert the Arab world from Soviet influence. Throughout the 20th and 21st centuries, the region has experienced both periods of relative peace and tolerance and periods of conflict particularly between Sunnis and Shiites.\nEconomy.\nMiddle Eastern economies range from being very poor (such as Gaza and Yemen) to extremely wealthy nations (such as Qatar and UAE). According to the International Monetary Fund, the three largest Middle Eastern economies in nominal GDP in 2023 were Saudi Arabia ($1.06 trillion), Turkey ($1.03 trillion), and Israel ($0.54 trillion). For nominal GDP per person, the highest ranking countries are Qatar ($83,891), Israel ($55,535), the United Arab Emirates ($49,451) and Cyprus ($33,807). Turkey ($3.6 trillion), Saudi Arabia ($2.3 trillion), and Iran ($1.7 trillion) had the largest economies in terms of GDP PPP. For GDP PPP per person, the highest-ranking countries are Qatar ($124,834), the United Arab Emirates ($88,221), Saudi Arabia ($64,836), Bahrain ($60,596) and Israel ($54,997). The lowest-ranking country in the Middle East, in terms of GDP nominal per capita, is Yemen ($573).\nThe economic structure of Middle Eastern nations are different because while some are heavily dependent on export of only oil and oil-related products (Saudi Arabia, the UAE and Kuwait), others have a highly diverse economic base (such as Cyprus, Israel, Turkey and Egypt). Industries of the Middle Eastern region include oil and oil-related products, agriculture, cotton, cattle, dairy, textiles, leather products, surgical instruments, defence equipment (guns, ammunition, tanks, submarines, fighter jets, UAVs, and missiles). Banking is an important sector, especially for UAE and Bahrain.\nWith the exception of Cyprus, Turkey, Egypt, Lebanon and Israel, tourism has been a relatively undeveloped area of the economy, in part because of the socially conservative nature of the region as well as political turmoil in certain regions. Since the end of the COVID pandemic however, countries such as the UAE, Bahrain, and Jordan have begun attracting greater numbers of tourists because of improving tourist facilities and the relaxing of tourism-related restrictive policies.\nUnemployment is high in the Middle East and North Africa region, particularly among people aged 15\u201329, a demographic representing 30% of the region's population. The total regional unemployment rate in 2025 is 10.8%, and among youth is as high as 28%.\nDemographics.\nEthnic groups.\nArabs constitute the largest ethnic group in the Middle East, followed by various Iranian peoples and then by Turkic peoples (Turkish, Azeris, Syrian Turkmen, and Iraqi Turkmen). Native ethnic groups of the region include, in addition to Arabs, Arameans, Assyrians, Baloch, Berbers, Copts, Druze, Greek Cypriots, Jews, Kurds, Lurs, Mandaeans, Persians, Samaritans, Shabaks, Tats, and Zazas. European ethnic groups that form a diaspora in the region include Albanians, Bosniaks, Circassians (including Kabardians), Crimean Tatars, Greeks, Franco-Levantines, Italo-Levantines, and Iraqi Turkmens. Among other migrant populations are Chinese, Filipinos, Indians, Indonesians, Pakistanis, Pashtuns, Romani, and Afro-Arabs.\nMigration.\n\"Migration has always provided an important vent for labor market pressures in the Middle East. For the period between the 1970s and 1990s, the Arab states of the Persian Gulf in particular provided a rich source of employment for workers from Egypt, Yemen and the countries of the Levant, while Europe had attracted young workers from North African countries due both to proximity and the legacy of colonial ties between France and the majority of North African states.\"\nAccording to the International Organization for Migration, there are 13\u00a0million first-generation migrants from Arab nations in the world, of which 5.8 reside in other Arab countries. Expatriates from Arab countries contribute to the circulation of financial and human capital in the region and thus significantly promote regional development. In 2009 Arab countries received a total of US$35.1\u00a0billion in remittance in-flows and remittances sent to Jordan, Egypt and Lebanon from other Arab countries are 40 to 190 per cent higher than trade revenues between these and other Arab countries. In Somalia, the Somali Civil War has greatly increased the size of the Somali diaspora, as many of the best educated Somalis left for Middle Eastern countries as well as Europe and North America.\nNon-Arab Middle Eastern countries such as Turkey, Israel and Iran are also subject to important migration dynamics.\nA fair proportion of those migrating from Arab nations are from ethnic and religious minorities facing persecution and are not necessarily ethnic Arabs, Iranians or Turks. Large numbers of Kurds, Jews, Assyrians, Greeks and Armenians as well as many Mandeans have left nations such as Iraq, Iran, Syria and Turkey for these reasons during the last century. In Iran, many religious minorities such as Christians, Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds, Jews and Zoroastrians have left since the Islamic Revolution of 1979.\nReligions.\nThe Middle East is very diverse when it comes to religions, many of which originated there. Islam is the largest religion in the Middle East, but other faiths that originated there, such as Judaism and Christianity, are also well represented. Christian communities have played a vital role in the Middle East, and they represent 78% of Cyprus population, and 40.5% of Lebanon, where the Lebanese president, half of the cabinet, and half of the parliament follow one of the various Lebanese Christian rites. There are also important minority religions like the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith, Yarsanism, Yazidism, Zoroastrianism, Mandaeism, Druze, and Shabakism, and in ancient times the region was home to Mesopotamian religions, Canaanite religions, Manichaeism, Mithraism and various monotheist gnostic sects.\nLanguages.\nThe six top languages, in terms of numbers of speakers, are Arabic, Persian, Turkish, Kurdish, Modern Hebrew and Greek. About 20 minority languages are also spoken in the Middle East.\nArabic, with all its dialects, is the most widely spoken language in the Middle East, with Literary Arabic being official in all North African and in most West Asian countries. Arabic dialects are also spoken in some adjacent areas in neighbouring Middle Eastern non-Arab countries. It is a member of the Semitic branch of the Afro-Asiatic languages. Several Modern South Arabian languages such as Mehri and Soqotri are also spoken in Yemen and Oman. Another Semitic language is Aramaic and its dialects are spoken mainly by Assyrians and Mandaeans, with Western Aramaic still spoken in two villages near Damascus, Syria. There is also an Oasis Berber-speaking community in Egypt where the language is also known as Siwa. It is a non-Semitic Afro-Asiatic sister language.\nPersian is the second most spoken language. While it is primarily spoken in Iran and some border areas in neighbouring countries, the country is one of the region's largest and most populous. It belongs to the Indo-Iranian branch of the family of Indo-European languages. Other Western Iranic languages spoken in the region include Achomi, Daylami, Kurdish dialects, Semmani, Lurish, amongst many others.\nThe close third-most widely spoken language, Turkish, is largely confined to Turkey, which is also one of the region's largest and most populous countries, but it is present in areas in neighboring countries. It is a member of the Turkic languages, which have their origins in East Asia. Another Turkic language, Azerbaijani, is spoken by Azerbaijanis in Iran.\nThe fourth-most widely spoken language, Kurdish, is spoken in the countries of Iran, Iraq, Syria and Turkey, Sorani Kurdish is the second official language in Iraq (instated after the 2005 constitution) after Arabic.\nHebrew is the official language of Israel, with Arabic given a special status after the lowered its status from an official language prior to 2018. Hebrew is spoken and used by over 80% of Israel's population, the other 20% using Arabic. Modern Hebrew only began being spoken in the 20th century after being revived in the late 19th century by Elizer Ben-Yehuda (Elizer Perlman) and European Jewish settlers, with the first native Hebrew speaker being born in 1882.\nGreek is one of the two official languages of Cyprus, and the country's main language. Small communities of Greek speakers exist all around the Middle East; until the 20th century it was also widely spoken in Asia Minor (being the second most spoken language there, after Turkish) and Egypt. During the antiquity, Ancient Greek was the lingua franca for many areas of the western Middle East and until the Muslim expansion it was widely spoken there as well. Until the late 11th century, it was also the main spoken language in Asia Minor; after that it was gradually replaced by the Turkish language as the Anatolian Turks expanded and the local Greeks were assimilated, especially in the interior.\nEnglish is one of the official languages of Akrotiri and Dhekelia. It is also commonly taught and used as a foreign second language, in countries such as Egypt, Jordan, Iran, Iraq, Qatar, Bahrain, United Arab Emirates and Kuwait. It is also a main language in some Emirates of the United Arab Emirates. It is also spoken as native language by Jewish immigrants from Anglophone countries (UK, US, Australia) in Israel and understood widely as second language there.\nFrench is taught and used in many government facilities and media in Lebanon, and is taught in some primary and secondary schools of Egypt and Syria. Maltese, a Semitic language mainly spoken in Europe, is used by the Franco-Maltese diaspora in Egypt. Due to widespread immigration of French Jews to Israel, it is the native language of approximately 200,000 Jews in Israel.\nArmenian speakers are to be found in the region. Georgian is spoken by the Georgian diaspora.\nRussian is spoken by a large portion of the Israeli population, because of emigration in the late 1990s. Russian today is a popular unofficial language in use in Israel; news, radio and sign boards can be found in Russian around the country after Hebrew and Arabic. Circassian is also spoken by the diaspora in the region and by almost all Circassians in Israel who speak Hebrew and English as well.\nThe largest Romanian-speaking community in the Middle East is found in Israel, where as of 1995[ [update]] Romanian is spoken by 5% of the population.\nBengali, Hindi and Urdu are widely spoken by migrant communities in many Middle Eastern countries, such as Saudi Arabia (where 20\u201325% of the population is South Asian), the United Arab Emirates (where 50\u201355% of the population is South Asian), and Qatar, which have large numbers of Pakistani, Bangladeshi and Indian immigrants.\nCulture.\nSport.\nThe Middle East has recently become more prominent in hosting global sport events due to its wealth and desire to diversify its economy.\nThe South Asian diaspora is a major backer of cricket in the region.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19324", "revid": "1315205129", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19324", "title": "Mo\u011follar", "text": "Turkish rock band\nMo\u011follar (\"Mongols\" in Turkish) was one of the pioneering bands in Turkish rock music during their early career and one of the founders of Turkish folk rock (or Anatolian rock). They have been active for over 40 years. The band uses multi-layered dynamism in the Turkish folk genre to create a sonic similarity with pop music's dynamism.\nHistory.\nThe band was founded end of 1967 by Aziz Azmet, Murat Ses, Cahit Berkay, Hasan Sel and Engin Y\u00f6r\u00fcko\u011flu.\nIn 1970, Hasan Sel was replaced by Taner \u00d6ng\u00fcr, previously a member of Meteorlar (Meteors) and the Erkin Koray Quartet. The band tried to fuse the technical aspects of pop music with the melodies of Anatolian folk music in the late 1960s and early 1970s.\nIn July 1970, Aziz Azmet, the band's vocalist left the band due to musical disagreements and Ersen Dinleten replaced him for a short time. Mo\u011follar recorded \"Ternek/Hali\u00e7'te G\u00fcn Bat\u0131\u015f\u0131\" (\"Ternek/Sunset on the Golden Horn\") on a 45 rpm single, and left for Paris in August 1970. While they went to Paris, they signed a 3-year contract with CBS, releasing a 45 rpm single \"Hitchin/Behind the Dark\" in 1972. They made one album for the imprint \"Guild International du Disque\", \"Danses et Rythmes de la Turquie -- d'Hier d'Aujourd'hui\". This album was recognized by the French \"Acad\u00e9mie Charles Cros\" in 1971, earning comparisons to Pink Floyd. By that time, they met with Bar\u0131\u015f Man\u00e7o and started to work with him while he was living in Belgium.\nIn 1968 the group won the third place in Turkish music contest Golden Microphone. In 1971 the group won the Grand Prix du Disque of the Charles Cros Academy for their instrumental album \"Danses et Rythmes de la Turquie\".\nIn 1971, Bar\u0131\u015f Man\u00e7o joined as vocalist and the band was renamed Manchomongol. Manchomongol recorded two 45 rpms, and this partnership ended after four months. Also, Engin Y\u00f6r\u00fcko\u011flu stayed in Paris, and the drummer of Mavi I\u015f\u0131klar (Blue Lights), Ayzer Danga, joined the band to replace him.\nMo\u011follar recorded one single with Selda Ba\u011fcan during the first half of 1972. Ersen then re-joined the band in July 1972 and they recorded another single. Murat Ses left the band in August 1972. In September 1972, Mo\u011follar replaced their soloists with Cem Karaca, who was then the soloist of Karda\u015flar (Brothers).This partnership of Cem Karaca and Mo\u011follar lasted for two years and they produced the song, Namus Belas\u0131, which became a great hit.\nIn 1974, Taner \u00d6ng\u00fcr and Ayzer Danga left the band. \u00d6ng\u00fcr joined Dada\u015flar, a band with Ersen Dinleten between 1974\u20131975 and 1979\u20131980 and Dervi\u015fan (Dervishes), a band with Cem Karaca between 1974 and 1978. He also briefly joined Dostlar, a band with Edip Akbayram in 1975. Danga initially joined Karda\u015flar between 1974 and 1975. He participated in Erkin Koray's 'Elektronik T\u00fcrk\u00fcler' (Electronic Songs) album in 1975. He then joined Dostlar between 1975 and 1978; G\u00fcne\u015fin Sofras\u0131, a band with Kerem G\u00fcney (1939-2012) in 1979; Dada\u015flar, a band with Ersen Dinleten in 1983 and Zorbeyler in 1984 before his retirement from music. Meanwhile, Cahit Berkay left for France after the dissolution of the band to meet with Engin Y\u00f6r\u00fcko\u011flu. Cahit and Engin recorded two albums under the name Mo\u011follar. They also recorded a single with Ali R\u0131za Binbo\u011fa in 1975. The band completely dissolved in 1976.\nAfter a 17-year absence, Cahit Berkay, Taner \u00d6ng\u00fcr and Engin Y\u00f6r\u00fcko\u011flu reformed the band in 1993, and were joined by keyboard player Serhat Ers\u00f6z. Murat Ses is dealing with other projects and is still pursuing an extraordinary international career.\nIn 2007, the Advertising agency TBWA decided to use Mo\u011follar's track from the late 1960's, \"Garip \u00c7oban\" (translated - Lonesome Shepherd; written by Murat Ses) in the \"This is Living\" advertisement campaign for Sony's PlayStation 3.\nEmrah Karaca (son of Cem Karaca) joined Mo\u011follar in 2007 as a vocalist and guitarist. Engin Y\u00f6r\u00fcko\u011flu was diagnosed with lung cancer in 2007 and died in 2010.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19325", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19325", "title": "Monism", "text": "View that attributes oneness or singleness to a concept\nMonism attributes oneness or singleness () to a concept, such as to existence. Various kinds of monism can be distinguished:\nDefinitions.\nThere are two sorts of definitions for monism:\nAlthough the term \"monism\" is derived from Western philosophy to typify positions in the mind\u2013body problem, it has also been used to typify religious traditions. In modern Hinduism, the term \"absolute monism\" has been applied to Advaita Vedanta, though Philip Renard points out that this may be a Western interpretation, bypassing the intuitive understanding of a nondual reality. It is more generally categorized by scholars as a form of absolute nondualism.\nHistory.\nMaterial monism can be traced back to the pre-Socratic philosophers who sought to understand the arche or basic principle of the universe in terms of different material causes. These included Thales, who argued that the basis of everything was water, Anaximenes, who claimed it was air, and Heraclitus who believed it to be fire. Later, Parmenides described the world as \"One\", which could not change in any way. Zeno of Elea defended this view of everything being a single entity through his paradoxes, which aim to show the existence of time, motion and space to be illusionary.\nBaruch Spinoza argued that 'God or Nature' (\"Deus sive Natura\") is the only substance of the universe, which can be referred to as either 'God' or 'Nature' (the two being interchangeable). This is because God/Nature has all the possible attributes and no two substances can share an attribute, which means there can be no other substances than God/Nature.\nMonism has been discussed thoroughly in Indian philosophy and Vedanta throughout their history starting as early as the Rig Veda. The term \"monism\" was introduced in the 18th century by Christian von Wolff in his work \"Logic\" (1728), to designate types of philosophical thought in which the attempt was made to eliminate the dichotomy of body and mind and explain all phenomena by one unifying principle, or as manifestations of a single substance.\nThe mind\u2013body problem in philosophy examines the relationship between mind and matter, and in particular the relationship between consciousness and the brain. The problem was addressed by Ren\u00e9 Descartes in the 17th century, resulting in Cartesian dualism, and by pre-Aristotelian philosophers, in Avicennian philosophy, and in earlier Asian and more specifically Indian traditions.\nMonism was later also applied to the theory of absolute identity set forth by Hegel and Schelling. Thereafter the term was more broadly used, for any theory postulating a unifying principle. The opponent thesis of dualism also was broadened, to include pluralism. According to Urmson, as a result of this extended use, the term is \"systematically ambiguous\".\nAccording to Jonathan Schaffer, monism lost popularity due to the emergence of analytic philosophy in the early twentieth century, which revolted against the neo-Hegelians. Rudolf Carnap and A. J. Ayer, who were strong proponents of positivism, \"ridiculed the whole question as incoherent mysticism\".\nThe mind\u2013body problem has reemerged in social psychology and related fields, with the interest in mind\u2013body interaction and the rejection of Cartesian mind\u2013body dualism in the \"identity thesis\", a modern form of monism. Monism is also still relevant to the philosophy of mind, where various positions are defended.\nTypes.\nDifferent types of monism include:\nViews contrasting with monism are:\nMonism in modern philosophy of mind can be divided into three broad categories:\nCertain positions do not fit easily into the above categories, such as functionalism, anomalous monism, and reflexive monism. Moreover, they do not define the meaning of \"real\".\nMonistic philosophers.\nPre-Socratic.\nWhile the lack of information makes it difficult in some cases to be sure of the details, the following pre-Socratic philosophers thought in monistic terms:\nReligion.\nPantheism.\nPantheism is the belief that everything composes an all-encompassing, immanent God, or that the universe (or nature) is identical with divinity. Pantheists thus do or do not believe in a personal or anthropomorphic god, but believe that interpretations of the term differ.\nPantheism was popularized in the modern era as both a theology and philosophy based on the work of the 17th-century philosopher Baruch Spinoza, whose \"Ethics\" was an answer to Descartes' famous dualist theory that the body and spirit are separate. Spinoza held that the two are the same, and this monism is a fundamental quality of his philosophy. He was described as a \"God-intoxicated man,\" and used the word God to describe the unity of all substance. Although the term pantheism was not coined until after his death, Spinoza is regarded as its most celebrated advocate.\nH. P. Owen claimed that\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Pantheists are \"monists\" ... they believe that there is only one Being, and that all other forms of reality are either modes (or appearances) of it or identical with it.\nPantheism is closely related to monism, as pantheists too believe all of reality is one substance, called Universe, God or Nature. Panentheism, a slightly different concept, is explained below in the next section. Some of the most famous pantheists are the Stoics, Giordano Bruno and Spinoza.\nPanentheism.\nPanentheism (from Greek (p\u00e2n) \"all\"; (en) \"in\"; and (the\u00f3s) \"God\"; \"all-in-God\") is a belief system that posits that the divine (be it a monotheistic God, polytheistic gods, or an eternal cosmic animating force) interpenetrates every part of nature, but is not one with nature. Panentheism differentiates itself from pantheism, which holds that the divine is synonymous with the universe.\nIn panentheism, there are two types of substance, \"pan\" the universe and God. The universe and the divine are not ontologically equivalent. God is viewed as the eternal animating force within the universe. In some forms of panentheism, the cosmos exists within God, who in turn \"transcends\", \"pervades\" or is \"in\" the cosmos.\nWhile pantheism asserts that 'All is God', panentheism claims that God animates all of the universe, and also transcends the universe. In addition, some forms indicate that the universe is contained within God, like in the Judaic concept of Tzimtzum. Much Hindu thought is highly characterized by panentheism and pantheism.\nPaul Tillich has argued for such a concept within Christian theology, as has liberal biblical scholar Marcus Borg and mystical theologian Matthew Fox, an Episcopal priest.\nPandeism.\nPandeism or pan-deism (from and meaning \"god\" in the sense of deism) is a term describing beliefs coherently incorporating or mixing logically reconcilable elements of pantheism (that \"God\", or a metaphysically equivalent creator deity, is identical to Nature) and classical deism (that the creator-god who designed the universe no longer exists in a status where it can be reached, and can instead be confirmed only by reason). It is therefore most particularly the belief that the creator of the universe actually became the universe, and so ceased to exist as a separate entity.\nThrough this synergy pandeism claims to answer primary objections to deism (why would God create and then not interact with the universe?) and to pantheism (how did the universe originate and what is its purpose?).\nIndian and East Asian religions.\nCharacteristics.\nThe central problem in Asian (religious) philosophy is not the body-mind problem, but the search for an unchanging Real or Absolute beyond the world of appearances and changing phenomena, and the search for liberation from dukkha and the liberation from the cycle of rebirth. In Hinduism, substance-ontology prevails, seeing Brahman as the unchanging real beyond the world of appearances. In Buddhism, process ontology is prevalent, seeing reality as empty of an unchanging essence.\nCharacteristic for various Asian philosophy, technology and religions is the discernment of levels of truth, an emphasis on intuitive-experiential understanding of the Absolute such as jnana, bodhi and jianxing: (Chinese; \u898b\u6027), and the technology of yin and yang used within East Asian medicine with an emphasis on the integration of these levels of truth and its understanding.\nHinduism.\nVedanta.\nVedanta is the inquiry into and systematisation of the Vedas and Upanishads, to harmonise the various and contrasting ideas that can be found in those texts. Within Vedanta, different schools exist:\nModern Hinduism.\nThe colonisation of India by the British had a major impact on Hindu society. In response, leading Hindu intellectuals started to study western culture and philosophy, integrating several western notions into Hinduism. This modernised Hinduism, at its turn, has gained popularity in the west.\nA major role was played in the 19th century by Swami Vivekananda in the revival of Hinduism, and the spread of Advaita Vedanta to the west via the Ramakrishna Mission. His interpretation of Advaita Vedanta has been called Neo-Vedanta. In Advaita, Shankara suggests meditation and Nirvikalpa Samadhi are means to gain knowledge of the already existing unity of \"Brahman\" and \"Atman\", not the highest goal itself:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[Y]oga is a meditative exercise of withdrawal from the particular and identification with the universal, leading to contemplation of oneself as the most universal, namely, Consciousness. This approach is different from the classical Yoga of complete thought suppression.\nVivekananda, according to Gavin Flood, was \"a figure of great importance in the development of a modern Hindu self-understanding and in formulating the West's view of Hinduism.\" Central to his philosophy is the idea that the divine exists in all beings, that all human beings can achieve union with this \"innate divinity\", and that seeing this divine as the essence of others will further love and social harmony. According to Vivekananda, there is an essential unity to Hinduism, which underlies the diversity of its many forms. According to Flood, Vivekananda's view of Hinduism is the most common among Hindus today. This monism, according to Flood, is at the foundation of earlier Upanishads, to theosophy in the later Vedanta tradition and in modern Neo-Hinduism.\nBuddhism.\nAccording to the P\u0101li Canon, both pluralism (\"n\u0101natta\") and monism (\"ekatta\") are speculative views. A Theravada commentary notes that the former is similar to or associated with nihilism (\"ucch\u0113dav\u0101da\"), and the latter is similar to or associated with eternalism (\"sassatavada\").\nLevels of truth.\nWithin Buddhism, a rich variety of philosophical and pedagogical models can be found. Various schools of Buddhism discern levels of truth:\nThe Prajnaparamita-sutras and Madhyamaka emphasize the non-duality of form and emptiness: \"form is emptiness, emptiness is form\", as the heart sutra says. In Chinese Buddhism this was understood to mean that ultimate reality is not a transcendental realm, but equal to the daily world of relative reality. This idea was well-situated for the existing Chinese culture, which emphasized the mundane world and society. But this does not tell how the absolute is present in the relative world:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;To deny the duality of samsara and nirvana, as the Perfection of Wisdom does, or to demonstrate logically the error of dichotomizing conceptualization, as Nagarjuna does, is not to address the question of the relationship between samsara and nirvana -or, in more philosophical terms, between phenomenal and ultimate reality [...] What, then, is the relationship between these two realms?\nThis question is answered in such schemata as the Five Ranks of Tozan, the Oxherding Pictures, and Hakuin's Four ways of knowing.\nSikhism.\nSikhism complies with the concept of Absolute\u00a0Monism. Sikh philosophy advocates that all that our senses comprehend is an illusion; God is the ultimate reality. Forms being subject to time shall pass away. God's Reality alone is eternal and abiding.\u00a0The thought is that Atma (soul) is born from, and a reflection of, ParamAtma (Supreme Soul), and \"will again merge into it\", in the words of the fifth guru of Sikhs, Guru Arjan, \"just as water merges back into the water.\"\nGod and Soul are fundamentally the same; identical in the same way as Fire and its sparks. \"Atam meh Ram, Ram meh Atam\" which means \"The Ultimate Eternal reality resides in the Soul and the Soul is contained in Him\". As from one stream, millions of waves arise and yet the waves, made of water, again become water; in the same way all souls have sprung from the Universal Being and would blend again into it.\nAbrahamic faiths.\nJudaism.\nJewish thought considers God as separate from all physical, created things and as existing outside of time.\nAccording to Maimonides, God is an incorporeal being that caused all other existence; to admit corporeality to God is tantamount to admitting complexity to God, which is a contradiction to God as the first cause and constitutes heresy. While Hasidic mystics considered the existence of the physical world a contradiction to God's simpleness, Maimonides saw no contradiction.\nAccording to Hasidic thought (particularly as propounded by the 18th century, early 19th-century founder of Chabad, Shneur Zalman of Liadi), God is held to be immanent within creation for two interrelated reasons:\nChristianity.\nCreator\u2013creature distinction.\nChristians maintain that God created the universe \"ex nihilo\" and not from his own substance, so that the creator is not to be confused with creation, but rather transcends it. There is a movement of \"Christian Panentheism\".\nRejection of radical dualism.\nIn \"On Free Choice of the Will\", Augustine argued, in the context of the problem of evil, that evil is not the opposite of good, but rather merely the absence of good, something that does not have existence in itself. Likewise, C. S. Lewis described evil as a \"parasite\" in \"Mere Christianity\", as he viewed evil as something that cannot exist without good to provide it with existence. Lewis went on to argue against dualism from the basis of moral absolutism, and rejected the dualistic notion that God and Satan are opposites, arguing instead that God has no equal, hence no opposite. Lewis rather viewed Satan as the opposite of Michael the archangel. Due to this, Lewis instead argued for a more limited type of dualism. Other theologians, such as Greg Boyd, have argued in more depth that the Biblical authors held a \"limited dualism\", meaning that God and Satan do engage in real battle, but only due to free will given by God, for the duration that God allows.\nMormonism.\nLatter Day Saint theology also expresses a form of dual-aspect monism via materialism and eternalism, claiming that creation was ex materia (as opposed to ex nihilo in conventional Christianity), as expressed by Parley Pratt and echoed in view by the movement's founder Joseph Smith, making no distinction between the spiritual and the material, these being not just similarly eternal, but ultimately two manifestations of the same reality or substance.\nParley Pratt implies a vitalism paired with evolutionary adaptation noting, \"these eternal, self-existing elements possess in themselves certain inherent properties or attributes, in a greater or less degree; or, in other words, they possess intelligence, adapted to their several spheres.\"\nParley Pratt's view is also similar to Gottfried Leibniz's monadology, which holds that \"reality consists of mind atoms that are living centers of force.\"\nBrigham Young anticipates a proto-mentality of elementary particles with his vitalist view, \"there is life in all matter, throughout the vast extent of all the eternities; it is in the rock, the sand, the dust, in water, air, the gases, and in short, in every description and organization of matter; whether it be solid, liquid, or gaseous, particle operating with particle.\"\nThe LDS conception of matter is \"essentially dynamic rather than static, if indeed it is not a kind of living energy, and that it is subject at least to the rule of intelligence.\"\nJohn A. Widstoe held a similar, more vitalist view, that \"Life is nothing more than matter in motion; that, therefore, all matter possess a kind of life... Matter... [is] intelligence... hence everything in the universe is alive.\" However, Widstoe resisted outright affirming a belief in panpsychism.\nIslam.\nQuran.\nVincent Cornell argues that the Quran provides a monist image of God by describing reality as a unified whole, with God being a single concept that would describe or ascribe all existing things.\nBut most argue that Abrahamic religious scriptures, especially the Quran, see creation and God as two separate existences. It explains that everything has been created by God and is under his control, but at the same time distinguishes creation as being dependent on the existence of God.\nSufism.\nSome Sufi mystics advocate monism. One of the most notable being the 13th-century Persian poet Rumi (1207\u20131273) in his didactic poem \"Masnavi\" espoused monism. Rumi says in the Masnavi,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther Sufi mystics however, such as Ahmad Sirhindi, upheld dualistic Monotheism (the separation of God and the Universe).\nThe most influential of the Islamic monists was the Sufi philosopher Ibn Arabi (1165\u20131240). He developed the concept of 'unity of being' (Arabic: \"wa\u1e25dat al-wuj\u016bd\"), which some argue is a monistic philosophy. Born in al-Andalus, he made an enormous impact on the Muslim world, where he was crowned \"the great Master\". In the centuries following his death, his ideas became increasingly controversial. Ahmad Sirhindi criticised monistic understanding of 'unity of being', advocating the dualistic-compatible 'unity of witness' (Arabic: \"wahdat ash-shuhud\"), maintaining separation of creator and creation. Later, Shah Waliullah Dehlawi reconciled the two ideas maintaining that their differences are semantic differences, arguing that the universal existence (which is different in creation to creator) and the divine essence are different and that the universal existence emanates (in a non-platonic sense) from the divine essence and that the relationship between them is similar to the relationship between the number four and a number being even.\nShi'ism.\nThe doctrine of \"wa\u1e25dat al-wuj\u016bd\" also enjoys considerable following in the rationalist philosophy of Twelver Shi'ism, with the most famous modern-day adherent being Ruhollah Khomeini.\nBah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith.\nAlthough the teachings of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith have a strong emphasis on social and ethical issues, there exist a number of foundational texts that have been described as mystical. Some of these include statements of a monist nature (e.g., \"The Seven Valleys\" and the \"Hidden Words\"). The differences between dualist and monist views are reconciled by the teaching that these opposing viewpoints are caused by differences in the observers themselves, not in that which is observed. This is not a 'higher truth/lower truth' position. God is unknowable. For man it is impossible to acquire any direct knowledge of God or the Absolute, because any knowledge that one has, is relative.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19327", "revid": "44905323", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19327", "title": "Master shot", "text": "Camera angle that shows the whole scene\nA master shot (or short master) is a film recording of an entire dramatized scene, start to finish, from a camera angle that keeps all the players in view. It is often a long shot and can sometimes perform a double function as an establishing shot. Usually, the master shot is the first shot checked off during the shooting of a scene. It is the foundation of what is called camera coverage, other shots that reveal different aspects of the action, groupings of two or three of the actors at crucial moments, close-ups of individuals, insert shots of various props, and so on.\nHistorically, the master shot was the most important shot of any given scene. All shots in a given scene were somehow related to what was happening in the master shot. This is one reason that some of the films from the 1930s and the 1940s are considered \"stagey\" by today's standards. By the 1960s and the 1970s, the style of film shooting and editing shifted to include radical angles that conveyed more subjectivity and intimacy within the scenes. Today, the master shot is still a key element of film production, but scenes are not built around the master shot in the same way that they were when professional filmmaking was in its infancy.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19328", "revid": "14703151", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19328", "title": "Medium shot", "text": "Camera angle shot from a medium distance\nIn a movie a medium shot, mid shot (MS), or waist shot is a camera angle shot from a medium distance.\nUse.\nMedium shots are favored in sequences where dialogues or a small group of people are acting, as they give the viewer a partial view of the background, such as when the shot is 'cutting the person in half' and also show the subjects' facial expressions in the context of their body language. Medium shots are also used when the subject in the shot is delivering information, such as news presenters. It is also used in interviews. It is the most common shot in movies, and it usually follows the first establishing shots of a new scene or location. \nA normal lens that sees what the human eye sees is usually used for medium shots.\nDefinition.\nThe medium shot shows equality between subjects and background. The dividing line between what constitutes a long shot and medium shot is not definite, nor is the line between medium shot and close-up. In some standard texts and professional references, a full-length view of a human subject is called a medium shot; in this terminology, a shot of the person from the knees up or the waist up is a close-up shot. In other texts, these partial views are called medium shots. In principle, the medium shot is what can be seen with the human eye in a single quick glance and convey all the action taking place in that field of view.\nTypes.\nMedium shots are divided into singles (a waist-high shot of one actor), group shots, over-the shoulders or two-shots (featuring two people). A medium wide shot, or American shot, shows a bit more of the background but is still close enough for facial expressions to be seen, although these facial expressions would be better seen in a waist-high shot.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19330", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19330", "title": "Mountain Ranges", "text": ""}
{"id": "19331", "revid": "234689", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19331", "title": "Moon", "text": "Natural satellite orbiting Earth\nThe Moon is the only natural satellite of Earth. It orbits around Earth at an average distance of , a distance roughly 30 times the width of Earth. It completes an orbit (lunar month) in relation to Earth and the Sun (synodically) every 29.5 days. The Moon and Earth are bound by gravitational attraction, which is stronger on their facing sides. The resulting tidal forces are the main driver of Earth's tides, and have pulled the Moon to always face Earth with the same near side. This tidal locking effectively synchronizes the Moon's rotation period (lunar day) to its orbital period (lunar month).\nIn geophysical terms, the Moon is a planetary-mass object or satellite planet. Its mass is 1.2% that of the Earth, and its diameter is , roughly one-quarter of Earth's (about as wide as the contiguous United States). Within the Solar System, it is larger and more massive than any known dwarf planet, and the fifth-largest and fifth-most massive moon, as well as the largest and most massive in relation to its parent planet. Its surface gravity is about one-sixth of Earth's, about half that of Mars, and the second-highest among all moons in the Solar System after Jupiter's moon Io. The body of the Moon is differentiated and terrestrial, with only a minuscule hydrosphere, atmosphere, and magnetic field. The lunar surface is covered in regolith dust, which mainly consists of the fine material ejected from the lunar crust by impact events. The lunar crust is marked by impact craters, with some younger ones featuring bright ray-like streaks. The Moon was volcanically active until 1.2 billion years ago, surfacing lava mostly on the thinner near side of the Moon, filling ancient craters, which through cooling formed the today prominently visible dark plains of basalt called maria ('seas'). The Moon formed out of material from Earth, ejected by a giant impact into Earth of a hypothesized Mars-sized body named Theia 4.51\u00a0billion years ago, not long after Earth's formation.\nFrom a distance, the day and night phases of the lunar day are visible as the lunar phases, and when the Moon passes through Earth's shadow a lunar eclipse is observable. The Moon's apparent size in Earth's sky is about the same as that of the Sun, which causes it to cover the Sun completely during a total solar eclipse. The Moon is the brightest celestial object in Earth's night sky because of its large apparent size, while the reflectance (albedo) of its surface is comparable to that of asphalt. About 59% of the surface of the Moon is visible from Earth owing to the different angles at which the Moon can appear in Earth's sky (libration), making parts of the far side of the Moon visible.\nThe Moon has been an important source of inspiration and knowledge in human history, having been crucial to cosmography, mythology, religion, art, time keeping, natural science and spaceflight. The first spaceflights to an extraterrestrial body were to the Moon, starting in 1959 with the flyby of \"Luna 1\" (sent by the Soviet Union), and the intentional impact of \"Luna 2\". In 1966 followed the first soft landing (by \"Luna 9\") and orbital insertion (by \"Luna 10\"). Humans first arrived in orbit on December 24, 1968, with \"Apollo 8\" (sent by the United States), and then on the surface on July 20, 1969, with \"Apollo 11\". By 1972, six \"Apollo\" missions had landed twelve humans on the Moon and stayed up to three days. Renewed robotic exploration of the Moon, in particular to confirm the presence of water on the Moon, has fueled plans to return humans to the Moon, starting with the Artemis program scheduled for the late 2020s.\nNames and etymology.\nThe English proper name for Earth's natural satellite is typically written as \"Moon\", with a capital \"M\". The noun \"moon\" is derived from Old English , which stems from Proto-Germanic\u00a0*\"m\u0113n\u014dn\", which in turn comes from Proto-Indo-European ('month')\u00a0\u2013 from earlier (genitive ), which may be related to a verb meaning 'to measure [time]'.\nThe Latin name for the Moon is . The English adjective \"lunar\" was ultimately borrowed from Latin, likely through French. In scientific writing and science fiction, the Moon is sometimes referred to as \"Luna\" to distinguish it from other moons. In poetry, \"Luna\" may also refer to the personification of the Moon as a woman.\nThe Ancient Greek word referred to the Moon as a celestial body, and also to the moon goddess Selene . The rare English adjective \"selenian\" is used to describe the Moon as a world, as opposed to a celestial object. Its cognate \"selenic\", originally a rare synonym, now almost always refers to the chemical element selenium. The corresponding prefix \"seleno-\" appears in terms including \"selenography\" (the study of the lunar surface).\nArtemis, the Greek goddess of the wilderness and the hunt, also came to be identified with Selene, and was sometimes called Cynthia after her birthplace on Mount Cynthus. Her Roman equivalent is Diana.\nThe astronomical symbols for the Moon are the crescent and decrescent , for example in \"M\"\u263e 'lunar mass'.\nNatural history.\nFormation.\nIsotope dating of lunar samples suggests the Moon formed around 50\u00a0million years after the origin of the Solar System. Historically, several formation mechanisms have been proposed, but none satisfactorily explains the features of the Earth\u2013Moon system. A fission of the Moon from Earth's crust through centrifugal force would require too great an initial rotation rate of Earth. Gravitational capture of a pre-formed Moon depends on an unfeasibly extended atmosphere of Earth to dissipate the energy of the passing Moon. A co-formation of Earth and the Moon together in the primordial accretion disk does not explain the depletion of metals in the Moon. None of these hypotheses can account for the high angular momentum of the Earth\u2013Moon system.\nThe prevailing theory is that the Earth\u2013Moon system formed after a giant impact of a Mars-sized body (named \"Theia\") with the proto-Earth. The oblique impact blasted material into orbit about the Earth and the material accreted and formed the Moon just beyond the Earth's Roche limit of ~.\nGiant impacts are thought to have been common in the early Solar System. Computer simulations of giant impacts have produced results that are consistent with the mass of the lunar core and the angular momentum of the Earth\u2013Moon system. These simulations show that most of the Moon derived from the impactor, rather than the proto-Earth. However, models from 2007 and later suggest a larger fraction of the Moon derived from the proto-Earth. Other bodies of the inner Solar System such as Mars and Vesta have, according to meteorites from them, very different oxygen and tungsten isotopic compositions compared to Earth. However, Earth and the Moon have nearly identical isotopic compositions. The isotopic equalization of the Earth\u2013Moon system might be explained by the post-impact mixing of the vaporized material that formed the two, although this is debated.\nThe impact would have released enough energy to liquefy both the ejecta and the Earth's crust, forming a magma ocean. The liquefied ejecta could have then re-accreted into the Earth\u2013Moon system. The newly formed Moon would have had its own magma ocean; its depth is estimated from about to .\nWhile the giant-impact theory explains many lines of evidence, some questions are still unresolved, most of which involve the Moon's composition. Models that have the Moon acquiring a significant amount of the proto-Earth are more difficult to reconcile with geochemical data for the isotopes of zirconium, oxygen, silicon, and other elements. A study published in 2022, using high-resolution simulations (up to particles), found that giant impacts can immediately place a satellite with similar mass and iron content to the Moon into orbit far outside Earth's Roche limit. Even satellites that initially pass within the Roche limit can reliably and predictably survive, by being partially stripped and then torqued onto wider, stable orbits.\nOn November 1, 2023, scientists reported that, according to computer simulations, remnants of Theia could still be present inside the Earth.\nNatural development.\nThe newly formed Moon settled into a much closer Earth orbit than it has today. Each body therefore appeared much larger in the sky of the other, eclipses were more frequent, and tidal effects were stronger.\nDue to tidal acceleration, the Moon's orbit around Earth has become significantly larger, with a longer period.\nFollowing formation, the Moon has cooled and most of its atmosphere has been stripped. The lunar surface has since been shaped by large impact events and many small ones, forming a landscape featuring craters of all ages.\nThe Moon was volcanically active until 1.2\u00a0billion years ago, which laid down the prominent lunar maria. Most of the mare basalts erupted during the Imbrian period, 3.3\u20133.7\u00a0billion years ago, though some are as young as 1.2\u00a0billion years and some as old as 4.2\u00a0billion years. The distribution of the mare basalts is uneven, with the basalts predominantly appearing on the Moon's near-side hemisphere. The reasons for this are not yet known, although the relative thinness of the crust on the near side of the Moon is hypothesized to be a factor. Causes of the distribution of the lunar highlands on the far side are also not well understood. Topological measurements show the crust on the near side to be thinner than on the far side. One possible explanation for this is that large impacts on the near side may have made it easier for lava to flow onto the surface.\nLunar geologic timescale.\nThe lunar geological periods are named after their characteristic features, from most impact craters outside the dark mare, to the mare and later craters, and finally the young, still bright and therefore readily visible craters with ray systems like Copernicus or Tycho.\nFuture.\nIn 5 billion years the Moon will have wandered 40% further away from Earth than it is now. However at a similar time the Sun will have become a red giant. Assuming the Sun envelopes the Earth-Moon system, the consequent drag from the Sun's atmosphere may cause the orbital distance between the Earth and the Moon to decay to the point where the Moon comes within the Earth's Roche limit, leading it to disintegrate.\nPhysical characteristics.\nThe Moon is a very slightly scalene ellipsoid due to tidal stretching, with its long axis displaced 30\u00b0 from facing the Earth, due to gravitational anomalies from impact basins. Its shape is more elongated than current tidal forces can account for. This 'fossil bulge' indicates that the Moon solidified when it orbited at half its current distance to the Earth, and that it is now too cold for its shape to restore hydrostatic equilibrium at its current orbital distance. Today tidal crust deformation is limited to lobate thrust fault scarps formation.\nSize and mass.\nThe Moon is the fifth largest (by size and mass) natural satellite of the Solar System. It is categorizable as a planetary-mass moon, making it a satellite planet under the geophysical definitions of the term. It is smaller than Mercury but considerably larger than the largest dwarf planet of the Solar System, Pluto. The Moon is the largest natural satellite in the Solar System relative to its primary planet.\nThe Moon's diameter is about 3,500\u00a0km, more than one-quarter of Earth's, with the face of the Moon comparable to the width of mainland Australia, Europe or the contiguous United States. The whole surface area of the Moon is about 38\u00a0million square kilometers, comparable to that of the Americas.\nThe Moon's mass is &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204481 of Earth's, being the second densest among the planetary moons, and having the second highest surface gravity, after Io, at and an escape velocity of .\nStructure.\nThe Moon is a differentiated body that was initially in hydrostatic equilibrium but has since departed from this condition. It has a geochemically distinct crust, mantle, and core. The Moon has a solid iron-rich inner core with a radius possibly as small as and a fluid outer core primarily made of liquid iron with a radius of roughly . Around the core is a partially molten boundary layer with a radius of about . This structure is thought to have developed through the fractional crystallization of a global magma ocean shortly after the Moon's formation 4.5\u00a0billion years ago.\nCrystallization of this magma ocean would have created a mafic mantle from the precipitation and sinking of the minerals olivine, clinopyroxene, and orthopyroxene; after about three-quarters of the magma ocean had crystallized, lower-density plagioclase minerals could form and float into a crust atop. The final liquids to crystallize would have been initially sandwiched between the crust and mantle, with a high abundance of incompatible and heat-producing elements. Consistent with this perspective, geochemical mapping made from orbit suggests a crust of mostly anorthosite. The Moon rock samples of the flood lavas that erupted onto the surface from partial melting in the mantle confirm the mafic mantle composition, which is more iron-rich than that of Earth. The crust is on average about thick.\nThe Moon is the second-densest satellite in the Solar System, after Io. However, the inner core of the Moon is small, with a radius of about or less, around 20% of the radius of the Moon. Its composition is not well understood but is probably metallic iron alloyed with a small amount of sulfur and nickel. Analyses of the Moon's time-variable rotation suggest that it is at least partly molten. The pressure at the lunar core is estimated to be .\nGravitational field.\nOn average the Moon's surface gravity is (; ), about half of the surface gravity of Mars and about a sixth of Earth's.\nThe Moon's gravitational field is not uniform. The details of the gravitational field have been measured through tracking the Doppler shift of radio signals emitted by orbiting spacecraft. The main lunar gravity features are mascons, large positive gravitational anomalies associated with some of the giant impact basins, partly caused by the dense mare basaltic lava flows that fill those basins. The anomalies greatly influence the orbit of spacecraft about the Moon. There are some puzzles: lava flows by themselves cannot explain all of the gravitational signature, and some mascons exist that are not linked to mare volcanism.\nThe sphere of influence, of the Moon's gravity field, in which it dominates over Earth's has a Hill radius of 60,000\u00a0km (i.e., extending less than one-sixth the distance of the 378,000\u00a0km between the Moon and the Earth), extending to the Earth-Moon lagrange points. This space is called cislunar space.\nMagnetic field.\nThe Moon has an external magnetic field of less than 0.2 nanoteslas, or less than one hundred thousandth that of Earth. The Moon does not have a global dipolar magnetic field and only has crustal magnetization likely acquired early in its history when a dynamo was still operating. Early in its history, 4 billion years ago, its magnetic field strength was likely close to that of Earth today. This early dynamo field apparently expired by about one billion years ago, after the lunar core had crystallized. Theoretically, some of the remnant magnetization may originate from transient magnetic fields generated during large impacts through the expansion of plasma clouds. These clouds are generated during large impacts in an ambient magnetic field. This is supported by the location of the largest crustal magnetizations situated near the antipodes of the giant impact basins.\nAdditionally the Moon moves ~27% of the time, or 5\u20136 days per lunar month in Earth's magnetotail, replacing solar wind with Earth wind.\nAtmosphere.\nThe Moon has an atmosphere consisting of only an exosphere, which is so tenuous as to be nearly vacuum, with a total mass of less than . The surface pressure of this small mass is around 3 \u00d7 10\u221215\u00a0atm (0.3\u00a0nPa); it varies with the lunar day. Its sources include outgassing and sputtering, a product of the bombardment of lunar soil by solar wind ions. Elements that have been detected include sodium and potassium, produced by sputtering (also found in the atmospheres of Mercury and Io); helium-4 and neon from the solar wind; and argon-40, radon-222, and polonium-210, outgassed after their creation by radioactive decay within the crust and mantle. The absence of such neutral species (atoms or molecules) as oxygen, nitrogen, carbon, hydrogen and magnesium, which are present in the regolith, is not understood. Water vapor has been detected by \"Chandrayaan-1\" and found to vary with latitude, with a maximum at ~60\u201370\u00a0degrees; it is possibly generated from the sublimation of water ice in the regolith. These gases either return into the regolith because of the Moon's gravity or are lost to space, either through solar radiation pressure or, if they are ionized, by being swept away by the solar wind's magnetic field.\nA permanent Moon dust cloud exists around the Moon, generated by small particles from comets. 5 tons of comet particles are estimated to strike the Moon's surface every 24 hours, resulting in the ejection of dust particles. The dust stays above the Moon for approximately 10 minutes, taking 5 minutes to rise, and 5 minutes to fall. On average, 120 kilograms of dust are present above the Moon, rising up to 100 kilometers above the surface. Dust counts made by LADEE's Lunar Dust EXperiment (LDEX) found particle counts peaked during the Geminid, Quadrantid, Northern Taurid, and Omicron Centaurid meteor showers, when the Earth, and Moon pass through comet debris. The lunar dust cloud is asymmetric, being denser near the boundary between the Moon's dayside and nightside.\nStudies of Moon magma samples retrieved by the Apollo missions demonstrate that the Moon had once possessed a relatively thick atmosphere for a period of 70 million years between 3 and 4 billion years ago. This atmosphere, sourced from gases ejected from lunar volcanic eruptions, was twice the thickness of that of present-day Mars. The ancient lunar atmosphere was eventually stripped away by solar winds and dissipated into space.\nSurface conditions.\nIonizing radiation from cosmic rays, their resulting neutron radiation, and the Sun results in an average radiation level of 1.369 millisieverts per day during lunar daytime, which is about 2.6 times more than the level on the International Space Station, 5\u201310 times more than the level during a trans-Atlantic flight, and 200 times more than the level on Earth's surface. For further comparison, radiation levels average about 1.84 millisieverts per day on a flight to Mars and about 0.64 millisieverts per day on Mars itself, with some locations on Mars possibly having levels as low as 0.342 millisieverts per day.\nSolar radiation also electrically charges the highly abrasive lunar dust and makes it levitate. This effect contributes to the easy spread of the sticky, lung- and gear-damaging lunar dust.\nThe Moon's axial tilt with respect to the ecliptic is only 1.5427\u00b0, much less than the 23.44\u00b0 of Earth. This small axial tilt means that the Moon's solar illumination varies much less with season than Earth's, and it also allows for the existence of some peaks of eternal light at the Moon's north pole, at the rim of the crater Peary.\nThe lunar surface is exposed to temperature differences ranging from to depending on the solar irradiance.\nBecause of the lack of atmosphere, temperatures of different areas vary particularly upon whether they are in sunlight or shadow, making topographical details play a decisive role on local surface temperatures.\nParts of many craters, particularly the bottoms of many polar craters, are permanently shadowed. These craters of eternal darkness have extremely low temperatures. The \"Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter\" measured the lowest summer temperatures in craters at the southern pole at and just close to the winter solstice in the north polar crater Hermite. This is the coldest temperature in the Solar System ever measured by a spacecraft, colder even than the surface of Pluto.\nBlanketed on top of the Moon's crust is a highly comminuted (broken into ever smaller particles) and impact gardened mostly gray surface layer called regolith, formed by impact processes. The finer regolith, the lunar soil of silicon dioxide glass, has a texture resembling snow and a scent resembling spent gunpowder. The regolith of older surfaces is generally thicker than for younger surfaces: it varies in thickness from in the highlands and in the maria. Beneath the finely comminuted regolith layer is the megaregolith, a layer of highly fractured bedrock many kilometers thick.\nThese extreme conditions are considered to make it unlikely for spacecraft to harbor bacterial spores at the Moon for longer than just one lunar orbit.\nSurface features.\nThe topography of the Moon has been measured with laser altimetry and stereo image analysis. Its most extensive topographic feature is the giant far-side South Pole\u2013Aitken basin, some in diameter, the largest crater on the Moon and the second-largest confirmed impact crater in the Solar System. At deep, its floor is the lowest point on the surface of the Moon, reaching at in a crater within Antoniadi crater. The highest elevations of the Moon's surface, with the so-called Selenean summit at , are located directly to the northeast (), which might have been thickened by the oblique formation impact of the South Pole\u2013Aitken basin. Other large impact basins such as Imbrium, Serenitatis, Crisium, Smythii, and Orientale possess regionally low elevations and elevated rims. The far side of the lunar surface is on average about higher than that of the near side.\nThe discovery of fault scarp cliffs suggest that the Moon has shrunk by about 90 metres (300\u00a0ft) within the past billion years. Similar shrinkage features exist on Mercury. Mare Frigoris, a basin near the north pole long assumed to be geologically dead, has cracked and shifted. Since the Moon does not have tectonic plates, its tectonic activity is slow, and cracks develop as it loses heat.\nScientists have confirmed the presence of a cave on the Moon near the Sea of Tranquillity, not far from the 1969 Apollo 11 landing site. The cave, identified as an entry point to a collapsed lava tube, is roughly 45 meters wide and up to 80 m long. This discovery marks the first confirmed entry point to a lunar cave. The analysis was based on photos taken in 2010 by NASA's Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter. The cave's stable temperature of around could provide a hospitable environment for future astronauts, protecting them from extreme temperatures, solar radiation, and micrometeorites. However, challenges include accessibility and risks of avalanches and cave-ins. This discovery offers potential for future lunar bases or emergency shelters.\nVolcanic features.\nThe main features visible from Earth by the naked eye are dark and relatively featureless lunar plains called \"maria\" (sing. \"mare\"; from Latin meaning 'seas', as they were once believed to be filled with water) which are vast solidified pools of ancient basaltic lava. Although similar to terrestrial basalts, lunar basalts have more iron and no minerals altered by water. The majority of these lava deposits erupted or flowed into the depressions associated with impact basins, though the Moon's largest expanse of basalt flooding, Oceanus Procellarum, does not correspond to an obvious impact basin. Different episodes of lava flow in maria can often be recognized by variations in surface albedo and distinct flow margins.\nAs the maria formed, cooling and contraction of the basaltic lava created wrinkle ridges in some areas. These low, sinuous ridges can extend for hundreds of kilometers and often outline buried structures within the mare. Another result of maria formation is the creation of concentric depressions along the edges, known as arcuate rilles. These features occur as the mare basalts sink inward under their own weight, causing the edges to fracture and separate.\nIn addition to the visible maria, the Moon has mare deposits covered by ejecta from impacts. Called cryptomares, these hidden mares are likely older than the exposed ones. Conversely, mare lava has obscured many impact melt sheets and pools. Impact melts are formed when intense shock pressures from collisions vaporize and melt zones around the impact site. Where still exposed, impact melt can be distinguished from mare lava by its distribution, albedo, and texture.\nSinuous rilles, found in and around maria, are likely extinct lava channels or collapsed lava tubes. They typically originate from volcanic vents, meandering and sometimes branching as they progress. The largest examples, such as Schroter's Valley and Rima Hadley, are significantly longer, wider, and deeper than terrestrial lava channels, sometimes featuring bends and sharp turns that again, are uncommon on Earth.\nMare volcanism has altered impact craters in various ways, including filling them to varying degrees, and raising and fracturing their floors from uplift of mare material beneath their interiors. Examples of such craters include Taruntius and Gassendi. Some craters, such as Hyginus, are of wholly volcanic origin, forming as calderas or collapse pits. Such craters are relatively rare and tend to be smaller (typically a few kilometers wide), shallower, and more irregularly shaped than impact craters. They also lack the upturned rims characteristic of impact craters.\nSeveral geologic provinces containing shield volcanoes and volcanic domes are found within the near side maria. There are also some regions of pyroclastic deposits, scoria cones and non-basaltic domes made of particularly high viscosity lava.\nAlmost all maria are on the near side of the Moon, and cover 31% of the surface of the near side compared with 2% of the far side. This is likely due to a concentration of heat-producing elements under the crust on the near side, which would have caused the underlying mantle to heat up, partially melt, rise to the surface and erupt. Most of the Moon's mare basalts erupted during the Imbrian period, 3.3\u20133.7\u00a0billion years ago, though some are as young as 1.2\u00a0billion years and as old as 4.2\u00a0billion years.\nIn 2006, a study of Ina, a tiny depression in Lacus Felicitatis, found jagged, relatively dust-free features that, because of the lack of erosion by infalling debris, appeared to be only 2 million years old. Moonquakes and releases of gas indicate continued lunar activity. Evidence of recent lunar volcanism has been identified at 70 irregular mare patches, some less than 50 million years old. This raises the possibility of a much warmer lunar mantle than previously believed, at least on the near side where the deep crust is substantially warmer because of the greater concentration of radioactive elements. Evidence has been found for 2\u201310 million years old basaltic volcanism within the crater Lowell, inside the Orientale basin. Some combination of an initially hotter mantle and local enrichment of heat-producing elements in the mantle could be responsible for prolonged activities on the far side in the Orientale basin.\nThe lighter-colored regions of the Moon are called \"terrae\", or more commonly \"highlands\", because they are higher than most maria. They have been radiometrically dated to having formed 4.4\u00a0billion years ago and may represent plagioclase cumulates of the lunar magma ocean. In contrast to Earth, no major lunar mountains are believed to have formed as a result of tectonic events.\nThe concentration of maria on the near side likely reflects the substantially thicker crust of the highlands of the Far Side, which may have formed in a slow-velocity impact of a second moon of Earth a few tens of millions of years after the Moon's formation. Alternatively, it may be a consequence of asymmetrical tidal heating when the Moon was much closer to the Earth.\nImpact craters.\nA major geologic process that has affected the Moon's surface is impact cratering, with craters formed when asteroids and comets collide with the lunar surface. There are estimated to be roughly 300,000 craters wider than on the Moon's near side. Lunar craters exhibit a variety of forms, depending on their size. In order of increasing diameter, the basic types are simple craters with smooth bowl shaped interiors and upturned rims, complex craters with flat floors, terraced walls and central peaks, peak ring basins, and multi-ring basins with two or more concentric rings of peaks. The vast majority of impact craters are circular, but some, like Cantor and Janssen, have more polygonal outlines, possibly guided by underlying faults and joints. Others, such as the Messier pair, Schiller, and Daniell, are elongated. Such elongation can result from highly oblique impacts, binary asteroid impacts, fragmentation of impactors before surface strike, or closely spaced secondary impacts.\nThe lunar geologic timescale is based on the most prominent impact events, such as multi-ring formations like Nectaris, Imbrium, and Orientale that are between hundreds and thousands of kilometers in diameter and associated with a broad apron of ejecta deposits that form a regional stratigraphic horizon. The lack of an atmosphere, weather, and recent geological processes mean that many of these craters are well-preserved. Although only a few multi-ring basins have been definitively dated, they are useful for assigning relative ages. Because impact craters accumulate at a nearly constant rate, counting the number of craters per unit area can be used to estimate the age of the surface.\nHowever care needs to be exercised with the crater counting technique due to the potential presence of secondary craters. Ejecta from impacts can create secondary craters that often appear in clusters or chains but can also occur as isolated formations at a considerable distance from the impact. These can resemble primary craters, and may even dominate small crater populations, so their unidentified presence can distort age estimates.\nThe radiometric ages of impact-melted rocks collected during the Apollo missions cluster between 3.8 and 4.1\u00a0billion years old: this has been used to propose a Late Heavy Bombardment period of increased impacts.\nHigh-resolution images from the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter in the 2010s show a contemporary crater-production rate significantly higher than was previously estimated. A secondary cratering process caused by distal ejecta is thought to churn the top two centimeters of regolith on a timescale of 81,000 years. This rate is 100 times faster than the rate computed from models based solely on direct micrometeorite impacts.\nLunar swirls.\nLunar swirls are enigmatic features found across the Moon's surface. They are characterized by a high albedo, appear optically immature (i.e. have the optical characteristics of a relatively young regolith), and often have a sinuous shape. Their shape is often accentuated by low albedo regions that wind between the bright swirls. They are located in places with enhanced surface magnetic fields and many are located at the antipodal point of major impacts. Well known swirls include the Reiner Gamma feature and Mare Ingenii. They are hypothesized to be areas that have been partially shielded from the solar wind, resulting in slower space weathering.\nPresence of water.\nLiquid water cannot persist on the lunar surface. When exposed to solar radiation, water quickly decomposes through a process known as photodissociation and is lost to space. However, since the 1960s, scientists have hypothesized that water ice may be deposited by impacting comets or possibly produced by the reaction of oxygen-rich lunar rocks, and hydrogen from solar wind, leaving traces of water which could possibly persist in cold, permanently shadowed craters at either pole on the Moon. Computer simulations suggest that up to of the surface may be in permanent shadow. The presence of usable quantities of water on the Moon is an important factor in rendering lunar habitation as a cost-effective plan; the alternative of transporting water from Earth would be prohibitively expensive.\nIn years since, signatures of water have been found to exist on the lunar surface. In 1994, the bistatic radar experiment located on the \"Clementine\" spacecraft, indicated the existence of small, frozen pockets of water close to the surface. However, later radar observations by Arecibo, suggest these findings may rather be rocks ejected from young impact craters. In 1998, the neutron spectrometer on the \"Lunar Prospector\" spacecraft showed that high concentrations of hydrogen are present in the first meter of depth in the regolith near the polar regions. Volcanic lava beads, brought back to Earth aboard Apollo 15, showed small amounts of water in their interior.\nThe 2008 \"Chandrayaan-1\" spacecraft has since confirmed the existence of surface water ice, using the on-board Moon Mineralogy Mapper. The spectrometer observed absorption lines common to hydroxyl, in reflected sunlight, providing evidence of large quantities of water ice, on the lunar surface. The spacecraft showed that concentrations may possibly be as high as 1,000\u00a0ppm. Using the mapper's reflectance spectra, indirect lighting of areas in shadow confirmed water ice within 20\u00b0 latitude of both poles in 2018. In 2009, \"LCROSS\" sent a impactor into a permanently shadowed polar crater, and detected at least of water in a plume of ejected material. Another examination of the LCROSS data showed the amount of detected water to be closer to .\nIn May 2011, 615\u20131410 ppm water in melt inclusions in lunar sample 74220 was reported, the famous high-titanium \"orange glass soil\" of volcanic origin collected during the Apollo 17 mission in 1972. The inclusions were formed during explosive eruptions on the Moon approximately 3.7 billion years ago. This concentration is comparable with that of magma in Earth's upper mantle. Although of considerable selenological interest, this insight does not mean that water is easily available since the sample originated many kilometers below the surface, and the inclusions are so difficult to access that it took 39 years to find them with a state-of-the-art ion microprobe instrument.\nAnalysis of the findings of the Moon Mineralogy Mapper (M3) revealed in August 2018 for the first time \"definitive evidence\" for water-ice on the lunar surface. The data revealed the distinct reflective signatures of water-ice, as opposed to dust and other reflective substances. The ice deposits were found on the North and South poles, although it is more abundant in the South, where water is trapped in permanently shadowed craters and crevices, allowing it to persist as ice on the surface since they are shielded from the sun.\nIn October 2020, astronomers reported detecting molecular water on the sunlit surface of the Moon by several independent spacecraft, including the Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared Astronomy (SOFIA).\nEarth\u2013Moon system.\nOrbit.\nThe Earth and the Moon form the Earth\u2013Moon satellite system with a shared center of mass, or barycenter. This barycenter is (about a quarter of Earth's radius) beneath the Earth's surface.\nThe Moon's orbit is slightly elliptical, with an orbital eccentricity of 0.055.\nThe semi-major axis of the geocentric lunar orbit, called the lunar distance, is approximately 400,000\u00a0km (250,000 miles or 1.28 light-seconds), comparable to going around Earth 9.5 times.\nThe Moon makes a complete orbit around Earth with respect to the fixed stars, its sidereal period, about once every 27.3\u00a0days. However, because the Earth\u2013Moon system moves at the same time in its orbit around the Sun, it takes slightly longer, 29.5\u00a0days, to return to the same lunar phase, completing a full cycle, as seen from Earth. This synodic period or synodic month is commonly known as the lunar month and is equal to the length of the solar day on the Moon.\nDue to tidal locking, the Moon has a 1:1 spin\u2013orbit resonance. This rotation\u2013orbit ratio makes the Moon's orbital periods around Earth equal to its corresponding rotation periods. This is the reason for only one side of the Moon, its so-called near side, being visible from Earth. That said, while the movement of the Moon is in resonance, it still is not without nuances such as libration, resulting in slightly changing perspectives, making over time and location on Earth about 59% of the Moon's surface visible from Earth.\nUnlike most satellites of other planets, the Moon's orbital plane is closer to the ecliptic plane than to the planet's equatorial plane. The Moon's orbit is subtly perturbed by the Sun and Earth in many small, complex and interacting ways. For example, the plane of the Moon's orbit gradually rotates once every 18.61years, which affects other aspects of lunar motion. These follow-on effects are mathematically described by Cassini's laws.\nTidal effects.\nThe gravitational attraction that Earth and the Moon (as well as the Sun) exert on each other manifests in a slightly greater attraction on the sides closest to each other, resulting in tidal forces. Ocean tides are the most widely experienced result of this, but tidal forces also considerably affect other mechanics of Earth, as well as the Moon and their system.\nThe lunar solid crust experiences tides of around amplitude over 27\u00a0days, with three components: a fixed one due to Earth, because they are in synchronous rotation, a variable tide due to orbital eccentricity and inclination, and a small varying component from the Sun. The Earth-induced variable component arises from changing distance and libration, a result of the Moon's orbital eccentricity and inclination (if the Moon's orbit were perfectly circular and un-inclined, there would only be solar tides). According to recent research, scientists suggest that the Moon's influence on the Earth may contribute to maintaining Earth's magnetic field.\nThe cumulative effects of stress built up by these tidal forces produces moonquakes. Moonquakes are much less common and weaker than are earthquakes, although moonquakes can last for up to an hour\u00a0\u2013 significantly longer than terrestrial quakes\u00a0\u2013 because of scattering of the seismic vibrations in the dry fragmented upper crust. The existence of moonquakes was an unexpected discovery from seismometers placed on the Moon by Apollo astronauts from 1969 through 1972.\nThe most commonly known effect of tidal forces is elevated sea levels called ocean tides. While the Moon exerts most of the tidal forces, the Sun also exerts tidal forces and therefore contributes to the tides as much as 40% of the Moon's tidal force; producing in interplay the spring and neap tides.\nThe tides are two bulges in the Earth's oceans, one on the side facing the Moon and the other on the side opposite. As the Earth rotates on its axis, one of the ocean bulges (high tide) is held in place \"under\" the Moon, while another such tide is opposite. The tide under the Moon is explained by the Moon's gravity being stronger on the water close to it. The tide on the opposite side can be explained either by the centrifugal force as the Earth orbits the barycenter or by the water's inertia as the Moon's gravity is stronger on the solid Earth close to it and it is pulled away from the farther water.\nThus, there are two high tides, and two low tides in about 24 hours. Since the Moon is orbiting the Earth in the same direction of the Earth's rotation, the high tides occur about every 12 hours and 25 minutes; the 25 minutes is due to the Moon's time to orbit the Earth.\nIf the Earth were a water world (one with no continents) it would produce a tide of only one meter, and that tide would be very predictable, but the ocean tides are greatly modified by other effects:\nAs a result, the timing of the tides at most points on the Earth is a product of observations that are explained, incidentally, by theory.\nSystem evolution.\nDelays in the tidal peaks of both ocean and solid-body tides cause torque in opposition to the Earth's rotation. This \"drains\" angular momentum and rotational kinetic energy from Earth's rotation, slowing the Earth's rotation. That angular momentum, lost from the Earth, is transferred to the Moon in a process known as tidal acceleration, which lifts the Moon into a higher orbit while lowering orbital speed around the Earth. This has resulted in the length of a anomalistic month having increased from 20 days to today's 27.55 days over the course of 3.2 billion years.\nThus the distance between Earth and Moon is increasing, and the Earth's rotation is slowing in reaction. Measurements from laser reflectors left during the Apollo missions (lunar ranging experiments) have found that the Moon's distance increases by per year (roughly the rate at which human fingernails grow).\nAtomic clocks show that Earth's Day lengthens by about 17\u00a0microseconds every year, slowly increasing the rate at which UTC is adjusted by leap seconds.\nThis tidal drag makes the rotation of the Earth, and the orbital period of the Moon very slowly match. This matching first results in tidally locking the lighter body of the orbital system, as is already the case with the Moon. Theoretically, in 50 billion years, the Earth's rotation will have slowed to the point of matching the Moon's orbital period, causing the Earth to always present the same side to the Moon. However, the Sun will become a red giant, most likely engulfing the Earth\u2013Moon system long before then.\nIf the Earth\u2013Moon system is not engulfed by the enlarged Sun, the drag from the solar atmosphere can cause the orbit of the Moon to decay. Once the orbit of the Moon closes to a distance of , it will cross Earth's Roche limit, meaning that tidal interaction with Earth would break apart the Moon, turning it into a ring system. Most of the orbiting rings will begin to decay, and the debris will impact Earth. Hence, even if the Sun does not swallow up Earth, the planet may be left moonless.\nOrientation and appearance.\nThe Moon appears in Earth's sky differently depending on the position of observation on Earth and the time of lunar year, lunar month and day on Earth. During a year the Moon culminates during a day at different altitudes. The Moon appears highest in the sky unlike the Sun during winter and lowest during summer, which is true for the seasons of each of Earth's northern and southern hemispheres.\nAt the North and South Poles the Moon is 24 hours above the horizon for two weeks every tropical month (about 27.3 days), comparable to the polar day of the tropical year. Zooplankton in the Arctic use moonlight when the Sun is below the horizon for months on end.\nThe apparent orientation of the Moon depends on its position in the sky and the hemisphere of the Earth from which it is being viewed. In the Northern Hemisphere it appears upside down compared to the view from the Southern Hemisphere. Sometimes the \"horns\" of a crescent moon appear to be pointing more upwards than sideways. This phenomenon is called a wet moon and occurs more frequently in the tropics.\nThe distance between the Moon and Earth varies from around (perigee) to (apogee), making the Moon's distance and apparent size fluctuate up to 14%. On average the Moon's angular diameter is about 0.52\u00b0, roughly the same apparent size as the Sun (see ). In addition, a purely psychological effect, known as the Moon illusion, makes the Moon appear larger when close to the horizon.\nRotation.\nThe tidally locked synchronous rotation of the Moon as it orbits the Earth results in it always keeping nearly the same face turned towards the planet. The side of the Moon that faces Earth is called the near side, and the opposite the far side. The far side is often inaccurately called the \"dark side\", but it is in fact illuminated as often as the near side: once every 29.5 Earth days. During dark moon to new moon, the near side is dark.\nThe Moon originally rotated at a faster rate, but early in its history its rotation slowed and became tidally locked in this orientation as a result of frictional effects associated with tidal deformations caused by Earth. With time, the energy of rotation of the Moon on its axis was dissipated as heat, until there was no rotation of the Moon relative to Earth. In 2016, planetary scientists using data collected on the 1998\u201399 NASA \"Lunar Prospector\" mission found two hydrogen-rich areas (most likely former water ice) on opposite sides of the Moon. It is speculated that these patches were the poles of the Moon billions of years ago before it was tidally locked to Earth.\nIllumination and phases.\nThe Moon rotates, as it orbits Earth, changing orientation toward the Sun, experiencing a lunar day. A lunar day is equal to one lunar month (one synodic orbit around Earth) due to it being tidally locked to Earth. Since the Moon is not tidally locked to the Sun, lunar daylight and night times both occur around the Moon. The changing position of the illumination of the Moon by the Sun during a lunar day is observable from Earth as the changing lunar phases, waxing crescent being the sunrise and the waning crescent the sunset phase of a day observed from afar.\nLunar night is the darkest on the far side and during lunar eclipses on the near side (and darker than a moonless night on Earth). During its night, the near side is illuminated by Earthlight to the extent that lunar surface features may be observable from Earth. Earthshine makes the night on the near side about 43 times brighter, and sometimes even 55 times brighter than a night on Earth illuminated by the light of the full moon.\nIn Earth's sky brightness and apparent size of the Moon changes also due to its elliptic orbit around Earth. At perigee (closest), since the Moon is up to 14% closer to Earth than at apogee (most distant), it subtends a solid angle which is up to 30% larger. Consequently, given the same phase, the Moon's brightness also varies by up to 30% between apogee and perigee. A full (or new) moon at such a position is called a supermoon.\nEach of the four intermediate phases of the Moon lasts, on average, about seven days (approximately 7.38 days), but this duration can vary by about \u00b111% due to the change in the distance between the Moon and Earth between apogee (farthest point) and perigee (closest point).\nThe number of days since the most recent new moon is called the Moon's age. A complete cycle of lunar phases is known as a lunation.\nThe approximate age and phase of the Moon for any date can be calculated by determining the number of days since a known new moon (e.g., January 1, 1900, or August 11, 1999) and dividing that value by the average length of a synodic month (29.53059 days). The remainder of the division represents the Moon's age. This method assumes a perfectly circular orbit and does not consider the exact time of the new moon, so results may be off by a few hours. Accuracy decreases as the date moves away from the reference date.\nThis simplified calculation is suitable for general or decorative purposes, such as moon phase clocks. More precise applications that take into account the Moon's apogee and perigee require more complex methods.\nDue to lunar libration, it is sometimes possible to see slightly more than the full moon (up to about 101%) or a small part of its far side (up to 5%).\nAs it orbits, the Moon moves an average of 13\u00b0 eastward on the celestial sphere every day. This means that from new moon onward, the moon will become increasingly distant from the Sun, becoming more prominent until full moon, when it appears to be on the opposite side of the Sun. Thereafter, the Moon appears to move closer to the Sun until a new moon occurs. The position and time at which the Moon rises on the eastern horizon vary continually, primarily due to the inclination of the lunar orbit , which is more than 5\u00b0 relative to the Earth's equator, which in turn is inclined more than 23\u00b0 to the ecliptic.\nObservational phenomena.\nThere has been historical controversy over whether observed features on the Moon's surface change over time. Today, many of these claims are thought to be illusory, resulting from observation under different lighting conditions, poor astronomical seeing, or inadequate drawings. However, outgassing does occasionally occur and could be responsible for a minor percentage of the reported lunar transient phenomena. Recently, it has been suggested that a roughly diameter region of the lunar surface was modified by a gas release event about a million years ago.\nAlbedo and true color of the surface.\nThe Moon's appearance is shaped by its reflective properties and surface composition. Its albedo is about 0.12, comparable to worn asphalt, making it relatively dark despite its brightness in the night sky. This low albedo represents the reflectance of the lunar regolith, a layer of fine rock fragments created by meteorite impacts. Light scattering by the regolith causes the Moon to appear much brighter at full moon than at quarter phases.\nThe Moon's true color, without atmospheric effects, is a muted brownish-gray. This results from silicate minerals in the regolith, with darker basaltic plains (maria) and lighter feldspar-rich highlands. The maria, formed by ancient volcanic flows, contain more iron and titanium, giving them a darker tone. From Earth, the Moon's color can be altered by the atmosphere, appearing red during lunar eclipses or occasionally blue due to volcanic particles.\nThe Moon also exhibits retro-reflection, scattering light back toward its source and creating a uniform brightness across its disc without significant limb darkening. Its apparent size and brightness vary due to its elliptical orbit, appearing up to 30% brighter and 14% larger at perigee compared to apogee, a phenomenon known as a \"Supermoon\".\nAt times, the Moon can appear red or blue. It may appear red during a lunar eclipse, because of the red spectrum of the Sun's light being refracted onto the Moon by Earth's atmosphere. Because of this red color, lunar eclipses are also sometimes called blood moons. The Moon can also seem red when it appears at low angles and through a thick atmosphere.\nThe Moon may appear blue depending on the presence of certain particles in the air, such as volcanic particles, in which case it can be called a blue moon.\nBecause the words \"red moon\" and \"blue moon\" can also be used to refer to specific full moons of the year, they do not always refer to the presence of red or blue moonlight.\nEclipses.\nEclipses only occur when the Sun, Earth, and Moon are all in a straight line (termed \"syzygy\"). Solar eclipses occur at new moon, when the Moon is between the Sun and Earth. In contrast, lunar eclipses occur at full moon, when Earth is between the Sun and Moon. The apparent size of the Moon is roughly the same as that of the Sun, with both being viewed at close to one-half a degree wide. The Sun is much larger than the Moon, but it is the vastly greater distance that gives it the same apparent size as the much closer and much smaller Moon from the perspective of Earth. The variations in apparent size, due to the non-circular orbits, are nearly the same as well, though occurring in different cycles. This makes possible both total (with the Moon appearing larger than the Sun) and annular (with the Moon appearing smaller than the Sun) solar eclipses. In a total eclipse, the Moon completely covers the disc of the Sun and the solar corona becomes visible to the naked eye.\nBecause the distance between the Moon and Earth is very slowly increasing over time, the angular diameter of the Moon is decreasing. As it evolves toward becoming a red giant, the size of the Sun, and its apparent diameter in the sky, are slowly increasing. The combination of these two changes means that hundreds of millions of years ago, the Moon would always completely cover the Sun on solar eclipses, and no annular eclipses were possible. Likewise, hundreds of millions of years in the future, the Moon will no longer cover the Sun completely, and total solar eclipses will not occur.\nAs the Moon's orbit around Earth is inclined by about 5.145\u00b0 (5\u00b0\u00a09\u2032) to the orbit of Earth around the Sun, eclipses do not occur at every full and new moon. For an eclipse to occur, the Moon must be near the intersection of the two orbital planes. The periodicity and recurrence of eclipses of the Sun by the Moon, and of the Moon by Earth, is described by the saros, which has a period of approximately 18\u00a0years.\nBecause the Moon continuously blocks the view of a half-degree-wide circular area of the sky, the related phenomenon of occultation occurs when a bright star or planet passes behind the Moon and is occulted: hidden from view. In this way, a solar eclipse is an occultation of the Sun. Because the Moon is comparatively close to Earth, occultations of individual stars are not visible everywhere on the planet, nor at the same time. Because of the precession of the lunar orbit, each year different stars are occulted.\nHistory of exploration and human presence.\nPre-telescopic observation (before 1609).\nIt is believed by some that the oldest cave paintings from up to 40,000 BP of bulls and geometric shapes, or 20\u201330,000 year old tally sticks were used to observe the phases of the Moon, keeping time using the waxing and waning of the Moon's phases.\nAspects of the Moon were identified and aggregated in lunar deities from prehistoric times and were eventually documented and put into symbols from the very first instances of writing in the 4th millennium BC. One of the earliest-discovered possible depictions of the Moon is a 3,000 BCE rock carving \"Orthostat 47\" at Knowth, Ireland. The crescent depicting the Moon as with the lunar deity Nanna/Sin have been found from the 3rd millennium BCE.\nThe oldest named astronomer and poet Enheduanna, Akkadian high priestess to the lunar deity Nanna/Sin and pricess, daughter of Sargon the Great (c.\u20092334 \u2013 c.\u20092279 BCE), had the Moon tracked in her chambers. The oldest found and identified depiction of the Moon in an astronomical relation to other astronomical features is the Nebra sky disc from c.\u20091800\u20131600 BCE, depicting features like the Pleiades next to the Moon.\nThe ancient Greek philosopher Anaxagoras (d.\u2009428 BC) reasoned that the Sun and Moon were both giant spherical rocks, and that the latter reflected the light of the former.227 Elsewhere in the 5th century BC to 4th century BC, Babylonian astronomers had recorded the 18-year Saros cycle of lunar eclipses, and Indian astronomers had described the Moon's monthly elongation. The Chinese astronomer Shi Shen (fl. 4th century BC) gave instructions for predicting solar and lunar eclipses.411\nIn Aristotle's (384\u2013322\u00a0BC) description of the universe, the Moon marked the boundary between the spheres of the mutable elements (earth, water, air and fire), and the imperishable stars of aether, an influential philosophy that would dominate for centuries. Archimedes (287\u2013212 BC) designed a planetarium that could calculate the motions of the Moon and other objects in the Solar System. In the 2nd century BC, Seleucus of Seleucia correctly thought that tides were due to the attraction of the Moon, and that their height depends on the Moon's position relative to the Sun. In the same century, Aristarchus computed the size and distance of the Moon from Earth, obtaining a value of about twenty times the radius of Earth for the distance.\nThe Chinese of the Han dynasty believed the Moon to be energy equated to \"qi\" and their 'radiating influence' theory recognized that the light of the Moon was merely a reflection of the Sun; Jing Fang (78\u201337\u00a0BC) noted the sphericity of the Moon. Ptolemy (90\u2013168\u00a0AD) greatly improved on the numbers of Aristarchus, calculating a mean distance of 59\u00a0times Earth's radius and a diameter of 0.292\u00a0Earth diameters, close to the correct values of about 60 and 0.273 respectively. In the 2nd century AD, Lucian wrote the novel \"A True Story\", in which the heroes travel to the Moon and meet its inhabitants. In 510\u00a0AD, the Indian astronomer Aryabhata mentioned in his \"Aryabhatiya\" that reflected sunlight is the cause of the shining of the Moon. The astronomer and physicist Ibn al-Haytham (965\u20131039) found that sunlight was not reflected from the Moon like a mirror, but that light was emitted from every part of the Moon's sunlit surface in all directions. Shen Kuo (1031\u20131095) of the Song dynasty created an allegory equating the waxing and waning of the Moon to a round ball of reflective silver that, when doused with white powder and viewed from the side, would appear to be a crescent. During the Middle Ages, before the invention of the telescope, the Moon was increasingly recognized as a sphere, though many believed that it was \"perfectly smooth\".\nTelescopic exploration (1609\u20131959).\nThe telescope was developed and reported on in 1608. The first record of telescopic astronomy and rough mapping of the Moon's features is from early summer 1609 by Thomas Harriot, but which he did not publish. At the same time Galileo Galilei too started to use telescopes to observe the sky and the Moon, recording later that year more detailed observations and crucial conclusions, such as that the Moon was not smooth, featuring mountains and craters, which he published in 1610 in his ground-breaking and soon widely discussed book .\nLater in the 17th century, the efforts of Giovanni Battista Riccioli and Francesco Maria Grimaldi led to the system of naming of lunar features in use today. The more exact 1834\u20131836 \"Mappa Selenographica\" of Wilhelm Beer and Johann Heinrich von M\u00e4dler, and their associated 1837 book , the first trigonometrically accurate study of lunar features, included the heights of more than a thousand mountains, and introduced the study of the Moon at accuracies possible in earthly geography. Lunar craters, first noted by Galileo, were thought to be volcanic until the 1870s proposal of Richard Proctor that they were formed by collisions. This view gained support in 1892 from the experimentation of geologist Grove Karl Gilbert, and from comparative studies from 1920 to the 1940s, leading to the development of lunar stratigraphy, which by the 1950s was becoming a new and growing branch of astrogeology.\nFirst missions to the Moon (1959\u20131976).\nAfter World War II the first launch systems were developed and by the end of the 1950s they reached capabilities that allowed the Soviet Union and the United States to launch spacecraft into space. The Cold War fueled a closely followed development of launch systems by the two states, resulting in the so-called Space Race and its later phase the Moon Race, accelerating efforts and interest in exploration of the Moon.\nAfter the first spaceflight of Sputnik 1 in 1957 during International Geophysical Year the spacecraft of the Soviet Union's \"Luna\" program were the first to accomplish a number of goals. Following three unnamed failed missions in 1958, the first human-made object \"Luna 1\" escaped Earth's gravity and passed the Moon on 4 January 1959. Later that year the first human-made object \"Luna 2\" reached the Moon's surface by intentionally impacting. By the end of the year \"Luna 3\" reached as the first human-made object the normally occluded far side of the Moon, taking the first photographs of it.\nThe first spacecraft to perform a successful lunar soft landing was \"Luna 9\" and the first vehicle to orbit the Moon was \"Luna 10\", both in 1966.\nFollowing President John F. Kennedy's 1961 commitment to a crewed Moon landing before the end of the decade, the United States, under NASA leadership, launched a series of uncrewed probes to develop an understanding of the lunar surface in preparation for human missions: the Jet Propulsion Laboratory's Ranger program, the Lunar Orbiter program and the Surveyor program. The crewed Apollo program was developed in parallel; after a series of uncrewed and crewed tests of the Apollo spacecraft in Earth orbit, and spurred on by a potential Soviet lunar human landing, in 1968 Apollo 8 made the first human mission to lunar orbit (the first Earthlings, two tortoises, had circled the Moon three months earlier on the Soviet Union's Zond 5, followed by turtles on Zond 6).\nThe first time a person landed on the Moon and any extraterrestrial body was when Neil Armstrong, the commander of the American mission Apollo 11, set foot on the Moon at 02:56\u00a0UTC on July 21, 1969. Considered the culmination of the Space Race, an estimated 500\u00a0million people worldwide watched the transmission by the Apollo TV camera, the largest television audience for a live broadcast at that time. While at the same time another mission, the robotic sample return mission Luna 15 by the Soviet Union had been in orbit around the Moon, becoming together with Apollo 11 the first ever case of two extraterrestrial missions being conducted at the same time.\nThe Apollo missions 11 to 17 (except Apollo 13, which aborted its planned lunar landing) removed of lunar rock and soil in 2,196 separate samples.\nScientific instrument packages were installed on the lunar surface during all the Apollo landings. Long-lived instrument stations, including heat flow probes, seismometers, and magnetometers, were installed at the Apollo 12, 14, 15, 16, and 17 landing sites. Direct transmission of data to Earth concluded in late 1977 because of budgetary considerations, but as the stations' lunar laser ranging corner-cube retroreflector arrays are passive instruments, they are still being used.\nApollo 17 in 1972 remains the last crewed mission to the Moon. Explorer 49 in 1973 was the last dedicated U.S. probe to the Moon until 1994.\nThe Soviet Union continued sending robotic missions to the Moon until 1976, deploying in 1970 with Luna 17 the first remote controlled rover Lunokhod 1 on an extraterrestrial surface, and collecting and returning 0.3\u00a0kg of rock and soil samples with three \"Luna\" sample return missions (\"Luna 16\" in 1970, \"Luna 20\" in 1972, and \"Luna 24\" in 1976).\nMoon Treaty and explorational absence (1976\u20131990).\nFollowing the last Soviet mission to the Moon of 1976, there was little further lunar exploration for fourteen years. Astronautics had shifted its focus towards the exploration of the inner (e.g. Venera program) and outer (e.g. Pioneer 10, 1972) Solar System planets, but also towards Earth orbit, developing and continuously operating, beside communication satellites, Earth observation satellites (e.g. Landsat program, 1972), space telescopes and particularly space stations (e.g. Salyut program, 1971).\nNegotiation in 1979 of Moon treaty, and its subsequent ratification in 1984 was the only major activity regarding the Moon until 1990.\nRenewed exploration (1990\u2013present).\nIn 1990 \"Hiten\" \u2013 \"Hagoromo\", the first dedicated lunar mission since 1976, reached the Moon. Sent by Japan, it became the first mission that was not a Soviet Union or U.S. mission to the Moon.\nIn 1994, the U.S. dedicated a mission to fly a spacecraft (\"Clementine\") to the Moon again for the first time since 1973. This mission obtained the first near-global topographic map of the Moon, and the first global multispectral images of the lunar surface. In 1998, this was followed by the \"Lunar Prospector\" mission, whose instruments indicated the presence of excess hydrogen at the lunar poles, which is likely to have been caused by the presence of water ice in the upper few meters of the regolith within permanently shadowed craters.\nThe next years saw a row of first missions to the Moon by a new group of states actively exploring the Moon.\nBetween 2004 and 2006 the first spacecraft by the European Space Agency (ESA) (\"SMART-1\") reached the Moon, recording the first detailed survey of chemical elements on the lunar surface.\nThe Chinese Lunar Exploration Program reached the Moon for the first time with the orbiter \"Chang'e 1\" (2007\u20132009), obtaining a full image map of the Moon.\nIndia reached, orbited and impacted the Moon in 2008 for the first time with its \"Chandrayaan-1\" and Moon Impact Probe, becoming the fifth and sixth state to do so, creating a high-resolution chemical, mineralogical and photo-geological map of the lunar surface, and confirming the presence of water molecules in lunar soil.\nThe U.S. launched the \"Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter\" (LRO) and the \"LCROSS\" impactor on June 18, 2009. \"LCROSS\" completed its mission by making a planned and widely observed impact in the crater Cabeus on October 9, 2009, whereas \"LRO\" is currently in operation, obtaining precise lunar altimetry and high-resolution imagery.\nChina continued its lunar program in 2010 with \"Chang'e 2\", mapping the surface at a higher resolution over an eight-month period, and in 2013 with \"Chang'e 3\", a lunar lander along with a lunar rover named \"Yutu\" (). This was the first lunar rover mission since \"Lunokhod 2\" in 1973 and the first lunar soft landing since \"Luna 24\" in 1976, making China the third country to achieve this.\nIn 2014 the first privately funded probe, the Manfred Memorial Moon Mission, reached the Moon.\nAnother Chinese rover mission, \"Chang'e 4\", achieved the first landing on the Moon's far side in early 2019.\nAlso in 2019, India successfully sent its second probe, \"Chandrayaan-2\" to the Moon.\nIn 2020, China carried out its first robotic sample return mission (\"Chang'e 5\"), bringing back 1,731 grams of lunar material to Earth.\nThe U.S. developed plans for returning to the Moon beginning in 2004, and with the signing of the U.S.-led Artemis Accords in 2020, the Artemis program aims to return the astronauts to the Moon in the 2020s. The Accords have been joined by a growing number of countries. The introduction of the Artemis Accords has fueled a renewed discussion about the international framework and cooperation of lunar activity, building on the Moon Treaty and the ESA-led Moon Village concept.\n2022 South Korea launched Danuri successfully, its first mission to the Moon, from the US.\nIn 2023 and 2024 India and Japan became the fourth and fifth country to soft land a spacecraft on the Moon, following the Soviet Union and United States in the 1960s, and China in the 2010s. Notably, Japan's spacecraft, the Smart Lander for Investigating Moon, survived 3 lunar nights. The IM-1 lander became the first commercially built lander to land on the Moon in 2024.\nChina launched the Chang'e 6 on May 3, 2024, which conducted another lunar sample return from the far side of the Moon. It also carried a Chinese rover to conduct infrared spectroscopy of lunar surface. Pakistan sent a lunar orbiter called ICUBE-Q along with Chang'e 6.\nNova-C 2, iSpace Lander and Blue Ghost were all launched to the Moon in 2024.\nFuture.\nBeside the progressing Artemis program and supporting Commercial Lunar Payload Services, China is continuing its ambitious Chang'e program, having announced with Russia's struggling \"Luna-Glob\" program joint missions. Both the Chinese and US lunar programs have the goal to establish in the 2030s a lunar base with their international partners, though the US and its partners will first establish an orbital Lunar Gateway station in the 2020s, from which Artemis missions will land the Human Landing System to set up temporary surface camps.\nWhile the Apollo missions were explorational in nature, the Artemis program plans to establish a more permanent presence. To this end, NASA is partnering with industry leaders to establish key elements such as modern communication infrastructure. A 4G connectivity demonstration is to be launched aboard an Intuitive Machines Nova-C lander in 2024. Another focus is on in situ resource utilization, which is a key part of the DARPA lunar programs. DARPA has requested that industry partners develop a 10\u2013year lunar architecture plan to enable the beginning of a lunar economy.\nHuman presence.\nIn 1959 the first extraterrestrial probes reached the Moon (Luna program), just a year into the space age, after the first ever orbital flight. Since then, humans have sent a range of probes and people to the Moon. The first stay of people on the Moon was conducted in 1969, in a series of crewed exploration missions (the Apollo Program), the last having taken place in 1972.\nUninterrupted presence has been the case through the remains of impactors, landings and lunar orbiters. Some landings and orbiters have maintained a small lunar infrastructure, providing continuous observation and communication at the Moon. Longterm missions continuing to be active are some orbiters such as the 2009-launched Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter surveilling the Moon for future missions, as well as some Landers such as the 2013-launched Chang'e 3 with its Lunar Ultraviolet Telescope still operational.\nFive retroreflectors have been installed on the Moon since the 1970s and since used for accurate measurements of the physical librations through laser ranging to the Moon.\nIncreasing human activity in cislunar space as well as on the Moon's surface, particularly missions at the far side of the Moon or the lunar north and south polar regions, are in need for a lunar infrastructure. For that purpose, orbiters in orbits around the Moon or the Earth\u2013Moon Lagrange points, have since 2006 been operated. With highly eccentric orbits providing continuous communication, as with the orbit of Queqiao and Queqiao-2 relay satellite or the planned first extraterrestrial space station, the Lunar Gateway.\nThere are several missions by different agencies and companies planned to establish a long-term human presence on the Moon, with the Lunar Gateway as the currently most advanced project as part of the Artemis program.\nHuman impact.\nWhile the Moon has the lowest planetary protection target-categorization, its degradation as a pristine body and scientific place has been discussed. If there is astronomy performed from the Moon, it will need to be free from any physical and radio pollution. While the Moon has no significant atmosphere, traffic and impacts on the Moon causes clouds of dust that can spread far and possibly contaminate the original state of the Moon and its special scientific content. Scholar Alice Gorman asserts that, although the Moon is inhospitable, describing the Moon as dead negates its dynamics, which requires sustainable human activity to treat the Moon's ecology as a co-participant.\nThe so-called \"Tardigrade affair\" of the 2019 crashed Beresheet lander and its carrying of tardigrades has been discussed as an example for lacking measures and lacking international regulation for planetary protection.\nSpace debris beyond Earth around the Moon has been considered as a future challenge with increasing numbers of missions to the Moon, particularly as a danger for such missions. As such lunar waste management has been raised as an issue which future lunar missions, particularly on the surface, need to tackle.&lt;ref name=\"NASA/ADS\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nHuman remains have been transported to the Moon, including by private companies such as Celestis and Elysium Space. Because the Moon has been sacred or significant to many cultures, the practice of space burials have attracted criticism from indigenous peoples leaders. For example, then\u2013Navajo Nation president Albert Hale criticized NASA for sending the cremated ashes of scientist Eugene Shoemaker to the Moon in 1998.\nBeside the remains of human activity on the Moon, there have been some intended permanent installations like the \"Moon Museum\" art piece, Apollo 11 goodwill messages, six lunar plaques, the \"Fallen Astronaut\" memorial, and other artifacts.\nAstronomy from the Moon.\nThe Moon has been used as a site for astronomical and Earth observations. The Earth appears in the Moon's sky with an apparent size of 1\u00b0\u00a048\u2032 to 2\u00b0, three to four times the size of the Moon or Sun in Earth's sky, or about the apparent width of two little fingers at an arm's length away. Observations from the Moon started as early as 1966 with the first images of Earth from the Moon, taken by Lunar Orbiter 1. Of particular cultural significance is the 1968 photograph called \"Earthrise\", taken by Bill Anders of Apollo 8 in 1968. In April 1972 the Apollo 16 mission set up the first dedicated telescope, the Far Ultraviolet Camera/Spectrograph, recording various astronomical photos and spectra.\nThe Moon is recognized as an excellent site for telescopes. It is relatively nearby; certain craters near the poles are permanently dark and cold and especially useful for infrared telescopes; and radio telescopes on the far side would be shielded from the radio chatter of Earth. The lunar soil, although it poses a problem for any moving parts of telescopes, can be mixed with carbon nanotubes and epoxies and employed in the construction of mirrors up to 50 meters in diameter. A lunar zenith telescope can be made cheaply with an ionic liquid.\nWith increased human activity on the surface of the Moon the atmospheric circulation of lunar dust will increase, reducing the favourable conditions for astronomy from the surface depending on meassures to mitigate the spread of lunar dust.\nLiving on the Moon.\nHumans have lived on the Moon in groups of two and for up to three days. Altogether twelve people have stayed on the Moon over the course of six visits. They all lived in one type of surface habitat, the Apollo Lunar Module. In the course of these stays some people have spent in total up to one day roaming the surface.\nChallenges when roaming the surface arise from lunar dust sticking to suits and tools, and has been carried inside the habitats. Astronauts could taste and smell the dust, which smells like gunpowder and was called the \"Apollo aroma\". This fine lunar dust can cause health issues.\nIn 2019, at least one plant seed sprouted in an experiment on the Chang'e 4 lander. It was carried from Earth along with other small life in its \"Lunar Micro Ecosystem\".\nLegal status.\nAlthough \"Luna\" landers scattered pennants of the Soviet Union on the Moon, and U.S. flags were symbolically planted at their landing sites by the Apollo astronauts, no nation claims ownership of any part of the Moon's surface. Likewise no private ownership of parts of the Moon, or as a whole, is considered credible.\nThe 1967 Outer Space Treaty defines the Moon and all outer space as the \"province of all mankind\". It restricts the use of the Moon to peaceful purposes, explicitly banning military installations and weapons of mass destruction. A majority of countries are parties of this treaty.\nThe 1979 Moon Agreement was created to elaborate, and restrict the exploitation of the Moon's resources by any single nation, leaving it to a yet unspecified international regulatory regime. As of January 2020, it has been signed and ratified by 18 nations, none of which have human spaceflight capabilities.\nSince 2020, countries have joined the U.S. in their Artemis Accords, which are challenging the treaty. The U.S. has furthermore emphasized in a presidential executive order (\"Encouraging International Support for the Recovery and Use of Space Resources.\") that \"the United States does not view outer space as a 'global commons'\" and calls the Moon Agreement \"a failed attempt at constraining free enterprise\".\nWith Australia signing and ratifying both the Moon Treaty in 1986 as well as the Artemis Accords in 2020, there has been a discussion if they can be harmonized. In this light an \"Implementation Agreement\" for the Moon Treaty has been advocated for, as a way to compensate for the shortcomings of the Moon Treaty and to harmonize it with other laws and agreements such as the Artemis Accords, allowing it to be more widely accepted.\nIn the face of such increasing commercial and national interest, particularly prospecting territories, U.S. lawmakers have introduced in late 2020 specific regulation for the conservation of historic landing sites and interest groups have argued for making such sites World Heritage Sites and zones of scientific value protected zones, all of which add to the legal availability and territorialization of the Moon.\nIn 2021, the \"Declaration of the Rights of the Moon\" was created by a group of \"lawyers, space archaeologists and concerned citizens\", drawing on precedents in the Rights of Nature movement and the concept of legal personality for non-human entities in space.\nCoordination and regulation.\nIncreasing human activity at the Moon has raised the need for coordination to safeguard international and commercial lunar activity. Issues from cooperation to mere coordination, through for example the development of a shared Lunar time, have been raised.\nIn particular the establishment of an international or United Nations regulatory regime for lunar human activity has been called for by the Moon Treaty and suggested through an \"Implementation Agreement\", but remains contentious. Current lunar programs are multilateral, with the US-led Artemis program and the China-led International Lunar Research Station. For broader international cooperation and coordination, the International Lunar Exploration Working Group (ILEWG), the Moon Village Association (MVA) and more generally the International Space Exploration Coordination Group (ISECG) has been established.\nIn culture and life.\nTimekeeping.\nSince pre-historic times people have taken note of the Moon's phases and its waxing and waning cycle and used it to keep record of time. Tally sticks, notched bones dating as far back as 20\u201330,000 years ago, are believed by some to mark the phases of the Moon. The counting of the days between the Moon's phases eventually gave rise to generalized time periods of lunar cycles as months, and possibly of its phases as weeks.\nThe words for the month in a range of different languages carry this relation between the period of the month and the Moon etymologically. The English \"month\" as well as \"moon\", and its cognates in other Indo-European languages (e.g. the Latin and Ancient Greek (\"meis\") or (m\u0113n), meaning \"month\") stem from the Proto-Indo-European (PIE) root of \"moon\", *\"m\u00e9h1n\u014dt\", derived from the PIE verbal root *\"meh1\"-, \"to measure\", \"indicat[ing] a functional conception of the Moon, i.e. marker of the month\" (cf. the English words \"measure\" and \"menstrual\"). To give another example from a different language family, the Chinese language uses the same word () for \"moon\" as for \"month\", which furthermore can be found in the symbols for the word \"week\" ().\nThis lunar timekeeping gave rise to the historically dominant, but varied, lunisolar calendars. The 7th-century Islamic calendar is an example of a purely lunar calendar, where months are traditionally determined by the visual sighting of the hilal, or earliest crescent moon, over the horizon.\nOf particular significance has been the occasion of full moon, highlighted and celebrated in a range of calendars and cultures, an example being the Buddhist Vesak. The full moon around the southern or northern autumnal equinox is often called the harvest moon and is celebrated with festivities such as the Harvest Moon Festival of the Chinese lunar calendar, its second most important celebration after the Chinese lunisolar Lunar New Year.\nFurthermore, association of time with the Moon can also be found in religion, such as the ancient Egyptian temporal and lunar deity Khonsu.\nCultural representation.\nHumans have not only observed the Moon since prehistoric times, but have also developed intricate perceptions of the Moon. Over time the Moon has been characterized and associated in many different ways, from having a spirit or being a deity, and an aspect thereof or an aspect in astrology, being made an important part of many cosmologies.\nThis rich history of humans viewing the Moon has been evidenced starting with depictions from 40,000 BP and in written form from the 4th millennium BCE in the earliest cases of writing. The oldest named astronomer and poet Enheduanna, Akkadian high priestess to the lunar deity Nanna/Sin and daughter of Sargon the Great (c.\u20092334 \u2013 c.\u20092279 BCE), tracked the Moon and wrote poems about her divine Moon.\nCrescent.\nFor the representation of the Moon, especially its lunar phases, the crescent (\ud83c\udf19) has been a recurring symbol in a range of cultures since at least 3,000 BCE or possibly earlier with bull horns dating to the earliest cave paintings at 40,000 BP. In writing systems such as Chinese the crescent has developed into the symbol , the word for Moon, and in ancient Egyptian it was the symbol \ud80c\uddf9, meaning Moon and spelled like the ancient Egyptian lunar deity \"Iah\", which the other ancient Egyptian lunar deities Khonsu and Thoth were associated with.\nIconographically the crescent was used in Mesopotamia as the primary symbol of Nanna/S\u00een, the ancient Sumerian lunar deity, who was the father of Inanna/Ishtar, the goddess of the planet Venus (symbolized as the eight pointed Star of Ishtar), and Utu/Shamash, the god of the Sun (symbolized as a disc, optionally with eight rays), all three often depicted next to each other. Nanna/S\u00een is, like some other lunar deities, for example Iah and Khonsu of ancient Egypt, Mene/Selene of ancient Greece and Luna of ancient Rome, depicted as a horned deity, featuring crescent shaped headgears or crowns.\nThe particular arrangement of the crescent with a star known as the star and crescent (\u262a\ufe0f) goes back to the Bronze Age, representing either the Sun and Moon, or the Moon and the planet Venus, in combination. It came to represent the selene goddess Artemis, and via the patronage of Hecate, which as triple deity under the epithet \"trimorphos\"/\"trivia\" included aspects of Artemis/Diana, came to be used as a symbol of Byzantium, with Virgin Mary (Queen of Heaven) later taking her place, becoming depicted in Marian veneration on a crescent and adorned with stars. Since then the heraldric use of the star and crescent proliferated, Byzantium's symbolism possibly influencing the development of the Ottoman flag, specifically the combination of the Turkish crescent with a star, and becoming a popular symbol for Islam (as the \"hilal\" of the Islamic calendar) and for a range of nations.\nOther associations.\nThe features of the Moon, the contrasting brighter highlands and darker maria, have been seen by different cultures forming abstract shapes. Such shapes are among others the Man in the Moon (e.g. Coyolx\u0101uhqui) or the Moon Rabbit (e.g. the Chinese Tu'er Ye or in Indigenous American mythologies the aspect of the Mayan Moon goddess, from which possibly Awilix is derived, or of Metztli/T\u0113ccizt\u0113catl).\nOccasionally some lunar deities have been also depicted driving a chariot across the sky, such as the Hindu Chandra/Soma, the Greek Artemis, which is associated with Selene, or Luna, Selene's ancient Roman equivalent.\nColor and material wise the Moon has been associated in Western alchemy with silver, while gold is associated with the Sun.\nThrough a miracle, the so-called splitting of the Moon () in Islam, association with the Moon applies also to Muhammad.\nRepresentation in modern culture.\nThe perception of the Moon in the modern era has been informed by telescope-enabled modern astronomy and later by spaceflight which enabled actual human activity at the Moon, particularly the culturally impactful lunar landings. These new insights inspired cultural references, connecting romantic reflections about the Moon and speculative fiction such as science-fiction dealing with the Moon.\nContemporarily the Moon has been seen as a place for economic expansion into space, with missions prospecting for lunar resources. This has been accompanied with renewed public and critical reflection on humanity's cultural and legal relation to the celestial body, especially regarding colonialism, as in the 1970 poem \"Whitey on the Moon\". In this light the Moon's nature has been invoked, particularly for lunar conservation and as a common.\nIn 2021 20 July, the date of the first crewed Moon landing, became the annual \"International Moon Day\".\nLunar effect.\nThe lunar effect is an unproven correlation between specific stages of the roughly 29.5-day lunar cycle and behavior and physiological changes in living beings on Earth, including humans. The Moon has long been associated with insanity and irrationality; the words \"lunacy\" and \"lunatic\" are derived from the Latin name for the Moon, \"Luna\". Philosophers Aristotle and Pliny the Elder argued that the full moon induced insanity in susceptible individuals, believing that the brain, which is mostly water, must be affected by the Moon and its power over the tides, but the Moon's gravity is too slight to affect any single person. Even today, people who believe in a lunar effect claim that admissions to psychiatric hospitals, traffic accidents, homicides or suicides increase during a full moon, but over 37 studies invalidate these claims.\nLunar cycles have significant impacts on human culture but no solid evidence connects these cycles to human biology.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19333", "revid": "51", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19333", "title": "Monterrey, California", "text": ""}
{"id": "19334", "revid": "37575500", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19334", "title": "Marco Polo", "text": "Venetian merchant, explorer, and writer (1254\u20131324)\nMarco Polo (; ; ; c.\u20091254\u00a0\u2013 8 January 1324) was a Venetian merchant, explorer, and writer who travelled through Asia along the Silk Road between 1271 and 1295. His travels are recorded in \"The Travels of Marco Polo\" (also known as \"Book of the Marvels of the World \" and \"Il Milione\", c.\u20091300), a book that described the then-mysterious culture and inner workings of the Eastern world, including the wealth and great size of the Mongol Empire and China under the Yuan dynasty, giving Europeans their first comprehensive look into China, Persia, India, Japan, and other Asian societies.\nBorn in Venice, Marco learned the mercantile trade from his father and his uncle, Niccol\u00f2 and Maffeo, who travelled through Asia and met Kublai Khan. In 1269, they returned to Venice to meet Marco for the first time. The three of them embarked on an epic journey to Asia, exploring many places along the Silk Road until they reached \"Cathay\". They were received by the royal court of Kublai Khan, who was impressed by Marco's intelligence and humility. Marco was appointed to serve as Kublai's foreign emissary, and he was sent on many diplomatic missions throughout the empire and Southeast Asia, visiting present-day Myanmar, India, Indonesia, Sri Lanka, and Vietnam. As part of this appointment, Marco also travelled extensively inside China, living in the emperor's lands for 17 years and seeing many things previously unknown to Europeans. \nAround 1291, the Polos offered to accompany the Mongol princess K\u00f6k\u00f6chin to Persia; they arrived there around 1293. After leaving the princess, they travelled overland to Constantinople and then to Venice, returning home after 24 years. At this time, Venice was at war with Genoa. Marco joined the war effort on behalf of Venice and was captured by the Genoans. While imprisoned, he dictated stories of his travels to Rustichello da Pisa, a cellmate. He was released in 1299, became a wealthy merchant, married, and had three children. He died in 1324 and was buried in the church of San Lorenzo in Venice.\nThough he was not the first European to reach China, Marco Polo was the first to leave a detailed chronicle of his experience. His account provided the Europeans with a clear picture of the East's geography and ethnic customs, and it included the first Western record of porcelain, gunpowder, paper money, and some Asian plants and exotic animals. His narrative inspired Christopher Columbus and many other travellers. There is substantial literature based on Polo's writings; he also influenced European cartography, leading to the introduction of the Catalan Atlas and the Fra Mauro map.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLife.\nFamily origin.\nMarco Polo was born around 1254 in Venice, but the exact date and place of birth are archivally unknown. The \"Travels of Marco Polo\" contains some basic information concerning Marco Polo's Venetian family and his birth in Venice; the book states that Marco's father, the travelling merchant Niccol\u00f2 Polo, returned to visit his family in his hometown of Venice around 1269 and there found out that his wife, whom he had left pregnant, had died and left a 15-year-old son named Marco.\nIn contrast to the general consensus, there are theories suggesting that Marco Polo's birthplace was the island of Kor\u010dula or Constantinople but such hypotheses failed to gain acceptance among most scholars and have been countered by other studies.\nNickname.\nHe was nicknamed during his lifetime (which in Italian literally means 'Million'). The Italian title of his book was \"Il Libro di Marco Polo soprannominato Milione\", which means \"The Book of Marco Polo, nicknamed 'Milione'\". According to the 15th-century humanist Giovanni Battista Ramusio, his fellow citizens awarded him this nickname when he came back to Venice because he kept on saying that Kublai Khan's wealth was counted in millions. More precisely, he was nicknamed (Mr Marco Millions).\nHowever, since also his father Niccol\u00f2 was nicknamed , 19th-century philologist Luigi Foscolo Benedetto was persuaded that was a shortened version of , and that this nickname was used to distinguish Niccol\u00f2's and Marco's branch from other Polo families.\nEarly life and Asian travel.\nHis father, Niccol\u00f2 Polo, a merchant, traded with the Near East, becoming wealthy and achieving great prestige. Niccol\u00f2 and his brother Maffeo set off on a trading voyage before Marco's birth. In 1260, Niccol\u00f2 and Maffeo, while residing in Constantinople, then the capital of the Latin Empire, foresaw a political change; they liquidated their assets into jewels and moved away. According to \"The Travels of Marco Polo\", they passed through much of Asia, and met with Kublai Khan, a Mongol ruler and founder of the Yuan dynasty.\nAlmost nothing is known about the childhood of Marco Polo until he was fifteen years old, except that he probably spent part of his childhood in Venice. Meanwhile, Marco Polo's mother died, and an aunt and uncle raised him. He received a good education, learning mercantile subjects including foreign currency, appraising, and the handling of cargo ships; he learned little or no Latin. His father later married Floradise Polo (n\u00e9e Trevisan).\nIn 1269, Niccol\u00f2 and Maffeo returned to their families in Venice, meeting young Marco for the first time. In 1271, during the rule of Doge Lorenzo Tiepolo, Marco Polo (at seventeen years of age), his father, and his uncle set off for Asia on the series of adventures that Marco later documented in his book.\nThey sailed to Acre and later rode on their camels to the Persian port Hormuz. During the first stages of the journey, they stayed for a few months in Acre and were able to speak with Archdeacon Tedaldo Visconti of Piacenza. The Polo family, on that occasion, had expressed their regret at the long lack of a pope, because on their previous trip to China they had received a letter from Kublai Khan to the Pope, and had thus had to leave for China disappointed.\nDuring the trip, they received news that after 33 months of vacation, the Conclave had elected the new Pope and that he was exactly the archdeacon of Acre. The three of them hurried to return to the Holy Land, where the new Pope entrusted them with letters for the \"Great Khan\", inviting him to send his emissaries to Rome. To give more weight to this mission, he sent with the Polos, as his legates, two Dominican fathers, Guglielmo of Tripoli and Nicola of Piacenza.\nThey continued overland until they arrived at Kublai Khan's palace in Shangdu, China, then known as Cathay. By this time, Marco was 21 years old. Impressed by Marco's intelligence and humility, Kublai appointed him to serve as his foreign emissary to India and Myanmar. He was sent on many diplomatic missions throughout his empire and in Southeast Asia, such as in present-day Indonesia, Sri Lanka and Vietnam, and entertained the Khan with stories and observations about the lands he saw. As part of this appointment, Marco travelled extensively inside China, living in the emperor's lands for 17 years.\nKublai initially refused several times to let the Polos return to Europe, as he appreciated their company and they became useful to him. Around 1291, he granted permission, entrusting the Polos with his last duty: accompany the Mongol princess K\u00f6k\u00f6chin, who was to become the consort of Arghun Khan, in Persia. When the Polos arrived to Persia, they learned that Arghun Khan died, and K\u00f6k\u00f6chin eventually became a wife of his son Ghazan. After leaving the princess, the Polos travelled overland to Constantinople. They later decided to return to their home.\nThey returned to Venice in 1295, after 24 years, with many riches and treasures. They had travelled almost .\nGenoese captivity and later life.\nMarco Polo returned to Venice in 1295 with his fortune converted into gemstones. At this time, Venice was at war with the Republic of Genoa. Polo armed a galley equipped with a trebuchet to join the war. He was probably caught by Genoans in a skirmish in 1296, off the Anatolian coast between Adana and the Gulf of Alexandretta (and not during the battle of Curzola (September 1298), off the Dalmatian coast, a claim which is due to a later tradition (16th century) recorded by Giovanni Battista Ramusio).\nHe spent several months of his imprisonment dictating a detailed account of his travels to a fellow inmate, Rustichello da Pisa, who incorporated tales of his own as well as other collected anecdotes and current affairs from China. The book soon spread throughout Europe in manuscript form, and became known as \"The Travels of Marco Polo\" (Italian title: Il Milione, lit. \"The Million\", deriving from Polo's nickname \"Milione\". Original title in Franco-Italian : \"Livres des Merveilles du Monde\"). It depicts the Polos' journeys throughout Asia, giving Europeans their first comprehensive look into the inner workings of the Far East, including China, India, and Japan.\nPolo was finally released from captivity in August 1299, and returned home to Venice, where his father and uncle in the meantime had purchased a large palazzo in the zone named \"contrada San Giovanni Crisostomo\" (Corte del Milion). For such a venture, the Polo family probably invested profits from trading, and even many gemstones they brought from the East. The company continued its activities and Marco soon became a wealthy merchant. Marco and his uncle Maffeo financed other expeditions, but likely never left Venetian provinces, nor returned to the Silk Road and Asia. Sometime before 1300, his father Niccol\u00f2 died. In 1300, he married Donata Bado\u00e8r, the daughter of Vitale Bado\u00e8r, a merchant. They had three daughters, Fantina (married Marco Bragadin), Bellela (married Bertuccio Querini), and Moreta. In 2022, it was found that Polo first had a daughter named Agnese (b. 1295/1299 - d. 1319) from a partnership or marriage which ended before 1300.\nPietro d'Abano, a philosopher, doctor and astrologer based in Padua, reports having spoken with Marco Polo about what he had observed in the vault of the sky during his travels. Marco told him that during his return trip to the South China Sea, he had spotted what he describes in a drawing as a star \"shaped like a sack\" (in Latin: \"ut sacco\") with a big tail (\"magna habens caudam\"); most likely a comet. Astronomers agree that there were no comets sighted in Europe at the end of the 13th century, but there are records about a comet sighted in China and Indonesia in 1293. This circumstance does not appear in Polo's book of travels. Peter D'Abano kept the drawing in his volume \"Conciliator Differentiarum, qu\u00e6 inter Philosophos et Medicos Versantur\". Marco Polo gave Pietro other astronomical observations he made in the Southern Hemisphere, and also a description of the Sumatran rhinoceros, which are collected in the \"Conciliator\".\nIn 1305, he is mentioned in a Venetian document among local sea captains regarding the payment of taxes. His relation with a certain Marco Polo, who in 1300 was mentioned in relation to riots against the aristocratic government, and who escaped the death penalty, who was also mentioned in relation to riots from 1310 led by Bajamonte Tiepolo and Marco Querini, among whose rebels were Jacobello and Francesco Polo from another family branch, is unclear. Polo is clearly mentioned again after 1305 in Maffeo's testament from 1309 to 1310, in a 1319 document according to which he became owner of some estates of his deceased father, and in 1321, when he bought part of the family property of his wife Donata.\nDeath.\nIn 1323, Polo was confined to bed due to illness. On 8 January 1324, despite physicians' efforts to treat him, Polo was on his deathbed. To write and certify the will, his family requested Giovanni Giustiniani, a priest of San Procolo. His wife, Donata, and his three daughters were appointed by him as co-executrices. The church was entitled by law to a portion of his estate; he approved of this and ordered that a further sum be paid to the convent of San Lorenzo, the place where he wished to be buried. He also set free Peter, a Tartar servant, who may have accompanied him from Asia, and to whom Polo bequeathed 100 lire of Venetian denari.\nHe divided up the rest of his assets, including several properties, among individuals, religious institutions, and every guild and fraternity to which he belonged. He also wrote off multiple debts, including 300\u00a0lire that his sister-in-law owed him, and others for the convent of San Giovanni, San Paolo of the Order of Preachers, and a cleric named Friar Benvenuto. He ordered 220\u00a0soldi be paid to Giovanni Giustiniani for his work as a notary and his prayers.\nThe will was not signed by Polo, but it was validated by the then-relevant \"signum manus\" rule, by which the testator had only to touch the document to make it legally valid. Due to the Venetian law stating that the day ends at sunset, the exact date of Marco Polo's death cannot be determined, but according to some scholars it was between the sunsets of 8 and 9 January 1324. Biblioteca Marciana, which holds the original copy of his testament, dates the testament on 9 January 1324, and it gives the date of his death at some time in June 1324.\n\"The Travels of Marco Polo\".\nAn authoritative version of Marco Polo's book does not and cannot exist, for the early manuscripts differ significantly, and the reconstruction of the original text is a matter of textual criticism. A total of about 150 copies in various languages are known to exist. Before the availability of printing press, errors were frequently made during copying and translating, so there are many differences between the various copies.\nPolo related his memoirs orally to Rustichello da Pisa while both were prisoners of the Genova Republic. Rustichello wrote \"Devisement du Monde\" in Franco-Venetian. The idea probably was to create a handbook for merchants, essentially a text on weights, measures and distances.\nThe oldest surviving manuscript is in Old French heavily flavoured with Italian; According to the Italian scholar Luigi Foscolo Benedetto, this \"F\" text is the basic original text, which he corrected by comparing it with the somewhat more detailed Italian of Giovanni Battista Ramusio, together with a Latin manuscript in the Biblioteca Ambrosiana. Other early important sources are \"R\" (Ramusio's Italian translation first printed in 1559), and \"Z\" (a 15th-century Latin manuscript kept at Toledo, Spain). Another Old French Polo manuscript, dating to around 1350, is held by the National Library of Sweden.\nOne of the early manuscripts was a translation into Latin made by the Dominican brother Francesco Pipino in 1302, just a few years after Marco's return to Venice. Since Latin was then the most widespread and authoritative language of culture, it is suggested that Rustichello's text was translated into Latin for a precise will of the Dominican Order, and this helped to promote the book on a European scale.\nThe first English translation is the Elizabethan version by John Frampton published in 1579, \"The most noble and famous travels of Marco Polo\", based on Santaella's Castilian translation of 1503 (the first version in that language).\nThe published editions of Polo's book rely on single manuscripts, blend multiple versions together, or add notes to clarify, for example in the English translation by Henry Yule. The 1938 English translation by A.\u2009C. Moule and Paul Pelliot is based on a Latin manuscript found in the library of the Cathedral of Toledo in 1932, and is 50% longer than other versions. The popular translation published by Penguin Books in 1958 by R.\u2009E. Latham works several texts together to make a readable whole. Sharon Kinoshita's 2016 version takes as its source the Franco-Italian \"F\" manuscript, and invites readers to \"focus on the text as the product of a larger European (and Eurasian) literary and commercial culture\", rather than questions of veracity of the account.\nNarrative.\nThe book opens with a preface describing his father and uncle travelling to Bolghar where Prince Berke Khan lived. A year later, they went to Ukek and continued to Bukhara. There, an envoy from the Levant invited them to meet Kublai Khan, who had never met Europeans. In 1266, they reached the seat of Kublai Khan at Dadu, present-day Beijing, China. Kublai received the brothers with hospitality and asked them many questions regarding the European legal and political system. He also inquired about the Pope and Church in Rome. After the brothers answered the questions he tasked them with delivering a letter to the Pope, requesting 100 Christians acquainted with the Seven Arts (grammar, rhetoric, logic, geometry, arithmetic, music and astronomy). Kublai Khan requested also that an envoy bring him back oil of the lamp in Jerusalem. The long between the death of Pope Clement IV in 1268 and the election of his successor delayed the Polos in fulfilling Kublai's request. They followed the suggestion of Theobald Visconti, then papal legate for the realm of Egypt, and returned to Venice in 1269 or 1270 to await the nomination of the new Pope, which allowed Marco to see his father for the first time, at the age of fifteen or sixteen.\nIn 1271, Niccol\u00f2, Maffeo and Marco Polo embarked on their voyage to fulfil Kublai's request. They sailed to Acre, and then rode on camels to the Persian port of Hormuz. The Polos wanted to sail straight into China, but the ships there were not seaworthy, so they continued overland through the Silk Road, until reaching Kublai's summer palace in Shangdu, near present-day Zhangjiakou. In one instance during their trip, the Polos joined a caravan of travelling merchants whom they crossed paths with. Unfortunately, the party was soon attacked by bandits, who used the cover of a sandstorm to ambush them. The Polos managed to fight and escape through a nearby town, but many members of the caravan were killed or enslaved. Three and a half years after leaving Venice, when Marco was about 21 years old, the Polos were welcomed by Kublai into his palace. The exact date of their arrival is unknown, but scholars estimate it to be between 1271 and 1275. On reaching the Yuan court, the Polos presented the sacred oil from Jerusalem and the papal letters to their patron.\nMarco knew four languages, and the family had accumulated a great deal of knowledge and experience that was useful to Kublai. It is possible that he became a government official; he wrote about many imperial visits to China's southern and eastern provinces, the far south and Myanmar. They were highly respected and sought after in the Mongolian court, and so Kublai Khan decided to decline the Polos' requests to leave China. They became worried about returning home safely, believing that if Kublai died, his enemies might turn against them because of their close involvement with the ruler. In 1292, Kublai's great-nephew, then ruler of Persia, sent representatives to China in search of a potential wife, and they asked the Polos to accompany them, so they were permitted to return to Persia with the wedding party\u00a0\u2013 which left that same year from Zaitun in southern China on a fleet of 14 junks. The party sailed to the port of Singapore, travelled north to Sumatra, and around the southern tip of India, eventually crossing the Arabian Sea to Hormuz. The two-year voyage was perilous\u00a0\u2013 of the six hundred people (not including the crew) in the convoy only eighteen had survived (including all three Polos). The Polos left the wedding party after reaching Hormuz and travelled overland to the port of Trebizond on the Black Sea, the present-day Trabzon.\nRole of Rustichello.\nThe British scholar Ronald Latham has pointed out that \"The Book of Marvels\" was a collaboration written in 1298\u20131299 between Polo and a professional writer of romances, Rustichello of Pisa. It is believed that Polo related his memoirs orally to Rustichello da Pisa while both were prisoners of the Genova Republic. Rustichello wrote \"Devisement du Monde\" in Franco-Venetian language, which was a literary-only language widespread in northern Italy between the subalpine belt and the lower Po between the 13th and 15th centuries.\nLatham also argued that Rustichello may have glamorised Polo's accounts, and added fantastic and romantic elements that made the book a bestseller. The Italian scholar Luigi Foscolo Benedetto had previously demonstrated that the book was written in the same \"leisurely, conversational style\" that characterised Rustichello's other works, and that some passages in the book were taken verbatim or with minimal modifications from other writings by Rustichello. For example, the opening introduction in \"The Book of Marvels\" to \"emperors and kings, dukes and marquises\" was lifted straight out of an Arthurian romance Rustichello had written several years earlier, and the account of the second meeting between Polo and Kublai Khan at the latter's court is almost the same as that of the arrival of Tristan at the court of King Arthur at Camelot in that same book. Latham believed that many elements of the book, such as legends of the Middle East and mentions of exotic marvels, might have been the work of Rustichello, who was giving what medieval European readers expected to find in a travel book.\nRole of the Dominican Order.\nApparently, from the very beginning, Marco's story aroused contrasting reactions, as it was received by some with a certain disbelief. The Dominican father Francesco Pipino was the author of a translation into Latin, in 1302, just a few years after Marco's return to Venice. Francesco Pipino solemnly affirmed the truthfulness of the book and defined Marco as a \"prudent, honoured and faithful man\". In his writings, the Dominican brother Jacopo d'Acqui explains why his contemporaries were sceptical about the content of the book. He also relates that before dying, Marco Polo insisted that \"he had told only a half of the things he had seen\".\nAccording to some recent research of the Italian scholar Antonio Montefusco, the very close relationship that Marco Polo cultivated with members of the Dominican Order in Venice suggests that local fathers collaborated with him for a Latin version of the book, which means that Rustichello's text was translated into Latin for a precise will of the Order.\nSince Dominican fathers had among their missions that of evangelising foreign peoples (cf. the role of Dominican missionaries in China and in the Indies), it is reasonable to think that they considered Marco's book as a trustworthy piece of information for missions in the East. The diplomatic communications between Pope Innocent IV and Pope Gregory X with the Mongols were probably another reason for this endorsement. At the time, there was open discussion of a possible Christian-Mongol alliance with an anti-Islamic function. A Mongol delegate was solemnly baptised at the Second Council of Lyon. At the council, Pope Gregory X promulgated a new Crusade to start in 1278 in liaison with the Mongols.\nAuthenticity and veracity.\nSince its publication, some have viewed the book with skepticism. Some in the Middle Ages regarded the book simply as a romance or fable, due largely to the sharp difference of its descriptions of a sophisticated civilisation in China to other early accounts by Giovanni da Pian del Carpine and William of Rubruck, who portrayed the Mongols as 'barbarians' who appeared to belong to 'some other world'. Doubts have also been raised in later centuries about Marco Polo's narrative of his travels in China, for example for his failure to mention the Great Wall of China, and in particular the difficulties in identifying many of the place names he used (the great majority, however, have since been identified). Many have questioned whether he had visited the places he mentioned in his itinerary, whether he had appropriated the accounts of his father and uncle or other travellers, and some doubted whether he even reached China, or that if he did, perhaps never went beyond Khanbaliq (Beijing).\nIt has been pointed out that Polo's accounts of China are more accurate and detailed than other travellers' accounts of the period. Polo had at times refuted the 'marvellous' fables and legends given in other European accounts, and despite some exaggerations and errors, Polo's accounts have relatively few of the descriptions of irrational marvels. In many cases of descriptions of events where he was not present (mostly given in the first part before he reached China, such as mentions of Christian miracles), he made a clear distinction that they are what he had heard rather than what he had seen. It is also largely free of the gross errors found in other accounts such as those given by the Moroccan traveller Ibn Battuta who had confused the Yellow River with the Grand Canal and other waterways, and believed that porcelain was made from coal.\nModern studies have further shown that details given in Marco Polo's book, such as the currencies used, salt productions and revenues, are accurate and unique. Such detailed descriptions are not found in other non-Chinese sources, and their accuracy is supported by archaeological evidence as well as Chinese records compiled after Polo had left China. His accounts are therefore unlikely to have been obtained second hand. Other accounts have also been verified; for example, when visiting Zhenjiang in Jiangsu, China, Marco Polo noted that a large number of Christian churches had been built there. His claim is confirmed by a Chinese text of the 14th century explaining how a Sogdian named Mar-Sargis from Samarkand founded six Nestorian Christian churches there in addition to one in Hangzhou during the second half of the 13th century. His story of the princess K\u00f6k\u00f6chin sent from China to Persia to marry the \u012al-kh\u0101n is also confirmed by independent sources in both Persia and China.\nScholarly analyses.\nExplaining omissions.\nSceptics have long wondered whether Marco Polo wrote his book based on hearsay, with some pointing to omissions about noteworthy practices and structures of China as well as the lack of details on some places in his book. While Polo describes paper money and the burning of coal, he fails to mention the Great Wall of China, tea, Chinese characters, chopsticks, or footbinding. His failure to note the presence of the Great Wall of China was first raised in the middle of the 17th century, and in the middle of the 18th century, it was suggested that he had never reached China. Later scholars such as John W. Haeger argued that Marco Polo might not have visited Southern China, in view of the lack of details in his description of southern Chinese cities compared to northern ones, while Herbert Franke also raised the possibility that Marco Polo had not been to China at all, and wondered if he had based his accounts on Persian sources, in view of his use of Persian expressions. This is taken further by Frances Wood, who claimed in her 1995 book \"Did Marco Polo Go to China?\" that at best Polo never went farther east than Persia (modern Iran), and that there is nothing in \"The Book of Marvels\" about China that could not have been obtained by reading Persian books. Wood maintains that it is more probable that Polo went only to Constantinople (modern Istanbul, Turkey) and some of the Italian merchant colonies around the Black Sea, picking hearsay from those travellers who had been farther east.\nSupporters of Polo's basic accuracy countered on the points raised by sceptics such as footbinding and the Great Wall of China. Historian Stephen G. Haw argued that the Great Walls were built to keep out northern invaders, whereas the ruling dynasty during Marco Polo's visit were those very northern invaders. They note that the Great Wall familiar to us today is a Ming structure built some two centuries after Marco Polo's travels; and that the Mongol rulers whom Polo served, controlled territories north and south of today's wall, and would have had no reasons to maintain any fortifications that might have remained there from the earlier dynasties. \nOther Europeans who travelled to Khanbaliq during the Yuan dynasty, such as Giovanni de' Marignolli and Odoric of Pordenone, said nothing about the wall either. The Muslim traveller Ibn Battuta, who asked about the wall when he visited China during the Yuan dynasty, could find no one who either had seen it, or knew of anyone who had seen it, suggesting that while ruins of the wall constructed in the earlier periods might have existed, they were not significant or noteworthy at that time.\nHaw argued that footbinding was not common even among Chinese during Polo's time and almost unknown among the Mongols. While the Italian missionary Odoric of Pordenone who visited Yuan China mentioned footbinding (it is however unclear whether he was merely relaying something he had heard as his description is inaccurate), no other foreign visitors to Yuan China mentioned the practice, perhaps an indication that the footbinding was not widespread or was not practised in an extreme form at that time. Marco Polo noted in the Toledo manuscript, the dainty walk of Chinese women who took very short steps. \nIt has been noted by other scholars that many of the things not mentioned by Marco Polo, such as tea and chopsticks, were not mentioned by other travellers either. Haw pointed out that despite the few omissions, Marco Polo's account is more extensive, more accurate and more detailed than those of other foreign travellers to China in this period. Marco Polo even observed Chinese nautical inventions such as the watertight compartments of bulkhead partitions in Chinese ships, knowledge of which he was keen to share with his fellow Venetians.\nIn addition to Haw, other scholars have argued in favour of the established view that Polo was in China, in response to Wood's book. The book has been criticised by figures including Igor de Rachewiltz (translator and annotator of \"The Secret History of the Mongols\") and Morris Rossabi (author of \"Kublai Khan: his life and times\"). The historian David Morgan points out basic errors made in Wood's book such as confusing the Liao dynasty with the Jin dynasty, and he found no compelling evidence in the book that would convince him that Marco Polo did not go to China. \nHaw argues in his book \"Marco Polo's China\" that Marco's account is much more correct and accurate than has often been supposed and that it is extremely unlikely that he could have obtained all the information in his book from secondhand sources. Haw criticizes Wood's approach to finding mention of Marco Polo in Chinese texts by contending that contemporaneous Europeans had little regard for using surnames and that a direct Chinese transliteration of the name \"Marco\" ignores the possibility of his taking on a Chinese or even Mongol name with no similarity to his Latin name.\nIn reply to Wood, J\u00f8rgen Jensen recalled the meeting of Marco Polo and Pietro d'Abano in the late 13th century. During this meeting, Marco gave to Pietro details of the astronomical observations he had made on his journey. These observations are compatible with Marco's stay in China, Sumatra and the South China Sea and are recorded in Pietro's book \"Conciliator Differentiarum\", but not in Marco's \"Book of Travels\".\nReviewing Haw's book, Peter Jackson (author of \"The Mongols and the West\") has said that Haw \"must surely now have settled the controversy surrounding the historicity of Polo's visit to China\". Igor de Rachewiltz's review, which refutes Wood's points, concludes with a strongly worded condemnation:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I regret to say that F. W.'s book falls short of the standard of scholarship that one would expect in a work of this kind. Her book can only be described as deceptive, both in relation to the author and to the public at large. Questions are posed that, in the majority of cases, have already been answered satisfactorily ... her attempt is unprofessional; she is poorly equipped in the basic tools of the trade, i.e., adequate linguistic competence and research methodology ... and her major arguments cannot withstand close scrutiny. Her conclusion fails to consider all the evidence supporting Marco Polo's credibility.\nAllegations of exaggeration.\nSome scholars believe that Marco Polo exaggerated his importance in China. The British historian David Morgan thought that Polo had likely exaggerated and lied about his status in China, while Ronald Latham believed that such exaggerations were embellishments by his ghostwriter Rustichello da Pisa.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis sentence in \"The Book of Marvels\" was interpreted as Marco Polo was \"the governor\" of the city of \"Yangiu\" Yangzhou for three years, and later of Hangzhou. This claim has raised some controversy. According to David Morgan no Chinese source mentions him as either a friend of the Emperor or as the governor of Yangzhou \u2013 indeed no Chinese source mentions Marco Polo at all. In the 1960s the German historian Herbert Franke noted that all occurrences of Po-lo or Bolod in Yuan texts were names of people of Mongol or Turkic extraction.\nIn the 2010s the Chinese scholar Peng Hai claimed to have identified Marco Polo with a certain \"Boluo\" (), a courtier of the emperor, who is mentioned in Volume 119 of the \"History of Yuan\" () commissioned by the succeeding Ming dynasty. The claim arises out of the report that Boluo was arrested in 1274 by an imperial dignitary named Saman () for walking on the same side of the road as a female courtesan, in contravention of the order for men and women to walk on opposite sides of the road inside the city. According to the \"History of Yuan\", Boluo was released at the request of the emperor himself, and was then transferred to the region of Ningxia, in the northeast of present-day China, in the spring of 1275. The date could correspond to the first mission of which Marco Polo speaks.\nIf this identification is correct, there is a record about Marco Polo in Chinese sources. These conjectures seem to be supported by the fact that in addition to the imperial dignitary Saman (the one who had arrested the official named \"Boluo\"), the documents mention his brother, Xiangwei (). According to sources, Saman died shortly after the incident, while Xiangwei was transferred to Yangzhou in 1282\u20131283. Marco Polo reports that he was moved to Hangzhou the following year, in 1284. It has been supposed that these displacements are due to the intention to avoid further conflicts between the two.\nThe sinologist Paul Pelliot thought that Polo might have served as an officer of the government salt monopoly in Yangzhou, which was a position of some significance that could explain the exaggeration.\nIt may seem unlikely that a European could hold a position of power in the Mongolian empire. Some records prove he was not the first nor the only one. In his book, Marco mentions an official named \"Mar Sarchis\" who probably was a Nestorian Christian bishop, and he says he founded two Christian churches in the region of \"Caigiu\". This official is actually mentioned in the local gazette \"Zhishun Zhenjian zhi\" under the name \"Ma Xuelijisi\" and the qualification of \"General of Third Class\". In the gazette, it is said Ma Xuelijsi was an assistant supervisor in the province of Zhenjiang for three years, and that during this time he founded two Christian churches. It is a well-documented fact that Kublai Khan trusted foreigners more than his Chinese subjects in internal affairs.\nStephen G. Haw challenges this idea that Polo exaggerated his own importance, writing that, \"contrary to what has often been said\u00a0... Marco does not claim any very exalted position for himself in the Yuan empire.\" He points out that Polo never claimed to hold high rank, such as a \"darughachi\", who led a \"tumen\" \u2013 a unit that was normally 10,000 strong. Polo does not even imply that he had led 1,000 personnel. Haw points out that Polo himself appears to state only that he had been an emissary of the khan, in a position with some esteem. According to Haw, this is a reasonable claim if Polo was, for example, a \"keshig\" \u2013 a member of the imperial guard by the same name, which included as many as 14,000 individuals at the time.\nHaw explains how the earliest manuscripts of Polo's accounts provide contradicting information about his role in Yangzhou, with some stating he was just a simple resident, others stating he was a governor, and Ramusio's manuscript claiming he was simply holding that office as a temporary substitute for someone else, yet all the manuscripts concur that he worked as an esteemed emissary for the khan. \nAnother contradictory claim is at chapter 145 when \"The Book of Marvels\" states that the three Polos provided the Mongols with technical advice on building mangonels during the Siege of Xiangyang,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSince the siege was over in 1273, before Marco Polo had arrived in China for the first time, the claim cannot be true. The Mongol army that besieged Xiangyang did have foreign military engineers, but they were mentioned in Chinese sources as being from Baghdad and had Arabic names. In this respect, Igor de Rachewiltz recalls that the claim that the \"three\" Polo were present at the siege of Xiang-yang is not present in all manuscripts, but Niccol\u00f2 and Matteo could have made this suggestion. Therefore, this claim seems a subsequent addition to give more credibility to the story.\nErrors.\nA number of errors in Marco Polo's account have been noted: for example, he described the bridge later known as Marco Polo Bridge as having twenty-four arches instead of eleven or thirteen. He also said that city wall of Khanbaliq had twelve gates when it had only eleven. Archaeologists have also pointed out that Polo may have mixed up the details from the two attempted invasions of Japan by Kublai Khan in 1274 and 1281. Polo wrote of five-masted ships, when archaeological excavations found that the ships had only three masts.\nAppropriation.\nHistorian Frances Wood accused Marco Polo of taking other people's accounts in his book, retelling other stories as his own, or basing his accounts on Persian guidebooks or other lost sources. For example, Sinologist Francis Woodman Cleaves noted that Polo's account of the voyage of the princess K\u00f6k\u00f6chin from China to Persia to marry the \u012al-kh\u0101n in 1293 has been confirmed by a passage in the 15th-century Chinese work \"Yongle Encyclopedia\" and by the Persian historian Rashid-al-Din Hamadani in his work \"Jami' al-tawarikh\". However, neither of these accounts mentions Polo or indeed any European as part of the bridal party, and Wood used the lack of mention of Polo in these works as an example of Polo's \"retelling of a well-known tale\". David O. Morgan, in Polo's defence, noted that even the princess herself was not mentioned in the Chinese source and that it would have been surprising if Polo had been mentioned by Rashid-al-Din. \nHistorian Igor de Rachewiltz strongly criticised Wood's arguments in his review of her book. Rachewiltz argued that Marco Polo's account allows the Persian and Chinese sources to be reconciled \u2013 by relaying the information that two of the three envoys sent (mentioned in the Chinese source and whose names accord with those given by Polo) had died during the voyage, it explains why only the third who survived, Coja/Khoja, was mentioned by Rash\u00ecd al-D\u00ecn. Polo had therefore completed the story by providing information not found in either source. He also noted that the only Persian source that mentions the princess was not completed until 1310\u201311, therefore Marco Polo could not have learned the information from any Persian book. According to de Rachewiltz, the concordance of Polo's detailed account of the princess with other independent sources that gave only incomplete information is proof of the veracity of Polo's story and his presence in China.\nAssessments.\nMorgan writes that since much of what \"The Book of Marvels\" has to say about China is \"demonstrably correct\", any claim that Polo did not go to China \"creates far more problems than it solves\", therefore the \"balance of probabilities\" strongly suggests that Polo really did go to China, even if he exaggerated somewhat his importance in China. Haw dismisses the various anachronistic criticisms of Polo's accounts that started in the 17th century, and highlights Polo's accuracy in great part of his accounts, for example on features of the landscape such as the Grand Canal of China. \"If Marco was a liar,\" Haw writes, \"then he must have been an implausibly meticulous one.\"\nIn 2012, the University of T\u00fcbingen Sinologist and historian Hans Ulrich Vogel released a detailed analysis of Polo's description of currencies, salt production and revenues, and argued that the evidence supports his presence in China because he included details which he could not have otherwise known. Vogel noted that no other Western, Arab, or Persian sources have given such accurate and unique details about the currencies of China, for example, the shape and size of the paper, the use of seals, the various denominations of paper money as well as variations in currency usage in different regions of China, such as the use of cowry shells in Yunnan, details supported by archaeological evidence and Chinese sources compiled long after the Polos had left China. His accounts of salt production and revenues from the salt monopoly are also accurate, and accord with Chinese documents of the Yuan era. \nEconomic historian Mark Elvin, in his preface to Vogel's 2013 monograph, concludes that Vogel \"demonstrates by specific example after specific example the ultimately overwhelming probability of the broad authenticity\" of Polo's account. Many problems were caused by the oral transmission of the original text and the proliferation of significantly different hand-copied manuscripts. For instance, did Polo exert \"political authority\" (\"seignora\") in Yangzhou or merely \"sojourn\" (\"sejourna\") there? Elvin concludes that \"those who doubted, although mistaken, were not always being casual or foolish\", but \"the case as a whole had now been closed\": the book is, \"in essence, authentic, and, when used with care, in broad terms to be trusted as a serious though obviously not always final, witness.\"\nLegacy.\nFurther exploration.\nOther lesser-known European explorers had already travelled to China, such as Giovanni da Pian del Carpine, but Polo's book meant that his journey was the first to be widely known. Christopher Columbus was inspired enough by Polo's description of the Far East to want to visit those lands for himself. A copy of Polo's book was among his belongings, with handwritten annotations. \nBento de G\u00f3is, inspired by Polo's writings of a Christian kingdom in the east, travelled in three years across Central Asia. He never found the kingdom but ended his travels at the Great Wall of China in 1605, proving that Cathay was what Matteo Ricci (1552\u20131610) called \"China\".\nCartography.\nMarco Polo's travels may have had some influence on the development of European cartography, ultimately leading to the European voyages of exploration a century later. The 1453 Fra Mauro map was said by Giovanni Battista Ramusio (disputed by historian/cartographer Piero Falchetta, in whose work the quote appears) to have been partially based on the one brought from Cathay by Marco Polo:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;That fine illuminated world map on parchment, which can still be seen in a large cabinet alongside the choir of their monastery [the Camaldolese monastery of San Michele di Murano] was by one of the brothers of the monastery, who took great delight in the study of cosmography, diligently drawn and copied from a most beautiful and very old nautical map and a world map that had been brought from Cathay by the most honourable Messer Marco Polo and his father.\u2014\u200a\nThough Marco Polo never produced a map that illustrated his journey, his family drew several maps of the Far East based on the traveller's accounts. These collections of maps were signed by Polo's three daughters, Fantina, Bellela and Moreta. The authenticity of these maps is uncertain. Benjamin B. Olshin a historian who wrote for the University of Chicago Press has been unable to \"establish the authenticity\" of these maps once owned by Marcian Rossi, an Italian immigrant living in California during the 1930s known for peddaling hoaxes. These maps have been compared to the Zeno Map hoax. However Olshin made no mention on the improbability they are real. According to the Telegraph, a radiocarbon study of the sheepskin the maps are made of date back to the 15th or 16th century strongly suggesting they are copies of the original maps. \nPasta myth.\nThere is a legend about Marco Polo importing pasta from China; however, it is actually a popular misconception, originating with the \"Macaroni Journal\", published by a food industry association with the goal of promoting the use of pasta in the United States. Marco Polo describes in his book a food similar to \"lasagna\", but he uses a term with which he was already familiar. Pasta had already been invented in Italy a long time before Marco Polo's travels to Asia. \nAccording to the National Macaroni Manufacturers Association and food writer Jeffrey Steingarten, durum wheat was introduced by Arabs from Libya, during their rule over Sicily in the late 9th century, predating Marco Polo's travels by about four centuries. Steingarten mentioned that Jane Grigson believed the Marco Polo story to have originated in the 1920s or 30s in an advertisement for a Canadian spaghetti company.\nCommemoration.\nThe \"Marco Polo sheep\", a subspecies of \"Ovis ammon\", is named after the explorer, who described it during his crossing of Pamir (ancient Mount Imeon) in 1271.\nIn 1851, a three-masted clipper built in Saint John, New Brunswick took his name. The \"Marco Polo\" was the first ship to sail around the world in under six months. The airport in Venice is named \"Venice Marco Polo Airport\".\nA square in Tianjin is named \"Marco Polo Square\". In 2010, the \"Marco Polo Memorial Hall\" was erected in Yangzhou, and renovated in 2023.\nCroatian state-owned shipping company's (Jadrolinija) ship connecting Split with Ancona in Italy is named after Marco Polo.\nArts, entertainment, and media.\nLiterature.\nThe travels of Marco Polo are fictionalised in a number of works, such as:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19335", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19335", "title": "Mountain Range", "text": ""}
{"id": "19336", "revid": "1317485055", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19336", "title": "M4", "text": "M4 or M-4 most often refers to:\nM4, M04, or M-4 may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles associated with the same title formed as a letter\u2013number combination."}
{"id": "19337", "revid": "42372246", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19337", "title": "Index of articles related to motion pictures", "text": "The film industry is built upon many technologies and techniques, drawing upon photography, stagecraft, music, and many other disciplines. Following is an index of specific terminology applicable thereto.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"TOC top/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\n0-9.\n180 degree rule\n- 30 degree rule\nA.\nA and B editing\n- A roll\n- Accelerated montage\n- Acousmatic\n- Action axis\n- Aerial shot\n- Ambient light\n- American night\n- American shot\n- Anamorphic\n- Angle of view\n- Angle plus angle\n- Angular resolution\n- Answer print\n- Aperture\n- Apple box\n- Artificial light\n- ASA speed rating\n- Aspect ratio\n- Autofocus\n- Automated dialogue replacement\n- Available light\n- Axial cut\nB.\nB roll\n- Baby plates\n- Backlot\n- Background lighting\n- Balloon light\n- Barn doors (lighting)\n- Below the line (film production)\n- Best boy\n- Blocking\n- Bluescreen\n- Boom shot\n- Boomerang (lighting)\n- Bounce board\n- Brightness (lighting)\n- Broadside (lighting)\n- Butterfly (lighting)\nC.\nC-Stand\n- Callier effect\n- Cameo lighting\n- Cameo (credits image)\n- Cameo role\n- Cameo shot\n- Camera angle\n- Camera boom\n- Camera crane\n- Camera dolly\n- Camera shot\n- Candles per square foot\n- Character animation\n- Choker shot\n- Chroma key\n- Chromatic aberration\n- CinemaDNG\n- Clapboard\n- Clock wipe\n- Close shot\n- Close up shot\n- Cold open\n- Color conversion filter\n- Color corrected fluorescent light\n- Color correction\n- Color gel\n- Color grading\n- Color rendering index\n- Color reversal internegative\n- Color temperature\n- Color timer\n- Continuity\n- Cooke Triplet lens\n- Crafts service\n- Crane shot\n- Creative geography\n- Cross cutting\n- Cutaway\n- Cut in - cut out\n- Cutting on action\nD.\nDaily rushes\n- Day for night\n- Deadspot (lighting)\n- Deep focus\n- Depth of field\n- Depth of focus\n- Dichroic lens\n- Diegetic sound\n- Diffraction\n- Diffuser (lighting)\n- Digital audio\n- Digital audio tape recorder\n- Digital cinema\n- Digital compositing\n- Digital film\n- Digital image processing\n- Digital intermediate\n- Digital negative\n- Digital projection\n- Dimmer (lighting)\n- Dissolve (film)\n- DMX (lighting)\n- Dolly grip\n- Dolly shot\n- Dolly zoom\n- Double-system recording\n- Douser (lighting)\n- DPX film format\n- Drawn on film animation\n- Dubbing\n- Dutch angle\n- Dynamic composition\nE.\nEffects light\n- Electrotachyscope\n- Ellipsoidal reflector spot light\n- Establishing shot\n- Extreme close-up\n- Extreme long shot\n- Eye-level camera angle\nF.\nF-number\n- F-stop\n- Fade-in\n- Fade-out\n- Fast cutting\n- Fast motion\n- Feature length\n- Field of view\n- Fill light\n- Film gate\n- Film modification\n- Film plane\n- Film recorder\n- Film scanner\n- Film score\n- Film speed\n- Filter (photography)\n- Fine cut\n- Fisheye lens\n- Flicker fusion threshold\n- Focal length\n- Focus (optics)\n- Focus puller\n- Foley artist\n- Follow focus\n- Follow shot\n- Followspot light\n- Forced perspective\n- Footage\n- Fourth wall\n- Frame\n- Frame composition\n- Frame rate\n- Freeze frame shot\n- Fresnel lens\n- Full frame\n- Full shot\nG.\nGobo (lighting)\n- Go motion\n- Godspot effect\n- Greenlight\n- Grip\n- Gaffer\nH.\nHard light\n- Head-on shot\n- Heart wipe\n- High-angle shot\n- High camera angle\n- High concept\n- High-intensity discharge lamp\n- High-key lighting\n- Hip hop montage\n- Hydrargyrum Medium-Arc Iodide lamp\nK.\nKey Grip\n- key light\nL.\nletterbox\n- light reflector\nM.\nMartini Shot\n- Mise en sc\u00e8ne\n- montage\n- MOS\n- movement mechanism\n- movie camera\n- MIDI Timecode\nN.\nnegative cutting\nO.\novercranking\nP.\npan and scan\n- persistence of vision\n- Pillarboxing\n- Point-of-view shot\n- point of view\n- post-production\nR.\nReel\n- Replay\nS.\nscreenplay\n- slow cutting\n- slow motion\n- sound stage\n- stand-in\n- storyboard\nT.\ntake\n- timecode\n- time-lapse\n- tracking shot\n- trailer\nU-Z.\nundercranking\n- voice artist\n- voice-over\n- widescreen\n- wrap"}
{"id": "19338", "revid": "7852030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19338", "title": "Mountain range", "text": "Geographic area containing several geologically related mountains\nA mountain range or hill range is a series of mountains or hills arranged in a line and connected by high ground. A mountain system or mountain belt is a group of mountain ranges with similarity in form, structure, and alignment that have arisen from the same cause, usually an orogeny. Mountain ranges are formed by a variety of geological processes, but most of the significant ones on Earth are the result of plate tectonics. Mountain ranges are also found on many planetary mass objects in the Solar System and are likely a feature of most terrestrial planets.\nMountain ranges are usually segmented by highlands or mountain passes and valleys. Individual mountains within the same mountain range do not necessarily have the same geologic structure or petrology. They may be a mix of different orogenic expressions and terranes, for example thrust sheets, uplifted blocks, fold mountains, and volcanic landforms resulting in a variety of rock types.\nMajor ranges.\nMost geologically young mountain ranges on the Earth's land surface are associated with either the Pacific Ring of Fire or the Alpide belt. The Pacific Ring of Fire includes the Andes of South America, extends through the North American Cordillera, the Aleutian Range, on through Kamchatka Peninsula, Japan, China, the Philippines, Papua New Guinea, to New Zealand. The Andes is long and is often considered the world's longest mountain system.\nThe Alpide belt stretches 15,000 km across southern Eurasia, from Java in Maritime Southeast Asia to the Iberian Peninsula in Western Europe, including the ranges of the Himalayas, Karakoram, Hindu Kush, Alborz, Caucasus, and the Alps. The Himalayas contain the highest mountains in the world, including Mount Everest, which is high.\nMountain ranges outside these two systems include the Arctic Cordillera, Appalachians, Great Dividing Range, East Siberians, Altais, Scandinavians, Qinling, Western Ghats, Vindhyas, Byrrangas, and the Annamite Range. If the definition of a mountain range is stretched to include underwater mountains, then the Ocean Ridge forms the longest continuous mountain system on Earth, with a length of .\nClimate.\nThe position of mountain ranges influences climate, such as rain or snow. When air masses move up and over mountains, the air cools, producing orographic precipitation (rain or snow). As the air descends on the leeward side, it warms again (following the adiabatic lapse rate) and is drier, having been stripped of much of its moisture. Often, a rain shadow will affect the leeward side of a range. As a consequence, large mountain ranges, such as the Andes, compartmentalize continents into distinct climate regions.\nErosion.\nMountain ranges are constantly subjected to erosional forces which work to tear them down. The basins adjacent to an eroding mountain range are then filled with sediments that are buried and turned into sedimentary rock. Erosion is at work while the mountains are being uplifted until the mountains are reduced to low hills and plains.\nThe early Cenozoic uplift of the Rocky Mountains of Colorado provides an example. As the uplift was occurring some of mostly Mesozoic sedimentary strata were removed by erosion over the core of the mountain range and spread as sand and clays across the Great Plains to the east. This mass of rock was removed as the range was actively undergoing uplift. The removal of such a mass from the core of the range most likely caused further uplift as the region adjusted isostatically in response to the removed weight.\nRivers are traditionally believed to be the principal cause of mountain range erosion, by cutting into bedrock and transporting sediment. Computer simulation has shown that as mountain belts change from tectonically active to inactive, the rate of erosion drops because there are fewer abrasive particles in the water and fewer landslides.\nExtraterrestrial \"Montes\".\nMountains on other planets and natural satellites of the Solar System, including the Moon, are often isolated and formed mainly by processes such as impacts, though there are examples of mountain ranges (or \"Montes\") somewhat similar to those on Earth. Saturn's moon Titan and Pluto, in particular, exhibit large mountain ranges in chains composed mainly of ices rather than rock. Examples include the Mithrim Montes and Doom Mons on Titan, and Tenzing Montes and Hillary Montes on Pluto. Some terrestrial planets other than Earth also exhibit rocky mountain ranges, such as Maxwell Montes on Venus taller than any on Earth and Tartarus Montes on Mars. Jupiter's moon Io has mountain ranges formed from tectonic processes including the Bo\u00f6saule, Dorian, Hi'iaka and Euboea Montes.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19339", "revid": "87355", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19339", "title": "Mathematical Limit", "text": ""}
{"id": "19342", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19342", "title": "Magnoliales", "text": "Basal order of flowering plants\nThe Magnoliales are an order of flowering plants. Well-known members of Magnoliales include: magnolias, tulip trees, custard apples, American pawpaw, cherimoyas, ylang-ylang, soursop fruit, and nutmeg.\nClassification.\nThe Magnoliales include six families:\nAPG system.\nThe APG system (1998), APG II system (2003), APG III system (2009), and APG IV system (2016) place this order in the clade magnoliids, circumscribed as follows:\nIn these systems, published by the APG, the Magnoliales are a basal group, excluded from the eudicots.\nEarlier systems.\nThe Cronquist system (1981) placed the order in the subclass Magnoliidae of class Magnoliopsida (=dicotyledons) and used this circumscription:\nThe Thorne system (1992) placed the order in superorder Magnolianae, subclass Magnoliidae (= dicotyledons), in the class Magnoliopsida (= angiosperms) and used this circumscription (including the plants placed in order Laurales and Piperales by other systems):\nThe Engler system, in its update of 1964, placed the order in subclassis Archychlamydeae in class Dicotyledoneae (=dicotyledons) and used this circumscription:\nThe Wettstein system, latest version published in 1935, did not use this name although it had an order with a similar circumscription with the name Polycarpicae. This was placed in the Dialypetalae in subclass Choripetalae of class Dicotyledones. (See also Sympetalae).\nFrom the above it will be clear that the plants included in this order by APG have always been seen as related. They have always been placed in the order Magnoliales (or a predecessor). The difference is that earlier systems have also included other plants, which have been moved to neighbouring orders (in the magnoliids) by APG.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19343", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19343", "title": "Maximum Likelihood", "text": ""}
{"id": "19344", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19344", "title": "March", "text": "Third month in the Julian and Gregorian calendars\nMarch is the third month of the year in both the Julian and Gregorian calendars. Its length is 31 days. In the Northern Hemisphere, the meteorological beginning of spring occurs on the first day of March. The March equinox on the 20 or 21 marks the astronomical beginning of spring in the Northern Hemisphere and the beginning of autumn in the Southern Hemisphere, where September is the seasonal equivalent of the Northern Hemisphere's March.\nHistory.\nThe name of March comes from \"Martius\", the first month of the earliest Roman calendar. It was named after Mars, the Roman god of war, and an ancestor of the Roman people through his sons Romulus and Remus. His month \"Martius\" was the beginning of the season for warfare, and the festivals held in his honor during the month were mirrored by others in October, when the season for these activities came to a close. \"Martius\" remained the first month of the Roman calendar year perhaps as late as 153 BC, and several religious observances in the first half of the month were originally new year's celebrations. Even in late antiquity, Roman mosaics picturing the months sometimes still placed March first.\nMarch 1 began the numbered year in Russia until the end of the 15th century. Great Britain and its colonies continued to use March 25 until 1752, when they finally adopted the Gregorian calendar (the fiscal year in the UK continues to begin on 6 April, initially identical to 25 March in the former Julian calendar). Many other cultures, for example in Iran, or Ethiopia, still celebrate the beginning of the New Year in March.\nMarch is the first month of spring in the Northern Hemisphere (North America, Europe, Asia and part of Africa) and the first month of fall or autumn in the Southern Hemisphere (South America, part of Africa, and Oceania).\nAncient Roman observances celebrated in March include Agonium Martiale, celebrated on March 1, March 14, and March 17, Matronalia, celebrated on March 1, Junonalia, celebrated on March 7, Equirria, celebrated on March 14, Mamuralia, celebrated on either March 14 or March 15, Hilaria on March 15 and then through March 22\u201328, Argei, celebrated on March 16\u201317, Liberalia and Bacchanalia, celebrated March 17, Quinquatria, celebrated March 19\u201323, and Tubilustrium, celebrated March 23. These dates do not correspond to the modern Gregorian calendar.\nOther names.\nIn Finnish, the month is called \"maaliskuu\", which is believed to originate from \"maallinen kuu\". The latter means \"earthy month\" and may refer to the first appearance of \"earth\" from under the winter's snow. In Ukrainian, the month is called \"\u0431\u0435\u0440\u0435\u0437\u0435\u043d\u044c\"/\"berezen\u02b9\", meaning \"birch tree\", and b\u0159ezen in Czech. Historical names for March include the Saxon \"Lentmonat\", named after the March equinox and gradual lengthening of days, and the eventual namesake of Lent. Saxons also called March \"Rhed-monat\" or \"Hreth-monath\" (deriving from their goddess \"Rhedam\"/\"Hreth\"), and Angles called it \"Hyld-monath\", which became the English \"Lide\". In Croatia, the month is called \"O\u017eujak\". In Slovene, the traditional name is \"su\u0161ec\", meaning the month when the earth becomes dry enough so that it is possible to cultivate it. The name was first written in 1466 in the \u0160kofja Loka manuscript. Other names were used too, for example \"brezen\" and \"breznik\", \"the month of birches\". The Turkish word \"Mart\" is given after the name of \"Mars\" the god.\nSymbols.\nMarch's birthstones are aquamarine and bloodstone. These stones symbolize courage. Its birth flower is the daffodil. The zodiac signs are Pisces until approximately March 20 and Aries from approximately March 21 onward.\nObservances.\n\"This list does not necessarily imply either official status or general observance.\"\nNon-Gregorian.\n\"(All Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed, Islamic, and Jewish observances begin at the sundown prior to the date listed, and end at sundown of the date in question unless otherwise noted.)\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19345", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19345", "title": "May", "text": "Fifth month in the Julian and Gregorian calendars\nMay is the fifth month of the year in the Julian and Gregorian calendars. Its length is 31 days.\nMay is a month of spring in the Northern Hemisphere, and autumn in the Southern Hemisphere. Therefore, May in the Southern Hemisphere is the seasonal equivalent of November in the Northern Hemisphere and vice versa. Late May typically marks the start of the summer vacation season in the United States (Memorial Day) and Canada (Victoria Day) that ends on Labor Day, the first Monday of September.\nMay (in Latin, \"Maius\") was named for the Greek goddess Maia, who was identified with the Roman era goddess of fertility, Bona Dea, whose festival was held in May. Conversely, the Roman poet Ovid provides a second etymology, in which he says that the month of May is named for the \"maiores,\" Latin for \"elders\", and that the following month (June) is named for the \"iuniores,\" or \"young people\" (\"Fasti VI.88\").\nEta Aquariids meteor shower appears in May. It is visible from about April 21 to about May 20 each year with peak activity on or around May 6. The Arietids shower from May 22 \u2013 July 2, and peaks on June 7. The Virginids also shower at various dates in May.\nAncient Roman observances.\nUnder the calendar of ancient Rome, the festival of Bona Dea fell on May 1, Argei fell on May 14 or May 15, Agonalia fell on May 21, and Ambarvalia on May 29. Floralia was held April 27 during the Republican era, or April 28 on the Julian calendar, and lasted until May 3. Lemuria fell on 9,11, and 13 May under the Julian calendar. The College of Aesculapius and Hygia celebrated two festivals of Rosalia, one on May 11 and one on May 22. Rosalia was also celebrated at Pergamon on May 24\u201326. A military Rosalia festival, Rosaliae signorum, also occurred on May 31. Ludi Fabarici was celebrated May 29 \u2013 June 1. Mercury would receive a sacrifice on the Ides of May (May 15). Tubilustrium took place on May 23 as well as in March. These dates do not correspond to the modern Gregorian calendar.\nSymbols.\nMay's birthstone is the emerald, which is emblematic of love and success. Birth flowers are the Lily of the Valley and \"Crataegus monogyna\". Both are native throughout the cool temperate Northern Hemisphere in Asia, Europe, and in the southern Appalachian Mountains in the United States, but have been naturalized throughout the temperate climatic world.\nThe \"Mayflower\" \"Epigaea repens\" is a North American harbinger of May, and the floral emblem of both Nova Scotia and Massachusetts. Its native range extends from Newfoundland south to Florida, west to Kentucky in the southern range, and to Northwest Territories in the north. The zodiac signs are Taurus (until May 20) and Gemini (May 21 onward).\nObservances.\nNon-Gregorian.\n\"(All Baha'i, Islamic, and Jewish observances begin at the sundown prior to the date listed, and end at sundown of the date in question unless otherwise noted.)\"\nMovable, 2019.\nWestern Christian.\nLabour Day: May 1 \nSunday after Divine Mercy Sunday: May 5 \nMonday and Tuesday in the week following the third Sunday of Easter: May 6\u20137 \nFourth Sunday after Easter: May 12 \nFourth Friday after Easter: May 17 \nThird Sunday of May: May 19 \nSunday preceding the Rogation days: May 26 \nMonday, Tuesday, and Wednesday preceding Feast of the Ascension: May 27\u201329\n39 days after Easter: May 30 \nEastern Christian.\nWednesday after Pascha: May 1\nThursday after Pascha: May 2 \nFriday after Pascha: May 3 \nSaturday after Pascha: May 4 \n8th day after Pascha: May 5 \n2nd Tuesday of Pascha, or 2nd Monday of Pascha, depending on region: May 6 or May 7 \n2nd Sunday following Pascha: May 12 \n4th Sunday of Pascha: May 26 \nWednesday after the Sunday of the Paralytic: May 29\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19346", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19346", "title": "March 1", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearMarch 1 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19347", "revid": "48535054", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19347", "title": "March 28", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearMarch 28 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19348", "revid": "47948189", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19348", "title": "May 1", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearMay 1 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19349", "revid": "47772716", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19349", "title": "May 2", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearMay 2 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19350", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19350", "title": "May 3", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearMay 3 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19351", "revid": "38556235", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19351", "title": "May 4", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearMay 4 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19352", "revid": "43271534", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19352", "title": "May 5", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearMay 5 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19353", "revid": "46628330", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19353", "title": "May 8", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearMay 8 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19354", "revid": "24013162", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19354", "title": "May 25", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearMay 25 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19355", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19355", "title": "May 29", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearMay 29 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19356", "revid": "41002480", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19356", "title": "Mental disorder", "text": "Medical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nA mental disorder, also referred to as a mental illness, a mental health condition, or a psychiatric disability, is a behavioral or mental pattern that causes significant distress or impairment of personal functioning. A mental disorder is also characterized by a clinically significant disturbance in an individual's cognition, emotional regulation, or behavior, often in a social context. Such disturbances may occur as single episodes, may be persistent, or may be relapsing\u2013remitting. There are many different types of mental disorders, with signs and symptoms that vary widely between specific disorders. A mental disorder is one aspect of mental health.\nThe causes of mental disorders are often unclear. Theories incorporate findings from a range of fields. Disorders may be associated with particular regions or functions of the brain. Disorders are usually diagnosed or assessed by a mental health professional, such as a clinical psychologist, psychiatrist, psychiatric nurse, or clinical social worker, using various methods such as psychometric tests, but often relying on observation and questioning. Cultural and religious beliefs, as well as social norms, should be taken into account when making a diagnosis.\nServices for mental disorders are usually based in psychiatric hospitals, outpatient clinics, or in the community. Treatments are provided by mental health professionals. Common treatment options are psychotherapy or psychiatric medication, while lifestyle changes, social interventions, peer support, and self-help are also options. In a minority of cases, there may be involuntary detention or treatment. Prevention programs have been shown to reduce depression.\nIn 2019, common mental disorders around the globe include: depression, which affects about 264\u00a0million people; dementia, which affects about 50\u00a0million; bipolar disorder, which affects about 45\u00a0million; and schizophrenia and other psychoses, which affect about 20\u00a0million people. Neurodevelopmental disorders include attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), autism spectrum disorder (ASD), and intellectual disability, of which onset occurs early in the developmental period. Stigma and discrimination can add to the suffering and disability associated with mental disorders, leading to various social movements attempting to increase understanding and challenge social exclusion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDefinition.\nThe definition and classification of mental disorders are key issues for researchers as well as service providers and those who may be diagnosed. For a mental state to be classified as a disorder, it generally needs to cause dysfunction. Most international clinical documents use the term mental \"disorder\", while \"illness\" is also common. It has been noted that using the term \"mental\" (i.e., of the mind) is not necessarily meant to imply separateness from the brain or body.\nAccording to the fourth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV), published in 1994, a mental disorder is a psychological syndrome or pattern that is associated with distress (e.g., via a painful symptom), disability (impairment in one or more important areas of functioning), increased risk of death, or causes a significant loss of autonomy; however, it excludes normal responses such as the grief from loss of a loved one and also excludes deviant behavior for political, religious, or societal reasons not arising from a dysfunction in the individual.\nDSM-IV predicates the definition with caveats, stating that, as in the case with many medical terms, \"mental disorder\" \"lacks a consistent operational definition that covers all situations\", noting that different levels of abstraction can be used for medical definitions, including pathology, symptomology, deviance from a normal range, or etiology, and that the same is true for mental disorders, so that sometimes one type of definition is appropriate and sometimes another, depending on the situation.\nIn 2013, the American Psychiatric Association (APA) redefined mental disorders in the DSM-5 as \"a syndrome characterized by clinically significant disturbance in an individual's cognition, emotion regulation, or behavior that reflects a dysfunction in the psychological, biological, or developmental processes underlying mental functioning.\" The final draft of ICD-11 contains a very similar definition.\nThe terms \"mental breakdown\" or \"nervous breakdown\" may be used by the general population to mean a mental disorder. The terms \"nervous breakdown\" and \"mental breakdown\" have not been formally defined through a medical diagnostic system such as the DSM-5 or ICD-10 and are nearly absent from scientific literature regarding mental illness. Although \"nervous breakdown\" is not rigorously defined, surveys of laypersons suggest that the term refers to a specific acute time-limited reactive disorder involving symptoms such as anxiety or depression, usually precipitated by external stressors. Many health experts today refer to a nervous breakdown as a \"mental health crisis\".\nNervous illness.\nIn addition to the concept of mental disorder, some people have argued for a return to the old-fashioned concept of nervous illness. In \"How Everyone Became Depressed: The Rise and Fall of the Nervous Breakdown\" (2013), Edward Shorter, a professor of psychiatry and the history of medicine, says:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;About half of them are depressed. Or at least that is the diagnosis that they got when they were put on antidepressants. ... They go to work but they are unhappy and uncomfortable; they are somewhat anxious; they are tired; they have various physical pains\u2014and they tend to obsess about the whole business. There is a term for what they have, and it is a good old-fashioned term that has gone out of use. They have nerves or a nervous illness. It is an illness not just of mind or brain, but a disorder of the entire body. ... We have a package here of five symptoms\u2014mild depression, some anxiety, fatigue, somatic pains, and obsessive thinking. ... We have had nervous illness for centuries. When you are too nervous to function ... it is a nervous breakdown. But that term has vanished from medicine, although not from the way we speak... The nervous patients of yesteryear are the depressives of today. That is the bad news... There is a deeper illness that drives depression and the symptoms of mood. We can call this deeper illness something else, or invent a neologism, but we need to get the discussion off depression and onto this deeper disorder in the brain and body. That is the point.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In eliminating the nervous breakdown, psychiatry has come close to having its own nervous breakdown.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Nervous breakdown\" is a pseudo-medical term to describe a wealth of stress-related feelings and they are often made worse by the belief that there is a real phenomenon called \"nervous breakdown\".\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Nerves stand at the core of common mental illness, no matter how much we try to forget them.\u2014\u200a\nClassifications.\nThere are currently two widely established systems that classify mental disorders:\nBoth of these list categories of disorder and provide standardized criteria for diagnosis. They have deliberately converged their codes in recent revisions so that the manuals are often broadly comparable, although significant differences remain. Other classification schemes may be used in non-western cultures, for example, the \"Chinese Classification of Mental Disorders\", and other manuals may be used by those of alternative theoretical persuasions, such as the \"Psychodynamic Diagnostic Manual\". In general, mental disorders are classified separately from neurological disorders, learning disabilities or intellectual disability.\nUnlike the DSM and ICD, some approaches are not based on identifying distinct categories of disorder using dichotomous symptom profiles intended to separate the abnormal from the normal. There is significant scientific debate about the relative merits of categorical versus such non-categorical (or hybrid) schemes, also known as continuum or dimensional models. A spectrum approach may incorporate elements of both.\nIn the scientific and academic literature on the definition or classification of mental disorder, one extreme argues that it is entirely a matter of value judgements (including of what is normal) while another proposes that it is or could be entirely objective and scientific (including by reference to statistical norms). Common hybrid views argue that the concept of mental disorder is objective even if only a \"fuzzy prototype\" that can never be precisely defined, or conversely that the concept always involves a mixture of scientific facts and subjective value judgments. Although the diagnostic categories are referred to as 'disorders', they are presented as medical diseases, but are not validated in the same way as most medical diagnoses. Some neurologists argue that classification will only be reliable and valid when based on neurobiological features rather than clinical interview, while others suggest that the differing ideological and practical perspectives need to be better integrated.\nThe DSM and ICD approach remains under attack both because of the implied causality model and because some researchers believe it better to aim at underlying brain differences which can precede symptoms by many years.\nDimensional models.\nThe high degree of comorbidity between disorders in categorical models such as the DSM and ICD have led some to propose dimensional models. Studying comorbidity between disorders have demonstrated two latent (unobserved) factors or dimensions in the structure of mental disorders that are thought to possibly reflect etiological processes. These two dimensions reflect a distinction between internalizing disorders, such as mood or anxiety symptoms, and externalizing disorders such as behavioral or substance use symptoms. A single general factor of psychopathology, similar to the g factor for intelligence, has been empirically supported. The \"p factor\" model supports the internalizing-externalizing distinction, but also supports the formation of a third dimension of thought disorders such as schizophrenia. Biological evidence also supports the validity of the internalizing-externalizing structure of mental disorders, with twin and adoption studies supporting heritable factors for externalizing and internalizing disorders. A leading dimensional model is the Hierarchical Taxonomy of Psychopathology.\nDisorders.\nThere are many different categories of mental disorders, and many different facets of human behavior and personality that can become disordered.\nAnxiety disorders.\nAn anxiety disorder is anxiety or fear that interferes with normal functioning may be classified as an anxiety disorder. Commonly recognized categories include specific phobias, generalized anxiety disorder, social anxiety disorder, panic disorder, agoraphobia, obsessive\u2013compulsive disorder and post-traumatic stress disorder.\nMood disorders.\nOther affective (emotion/mood) processes can also become disordered. Mood disorder involving unusually intense and sustained sadness, melancholia, or despair is known as major depression (also known as unipolar or clinical depression). Milder, but still prolonged depression, can be diagnosed as dysthymia. Bipolar disorder (also known as manic depression) involves abnormally \"high\" or pressured mood states, known as mania or hypomania, alternating with normal or depressed moods. The extent to which unipolar and bipolar mood phenomena represent distinct categories of disorder, or mix and merge along a dimension or spectrum of mood, is subject to some scientific debate.\nPsychotic disorders.\nPatterns of belief, language use and perception of reality can become dysregulated (e.g., delusions, thought disorder, hallucinations). Psychotic disorders in this domain include schizophrenia, and delusional disorder. Schizoaffective disorder is a category used for individuals showing aspects of both schizophrenia and affective disorders. Schizotypy is a category used for individuals showing some of the characteristics associated with schizophrenia, but without meeting cutoff criteria.\nPersonality disorders.\nPersonality\u2014the fundamental characteristics of a person that influence thoughts and behaviors across situations and time\u2014may be considered disordered if judged to be abnormally rigid and maladaptive. Although treated separately by some, the commonly used categorical schemes include them as mental disorders. Personality disorders, in general, are defined as emerging in childhood, or at least by adolescence or early adulthood. There is an emerging consensus that personality disorders, similar to personality traits in general, incorporate a mixture of acute dysfunctional behaviors that may resolve in short periods, and maladaptive temperamental traits that are more enduring. Furthermore, there are also non-categorical schemes that rate all individuals via a profile of different dimensions of personality without a symptom-based cutoff from normal personality variation, for example through schemes based on dimensional models of personality disorders.\nA number of different personality disorders are listed in the DSM-5-TR, including those sometimes classed as \"eccentric\", such as paranoid, schizoid and schizotypal personality disorders; types that have described as dramatic or emotional, such as antisocial, borderline, histrionic or narcissistic personality disorders; and those sometimes classed as fear-related, such as anxious-avoidant, dependent, or obsessive\u2013compulsive personality disorders.\nWhile the DSM-5-TR standard model diagnoses personality disorders as distinct categories, the ICD-11 classification of personality disorders contains a single, dimensional \"personality disorder\" which is diagnosed according to severity, with the possibility to additionally diagnose trait domains. In the case of the \"Alternative DSM-5 Model for Personality disorders\", the approach chosen is a dimensional\u2013categorical model, in which diagnosis can consist of either predefined categories based on specific combinations of traits and functioning levels, or of a general diagnosis called \"personality disorder \u2013 trait specified\". The ICD-11 classifies \"schizotypal disorder\" among primary psychotic disorders rather than as a personality disorder as in the DSM-5.\nNeurodevelopmental disorders.\nNeurodevelopmental disorders is a group of mental disorder that affect the central nervous system, such as the brain and spinal cord. These disorders can appear in early childhood. They can even persist into adulthood. A few of the common ones are attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), autism spectrum disorder (ASD), intellectual disabilities, motor disorders, and communication disorders among others. Some causes can contribute to these disorders like genetic factors (genetics, family medical history), environmental factors (excessive stress, exposure to neurotoxins, pollution, viral infections, and bacterial infections), physical factors (traumatic brain injury, illness), and prenatal factors (birth defects, exposure to drugs during pregnancy, low birth weight). Neurodevelopmental disorders can be managed with behavioral therapy, applied behavior analysis (ABA), educational interventions, specific medications, and other such treatments.\nApproximately 8 in 10 people with autism suffer from a mental health problem in their lifetime, in comparison to 1 in 4 of the general population that suffers from a mental health problem in their lifetimes.\nEating disorders.\nAn eating disorder is a serious mental health condition that involves an unhealthy relationship with food and body image. They can cause severe physical and psychological problems. Eating disorders involve disproportionate concern in matters of food and weight. Categories of disorder in this area include anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, exercise bulimia or binge eating disorder.\nSleep disorders.\nSleep disorders are associated with disruption to normal sleep patterns. A common sleep disorder is insomnia, which is described as difficulty falling and/or staying asleep. Other sleep disorders include narcolepsy, sleep apnea, REM sleep behavior disorder, chronic sleep deprivation, and restless leg syndrome.\nNarcolepsy is a condition of extreme tendencies to fall asleep whenever and wherever. People with narcolepsy feel refreshed after their random sleep, but eventually get sleepy again. Narcolepsy diagnosis requires an overnight stay at a sleep center for analysis, during which doctors ask for a detailed sleep history and sleep records. Doctors also use actigraphs and polysomnography. Doctors will do a multiple sleep latency test, which measures how long it takes a person to fall asleep.\nSleep apnea, when breathing repeatedly stops and starts during sleep, can be a serious sleep disorder. Three types of sleep apnea include obstructive sleep apnea, central sleep apnea, and complex sleep apnea. Sleep apnea can be diagnosed at home or with polysomnography at a sleep center. An ear, nose, and throat doctor may further help with the sleeping habits.\nSexuality related.\nSexual disorders include dyspareunia and various kinds of paraphilia (sexual arousal to objects, situations, or individuals that are considered abnormal or harmful to the person or others). Sexual dysfunction is common among psychiatric patients, yet the specific impact of psychopathology independent of factors like psychotropic substances or somatic symptom disorders, remains unclear.\nA systematic review explored the prevalence of sexual dysfunction in psychiatric patients free from psychotropic medications and somatic diseases. The review included 24 studies with 1,199 participants and identified high rates of sexual dysfunction across various psychiatric disorders. Reported prevalence ranged from 45%-93% for depressive disorders, 33%-75% for anxiety disorders, 25%-81% for obsessive\u2013compulsive disorder (OCD), and 25% for schizophrenia. Sexual desire was frequently impaired in depressive disorders, PTSD, and schizophrenia, while OCD and anxiety disorders were associated with difficulties during the orgasm phase.\nThe findings emphasize the importance of addressing sexual health in psychiatric care through psychoeducation, sexual history assessments, and targeted interventions. This highlights the significant impact of psychopathology on sexual functioning.\nOther.\nImpulse control disorders: People who are abnormally unable to resist certain urges or impulses that could be harmful to themselves or others, may be classified as having an impulse control disorder, and disorders such as kleptomania (stealing) or pyromania (fire-setting). Various behavioral addictions, such as gambling addiction, may be classed as a disorder. Obsessive\u2013compulsive disorder can sometimes involve an inability to resist certain acts but is classed separately as being primarily an anxiety disorder.\nSubstance use disorders: This disorder refers to the use of drugs (legal or illegal, including alcohol) that persists despite significant problems or harm related to its use. Substance dependence and substance abuse fall under this umbrella category in the DSM. Substance use disorder may be due to a pattern of compulsive and repetitive use of a drug that results in tolerance to its effects and withdrawal symptoms when use is reduced or stopped.\nDissociative disorders: People with severe disturbances of their self-identity, memory, and general awareness of themselves and their surroundings may be classified as having these types of disorders, including depersonalization derealization disorder or dissociative identity disorder (which was previously referred to as multiple personality disorder or \"split personality\").\nCognitive disorders: These affect cognitive abilities, including learning and memory. This category includes delirium and mild and major neurocognitive disorder (previously termed dementia).\nSomatoform disorders may be diagnosed when there are problems that appear to originate in the body that are thought to be manifestations of a mental disorder. This includes somatization disorder and conversion disorder. There are also disorders of how a person perceives their body, such as body dysmorphic disorder. Neurasthenia is an old diagnosis involving somatic complaints as well as fatigue and low spirits/depression, which is officially recognized by the ICD-10 but no longer by the DSM-IV.\nFactitious disorders are diagnosed where symptoms are thought to be reported for personal gain. Symptoms are often deliberately produced or feigned, and may relate to either symptoms in the individual or in someone close to them, particularly people they care for.\nThere are attempts to introduce a category of relational disorder, where the diagnosis is of a relationship rather than on any one individual in that relationship. The relationship may be between children and their parents, between couples, or others. There already exists, under the category of psychosis, a diagnosis of shared psychotic disorder where two or more individuals share a particular delusion because of their close relationship with each other.\nThere are a number of uncommon psychiatric syndromes, which are often named after the person who first described them, such as Capgras syndrome, De\u00a0Clerambault syndrome, Othello syndrome, Ganser syndrome, Cotard delusion, and Ekbom syndrome, and additional disorders such as the Couvade syndrome and Geschwind syndrome.\nSigns and symptoms.\nCourse.\nThe onset of psychiatric disorders usually occurs from childhood to early adulthood. Impulse-control disorders and a few anxiety disorders tend to appear in childhood. Some other anxiety disorders, substance disorders, and mood disorders emerge later in the mid-teens. Symptoms of schizophrenia typically manifest from late adolescence to early twenties.\nThe likely course and outcome of mental disorders vary and are dependent on numerous factors related to the disorder itself, the individual as a whole, and the social environment. Some disorders may last a brief period of time, while others may be long-term in nature.\nAll disorders can have a varied course. Long-term international studies of schizophrenia have found that over a half of individuals recover in terms of symptoms, and around a fifth to a third in terms of symptoms and functioning, with many requiring no medication. While some have serious difficulties and support needs for many years, \"late\" recovery is still plausible. The World Health Organization (WHO) concluded that the long-term studies' findings converged with others in \"relieving patients, carers and clinicians of the chronicity paradigm which dominated thinking throughout much of the 20th century.\"\nA follow-up study by Tohen and coworkers revealed that around half of people initially diagnosed with bipolar disorder achieve symptomatic recovery (no longer meeting criteria for the diagnosis) within six weeks, and nearly all achieve it within two years, with nearly half regaining their prior occupational and residential status in that period. Less than half go on to experience a new episode of mania or major depression within the next two years.\nDisability.\nSome disorders may be very limited in their functional effects, while others may involve substantial disability and support needs. In this context, the terms \"psychiatric disability\" and \"psychological disability\" are sometimes used instead of \"mental disorder\". The degree of ability or disability may vary over time and across different life domains. Furthermore, psychiatric disability has been linked to institutionalization, discrimination and social exclusion as well as to the inherent effects of disorders. Alternatively, functioning may be affected by the stress of having to hide a condition in work or school, etc., by adverse effects of medications or other substances, or by mismatches between illness-related variations and demands for regularity.\nIt is also the case that, while often being characterized in purely negative terms, some mental traits or states labeled as psychiatric disabilities can also involve above-average creativity, non-conformity, goal-striving, meticulousness, or empathy. In addition, the public perception of the level of disability associated with mental disorders can change.\nNevertheless, internationally, people report equal or greater disability from commonly occurring mental conditions than from commonly occurring physical conditions, particularly in their social roles and personal relationships. The proportion with access to professional help for mental disorders is far lower, however, even among those assessed as having a severe psychiatric disability. Disability in this context may or may not involve such things as:\nIn terms of total disability-adjusted life years (DALYs), which is an estimate of how many years of life are lost due to premature death or to being in a state of poor health and disability, psychiatric disabilities rank amongst the most disabling conditions. Unipolar (also known as Major) depressive disorder is the third leading cause of disability worldwide, of any condition mental or physical, accounting for 65.5\u00a0million years lost. The first systematic description of global disability arising in youth, in 2011, found that among 10- to 24-year-olds nearly half of all disability (current and as estimated to continue) was due to psychiatric disabilities, including substance use disorders and conditions involving self-harm. Second to this were accidental injuries (mainly traffic collisions) accounting for 12 percent of disability, followed by communicable diseases at 10 percent. The psychiatric disabilities associated with most disabilities in high-income countries were unipolar major depression (20%) and alcohol use disorder (11%). In the eastern Mediterranean region, it was unipolar major depression (12%) and schizophrenia (7%), and in Africa it was unipolar major depression (7%) and bipolar disorder (5%).\nSuicide, which is often attributed to some underlying mental disorder, is a leading cause of death among teenagers and adults under 35. There are an estimated 10 to 20\u00a0million non-fatal attempted suicides every year worldwide.\nRisk factors.\nThe predominant view as of 2018[ [update]] is that genetic, psychological, and environmental factors all contribute to the development or progression of mental disorders. Different risk factors may be present at different ages, with risk occurring as early as during prenatal period.\nGenetics.\nA number of psychiatric disorders are linked to a family history (including depression, narcissistic personality disorder and anxiety). Twin studies have also revealed a very high heritability for many mental disorders (especially autism and schizophrenia). Although researchers have been looking for decades for clear linkages between genetics and mental disorders, that work has not yielded specific genetic biomarkers yet that might lead to better diagnosis and better treatments.\nStatistical research looking at eleven disorders found widespread assortative mating between people with mental illness. That means that individuals with one of these disorders were two to three times more likely than the general population to have a partner with a mental disorder. Sometimes people seemed to have preferred partners with the same mental illness. Thus, people with schizophrenia or ADHD are seven times more likely to have affected partners with the same disorder. This is even more pronounced for people with Autism spectrum disorders who are 10 times more likely to have a spouse with the same disorder.\nEnvironment.\nDuring the prenatal stage, factors like unwanted pregnancy, lack of adaptation to pregnancy or substance use during pregnancy increases the risk of developing a mental disorder. Maternal stress and birth complications including prematurity and infections have also been implicated in increasing susceptibility for mental illness. Infants neglected or not provided optimal nutrition have a higher risk of developing cognitive impairment.\nSocial influences have also been found to be important, including abuse, neglect, bullying, social stress, traumatic events, and other negative or overwhelming life experiences. Aspects of the wider community have also been implicated, including employment problems, socioeconomic inequality, lack of social cohesion, problems linked to migration, and features of particular societies and cultures. The specific risks and pathways to particular disorders are less clear, however.\nNutrition also plays a role in mental disorders.\nIn schizophrenia and psychosis, risk factors include migration and discrimination, childhood trauma, bereavement or separation in families, recreational use of drugs, and urbanicity.\nIn anxiety, risk factors may include parenting factors including parental rejection, lack of parental warmth, high hostility, harsh discipline, high maternal negative affect, anxious childrearing, modelling of dysfunctional and drug-abusing behavior, and child abuse (emotional, physical and sexual). Adults with imbalance work to life are at higher risk for developing anxiety.\nFor bipolar disorder, stress (such as childhood adversity) is not a specific cause, but does place genetically and biologically vulnerable individuals at risk for a more severe course of illness.\nDrug use.\nMental disorders are associated with drug use including: cannabis, alcohol and caffeine, use of which appears to promote anxiety. For psychosis and schizophrenia, usage of a number of drugs has been associated with development of the disorder, including cannabis, cocaine, and amphetamines. There has been debate regarding the relationship between usage of cannabis and bipolar disorder. Cannabis has also been associated with depression. Adolescents are at increased risk for tobacco, alcohol and drug use; Peer pressure is the main reason why adolescents start using substances. At this age, the use of substances could be detrimental to the development of the brain and place them at higher risk of developing a mental disorder.\nChronic disease.\nPeople living with chronic conditions like HIV and diabetes are at higher risk of developing a mental disorder. People living with diabetes experience significant stress from the biological impact of the disease, which places them at risk for developing anxiety and depression. Diabetic patients also have to deal with emotional stress trying to manage the disease. Conditions like heart disease, stroke, respiratory conditions, cancer, and arthritis increase the risk of developing a mental disorder when compared to the general population.\nPersonality traits.\nRisk factors for mental illness include a propensity for high neuroticism or \"emotional instability\". In anxiety, risk factors may include temperament and attitudes (e.g. pessimism). Key personality traits, including Neuroticism, Extraversion, Agreeableness, Conscientiousness, and Openness, significantly influence various dimensions of mental health, as measured by the General Health Questionnaire(GHQ-12). The GHQ-12 assesses mental health across three dimensions: GHQ-12A (social dysfunction &amp; anhedonia), GHQ-12B (depression &amp; anxiety), and GHQ-12C (loss of confidence). Neuroticism was found to be strongly linked to all three dimensions, indicating greater vulnerability to mental health issues, while Extraversion was negatively associated with social dysfunction and depression, suggesting better mental health outcomes.Agreeableness and Conscientiousness were both negatively related to social dysfunction and loss of confidence, highlighting their protective roles. Openness showed a negative relationship with depression and anxiety.\nThese findings support several models of personality's impact on mental health, including the predisposition/vulnerability, complication/scar, and pathoplasty/exacerbation models. This underscores the importance of considering personality traits in mental health assessments and interventions, as they help identify individuals at higher risk for mental health challenges and guide targeted psychological care.\nCausal models.\nMental disorders can arise from multiple sources, and in many cases there is no single accepted or consistent cause currently established. An eclectic or pluralistic mix of models may be used to explain particular disorders. The primary paradigm of contemporary mainstream Western psychiatry is said to be the biopsychosocial model which incorporates biological, psychological and social factors, although this may not always be applied in practice.\nBiological psychiatry follows a biomedical model where many mental disorders are conceptualized as disorders of brain circuits likely caused by developmental processes shaped by a complex interplay of genetics and experience. A common assumption is that disorders may have resulted from genetic and developmental vulnerabilities, exposed by stress in life (for example in a diathesis\u2013stress model), although there are various views on what causes differences between individuals. Some types of mental disorders may be viewed as primarily neurodevelopmental disorders.\nEvolutionary psychology may be used as an overall explanatory theory, while attachment theory is another kind of evolutionary-psychological approach sometimes applied in the context of mental disorders. Psychoanalytic theories have continued to evolve alongside and cognitive-behavioral and systemic-family approaches. A distinction is sometimes made between a \"medical model\" or a \"social model\" of psychiatric disability.\nDiagnosis.\nPsychiatrists seek to provide a medical diagnosis of individuals by an assessment of symptoms, signs and impairment associated with particular types of mental disorder. Other mental health professionals, such as clinical psychologists, may or may not apply the same diagnostic categories to their clinical formulation of a client's difficulties and circumstances. The majority of mental health problems are, at least initially, assessed and treated by family physicians (in the UK general practitioners) during consultations, who may refer a patient on for more specialist diagnosis in acute or chronic cases.\nRoutine diagnostic practice in mental health services typically involves an interview known as a mental status examination, where evaluations are made of appearance and behavior, self-reported symptoms, mental health history, and current life circumstances. The views of other professionals, relatives, or other third parties may be taken into account. A physical examination to check for ill health or the effects of medications or other drugs may be conducted. Psychological testing is sometimes used via paper-and-pen or computerized questionnaires, which may include algorithms based on ticking off standardized diagnostic criteria, and in rare specialist cases neuroimaging tests may be requested, but such methods are more commonly found in research studies than routine clinical practice.\nTime and budgetary constraints often limit practicing psychiatrists from conducting more thorough diagnostic evaluations. It has been found that most clinicians evaluate patients using an unstructured, open-ended approach, with limited training in evidence-based assessment methods, and that inaccurate diagnosis may be common in routine practice. In addition, comorbidity is very common in psychiatric diagnosis, where the same person meets the criteria for more than one disorder. On the other hand, a person may have several different difficulties only some of which meet the criteria for being diagnosed. There may be specific problems with accurate diagnosis in developing countries.\nMore structured approaches are being increasingly used to measure levels of mental illness.\nCriticism.\nSince the 1980s, Paula Caplan has been concerned about the subjectivity of psychiatric diagnosis, and people being arbitrarily \"slapped with a psychiatric label.\" Caplan says because psychiatric diagnosis is unregulated, doctors are not required to spend much time interviewing patients or to seek a second opinion. The \"Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders\" can lead a psychiatrist to focus on narrow checklists of symptoms, with little consideration of what is actually causing the person's problems. So, according to Caplan, getting a psychiatric diagnosis and label often stands in the way of recovery.\nIn 2013, psychiatrist Allen Frances wrote a paper entitled \"The New Crisis of Confidence in Psychiatric Diagnosis\", which said that \"psychiatric diagnosis... still relies exclusively on fallible subjective judgments rather than objective biological tests.\" Frances was also concerned about \"unpredictable overdiagnosis\". For many years, marginalized psychiatrists (such as Peter Breggin, Thomas Szasz) and outside critics (such as Stuart A. Kirk) have \"been accusing psychiatry of engaging in the systematic medicalization of normality.\" More recently these concerns have come from insiders who have worked for and promoted the American Psychiatric Association (e.g., Robert Spitzer, Allen Frances). A 2002 editorial in the \"British Medical Journal\" warned of inappropriate medicalization leading to disease mongering, where the boundaries of the definition of illnesses are expanded to include personal problems as medical problems or risks of diseases are emphasized to broaden the market for medications.\nGary Greenberg, a psychoanalyst, in his book \"the Book of Woe\", argues that mental illness is really about suffering and how the DSM creates diagnostic labels to categorize people's suffering. Indeed, the psychiatrist Thomas Szasz, in his book \"the Medicalization of Everyday Life\", also argues that what is psychiatric illness, is not always biological in nature (i.e. social problems, poverty, etc.), and may even be a part of the human condition.\nPotential routine use of MRI/fMRI in diagnosis.\nin 2018 the American Psychological Association commissioned a review to reach a consensus on whether modern clinical MRI/fMRI will be able to be used in the diagnosis of mental health disorders. The criteria presented by the APA stated that the biomarkers used in diagnosis should:\nThe review concluded that although neuroimaging diagnosis may technically be feasible, very large studies are needed to evaluate specific biomarkers which were not available.\nPrevention.\nThe 2004 WHO report \"Prevention of Mental Disorders\" stated that \"Prevention of these disorders is obviously one of the most effective ways to reduce the [disease] burden.\"\nThe 2011 European Psychiatric Association (EPA) guidance on prevention of mental disorders states \"There is considerable evidence that various psychiatric conditions can be prevented through the implementation of effective evidence-based interventions.\"\nA 2011 UK Department of Health report on the economic case for mental health promotion and mental illness prevention found that \"many interventions are outstandingly good value for money, low in cost and often become self-financing over time, saving public expenditure\".\nIn 2016, the National Institute of Mental Health re-affirmed prevention as a research priority area.\nParenting may affect the child's mental health, and evidence suggests that helping parents to be more effective with their children can address mental health needs.\nUniversal prevention (aimed at a population that has no increased risk for developing a mental disorder, such as school programs or mass media campaigns) need very high numbers of people to show effect (sometimes known as the \"power\" problem). Approaches to overcome this are (1) focus on high-incidence groups (e.g. by targeting groups with high risk factors), (2) use multiple interventions to achieve greater, and thus more statistically valid, effects, (3) use cumulative meta-analyses of many trials, and (4) run very large trials.\nManagement.\nTreatment and support for mental disorders are provided in psychiatric hospitals, clinics or a range of community mental health services. In some countries services are increasingly based on a recovery approach, intended to support individuals' personal journey to gain the kind of life they want.\nThere is a range of different types of treatment and what is most suitable depends on the disorder and the individual. Many things have been found to help at least some people, and a placebo effect may play a role in any intervention or medication. In a minority of cases, individuals may be treated against their will, which can cause particular difficulties depending on how it is carried out and perceived. Compulsory treatment while in the community versus non-compulsory treatment does not appear to make much of a difference except by maybe decreasing victimization.\nLifestyle.\nLifestyle strategies, including dietary changes, exercise and quitting smoking may be of benefit.\nDietary patterns can influence the risk and management of mental disorders. Observational studies have shown that nutrient-dense, whole-food diets - such as the Mediterranean diet, which is rich in fruits, vegetables, whole grains, legumes, nuts, fish, and healthy fats like olive oil - are associated with a lower risk of depression and anxiety. In contrast, Western diets high in ultra-processed foods, refined sugars, and saturated fats are linked to a greater incidence of mental health disorders, potentially due to their impact on neuroinflammation, oxidative stress, gut microbiota, and neuroplasticity.\nPsychotherapy.\nThere is also a wide range of psychotherapists (including family therapists), counselors, and public health professionals. In addition, there are peer support roles where personal experience of similar issues is the primary source of expertise.\nA major option for many mental disorders is psychotherapy. There are several main types. Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is widely used and is based on modifying the patterns of thought and behavior associated with a particular disorder. Other psychotherapies include dialectic behavioral therapy (DBT) and interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT). Psychoanalysis, addressing underlying psychic conflicts and defenses, has been a dominant school of psychotherapy and is still in use. Systemic therapy or family therapy is sometimes used, addressing a network of significant others as well as an individual.\nSome psychotherapies are based on a humanistic approach. There are many specific therapies used for particular disorders, which may be offshoots or hybrids of the above types. Mental health professionals often employ an eclectic or integrative approach. Much may depend on the therapeutic relationship, and there may be problems with trust, confidentiality and engagement.\nNeurotherapy.\nNeurotherapy is a treatment method that involves the targeted systemic application of an energetic stimulus or chemical agent to a specific neurological area. A substantial part of this treatment is non-invasive. Neurotherapy is firmly rooted in conventional medicine (allopathic, Western biomedicine), relying on scientific approach and evidence-based practice. However, certain neuromodulation techniques, due to their novelty and lack of supporting evidence, are still considered alternative medicine, not easily integrated into the mainstream healthcare model. The wide range of neurotherapy methods can be divided into four domains depending on the use of energy stimulation: acoustic energy, electrical energy, electromagnetic radiation, and magnetic energy.\nMedication.\nA major option for many mental disorders is psychiatric medication and there are several main groups. Antidepressants are used for the treatment of clinical depression, as well as often for anxiety and a range of other disorders. Anxiolytics (including sedatives) are used for anxiety disorders and related problems such as insomnia. Mood stabilizers are used primarily in bipolar disorder. Antipsychotics are used for psychotic disorders, notably for positive symptoms in schizophrenia, and also increasingly for a range of other disorders. Stimulants are commonly used, notably for ADHD.\nOther.\nElectroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is sometimes used in severe cases when other interventions for severe intractable depression have failed. ECT is usually indicated for treatment resistant depression, severe vegetative symptoms, psychotic depression, intense suicidal ideation, depression during pregnancy, and catatonia. Psychosurgery is considered experimental but is advocated by some neurologists in certain rare cases.\nCounseling (professional) and co-counseling (between peers) may be used. Psychoeducation programs may provide people with the information to understand and manage their problems. Creative therapies are sometimes used, including music therapy, art therapy or drama therapy. Lifestyle adjustments and supportive measures are often used, including peer support, self-help groups for mental health and supported housing or supported employment (including social firms). Some advocate dietary supplements.\nReasonable accommodations (adjustments and supports) might be put in place to help an individual cope and succeed in environments despite potential disability related to mental health problems. This could include an emotional support animal or specifically trained psychiatric service dog. As of 2019[ [update]] cannabis is specifically not recommended as a treatment.\nEpidemiology.\nMental disorders are common. Worldwide, more than one in three people in most countries report sufficient criteria for at least one at some point in their life. In the United States, 46% qualify for a mental illness at some point. An ongoing survey indicates that anxiety disorders are the most common in all but one country, followed by mood disorders in all but two countries, while substance disorders and impulse-control disorders were consistently less prevalent. Rates varied by region.\nA review of anxiety disorder surveys in different countries found average lifetime prevalence estimates of 16.6%, with women having higher rates on average. A review of mood disorder surveys in different countries found lifetime rates of 6.7% for major depressive disorder (higher in some studies, and in women) and 0.8% for Bipolar I disorder.\nIn the United States the frequency of disorder is: anxiety disorder (28.8%), mood disorder (20.8%), impulse-control disorder (24.8%) or substance use disorder (14.6%).\nA 2004 cross-Europe study found that approximately one in four people reported meeting criteria at some point in their life for at least one of the DSM-IV disorders assessed, which included mood disorders (13.9%), anxiety disorders (13.6%), or alcohol disorder (5.2%). Approximately one in ten met the criteria within a 12-month period. Women and younger people of either gender showed more cases of the disorder. A 2005 review of surveys in 16 European countries found that 27% of adult Europeans are affected by at least one mental disorder in a 12-month period.\nAn international review of studies on the prevalence of schizophrenia found an average (median) figure of 0.4% for lifetime prevalence; it was consistently lower in poorer countries.\nStudies of the prevalence of personality disorders (PDs) have been fewer and smaller-scale, but one broad Norwegian survey found a five-year prevalence of almost 1 in 7 (13.4%). Rates for specific disorders ranged from 0.8% to 2.8%, differing across countries, and by gender, educational level and other factors. A US survey that incidentally screened for personality disorder found a rate of 14.79%.\nApproximately 7% of a preschool pediatric sample were given a psychiatric diagnosis in one clinical study, and approximately 10% of 1- and 2-year-olds receiving developmental screening have been assessed as having significant emotional/behavioral problems based on parent and pediatrician reports.\nWhile rates of psychological disorders are often the same for men and women, women tend to have a higher rate of depression. Each year 73\u00a0million women are affected by major depression, and suicide is ranked 7th as the cause of death for women between the ages of 20\u201359. Depressive disorders account for close to 41.9% of the psychiatric disabilities among women compared to 29.3% among men.\nHistory.\nAncient civilizations.\nAncient civilizations described and treated a number of mental disorders. Mental illnesses were well known in ancient Mesopotamia, where diseases and mental disorders were believed to be caused by specific deities. Because hands symbolized control over a person, mental illnesses were known as \"hands\" of certain deities. One psychological illness was known as \"Q\u0101t I\u0161tar\", meaning \"Hand of Ishtar\". Others were known as \"Hand of Shamash\", \"Hand of the Ghost\", and \"Hand of the God\". Descriptions of these illnesses, however, are so vague that it is usually impossible to determine which illnesses they correspond to in modern terminology. Mesopotamian doctors kept detailed record of their patients' hallucinations and assigned spiritual meanings to them. The royal family of Elam was notorious for its members often being insane. The Greeks coined terms for melancholy, hysteria and phobia and developed the humorism theory. Mental disorders were described, and treatments developed, in Persia, Arabia and in the medieval Islamic world.\nEurope.\nMiddle Ages.\nConceptions of madness in the Middle Ages in Christian Europe were a mixture of the divine, diabolical, magical and humoral, and transcendental. In the early modern period, some people with mental disorders may have been victims of the witch-hunts. While not every witch and sorcerer accused were mentally ill, all mentally ill were considered to be witches or sorcerers. Many terms for mental disorders that found their way into everyday use first became popular in the 16th and 17th centuries.\nEighteenth century.\nBy the end of the 17th century and into the Enlightenment, madness was increasingly seen as an organic physical phenomenon with no connection to the soul or moral responsibility. Asylum care was often harsh and treated people like wild animals, but towards the end of the 18th century a moral treatment movement gradually developed. Clear descriptions of some syndromes may be rare before the 19th century.\nNineteenth century.\nIndustrialization and population growth led to a massive expansion of the number and size of insane asylums in every Western country in the 19th century. Numerous different classification schemes and diagnostic terms were developed by different authorities, and the term psychiatry was coined (1808), though medical superintendents were still known as alienists.\nTwentieth century.\nThe turn of the 20th century saw the development of psychoanalysis, which would later come to the fore, along with Kraepelin's classification scheme. Asylum \"inmates\" were increasingly referred to as \"patients\", and asylums were renamed as hospitals.\nEurope and the United States.\nEarly in the 20th century in the United States, a mental hygiene movement developed, aiming to prevent mental disorders. Clinical psychology and social work developed as professions. World War I saw a massive increase of conditions that came to be termed \"shell shock\".\nWorld War II saw the development in the U.S. of a new psychiatric manual for categorizing mental disorders, which along with existing systems for collecting census and hospital statistics led to the first \"Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders\". The International Classification of Diseases (ICD) also developed a section on mental disorders. The term stress, having emerged from endocrinology work in the 1930s, was increasingly applied to mental disorders.\nElectroconvulsive therapy, insulin shock therapy, lobotomies and the neuroleptic chlorpromazine came to be used by mid-century. In the 1960s there were many challenges to the concept of mental illness itself. These challenges came from psychiatrists like Thomas Szasz who argued that mental illness was a myth used to disguise moral conflicts; from sociologists such as Erving Goffman who said that mental illness was merely another example of how society labels and controls non-conformists; from behavioral psychologists who challenged psychiatry's fundamental reliance on unobservable phenomena; and from gay rights activists who criticised the APA's listing of homosexuality as a mental disorder. A study published in \"Science\" by Rosenhan received much publicity and was viewed as an attack on the efficacy of psychiatric diagnosis.\nDeinstitutionalization gradually occurred in the West, with isolated psychiatric hospitals being closed down in favor of community mental health services. A consumer/survivor movement gained momentum. Other kinds of psychiatric medication gradually came into use, such as \"psychic energizers\" (later antidepressants) and lithium. Benzodiazepines gained widespread use in the 1970s for anxiety and depression, until dependency problems curtailed their popularity.\nAdvances in neuroscience, genetics, and psychology led to new research agendas. Cognitive behavioral therapy and other psychotherapies developed. The \"DSM\" and then ICD adopted new criteria-based classifications, and the number of \"official\" diagnoses saw a large expansion. Through the 1990s, new SSRI-type antidepressants became some of the most widely prescribed drugs in the world, as later did antipsychotics. Also during the 1990s, a recovery approach developed.\nAfrica and Nigeria.\nMost Africans view mental disturbances as external spiritual attack on the person. Those who have a mental illness are thought to be under a spell or bewitched. Often than usual, People view a mentally ill person as possessed of an evil spirit and is seen as more of sociological perspective than a psychological order.\nThe WHO estimated that fewer than 10% of mentally ill Nigerians have access to a psychiatrist or health worker, because there is a low ratio of mental-health specialists available in a country of 200 million people. WHO estimates that the number of mentally ill Nigerians ranges from 40 million to 60 million. Disorders such as depression, anxiety, schizophrenia, personality disorder, old age-related disorder, and substance-abuse disorder are common in Nigeria, as in other countries in Africa.\nNigeria is still nowhere near being equipped to solve prevailing mental health challenges. With little scientific research carried out, coupled with insufficient mental-health hospitals in the country, traditional healers provide specialized psychotherapy care to those that require their services and pharmacotherapy\nSociety and culture.\nDifferent societies or cultures, even different individuals in a subculture, can disagree as to what constitutes optimal versus pathological biological and psychological functioning. Research has demonstrated that cultures vary in the relative importance placed on, for example, happiness, autonomy, or social relationships for pleasure. Likewise, the fact that a behavior pattern is valued, accepted, encouraged, or even statistically normative in a culture does not necessarily mean that it is conducive to optimal psychological functioning.\nPeople in all cultures find some behaviors bizarre or even incomprehensible. But just what they feel is bizarre or incomprehensible is ambiguous and subjective. These differences in determination can become highly contentious. The process by which conditions and difficulties come to be defined and treated as medical conditions and problems, and thus come under the authority of doctors and other health professionals, is known as medicalization or pathologization.\nMental illness in the Latin American community.\nThere is a perception in Latin American communities, especially among older people, that discussing problems with mental health can create embarrassment and shame for the family. This results in fewer people seeking treatment.\nLatin Americans from the US are slightly more likely to have a mental health disorder than first-generation Latin American immigrants, although differences between ethnic groups were found to disappear after adjustment for place of birth.\nFrom 2015 to 2018, rates of serious mental illness in young adult Latin Americans increased by 60%, from 4% to 6.4%. The prevalence of major depressive episodes in young and adult Latin Americans increased from 8.4% to 11.3%. More than a third of Latin Americans reported more than one bad mental health day in the last three months. The rate of suicide among Latin Americans was about half the rate of non-Latin American white Americans in 2018, and this was the second-leading cause of death among Latin Americans ages 15 to 34. However, Latin American suicide rates rose steadily after 2020 in relation to the COVID-19 pandemic, even as the national rate declined.\nFamily relations are an integral part of the Latin American community. Some research has shown that Latin Americans are more likely rely on family bonds, or \"familismo\", as a source of therapy while struggling with mental health issues. Because Latin Americans have a high rate of religiosity, and because there is less stigma associated with religion than with psychiatric services, religion may play a more important therapeutic role for the mentally ill in Latin American communities. However, research has also suggested that religion may also play a role in stigmatizing mental illness in Latin American communities, which can discourage community members from seeking professional help.\nReligion.\nReligious, spiritual, or transpersonal experiences and beliefs meet many criteria of delusional or psychotic disorders. A belief or experience can sometimes be shown to produce distress or disability\u2014the ordinary standard for judging mental disorders. There is a link between religion and schizophrenia, a complex mental disorder characterized by a difficulty in recognizing reality, regulating emotional responses, and thinking in a clear and logical manner. Those with schizophrenia commonly report some type of religious delusion, and religion itself may be a trigger for schizophrenia.\nMovements.\nControversy has often surrounded psychiatry, and the term anti-psychiatry was coined by the psychiatrist David Cooper in 1967. The anti-psychiatry message is that psychiatric treatments are ultimately more damaging than helpful to patients, and psychiatry's history involves what may now be seen as dangerous treatments. Electroconvulsive therapy was one of these, which was used widely between the 1930s and 1960s. Lobotomy was another practice that was ultimately seen as too invasive and brutal. Diazepam and other sedatives were sometimes over-prescribed, which led to an epidemic of dependence. There was also concern about the large increase in prescribing psychiatric drugs for children. Some charismatic psychiatrists came to personify the movement against psychiatry. The most influential of these was R.D. Laing who wrote a series of best-selling books, including \"The Divided Self\". Thomas Szasz wrote \"The Myth of Mental Illness\". Some ex-patient groups have become militantly anti-psychiatric, often referring to themselves as survivors. Giorgio Antonucci has questioned the basis of psychiatry through his work on the dismantling of two psychiatric hospitals (in the city of Imola), carried out from 1973 to 1996.\nThe consumer/survivor movement (also known as user/survivor movement) is made up of individuals (and organizations representing them) who are clients of mental health services or who consider themselves survivors of psychiatric interventions. Activists campaign for improved mental health services and for more involvement and empowerment within mental health services, policies and wider society. Patient advocacy organizations have expanded with increasing deinstitutionalization in developed countries, working to challenge the stereotypes, stigma and exclusion associated with psychiatric conditions. There is also a carers rights movement of people who help and support people with mental health conditions, who may be relatives, and who often work in difficult and time-consuming circumstances with little acknowledgement and without pay. An anti-psychiatry movement fundamentally challenges mainstream psychiatric theory and practice, including in some cases asserting that psychiatric concepts and diagnoses of 'mental illness' are neither real nor useful.\nAlternatively, a movement for global mental health has emerged, defined as 'the area of study, research and practice that places a priority on improving mental health and achieving equity in mental health for all people worldwide'.\nCultural bias.\nDiagnostic guidelines of the 2000s, namely the DSM and to some extent the ICD, have been criticized as having a fundamentally Euro-American outlook. Opponents argue that even when diagnostic criteria are used across different cultures, it does not mean that the underlying constructs have validity within those cultures, as even reliable application can prove only consistency, not legitimacy. Advocating a more culturally sensitive approach, critics such as Carl Bell and Marcello Maviglia contend that the cultural and ethnic diversity of individuals is often discounted by researchers and service providers.\nCross-cultural psychiatrist Arthur Kleinman contends that the Western bias is ironically illustrated in the introduction of cultural factors to the DSM-IV. Disorders or concepts from non-Western or non-mainstream cultures are described as \"culture-bound\", whereas standard psychiatric diagnoses are given no cultural qualification whatsoever, revealing to Kleinman an underlying assumption that Western cultural phenomena are universal. Kleinman's negative view towards the culture-bound syndrome is largely shared by other cross-cultural critics. Common responses included both disappointment over the large number of documented non-Western mental disorders still left out and frustration that even those included are often misinterpreted or misrepresented.\nMany mainstream psychiatrists are dissatisfied with the new culture-bound diagnoses, although for partly different reasons. Robert Spitzer, a lead architect of the DSM-III, has argued that adding cultural formulations was an attempt to appease cultural critics, and has stated that they lack any scientific rationale or support. Spitzer also posits that the new culture-bound diagnoses are rarely used, maintaining that the standard diagnoses apply regardless of the culture involved. In general, mainstream psychiatric opinion remains that if a diagnostic category is valid, cross-cultural factors are either irrelevant or are significant only to specific symptom presentations.\nClinical conceptions of mental illness also overlap with personal and cultural values in the domain of morality, so much so that it is sometimes argued that separating the two is impossible without fundamentally redefining the essence of being a particular person in a society. In clinical psychiatry, persistent distress and disability indicate an internal disorder requiring treatment; but in another context, that same distress and disability can be seen as an indicator of emotional struggle and the need to address social and structural problems. This dichotomy has led some academics and clinicians to advocate a postmodernist conceptualization of mental distress and well-being.\nSuch approaches, along with cross-cultural and \"heretical\" psychologies centered on alternative cultural and ethnic and race-based identities and experiences, stand in contrast to the mainstream psychiatric community's alleged avoidance of any explicit involvement with either morality or culture. In many countries there are attempts to challenge perceived prejudice against minority groups, including alleged institutional racism within psychiatric services. There are also ongoing attempts to improve professional cross cultural sensitivity.\nLaws and policies.\nThree-quarters of countries around the world have mental health legislation. Compulsory admission to mental health facilities (also known as involuntary commitment) is a controversial topic. It can impinge on personal liberty and the right to choose, and carry the risk of abuse for political, social, and other reasons; yet it can potentially prevent harm to self and others, and assist some people in attaining their right to healthcare when they may be unable to decide in their own interests. Because of this it is a concern of medical ethics.\nAll human rights oriented mental health laws require proof of the presence of a mental disorder as defined by internationally accepted standards, but the type and severity of disorder that counts can vary in different jurisdictions. The two most often used grounds for involuntary admission are said to be serious likelihood of immediate or imminent danger to self or others, and the need for treatment. Applications for someone to be involuntarily admitted usually come from a mental health practitioner, a family member, a close relative, or a guardian. Human-rights-oriented laws usually stipulate that independent medical practitioners or other accredited mental health practitioners must examine the patient separately and that there should be regular, time-bound review by an independent review body. The individual should also have personal access to independent advocacy.\nFor involuntary treatment to be administered (by force if necessary), it should be shown that an individual lacks the mental capacity for informed consent (i.e. to understand treatment information and its implications, and therefore be able to make an informed choice to either accept or refuse). Legal challenges in some areas have resulted in supreme court decisions that a person does \"not\" have to agree with a psychiatrist's characterization of the issues as constituting an \"illness\", nor agree with a psychiatrist's conviction in medication, but only recognize the issues and the information about treatment options.\nProxy consent (also known as surrogate or substituted decision-making) may be transferred to a personal representative, a family member, or a legally appointed guardian. Moreover, patients may be able to make, when they are considered well, an advance directive stipulating how they wish to be treated should they be deemed to lack mental capacity in the future. The right to supported decision-making, where a person is helped to understand and choose treatment options before they can be declared to lack capacity, may also be included in the legislation. There should at the very least be shared decision-making as far as possible. Involuntary treatment laws are increasingly extended to those living in the community, for example outpatient commitment laws (known by different names) are used in New Zealand, Australia, the United Kingdom, and most of the United States.\nThe World Health Organization reports that in many instances national mental health legislation takes away the rights of persons with mental disorders rather than protecting rights, and is often outdated. In 1991, the United Nations adopted the \"Principles for the Protection of Persons with Mental Illness and the Improvement of Mental Health Care\", which established minimum human rights standards of practice in the mental health field. In 2006, the UN formally agreed the \"Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities\" to protect and enhance the rights and opportunities of disabled people, including those with psychiatric disabilities.\nThe term insanity, sometimes used colloquially as a synonym for mental illness, is often used technically as a legal term.\nPerception and discrimination.\nStigma.\nThe social stigma associated with mental disorders is a widespread problem. The US Surgeon General stated in 1999 that: \"Powerful and pervasive, stigma prevents people from acknowledging their own mental health problems, much less disclosing them to others.\" Additionally, researcher Wulf R\u00f6ssler in 2016, in his article, \"The Stigma of Mental Disorders\" stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For millennia, society did not treat persons suffering from depression, autism, schizophrenia and other mental illnesses much better than slaves or criminals: they were imprisoned, tortured or killed.\nIn the United States, racial and ethnic minorities are more likely to experience mental health disorders often due to low socioeconomic status, and discrimination. In Taiwan, people with mental disorders often face misconceptions from the general public. These misconceptions include the belief that mental health issues stem from excessive worry, having too much free time, a lack of progress or ambition, not taking life seriously, neglecting real-life responsibilities, mental weakness, unwillingness to be resilient, perfectionism, or a lack of courage.\nEmployment discrimination is reported to play a significant part in the high rate of unemployment among those with a diagnosis of mental illness. An Australian study found that having a psychiatric disability is a bigger barrier to employment than a physical disability. The mentally ill are stigmatized in Chinese society and can not legally marry.\nEfforts are being undertaken worldwide to eliminate the stigma of mental illness, although the methods and outcomes used have sometimes been criticized.\nMedia and general public.\nMedia coverage of mental illness comprises predominantly negative and pejorative depictions, for example, of incompetence, violence or criminality, with far less coverage of positive issues such as accomplishments or human rights issues. Such negative depictions, including in children's cartoons, are thought to contribute to stigma and negative attitudes in the public and in those with mental health problems themselves, although more sensitive or serious cinematic portrayals have increased in prevalence.\nIn the United States, the Carter Center has created fellowships for journalists in South Africa, the U.S., and Romania, to enable reporters to research and write stories on mental health topics. Former US First Lady Rosalynn Carter began the fellowships not only to train reporters in how to sensitively and accurately discuss mental health and mental illness, but also to increase the number of stories on these topics in the news media. There is also a World Mental Health Day, which in the United States and Canada falls within a Mental Illness Awareness Week.\nThe general public have been found to hold a strong stereotype of dangerousness and desire for social distance from individuals described as mentally ill. A US national survey found that a higher percentage of people rate individuals described as displaying the characteristics of a mental disorder as \"likely to do something violent to others\", compared to the percentage of people who are rating individuals described as being troubled. In the article, \"Discrimination Against People with a Mental Health Diagnosis: Qualitative Analysis of Reported Experiences\", an individual who has a mental disorder, revealed that, \"If people don't know me and don't know about the problems, they'll talk to me quite happily. Once they've seen the problems or someone's told them about me, they tend to be a bit more wary.\" In addition, in the article, \"Stigma and its Impact on Help-Seeking for Mental Disorders: What Do We Know?\" by George Schomerus and Matthias Angermeyer, it is affirmed that \"Family doctors and psychiatrists have more pessimistic views about the outcomes for mental illnesses than the general public (Jorm et al., 1999), and mental health professionals hold more negative stereotypes about mentally ill patients, but, reassuringly, they are less accepting of restrictions towards them.\"\nRecent depictions in media have included leading characters successfully living with and managing a mental illness, including in bipolar disorder in \"Homeland\" (2011) and post-traumatic stress disorder in \"Iron Man 3\" (2013).\nCrime.\nThe insanity defense may be used in a legal trial as a legal excuse for crime.\nDespite public or media opinion, national studies have indicated that severe mental illness does not independently predict future violent behavior, on average, and is not a leading cause of violence in society. There is a statistical association with various factors that do relate to violence (in anyone), such as substance use and various personal, social, and economic factors. A 2015 review found that in the United States, about 4% of violence is attributable to people diagnosed with mental illness, and a 2014 study found that 7.5% of crimes committed by mentally ill people were directly related to the symptoms of their mental illness. The majority of people with serious mental illness are never violent.\nIn fact, findings consistently indicate that it is many times more likely that people diagnosed with a serious mental illness living in the community will be the victims rather than the perpetrators of violence. In a study of individuals diagnosed with \"severe mental illness\" living in a US inner-city area, a quarter were found to have been victims of at least one violent crime over the course of a year, a proportion eleven times higher than the inner-city average, and higher in every category of crime including violent assaults and theft. People with a diagnosis may find it more difficult to secure prosecutions, however, due in part to prejudice and being seen as less credible.\nHowever, there are some specific diagnoses, such as childhood conduct disorder or adult antisocial personality disorder or psychopathy, which are defined by, or are inherently associated with, conduct problems and violence. There are conflicting findings about the extent to which certain specific symptoms, notably some kinds of psychosis (hallucinations or delusions) that can occur in disorders such as schizophrenia, delusional disorder or mood disorder, are linked to an increased risk of serious violence on average. The mediating factors of violent acts, however, are most consistently found to be mainly socio-demographic and socio-economic factors such as being young, male, of lower socioeconomic status and, in particular, substance use (including alcohol use) to which some people may be particularly vulnerable.\nHigh-profile cases have led to fears that serious crimes, such as homicide, have increased due to deinstitutionalization, but the evidence does not support this conclusion. Violence that does occur in relation to mental disorder (against the mentally ill or by the mentally ill) typically occurs in the context of complex social interactions, often in a family setting rather than between strangers. It is also an issue in health care settings and the wider community.\nMental health.\nThe recognition and understanding of mental health conditions have changed over time and across cultures and there are still variations in definition, assessment, and classification, although standard guideline criteria are widely used. In many cases, there appears to be a continuum between mental health and mental illness, making diagnosis complex. According to the World Health Organization, over a third of people in most countries report problems at some time in their life which meet the criteria for diagnosis of one or more of the common types of mental disorder. Corey M Keyes has created a \"two continua model\" of mental illness and health which holds that both are related, but distinct dimensions: one continuum indicates the presence or absence of mental health, the other the presence or absence of mental illness. For example, people with optimal mental health can also have a mental illness, and people who have no mental illness can also have poor mental health.\nOther animals.\nPsychopathology in non-human primates has been studied since the mid-20th century. Over 20 behavioral patterns in captive chimpanzees have been documented as (statistically) abnormal for frequency, severity or oddness\u2014some of which have also been observed in the wild. Captive great apes show gross behavioral abnormalities such as stereotypy of movements, self-mutilation, disturbed emotional reactions (mainly fear or aggression) towards companions, lack of species-typical communications, and generalized learned helplessness. In some cases such behaviors are hypothesized to be equivalent to symptoms associated with psychiatric disorders in humans such as depression, anxiety disorders, eating disorders and post-traumatic stress disorder. Concepts of antisocial, borderline and schizoid personality disorders have also been applied to non-human great apes.\nThe risk of anthropomorphism is often raised concerning such comparisons, and assessment of non-human animals cannot incorporate evidence from linguistic communication. However, available evidence may range from nonverbal behaviors\u2014including physiological responses and homologous facial displays and acoustic utterances\u2014to neurochemical studies. It is pointed out that human psychiatric classification is often based on statistical description and judgment of behaviors (especially when speech or language is impaired) and that the use of verbal self-report is itself problematic and unreliable.\nPsychopathology has generally been traced, at least in captivity, to adverse rearing conditions such as early separation of infants from mothers; early sensory deprivation; and extended periods of social isolation. Studies have also indicated individual variation in temperament, such as sociability or impulsiveness. Particular causes of problems in captivity have included integration of strangers into existing groups and a lack of individual space, in which context some pathological behaviors have also been seen as coping mechanisms. Remedial interventions have included careful individually tailored re-socialization programs, behavior therapy, environment enrichment, and on rare occasions psychiatric drugs. Socialization has been found to work 90% of the time in disturbed chimpanzees, although restoration of functional sexuality and caregiving is often not achieved.\nLaboratory researchers sometimes try to develop animal models of human mental disorders, including by inducing or treating symptoms in animals through genetic, neurological, chemical or behavioral manipulation, but this has been criticized on empirical grounds and opposed on animal rights grounds.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19357", "revid": "1280219234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19357", "title": "Marijuana (disambiguation)", "text": "Marijuana is a psychoactive drug from the cannabis. The plant itself is known by the name \u201cmarijuana\u201d.\nMarijuana or Marihuana may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "19358", "revid": "317363", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19358", "title": "Michael Moorcock", "text": "English writer, editor, critic (born 1939)\nMichael John Moorcock (born 18 December 1939) is an English writer, originally of science fiction and fantasy, who has published many well-received literary novels as well as comic thrillers, graphic novels and non-fiction. He has worked as an editor and is also a successful musician. He is best known for his novels about the character Elric of Melnibon\u00e9, which were a seminal influence on the field of fantasy in the 1960s and 1970s.\nAs editor of the British science fiction magazine \"New Worlds\", from May 1964 until March 1971 and then again from 1976 to 1996, Moorcock fostered the development of the science fiction \"New Wave\" in the UK and indirectly in the United States, leading to the advent of cyberpunk. His publication of \"Bug Jack Barron\" (1969) by Norman Spinrad as a serial novel was notorious; in Parliament, some British MPs condemned the Arts Council of Great Britain for funding the magazine. In 2008, \"The Times\" named Moorcock in its list of \"The 50 greatest British writers since 1945\".\nMoorcock is also a recording musician; he has contributed to the music acts Hawkwind, Blue \u00d6yster Cult, Robert Calvert and Spirits Burning, and to his own project, Michael Moorcock &amp; The Deep Fix.\nBiography.\nMichael Moorcock was born in Mitcham, Surrey (now Greater London), in December 1939, and the landscape of London, particularly the area of Notting Hill Gate and Ladbroke Grove, is an important influence in some of his fiction (such as the Cornelius novels).\nMoorcock has mentioned \"The Master Mind of Mars\" by Edgar Rice Burroughs, \"The Apple Cart\" by George Bernard Shaw and \"The Constable of St. Nicholas\" by Edwin Lester Arnold as the first three non-juvenile books that he read before beginning primary school. The first book he bought was a secondhand copy of \"The Pilgrim's Progress\".\nMoorcock is the former husband of the writer Hilary Bailey, with whom he had three children: Sophie (b. 1963), Katherine (b. 1964), and Max (b. 1972). Moorcock is also the former husband of Jill Riches, who later married Robert Calvert. She illustrated some of Moorcock's books, including covers, among them the dustjacket for the first edition of \"Gloriana\" (Allison and Busby, 1978). In 1983, Linda Steele became Moorcock's third wife.\nHe was an early member of the Swordsmen and Sorcerers' Guild of America (SAGA), a loose-knit group of eight heroic fantasy authors founded in the 1960s and led by Lin Carter, selected by fantasy credentials alone.\nMoorcock is the subject of four book-length works, a monograph and an interview, by Colin Greenland. In 1983, Greenland published \"\". He followed this with \"Michael Moorcock: Death is No Obstacle\", a book-length series of interviews with Moorcock about the techniques in his writing, in 1992. \"Michael Moorcock: Law of Chaos\" by Jeff Gardiner and \"Michael Moorcock: Fiction, Fantasy and the World's Pain\" by Mark Scroggins were published more recently.\nIn the 1990s, Moorcock moved to Texas in the United States. His wife Linda is American. He spends half of the year in Texas, the other half in Paris, France.\nPolitical views.\nMoorcock's works feature political content. In one interview, he states, \"I am an anarchist and a pragmatist. My moral/philosophical position is that of an anarchist.\" In describing how his writing relates to his political philosophy, Moorcock says, \"My books frequently deal with aristocratic heroes, gods and so forth. All of them end on a note which often states quite directly that one should serve neither gods nor masters but become one's own master.\" \nBesides using fiction to explore his politics, Moorcock also engages in non-violent political activism. In order to \"marginalize stuff that works to objectify women and suggests women enjoy being beaten\", he has encouraged W H Smiths to move John Norman's \"Gor\" series novels to the top shelf. For many years he has written for magazines and newspapers of all political stripes, including \"The Times\", \"New Statesman\", \"The Spectator\", \"The Guardian\", \"The Daily Telegraph\", \"The Washington Post\", \"LA Times\" and many others on all manner of subjects.\nWriter.\nFiction.\nMoorcock began writing while he was still at school, contributing to a magazine he entitled \"Outlaw's Own\" from 1950 on.\nIn 1957, at the age of 17, Moorcock became editor of \"Tarzan Adventures\" (a national juvenile weekly featuring text and Tarzan comic strip), which had published at least a dozen of his own \"Sojan the Swordsman\" stories during that year and the next. At the age of 18, in 1958, he wrote the allegorical fantasy novel \"The Golden Barge\". This remained unpublished until 1980, when it was issued by Savoy Books with an introduction by M. John Harrison. At 19, Moorcock worked on \"The Sexton Blake Library\", a serial pulp fiction featuring Sexton Blake, which \"The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction\" referred to as \"the poor man's Sherlock Holmes\". \nUnder Moorcock's leadership, \"New Worlds\" became central to \"New Wave\" science fiction. This movement, not of its own naming, promoted individual vision, literary style and an existential view of technological change, in contrast to generic \"hard science fiction\", which extrapolated on technological change itself. Some \"New Wave\" stories were not recognisable as traditional science fiction, and \"New Worlds\" remained controversial for as long as Moorcock edited it. Moorcock claimed that he wanted to publish experimental/literary fiction using techniques and subject matter from generic SF but, initially at least, to marry \"popular\" and \"literary\" fiction at what he considered their natural overlap. After 1967, this policy became evident and allied to the British \"pop art\" movement exemplified by Eduardo Paolozzi, Richard Hamilton and others. Paolozzi became \"Aviation Editor\".\nDuring that time, he occasionally wrote as \"James Colvin\", a \"house pseudonym\" originally created for him by John Carnell also used by other \"New Worlds\" critics. A spoof obituary of Colvin appeared in \"New Worlds\" #197 (January 1970), written by Charles Platt as \"William Barclay\". Moorcock makes much use of the initials \"JC\"; these are also the initials of Jesus Christ, the subject of his 1967 Nebula Award-winning novella \"Behold the Man\", which tells the story of Karl Glogauer, a time-traveller who takes on the role of Christ. They are also the initials of various \"Eternal Champion\" Moorcock characters such as Jerry Cornelius, Jerry Cornell and Jherek Carnelian. In more recent years, Moorcock has taken to using \"Warwick Colvin, Jr.\" as a pseudonym, particularly in his \"Second Ether\" fiction.\nMoorcock has also published pastiches of writers for whom he felt affection as a boy, including Edgar Rice Burroughs, Leigh Brackett, and Robert E. Howard. All his fantasy adventures have elements of satire and parody, while respecting what he considers the essentials of the form. Although his heroic fantasies have been his most consistently reprinted books in the United States, he achieved prominence in the UK as a literary author, with the \"Guardian\" Fiction Prize in 1977 for \"The Condition of Muzak\", and with \"Mother London\" later shortlisted for the Whitbread Prize.\nNovels and series such as the \"Cornelius Quartet\", \"Mother London\", \"King of the City\", the \"Pyat Quartet\" and the short story collection \"London Bone\" have established him in the eyes of critics such as Iain Sinclair, Peter Ackroyd and Allan Massie in publications including \"The Times Literary Supplement\" and the \"London Review of Books\" as a major contemporary literary novelist. In 2008 Moorcock was named by a critics' panel in \"The Times\" as one of the fifty best British novelists since 1945. Virtually all of his stories are part of his overarching \"Eternal Champion\" theme or \"oeuvre\", with characters (including Elric) moving from one storyline and fictional universe to another, all of them interconnected (though often only in dreams or visions).\nMost of Moorcock's earlier work consisted of short stories and relatively brief novels: he has mentioned that \"I could write 15,000 words a day and gave myself three days a volume. That's how, for instance, the Hawkmoon books were written.\" Over the period of the \"New Worlds\" editorship and his publishing of the original fantasy novels Moorcock has maintained an interest in the craft of writing and a continuing interest in the semi-journalistic craft of \"pulp\" authorship. This is reflected in his development of interlocking cycles which hark back to the origins of fantasy in myth and medieval cycles (see \"Wizardry and Wild Romance \u2013 Moorcock\" and \"Death Is No Obstacle \u2013 Colin Greenland\" for more commentary). This also provides an implicit link with the episodic origins of literature in newspaper/magazine serials from Trollope and Dickens onwards. None of this should be surprising given Moorcock's background in magazine publishing.\nSince the 1980s, Moorcock has written longer, more literary \"mainstream\" novels, such as \"Mother London\" and \"Byzantium Endures,\" but he continued to revisit characters from his earlier works, such as Elric. With the publication of the third and last book in his Elric Moonbeam Roads sequence, he announced that he was \"retiring\" from writing heroic fantasy fiction, though he continued to write Elric's adventures as graphic novels with his long-time collaborators Walter Simonson and the late James Cawthorn (1929\u20132008) and in 2021 announced that he had written a 'straight' Elric novel, within the first canon, for the 60th anniversary of his hero's appearance. He and Simonson produced the graphic novel, \"Elric: the Making of a Sorcerer\", published by DC Comics in 2007. In 2006, he completed his highly praised \"Colonel Pyat\" sequence, dealing with the Nazi Holocaust. This began in 1981 with \"Byzantium Endures\", continued through \"The Laughter of Carthage\" (1984) and \"Jerusalem Commands\" (1992), and culminated with \"The Vengeance of Rome\" (2006). His most recent sequence, \"KABOUL\", with illustrations by Miles Hyman, was published in French by Denoel.\nAmong other works by Moorcock are \"The Dancers at the End of Time\", comedies set on Earth millions of years in the future; \"Gloriana, or The Unfulfill'd Queen,\" which he describes as an argument with Spenser's \"The Faerie Queen\", set in an alternative Earth history; and the \"Second Ether\" sequence beginning with \"Blood\", mixing absurdism, reminiscence and family memoir against the background of his multiverse.\nMoorcock is prone to revising his existing work, with the result that different editions of a given book may contain significant variations. The changes range from simple retitlings (the Elric story \"The Flame Bringers\" became \"The Caravan of Forgotten Dreams\" in the 1990s Victor Gollancz/White Wolf omnibus editions) to character name changes (such as detective \"Minos Aquilinas\" becoming first \"Minos von Bek\" and later \"Sam Begg\" in three different versions of the short story \"The Pleasure Garden of Felipe Sagittarius\"), major textual alterations (for example, the addition of several new chapters to \"The Steel Tsar\" in the omnibus editions), and even complete restructurings (as with the 1966 novella \"Behold the Man\" being expanded to novel-length and into a novel rather than an SF story recreated from the original version that appeared in \"New Worlds\" for republication as a book in 1969 by Allison and Busby).\nA new, final revision of almost Moorcock's entire oeuvre, with the exception of his literary novels \"Mother London\", \"King of the City\" and the Pyat quartet, is issued by Gollancz and many of his titles are reprinted in the United States by Simon and Schuster and Titan and in France by Gallimard. Many novels and comics based on his work are being reprinted by Titan Books under the general title The Michael Moorcock Library, while in France a new adaptation of the Elric and Hawkmoon series has been translated into many languages, including English. In 2025 \"Mutter London\" was published in Germany by Carcosa Verlag.\nElric of Melnibon\u00e9 and the Eternal Champion.\nMoorcock's best-selling works have been the \"Elric of Melnibon\u00e9\" stories. In these, Elric is a deliberate reversal of clich\u00e9s found in fantasy adventure novels inspired by the works of J. R. R. Tolkien.\nCentral to many of his seminal fantasy novels, including his Elric books, is the concept of an \"Eternal Champion\", who has multiple identities across alternate universes. This cosmology is called the \"Multiverse\" within his novels. The Multiverse deals with fundamental polarities, such as Law versus Chaos, and order versus entropy.\nElric's success has overshadowed Moorcock's other works, though he has worked the Elric stories' themes into his other works (the \"Hawkmoon\" and \"Corum\" novels, for example). His Eternal Champion sequence has been collected in two different editions of omnibus volumes totaling 16 books (the U.S. edition was 15 volumes, while the British edition was 14 volumes, but due to various rights issues, the U.S. edition contained two volumes that were not included in the British edition, and the British edition likewise contained one volume that was not included in the U.S. edition) containing several books per volume, by Victor Gollancz in the UK and by White Wolf Publishing in the US. Several attempts to make an Elric film were made. Moorcock refused to resign the options, usually when they seemed to drift too far off course. In February 2019, BBC Studios announced they had secured the rights to the Runestaff series of fantasy novels, which feature Hawkmoon as their hero.\nJerry Cornelius.\nAnother of Moorcock's creations is Jerry Cornelius, a hip urban adventurer of ambiguous gender; the same characters featured in each of several Cornelius books. These books were satirical of modern times, including the Vietnam War, and continued to feature another variation of the multiverse theme. The first Jerry Cornelius book, \"The Final Programme\" (1968), was made into a feature film in 1973. Its story line is identical to two of the Elric stories: \"The Dreaming City\" and \"The Dead Gods' Book\". Since 1998, Moorcock has returned to Cornelius in a series of new stories: \"The Spencer Inheritance\", \"The Camus Connection\", \"Cheering for the Rockets\", and \"Firing the Cathedral\", which was concerned with 9/11. All four novellas were included in the 2003 edition of \"The Lives and Times of Jerry Cornelius\". Moorcock's recent Cornelius story, \"Modem Times\", appeared in \"The Solaris Book of New Science Fiction: Volume 2\", published in 2008, this was expanded in 2011 as \"Modem Times 2.0\"(PM Press). Additionally, a version of Cornelius also appeared in Moorcock's 2010 \"Doctor Who\" novel \"The Coming of the Terraphiles\". \"Pegging the President\" (PS. 2018), \"The Fracking Factory\" (PS, 2018) are two recent novellas, \"Wigan!\" (NEW WORLDS 2024) appeared in the magazine's 60th anniversary issue and further stories are forthcoming.\nViews on fiction writing.\nMoorcock is a fervent supporter of Mervyn Peake's works. \nMoorcock is critical of J. R. R. Tolkien's works. He met both Tolkien and C. S. Lewis in his teens and claims to have liked them personally even though he does not admire them on artistic grounds. Moorcock criticised works such as \"The Lord of the Rings\" for their \"Merry England\" comfort-fantasy point of view, equating Tolkien's novel to the reassuring tone of BBC Children's Hour, designed to calm children down for bed-time and \"Winnie-the-Pooh\" in his essay \"Epic Pooh\". Even so, James Cawthorn and Moorcock included \"The Lord of the Rings\" in \"Fantasy: The 100 Best Books\" (Carroll &amp; Graf, 1988), and their review is not dismissive.\nMoorcock has also criticized writers for their political agendas. He included Robert A. Heinlein and H. P. Lovecraft among this group in a 1978 essay, \"Starship Stormtroopers\" (\"Anarchist Review\"). There he criticised the production of \"authoritarian\" fiction by certain canonical writers and Lovecraft for having antisemitic, misogynistic, and racist viewpoints woven into his short stories.\nSharing fictional universes with others.\nMoorcock has allowed other writers to create stories in his fictional Jerry Cornelius universe. Brian Aldiss, Hilary Bailey, M. John Harrison, Norman Spinrad, James Sallis, and Steve Aylett have written such stories. In an interview published in \"The Internet Review of Science Fiction,\" Moorcock explains the reason for sharing his character:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I came out of popular fiction and Jerry was always meant to be a sort of crystal ball for others to see their own visions in \u2013 the stories were designed to work like that \u2013 a diving board, to use another analogy, from which to jump into the river and be carried along by it. [...] All of these have tended to use Jerry the way I intended to use him \u2013 as a way of seeing modern life and sometimes as a way of commenting on it. Jerry, as Harrison said, was as much a technique as a character and I'm glad that others have taken to using that method.\nTwo short stories by Keith Roberts, \"Coranda\" and \"The Wreck of the Kissing Bitch\", are set in the frozen Matto Grosso plateau of Moorcock's 1969 novel, \"The Ice Schooner\".\nElric of Melnibone and Moonglum appear in Karl Edward Wagner's story \"The Gothic Touch\", where they meet with Kane, who borrows Elric for his ability to deal with demons.\nHe is a friend and fan of comic book writer Alan Moore and allowed Moore the use of his own character, Michael Kane of Old Mars, mentioned in Moore's \"The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen, Volume II\". The two appeared on stage at the Vanbrugh Theatre in London in January 2006 where they discussed Moorcock's work. The Green City from \"Warriors of Mars\" was also referenced in Larry Niven's \"Rainbow Mars\". Jerry Cornelius appeared in Moore's \"\".\nCornelius also appeared in French artist M\u0153bius' comic series \"Le Garage Herm\u00e9tique\".\nIn 1995\u201396, Moorcock wrote a script for a computer game/film/novel by Origin Systems. When Electronic Arts bought Origins, the game was cancelled, but Moorcock's 40,000-word treatment was fleshed out by Storm Constantine, resulting in the novel \"Silverheart\". The story is set in Karadur-Shriltasi, a city at the heart of the Multiverse. A second novel, \"Dragonskin\", was in preparation, with Constantine as the main writer, but she died in January 2021, after a long illness. Moorcock abandoned a memoir about his friends Mervyn Peake and Maeve Gilmore because he felt it was too personal.\nHe wrote prose and verse for \"The Sunday Books\" first publication in French to accompany a set of unpublished Peake drawings. His book \"The Metatemporal Detective\" was published in 2007. His most recent book published first in French is \"Kaboul\", in 2018.\nIn November 2009, Moorcock announced that he would be writing a \"Doctor Who\" novel for BBC Books in 2010, one of the few occasions when he has written stories set in other people's \"shared universes\". The novel \"The Coming of the Terraphiles\" was released in October 2010. The story merges Doctor Who with many of Moorcock's characters from the multiverse, notably Captain Cornelius and his pirates. In 2016 Moorcock published the first novel in what he terms a literary experiment blending memoir and fantasy, \"The Whispering Swarm\". In 2018, he announced his completion of the second volume \"The Woods of Arcady\". In 2020, he said he was completing the final Elric novel \"The Citadel of Forgotten Myths\" ready for Elric's 60th anniversary in 2021. Moorcock's Jerry Cornelius novella \"Pegging the President\" was launched in 2018 at Shakespeare and Co, Paris, where he discussed his work with Hari Kunzru and reaffirmed his commitment to literary experiment.\nAudiobooks.\nThe first of an audiobook series of unabridged Elric novels, with new work read by Moorcock, began appearing from AudioRealms; however, https:// is no longer in business. The second audiobook in the series \u2013 \"The Sailor on the Seas of Fate\" \u2013 was published in 2007. There have been audio-books of \"Corum\" and others, several of which were unofficial and \"A Winter Admiral\" and \"Furniture\" are audio versions of short stories. Since then \"The Whispering Swarm\" and the \"Corum\" books became available via Audible and all the Elric books were scheduled to appear in audio form to coincide with Simon and Schuster's new illustrated set in 2022.\nMusic.\nMichael Moorcock &amp; The Deep Fix.\nMoorcock has his own music project, which records under the name Michael Moorcock &amp; The Deep Fix. \"The Deep Fix\" was the title story of an obscure collection of short stories by James Colvin (a pen name of Moorcock) and was the name of the Jerry Cornelius band. Moorcock's story had dealt with releasing the unconscious, and although it referenced William Burroughs, it was not specifically about illicit drugs. This allegedly lost the band considerable airplay and gave Moorcock what he called 'a great reputation in the drug community' but made venues and stations wary of booking and playing them. \nThe first album \"New Worlds Fair\" was released in 1975. The album included Snowy White, Peter Pavli of The Third Ear Band, regulars Steve Gilmore and Graham Charnock, Moorcock himself on guitars, mandolin and banjo, and a number of Hawkwind regulars in the credits. A second version of the \"New Worlds\" album was issued in 2004 under the album name \"Roller Coaster Holiday\". A non-album rock single, including Lemmy on bass and Moorcock playing his own Rickenbacker 330/12, \"Starcruiser\" coupled with \"Dodgem Dude\", was belatedly issued in 1980 on \"Flicknife\".\nAlthough announced to appear at Dingwalls, the performance was cancelled when schedules clashed. The Deep Fix gave a rare live performance at the Roundhouse, London on 18 June 1978 at \"Nik Turner's Bohemian Love-In\", headlined by Turner's band Sphynx and also featuring Tanz Der Youth with Brian James (ex-The Damned), Lightning Raiders, Steve Took's Horns, Roger Ruskin and others.\nIn 1982, as a trio with Peter Pavli and Drachen Theaker, some Deep Fix recordings were issued on \"Hawkwind, Friends and Relations\" and a limited-edition 7\" single of \"Brothel in Rosenstrasse\" backed with \"Time Centre\", which featured \"Langdon Jones\" on piano.\nIn 2008, \"The Entropy Tango &amp; Gloriana Demo Sessions\" by Michael Moorcock &amp; The Deep Fix was released. These were sessions for planned albums based on two of Moorcock's novels, \"Gloriana, or The Unfulfill'd Queen\" and \"The Entropy Tango\", which were never completed. Pavli, Moorcock and Falcone are currently in the process of making the intended versions of those songs based on the group's TEAC recordings of the 80s. They are influenced heavily by modern classical music which they look to for inspiration. Moorcock's considerable range is demanded. Moorcock and Pavli have long been advocates for Mahler, Schoenberg, Ives and other 20th century composers.\nWorking with Martin Stone, Moorcock began recording a new Deep Fix album in Paris, titled \"Live at the Terminal Cafe\". Following Stone's death in 2016, Moorcock completed the album with producer Don Falcone. In 2019, Moorcock announced the completion of the album, and it was released 11 October 2019, on Cleopatra Records.\nWith Hawkwind.\nMoorcock collaborated with the British rock band Hawkwind on many occasions: the Hawkwind track \"The Black Corridor\", for example, included verbatim quotes from Moorcock's novel of the same name, and he worked with the band on their album \"Warrior on the Edge of Time, \"for which he earned a gold disc. Moorcock also wrote the lyrics to \"Sonic Attack\", a Sci-Fi satire of the public information broadcast, that was part of Hawkwind's \"Space Ritual\" set. Hawkwind's album \"The Chronicle of the Black Sword\" was largely based on the Elric novels. Moorcock appeared on stage with the band on many occasions, including the Black Sword tour. His contributions were removed from the original release of the \"Live Chronicles\" album, recorded on this tour, for legal reasons, but have subsequently appeared on some double-CD versions. He can also be seen performing on the DVD version of \"Chronicle of the Black Sword\".\nWith Robert Calvert.\nMoorcock also collaborated with former Hawkwind frontman and resident poet, Robert Calvert (who gave the chilling declamation of \"Sonic Attack\"), on Calvert's albums \"Lucky Leif and the Longships\" and \"Hype\", playing guitar and banjo and singing background vocals with his wife Linda.\nWith Blue \u00d6yster Cult.\nMoorcock wrote the lyrics to three album tracks by the American band Blue \u00d6yster Cult: \"Black Blade\", referring to the sword Stormbringer in the Elric books, \"Veteran of the Psychic Wars\", showing us Elric's emotions at a critical point of his story (this song may also refer to the \"Warriors at the Edge of Time\", which figure heavily in Moorcock's novels about John Daker; at one point his novel \"The Dragon in the Sword\" they call themselves the \"veterans of a thousand psychic wars\", although the term is also applied to Elric in 2022's \"The Citadel of Forgotten Myths\"), and \"The Great Sun Jester\", about his friend, the poet Bill Butler, who died of a drug overdose. Moorcock has performed live with B\u00d6C (in 1987 at the Atlanta, GA Dragon Con Convention).\nWith Spirits Burning.\nMoorcock contributed vocals and harmonica to the Spirits Burning albums \"An Alien Heat\", \"The Hollow Lands\", \"The End Of All Songs - Part 1\", and \"The End Of All Songs - Part 2\". Most of the lyrics were taken from or based on text in novels from Moorcock's \"The Dancers at the End of Time\" trilogy. The albums were produced by Spirits Burning leader Don Falcone, and included contributions from Albert Bouchard and other members of Blue \u00d6yster Cult, as well as former members of Hawkwind.\nMoorcock plays harmonica on three songs on the 2021 Spirits Burning album \"Evolution Ritual\".\nMoorcock also appeared on five tracks on the Spirits Burning CD \"Alien Injection\", released in 2008. He is credited with singing lead vocals and playing glockenspiel, guitar and mandolin. The performances used on the CD were from \"The Entropy Tango &amp; Gloriana Demo Sessions\".\nWith Smoulder.\nMoorcock wrote and narrated the introduction to the Smoulder track \"Victims of Fate,\" which is featured on their 2023 album \"Violent Creed of Vengeance\".\nOther appearances.\nMoorcock's last public appearance as a music performer was with Nik Turner and Flame Tree in Austin, Texas, March 2019.\nMoorcock is currently working on a record with Alan Davey, recording some of his own songs and songs by Robert Calvert, his co-performer in Hawkwind. Moorcock is also writing songs with other long-time collaborators.\nAwards and honours.\nMichael Moorcock has received great recognition for his career contributions as well as for particular works.\nThe Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame inducted Moorcock in 2002 He also received life achievement awards at the World Fantasy Convention in 2000 (World Fantasy Award), at the Utopiales International Festival in 2004 (Prix Utopia), from the Horror Writers Association in 2005 (Bram Stoker Award), and from the Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America in 2008 (named its 25th Grand Master). He is a Parisian member of the London College of Pataphysicians.\nHe was \"Co-Guest of Honor\" at the 1976 World Fantasy Convention in New York City and one Guest of Honor at the 1997 55th World Science Fiction Convention in San Antonio, Texas.\nSelected works.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWith Mark Hodder he is also writing a series of thrillers set at different times in the 20th century featuring his character The Metatemporal Detective, including \"The Albino's Secret\" and \"The Albino's Honour\", which involve a descendant of Elric (possibly Elric himself), published by Simon and Schuster beginning in 2025.\nAnthologies edited.\nAs well as a series of \"Best SF Stories from New Worlds\" and \"The Traps of Time\" (Hart-Davis), Moorcock has also edited other volumes, including two bringing together examples of pre-1914 invasion literature:\nHe also edited \"The Inner Landscape\", featuring novellas by Peake, Aldiss and Ballard.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19359", "revid": "5563803", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19359", "title": "Mandarin Chinese", "text": "Branch of the Chinese language family\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nMandarin ( ; ) is the largest branch of the Sinitic languages. Mandarin varieties are spoken by 70 percent of all Chinese speakers over a large geographical area that stretches from Yunnan in the southwest to Xinjiang in the northwest and Heilongjiang in the northeast. Its spread is generally attributed to the greater ease of travel and communication in the North China Plain compared to the more mountainous south, combined with the relatively recent spread of Mandarin to frontier areas.\nMany varieties of Mandarin, such as those of the Southwest (including Sichuanese) and the Lower Yangtze, are not mutually intelligible with the Beijing dialect (or are only partially intelligible). Nevertheless, Mandarin as a group is often placed first in lists of languages by number of native speakers (with nearly one billion). Because Mandarin originated in North China and most Mandarin varieties are found in the north, the group is sometimes referred to as Northern Chinese ().\nMost Mandarin varieties have four tones. The final stops of Middle Chinese have disappeared in most of these varieties, but some have merged them as a final glottal stop. Many Mandarin varieties, including that of Beijing, retain retroflex initial consonants, which have been lost in southern Chinese languages.\nThe capitals of China have been within the Mandarin-speaking area for most of the last millennium, making these dialects very influential. Some form of Mandarin has served as a lingua franca for government officials and the courts since the 14th century. In the early 20th century, a standard form based on the Beijing dialect, with elements from other Mandarin varieties, was adopted as the national language. Standard Chinese is the official language of China and Taiwan, one of four official languages of Singapore and one of six official languages of the United Nations. Recent increased migration from Mandarin-speaking regions of China and Taiwan has now resulted in the language being one of the more frequently used varieties of Chinese among Chinese diaspora communities. It is also the most commonly taught Chinese language.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nName.\nThe English word \"mandarin\" (from Portuguese , from Malay , from Sanskrit , , meaning 'minister or counsellor') originally meant an official of the Ming and Qing empires.\nSince their native varieties were often mutually unintelligible, these officials communicated using a koin\u00e9 language based on various northern varieties. When Jesuit missionaries learned this standard language in the 16th century, they called it \"Mandarin\", from its Chinese name .\nIn everyday English, \"Mandarin\" refers to Standard Chinese, which is often called simply \"Chinese\". Standard Mandarin Chinese is based on Beijing dialect, with some lexical and syntactic influence from other Mandarin dialects. It is the official spoken language of the People's Republic of China (PRC) and Taiwan (Republic of China, ROC), as well as one of the four official languages of Singapore, and a high-prestige minority language in Malaysia. It also functions as the language of instruction in mainland China and Taiwan. It is one of the six official languages of the United Nations, under the name \"Chinese\". Chinese speakers refer to the modern standard language as in mainland China, in Taiwan, and in Malaysia and Singapore, but not as .\nLinguists use the term \"Mandarin\" to refer to the diverse group of dialects spoken in northern and southwestern China, which Chinese linguists call . The alternative term , is used less and less among Chinese linguists. By extension, the term \"Old Mandarin\" or \"Early Mandarin\" is used by linguists to refer to the northern dialects recorded in materials from the Yuan dynasty.\nNative speakers who are not academic linguists may not recognize that the variants they speak are classified in linguistics as members of \"Mandarin\" (or so-called \"Northern dialects\") in a broader sense. Within Chinese social or cultural discourse, there is not a \"Mandarin\" identity based on language; rather, there are strong regional identities centred on individual dialects because of the wide geographical distribution and cultural diversity of their speakers. Speakers of forms of Mandarin other than the standard typically refer to the variety they speak by a geographic name\u2014for example the Sichuan dialect and the Hebei dialect or Northeastern dialect, all being regarded as distinct from the standard language, with which they may not share much mutual intelligibility.\nHistory.\nThe hundreds of modern local varieties of Chinese developed from regional variants of Old Chinese and Middle Chinese. Traditionally, seven major groups of dialects have been recognized. Aside from Mandarin, the other six are Wu, Gan, and Xiang in central China and Min, Hakka, and Yue on the southeast coast. The \"Language Atlas of China\" (1987) distinguishes three further groups: Jin (split from Mandarin), Huizhou in the Huizhou region of Anhui and Zhejiang, and Pinghua in Guangxi and Yunnan.\nOld Mandarin.\nAfter the fall of the Northern Song (959\u20131126) and during the reign of the Jin (1115\u20131234) and Yuan (Mongol) dynasties in northern China, a common form of speech developed based on the dialects of the North China Plain around the capital, a language referred to as Old Mandarin. New genres of vernacular literature were based on this language, including verse, drama and story forms, such as the \"qu\" and \"sanqu\" poetry.\nThe rhyming conventions of the new verse were codified in a rime dictionary called the \"Zhongyuan Yinyun\" (1324). A radical departure from the rime table tradition that had evolved over the previous centuries, this dictionary contains a wealth of information on the phonology of Old Mandarin. Further sources are the 'Phags-pa script based on the Tibetan alphabet, which was used to write several of the languages of the Mongol empire, including Chinese and the \"Menggu Ziyun\", a rime dictionary based on 'Phags-pa. The rime books differ in some details, but overall show many of the features characteristic of modern Mandarin dialects, such as the reduction and disappearance of final plosives and the reorganization of the Middle Chinese tones.\nIn Middle Chinese, initial stops and affricates showed a three-way contrast between tenuis, voiceless aspirated and voiced consonants. There were four tones, with the fourth or \"entering tone\", a checked tone comprising syllables ending in plosives (\"-p\", \"-t\" or \"-k\"). Syllables with voiced initials tended to be pronounced with a lower pitch and by the late Tang dynasty, each of the tones had split into two registers conditioned by the initials. When voicing was lost in all languages except the Wu subfamily, this distinction became phonemic and the system of initials and tones was rearranged differently in each of the major groups.\nThe \"Zhongyuan Yinyun\" shows the typical Mandarin four-tone system resulting from a split of the \"even\" tone and loss of the entering tone, with its syllables distributed across the other tones (though their different origin is marked in the dictionary). Similarly, voiced plosives and affricates have become voiceless aspirates in the \"even\" tone and voiceless non-aspirates in others, another distinctive Mandarin development. However, the language still retained a final \"-m\", which has merged with \"-n\" in modern dialects and initial voiced fricatives. It also retained the distinction between velars and alveolar sibilants in palatal environments, which later merged in most Mandarin dialects to yield a palatal series (rendered \"j-\", \"q-\" and \"x-\" in pinyin).\nThe flourishing vernacular literature of the period also shows distinctively Mandarin vocabulary and syntax, though some, such as the third-person pronoun , can be traced back to the Tang dynasty.\nVernacular literature.\nUntil the early 20th century, formal writing and even much poetry and fiction was done in Literary Chinese, which was modeled on the classics of the Warring States period and the Han dynasty. Over time, the various spoken varieties diverged greatly from Literary Chinese, which was learned and composed as a special language. Preserved from the sound changes that affected the various spoken varieties, its economy of expression was greatly valued. For example, is unambiguous in written Chinese, but has over 75 homophones in Standard Chinese.\nThe literary language was less appropriate for documents that were meant to be performed or recited, such as plays or stories. From at least the Yuan dynasty plays that recounted the subversive tales of China's Robin Hoods to the Ming dynasty novels such as \"Water Margin\", on down to the Qing dynasty novel \"Dream of the Red Chamber\" and beyond, there developed a literature in written vernacular Chinese (). In many cases, this written language reflected Mandarin varieties and since pronunciation differences were not conveyed in this written form, this tradition had a unifying force across all the Mandarin-speaking regions and beyond.\nHu Shih, a pivotal figure of the first half of the twentieth century, wrote an influential and perceptive study of this literary tradition, entitled .\nLate imperial koin\u00e9.\nThe Chinese have different languages in different provinces, to such an extent that they cannot understand each other... [They] also have another language which is like a universal and common language; this is the official language of the mandarins and of the court; it is among them like Latin among ourselves... Two of our fathers [Michele Ruggieri and Matteo Ricci] have been learning this mandarin language... \u2014\u200aAlessandro Valignano, \"Historia del principio y progresso de la Compa\u00f1\u00eda de Jes\u00fas en las Indias Orientales\", I:28 (1542\u20131564)\nUntil the mid-20th century, most Chinese people living in many parts of South China spoke only their local variety. As a practical measure, officials of the Ming and Qing dynasties carried out the administration of the empire using a common language based on Mandarin varieties, known as \"Gu\u0101nhu\u00e0\". Knowledge of this language was thus essential for an official career, but it was never formally defined.\nOfficials varied widely in their pronunciation; in 1728, the Yongzheng Emperor, unable to understand the accents of officials from Guangdong and Fujian, issued a decree requiring the governors of those provinces to provide for the teaching of proper pronunciation. Although the resulting Academies for Correct Pronunciation () were short-lived, the decree did spawn a number of textbooks that give some insight into the ideal pronunciation. Common features included:\nAs the last two of these features indicate, this language was a koin\u00e9 based on dialects spoken in the Nanjing area, though not identical to any single dialect. This form remained prestigious long after the capital moved to Beijing in 1421, though the speech of the new capital emerged as a rival standard. As late as 1815, Robert Morrison based the first English\u2013Chinese dictionary on this koin\u00e9 as the standard of the time, though he conceded that the Beijing dialect was gaining in influence. By the middle of the 19th century, the Beijing dialect had become dominant and was essential for any business with the imperial court.\nStandard Chinese.\nThe variant of Mandarin as spoken by educated classes in Beijing was made the official language of China by the Qing dynasty in the early 1900s and the successive Republican government. In the early years of the Republic of China, intellectuals of the New Culture Movement, such as Hu Shih and Chen Duxiu, successfully campaigned for the replacement of Literary Chinese as the written standard by written vernacular Chinese, which was based on northern dialects. A parallel priority was the definition of a standard national language (). After much dispute between proponents of northern and southern dialects and an abortive attempt at an artificial pronunciation, the National Language Unification Commission finally settled on the Beijing dialect in 1932. The People's Republic, founded in 1949, retained this standard, calling it . Some 54% of speakers of Mandarin varieties could understand the standard language in the early 1950s, rising to 91% in 1984. Nationally, the proportion understanding the standard rose from 41% to 90% over the same period.\nThis standard language is now used in education, the media, and formal occasions in both mainland China and Taiwan, as well as among the Chinese community of Singapore. However, in other parts of the Chinese-speaking world, namely Hong Kong and Macau, the standard form of Chinese used in education, the media, formal speech, and everyday life remains the local Cantonese because of their colonial and linguistic history. While Standard Mandarin is now the medium of instruction in schools throughout China, it still has yet to gain traction as a common language among the local population in areas where Mandarin dialects are not native. In these regions, people may be either diglossic or speak the standard language with a notable accent. However, since the start of the 21st century, there has been an effort of mass education in Standard Mandarin Chinese and discouragement of local language usage by the Chinese government in order to erase these regional differences.\nFrom an official point of view, the mainland Chinese and the Taiwanese governments maintain their own forms of the standard under different names. The codified forms of both \"P\u01d4t\u014dnghu\u00e0\" and \"Gu\u00f3y\u01d4\" base their phonology on the Beijing accent, and also take some elements from other sources, and deviate from the Beijing dialect in vocabulary, grammar, and pragmatics. Comparison of dictionaries produced in the two areas will show that there are few substantial differences. However, both versions of \"school-standard\" Chinese are often quite different from the Mandarin varieties that are spoken in accordance with regional habits, and neither is wholly identical to the Beijing dialect.\nThe written forms of Standard Chinese are also essentially equivalent, although simplified characters are used in mainland China and Singapore, while traditional characters remain in use in Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Macau. Singapore has followed mainland China in officially adopting simplified characters.\nGeographic distribution.\nMandarin is spoken across northern and southwestern China, with some pockets in neighbouring countries.\nUnlike their compatriots on the southeast coast, few Mandarin speakers engaged in overseas emigration until the late 20th century, but there are now significant communities of them in cities across the world.\nMainland China.\nMost Han Chinese living in northern and southwestern China are native speakers of a dialect of Mandarin. The North China Plain provided few barriers to migration, leading to relative linguistic homogeneity over a wide area in northern China. In contrast, the mountains and rivers of southern China have spawned the other six major groups of Chinese varieties, with great internal diversity, particularly in Fujian.\nHowever, the varieties of Mandarin cover a huge area containing nearly a billion people. As a result, there are pronounced regional variations in pronunciation, vocabulary, and grammar, and many Mandarin varieties are not mutually intelligible.\nMost of northeast China, except for Liaoning, did not receive significant settlements by Han Chinese until the 18th century, and as a result the Northeastern Mandarin dialects spoken there differ little from the Beijing dialect. The Manchu people of the area now speak these dialects exclusively; their native language is only maintained in northwestern Xinjiang, where Xibe, a modern dialect, is spoken.\nThe frontier areas of northwest China were colonized by speakers of Mandarin dialects at the same time, and the dialects in those areas similarly closely resemble their relatives in the core Mandarin area. The Southwest was settled early, but the population fell dramatically for obscure reasons in the 13th century, and did not recover until the 17th century. The dialects in this area are now relatively uniform. However, long-established cities even very close to Beijing, such as Tianjin, Baoding, Shenyang, and Dalian, have markedly different dialects.\nTaiwan.\nStandard Mandarin is one of the official languages of Taiwan. The Taiwanese standard of Mandarin differs very little from that of mainland China, with differences largely in some technical vocabulary developed from the 1950s onwards.\nWhile the spoken standard of Taiwanese Mandarin is nearly identical to that of mainland China, the colloquial form has been heavily influenced by other local languages, especially Taiwanese Hokkien. Notable differences include: the merger of retroflex sounds (zh, ch, sh, r) with the alveolar series (z, c, s), frequent mergers of the \"neutral tone\" with a word's original tone, and absence of erhua. Code-switching between Mandarin and Taiwanese Hokkien is common, as the majority of the population continues to also speak the latter as a native language.\nSoutheast Asia.\nSingapore.\nMandarin is one of the four official languages of Singapore along with English, Malay, and Tamil. Historically, it was seldom used by the Chinese Singaporean community, which primarily spoke the Southern Chinese languages of Hokkien, Teochew, Cantonese, or Hakka. The launch of the Speak Mandarin Campaign in 1979 by the government prioritized the language over traditional vernaculars in an attempt to create a common ethnic language and foster closer connections to China. This has led to a significant increase and presence of Mandarin usage in the country, coupled with a strong decline in usage of other Chinese variants.\nStandard Singaporean Mandarin is nearly identical to the standards of China and Taiwan, with minor vocabulary differences. It is the Mandarin variant used in education, media, and official settings. Meanwhile, a colloquial form called Singdarin is used in informal daily life and is heavily influenced in terms of both grammar and vocabulary by local languages such as Cantonese, Hokkien, and Malay. Instances of code-switching with English, Hokkien, Cantonese, Malay, or a combination of any of these is also common.\nMalaysia.\nIn Malaysia, Mandarin has been adopted by local Chinese-language schools as the medium of instruction with the standard based on that of Singapore. However, it is not as widespread in daily life among the Malaysian Chinese community, as Hokkien speakers continue to form a plurality among the ethnic Chinese population and Cantonese serves as the common language (especially in commerce and local media). An exception is in the state of Johor, where Mandarin is increasingly used alongside Cantonese as a lingua franca in part due to Singaporean influence. As in Singapore, the local colloquial variant of Mandarin exhibits influences from Cantonese and Malay.\nMyanmar.\nIn northern Myanmar, a Southwestern Mandarin variant close to the Yunnanese dialect is spoken by local Chinese and other ethnic groups. In some rebel group-controlled regions, Mandarin also serves as the lingua franca.\nCentral Asia.\nThe Dungan people of Kyrgyzstan, Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan are descendants of Hui people who fled to the Russian Empire from Dzungaria in 1877 after the fall of Kashgaria to Qing forces and from the Ili valley after it was ceded to China in the Treaty of Saint Petersburg in 1881. About 500 speakers live in a compact area in Rovensky District, Saratov Oblast in Russia. The Dungan speak two dialects, descended from Central Plains Mandarin dialects of southeast Gansu and southwest Shaanxi, and write their language in the Cyrillic script.\nClassification.\nBoundaries.\nThe classification of Chinese dialects evolved during the 20th century, and many points remain unsettled. Early classifications tended to follow provincial boundaries or major geographical features.\nIn 1936, Wang Li produced the first classification based on phonetic criteria, principally the evolution of Middle Chinese voiced initials. His Mandarin group included dialects of northern and southwestern China, as well as those of Hunan and northern Jiangxi.\nLi Fang-Kuei's classification of 1937 distinguished the latter two groups as Xiang and Gan, while splitting the remaining Mandarin dialects between Northern, Lower Yangtze and Southwestern Mandarin groups.\nThe widely accepted seven-group classification of Yuan Jiahua in 1960 kept Xiang and Gan separate, with Mandarin divided into Northern, Northwestern, Southwestern and Jiang\u2013Huai (Lower Yangtze) subgroups.\nOf Yuan's four Mandarin subgroups, the Northwestern dialects are the most diverse, particularly in the province of Shanxi. The linguist Li Rong proposed that the northwestern dialects of Shanxi and neighbouring areas that retain a final glottal stop in the Middle Chinese entering tone (plosive-final) category should constitute a separate top-level group called Jin. He used this classification in the \"Language Atlas of China\" (1987). Many other linguists continue to include these dialects in the Mandarin group, pointing out that the Lower Yangtze dialects also retain the glottal stop.\nThe southern boundary of the Mandarin area, with the central Wu, Gan and Xiang groups, is weakly defined due to centuries of diffusion of northern features. Many border varieties have a mixture of features that make them difficult to classify.\nThe boundary between Southwestern Mandarin and Xiang is particularly weak, and in many early classifications the two were not separated. Zhou Zhenhe and You Rujie include the New Xiang dialects within Southwestern Mandarin, treating only the more conservative Old Xiang dialects as a separate group.\nThe Huizhou dialects have features of both Mandarin and Wu, and have been assigned to one or other of these groups or treated as separate by various authors. Li Rong and the \"Language Atlas of China\" treated it as a separate top-level group, but this remains controversial.\nSubgroups.\nThe \"Language Atlas of China\" calls the remainder of Mandarin a \"supergroup\", divided into eight dialect groups distinguished by their treatment of the Middle Chinese entering tone (see Tones below):\nThe \"Atlas\" also includes several unclassified Mandarin dialects spoken in scattered pockets across southeastern China, such as Nanping in Fujian and Dongfang on Hainan.\nAnother Mandarin variety of uncertain classification is apparently Gyami, recorded in the 19th century in the Tibetan foothills, who the Chinese apparently did not recognize as Chinese.\nSome northwestern Mandarin varieties in the Qinghai\u2013Gansu sprachbund have undergone drastic changes in phonology, lexicon and grammar.\nPhonology.\nA syllable consists maximally of an initial consonant, a medial glide, a vowel, a coda, and tone. In the traditional analysis, the medial, vowel and coda are combined as a \"final\".\nNot all combinations occur. For example, Standard Chinese (based on the Beijing dialect) has about 1,200 distinct syllables.\nPhonological features that are generally shared by the Mandarin dialects include:\nInitials.\nThe maximal inventory of initials of a Mandarin dialect is as follows, with bracketed pinyin spellings given for those present in the standard language:\nFinals.\nMost Mandarin dialects have three medial glides, , and (spelled \"i\", \"u\" and \"\u00fc\" in pinyin), though their incidence varies.\nThe medial , is lost after apical initials in several areas.\nThus Southwestern Mandarin has \"correct\" where the standard language has \"dui\" .\nSouthwestern Mandarin also has in some words where the standard has \"jie qie xie\" . This is a stereotypical feature of southwestern Mandarin, since it is so easily noticeable. E.g. \"hai\" \"shoe\" for standard \"xie\", \"gai\" \"street\" for standard \"jie\".\nMandarin dialects typically have relatively few vowels. Syllabic fricatives, as in standard \"zi\" and \"zhi\", are common in Mandarin dialects, though they also occur elsewhere.\nThe Middle Chinese off-glides and are generally preserved in Mandarin dialects, yielding several diphthongs and triphthongs in contrast to the larger sets of monophthongs common in other dialect groups (and some widely scattered Mandarin dialects).\nThe Middle Chinese coda was still present in Old Mandarin, but has merged with in the modern dialects. In some areas (especially the southwest) final has also merged with . This is especially prevalent in the rhyme pairs \"-en/-eng\" and \"-in/-ing\" . As a result, \"gold\" and \"capital\" merge in those dialects.\nThe Middle Chinese final stops have undergone a variety of developments in different Mandarin dialects (see Tones below). In Lower Yangtze dialects and some north-western dialects they have merged as a final glottal stop. In other dialects they have been lost, with varying effects on the vowel. As a result, Beijing Mandarin and Northeastern Mandarin underwent more vowel mergers than many other varieties of Mandarin. For example:\nR-coloring, a characteristic feature of Mandarin, works quite differently in the southwest. Whereas Beijing dialect generally removes only a final or when adding the rhotic final \"-r\" , in the southwest the \"-r\" replaces nearly the entire rhyme.\nTones.\nIn general, no two Mandarin-speaking areas have exactly the same set of tone values, but most Mandarin-speaking areas have very similar tone \"distribution\". For example, the dialects of Jinan, Chengdu, Xi'an and so on all have four tones that correspond quite well to the Beijing dialect tones of (55), (35), (214), and (51). The exception to this rule lies in the distribution of syllables formerly ending in a stop consonant, which are treated differently in different dialects of Mandarin.\nMiddle Chinese stops and affricates had a three-way distinction between tenuis, voiceless aspirate and voiced (or breathy voiced) consonants.\nIn Mandarin dialects the voicing is generally lost, yielding voiceless aspirates in syllables with a Middle Chinese level tone and non-aspirates in other syllables.\nOf the four tones of Middle Chinese, the level, rising and departing tones have also developed into four modern tones in a uniform way across Mandarin dialects; the Middle Chinese level tone has split into two registers, conditioned on voicing of the Middle Chinese initial, while rising tone syllables with voiced obstruent initials have shifted to the departing tone.\nThe following examples from the standard language illustrate the regular development common to Mandarin dialects (recall that pinyin \"d\" denotes a non-aspirate , while \"t\" denotes an aspirate ):\nIn traditional Chinese phonology, syllables that ended in a stop in Middle Chinese (i.e. /p/, /t/ or /k/) were considered to belong to a special category known as the \"entering tone\".\nThese final stops have disappeared in most Mandarin dialects, with the syllables distributed over the other four modern tones in different ways in the various Mandarin subgroups.\nIn the Beijing dialect that underlies the standard language, entering-tone syllables beginning with original voiceless consonants are distributed across the four tones. For example, the three characters \u7a4d\u810a\u8de1, all \"tsjek\" in Middle Chinese (William H. Baxter's transcription), are now pronounced , and respectively. Older dictionaries such as \"Mathews' Chinese-English Dictionary\" mark characters whose pronunciation formerly ended with a stop with a superscript 5; however, this tone number is more commonly used for syllables that always have a neutral tone (see below).\nIn Lower Yangtze dialects, a minority of Southwestern dialects (e.g. Minjiang) and Jin Chinese (sometimes considered non-Mandarin), former final stops were not deleted entirely, but were reduced to a glottal stop . (This includes the dialect of Nanjing on which the Postal Romanization was based; it transcribes the glottal stop as a trailing \"h\".) This development is shared with Wu Chinese and is thought to represent the pronunciation of Old Mandarin. In line with traditional Chinese phonology, dialects such as Lower Yangtze and Minjiang are thus said to have five tones instead of four. However, modern linguistics considers these syllables as having no phonemic tone at all.\nAlthough the system of tones is common across Mandarin dialects, their realization as tone contours varies widely:\nMandarin dialects frequently employ neutral tones in the second syllables of words, creating syllables whose tone contour is so short and light that it is difficult or impossible to discriminate. These atonal syllables also occur in non-Mandarin dialects, but in many southern dialects the tones of all syllables are made clear.\nVocabulary.\nThere are more polysyllabic words in Mandarin than in all other major varieties of Chinese except Shanghainese. This is partly because Mandarin has undergone many more sound changes than southern varieties of Chinese have, and needed to deal with many more homophones. New words have been formed by adding affixes such as , , , and , or by compounding, e.g. by combining two words of similar meaning as in , made from elements meaning \"hurried\" and \"busy\".\nA distinctive feature of southwestern Mandarin is its frequent use of noun reduplication, which is hardly used in Beijing. In Sichuan, one hears \"handbag\" where Beijing uses .\nThere are also a small number of words that have been polysyllabic since Old Chinese, such as .\nThe singular pronouns in Mandarin are , (\u4f60 or \u59b3, 'you') , , and (\u4ed6, \u5979 or , \"he\", \"she\", \"it\"), with added for the plural. Further, there is a distinction between the plural first-person pronoun , which is inclusive of the listener, and , which may be exclusive of the listener. Dialects of Mandarin agree with each other quite consistently on these pronouns. While the first and second person singular pronouns are cognate with forms in other varieties of Chinese, the rest of the pronominal system is a Mandarin innovation (e.g., Shanghainese has and ).\nBecause of contact with Mongolian and Manchurian peoples, Mandarin (especially the Northeastern varieties) has some loanwords from these languages not present in other varieties of Chinese, such as () \"alley\". Southern Chinese varieties have borrowed from Tai, Austroasiatic, and Austronesian languages.\nThere are also many Chinese words which come from foreign languages such as from \"golf\"; from \"bikini\", and from \"hamburger\".\nIn general, the greatest variation occurs in slang, in kinship terms, in names for common crops and domesticated animals, for common verbs and adjectives, and other such everyday terms. The least variation occurs in \"formal\" vocabulary\u2014terms dealing with science, law, or government.\nGrammar.\nChinese varieties of all periods are considered prime examples of analytic languages, relying on word order and particles instead of inflection or affixes to provide grammatical information such as person, number, tense, mood, or case.\nAlthough modern varieties, including the Mandarin dialects, use a small number of particles in a similar fashion to suffixes, they are still strongly analytic.\nThe basic word order of subject\u2013verb\u2013object is common across Chinese dialects, but there are variations in the order of the two objects of ditransitive sentences.\nIn northern dialects the indirect object precedes the direct object (as in English), for example in the Standard Chinese sentence:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn southern dialects, as well as many southwestern and Lower Yangtze dialects, the objects occur in the reverse order.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMost varieties of Chinese use post-verbal particles to indicate aspect, but the particles used vary.\nMost Mandarin dialects use the particle to indicate the perfective aspect and for the progressive aspect.\nOther Chinese varieties tend to use different particles, e.g. Cantonese and respectively.\nThe experiential aspect particle is used more widely, except in Southern Min.\nThe subordinative particle is characteristic of Mandarin dialects.\nSome southern dialects, and a few Lower Yangtze dialects, preserve an older pattern of subordination without a marking particle, while in others a classifier fulfils the role of the Mandarin particle.\nEspecially in conversational Chinese, sentence-final particles alter the inherent meaning of a sentence. Like much vocabulary, particles can vary a great deal with regards to the locale. For example, the particle , which is used in most northern dialects to denote obviousness or contention, is replaced by in southern usage.\nSome characters in Mandarin can be combined with others to indicate a particular meaning just like prefix and suffix in English. For example, the suffix -er which means the person who is doing the action, e.g. teacher, person who teaches. In Mandarin the character has the same function, it is combined with , which means 'teach', to form the word 'teacher'.\nList of several common Chinese prefixes and suffixes:\nExample text.\nFrom Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in Chinese (Mandarin):&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistorical Western language texts.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt; "}
{"id": "19360", "revid": "46903458", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19360", "title": "Mayo", "text": "Mayo often refers to:\nMayo may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "19361", "revid": "4967956", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19361", "title": "Moby", "text": "American musician (born 1965)\nRichard Melville Hall (September 11, 1965), known professionally as Moby, is an American musician, songwriter, record producer, disc jockey, and animal rights activist. He has sold 20 million records worldwide. AllMusic considers him to be \"among the most important dance music figures of the early 1990s, helping bring dance music to a mainstream audience both in the United States and the United Kingdom\".\nAfter taking up guitar and piano at age nine, he played in several underground punk rock bands through the 1980s before turning to electronic dance music. In 1989, he moved to New York City and became a prolific figure as a DJ, producer and remixer. His 1991 single \"Go\" was his mainstream breakthrough, especially in Europe, where it peaked within the top ten of the charts in the Netherlands and the United Kingdom. Between 1992 and 1997 he scored eight top 10 hits on the \"Billboard\" Dance Club Songs chart including \"Move (You Make Me Feel So Good)\", \"Feeling So Real\", and \"James Bond Theme (Moby Re-Version)\". Throughout the decade he also produced music under various pseudonyms, released the critically acclaimed \"Everything Is Wrong\" (1995) and composed music for films. His punk-oriented album \"Animal Rights\" (1996) alienated much of his fan base.\nMoby found commercial and critical success with his fifth album \"Play\" (1999), which, after receiving little recognition, became an unexpected global hit in 2000 after each track was licensed to films, television shows, and commercials. It remains his highest selling album with 12 million copies sold. Its seventh single, \"South Side\", featuring Gwen Stefani, remains his only one to appear on the US \"Billboard\" Hot 100, reaching No. 14. Moby followed \"Play\" with albums of varied styles including electronic, dance, rock, and downtempo music, starting with \"18\" (2002), \"Hotel\" (2005), and \"Last Night\" (2008). His later albums saw him explore ambient music, including the almost four-hour release \"\" (2016). Moby continues to record and release albums; his twenty-first studio album, \"Resound NYC\", was released in May 2023.\nIn addition to his music career, Moby is known for his veganism and support for animal rights and humanitarian aid. He was the owner of TeaNY, a vegan cafe in Manhattan, and Little Pine, a vegan restaurant in Los Angeles, and organized the vegan music and food festival Circle V. He is the author of four books, including a collection of his photography and two memoirs: \"\" (2016) and \"Then It Fell Apart\" (2019).\nEarly life and influences.\nRichard Melville Hall was born September 11, 1965, in the neighborhood of Harlem in Manhattan, New York City. He is an only child of Elizabeth McBride (n\u00e9e Warner), a medical secretary, and James Frederick Hall (1941\u20131967), a chemistry professor, who died in a car crash while drunk when Moby was two. His father gave him the nickname Moby three days after his birth as his parents considered the name Richard too large for a newborn baby. The name was also a reference to the ancestry Hall says he was told by his family, though he is not directly related to Herman Melville, author of \"Moby-Dick.\" Moby is distantly related to David Melville, inventor of the first United States-patented gas light system.\nMoby was raised by his mother, first in San Francisco from 1969 for a short period. He recalled being sexually abused by a staff member at his daycare during this time. This was followed by a move to Darien, Connecticut, living in a squat with \"three or four other drug-addicted hippies, with bands playing in the basement.\" The two then moved to Stratford, Connecticut, for a brief time. His mother struggled to support her son, often relying on food stamps and government welfare. They occasionally stayed with Moby's grandparents in Darien, but the affluence of the Connecticut suburb made him feel poor and ashamed. Shortly before his mother's death in 1997, Moby learned from her that he has a half brother. His first job was a caddy at a golf course.\nMoby took up music at the age of nine. He started on classical guitar and received piano lessons from his mother before studying jazz, music theory, and percussion. In 1983, he became the guitarist in a hardcore punk band, the Vatican Commandos, playing on their debut EP \"Hit Squad for God\". Around this time he was the lead vocalist for Flipper for two days; Moby played bass for their reunion shows in the 2000s. Moby formed a post-punk group named AWOL around the time of his eighteenth birthday. He is credited on their only release, a self-titled EP, as Moby Hall.\nIn 1983, Moby graduated from Darien High School and started a philosophy degree at the University of Connecticut in Storrs, Connecticut. Around this time he had found the instruments he had learned \"sonically limiting\" and moved to electronic music. He spun records at the campus radio station WHUS, which led to DJ work in local clubs and bars. Moby grew increasingly unhappy at university, however, and transferred to State University of New York at Purchase, studying philosophy and photography, to try and renew his interest in studying. He dropped out in April 1984 to pursue DJing and music full-time, which started his interest in electronic dance music. For two years he lived in Greenwich, Connecticut, where he DJ'd at The Cafe, an under-21 nightclub at the back of a church. In 1987, he started to send demos of his music to record labels in New York City; he failed to receive an offer, which led to a two-year period of \"very fruitless labor\". Around 1988, Moby moved into a semi-abandoned factory in Stamford, Connecticut, that had no bathroom or running water, but the free electricity supply allowed him to work on his music, using a 4-track recorder, synthesizer, and drum machine.\nMoby cites the English band Orchestral Manoeuvres in the Dark (OMD) as \"heroes\", without whom he would never have begun making electronic music. His other formative influences include Nick Drake, Suicide, Silver Apples, Eric B. &amp; Rakim, and Public Enemy.\nCareer.\n1989\u20131993: Signing with Instinct, \"Go\", and breakthrough.\nIn 1989, Moby relocated to New York City with his close friend, artist Damian Loeb. In addition to performing DJ sets in local bars and clubs, he played guitar in alternative rock group Ultra Vivid Scene and appeared in the video for their 1989 single \"Mercy Seat\". In 1990, Moby joined Shopwell and played on their album \"Peanuts\". Moby's first live electronic music gig followed in the summer of 1990 at Club MK; he wore a suit for the show. His future manager Eric H\u00e4rle, who was in attendance, recalled Moby's set: \"The music was amazing, but the show was riddled with technical mishaps. It left me very intrigued and impressed in a strange way.\"\nBy mid-1990, Moby had signed a deal as the sole artist of Instinct Records, an independent New York City-based dance label then still in its infancy. The three-man operation saw Moby answer incoming calls and make records in a studio he set up in the owner's lounge. To appear that Instinct had more artists, Moby's early singles were put out under several names such as Voodoo Child, Barracuda, Brainstorm, and UHF. The first, \"Time's Up\" as The Brotherhood, was co-written by Moby and vocalist Jimmy Mack. This was followed by \"Mobility\", his first single released as Moby, in November 1990, which sold an initial 2,000 copies. He then scored a breakthrough hit with a remix of \"Go\", originally a B-side to \"Mobility\" with an added sample of \"Laura Palmer's Theme\" by Angelo Badalamenti from the television series \"Twin Peaks\". Released in March 1991, it peaked at No. 10 in the UK in October and earned him national exposure there with an appearance on \"Top of the Pops\". Instinct capitalised on Moby's success with the late 1991 compilation \"Instinct Dance\" featuring tracks by Moby and his pseudonyms. The following year, Moby revealed that \"Go\" had earned him just $2,000 in royalties.\nThe success of \"Go\" led to increased demand for Moby to produce more music and to remix other artists' songs. He often arranged for the artist and himself to trade remixes as opposed to being paid for his work, which was the case for his mixes for Billy Corgan and Soundgarden. The increased mainstream exposure led Moby to request a release from his contract with Instinct for a bigger label. Instinct refused, so Moby retaliated by holding out on new material. However, Instinct continued to put out records, mostly from demos, without his consent having previously copied many of his tapes and had the master rights. This was the case for Moby's debut album, \"Moby\", released in July 1992 and formed mostly of previously unreleased demos that Moby considered old and unrepresentative of the musical direction he had taken since. Nonetheless, he claimed Instinct had insisted and had the legal right to put it out. It was re-titled \"The Story So Far\" and presented with a different track listing for its UK release. Four singles were released: \"Go\", \"Drop a Beat\", \"Next Is the E\", and a double A-side of \"I Feel It\" with \"Thousand\". The latter was recognised by \"Guinness World Records\" as the fastest tempo in a recorded song at 1,015 beats-per-minute.\nIn 1992, Moby completed his first US tour as the opening act for the Shamen. In mid-1992, Moby estimated that he had earned between $8,000 to $11,000 a year for the past six years. At the 1992 \"Mixmag\" awards, he smashed his keyboard after his set. After his second nationwide tour, this time with the Prodigy and Richie Hawtin, in early 1993, a second compilation of Moby's work for Instinct followed named \"Early Underground\". His second and final album on Instinct, \"Ambient\", was released in August 1993. It is a collection of mostly ambient techno instrumentals of a more experimental style. By this time Instinct had agreed to release Moby who then took legal action, claiming that the label demanded \"a ridiculous amount of money\" that he did not have to leave. He also expressed disagreements over the way Instinct had packaged and handled his music. Moby was eventually released after he paid the label $10,000.\n1993\u20131998: Signing with Elektra, \"Everything Is Wrong\", and \"Animal Rights\".\nIn 1993, Moby signed with Elektra Records, which lasted for five years. He secured a deal with Mute Records, a British label, to handle his European distribution. Moby's output for Elektra/Mute began with \"Move\", a four-track EP released in August 1993. He attempted to make it in a professional studio, but he disliked the results and re-recorded it at home. The song \"All That I Need Is to Be Loved (MV)\" is his first song to feature his own vocals. The first single, \"Move (You Make Me Feel So Good)\", reached No. 1 on the US \"Billboard\" Hot Dance Music/Club Play chart and No. 21 in the UK. In 1993, Moby toured as the headlining act with Orbital and Aphex Twin. A rift developed between Aphex Twin and himself, partly due to Moby's refusal to tolerate their cigarette smoke, so he travelled to each gig by plane, leaving the rest on the tour bus. In 1994, Moby put out \"Demons/Horses\", an electronic album of two 20-minute tracks under the name Voodoo Child.\nMoby's contract with Elektra allowed the opportunity to make his third full-length album, which was underway in 1994. He chose to include a variety of musical styles on the album that he either liked or had been influenced by, including electronic dance, ambient, rock, and industrial music. \"Everything Is Wrong\" was released in March 1995 to critical praise; \"Spin\" magazine named it Album of the Year and some commentators considered it to be an album ahead of its time as it failed to crack the \"Billboard\" 200 or have an impact on the dance charts. In the UK, the album reached No. 25 and the singles \"Hymn\" and \"Feeling So Real\" went to Nos. 31 and 30, respectively. Elektra took advantage of its diverse sound by distributing tracks of the same style to corresponding radio stations nationwide. Early copies put out in the UK and Germany included a bonus CD of ambient music entitled \"Underwater\". Moby toured the album with some headline spots on the second stage at the 1995 Lollapalooza festival. He followed it with a double remix album, \"Everything Is Wrong\u2014Mixed and Remixed\".\nThe success of \"Everything Is Wrong\" had Moby reach a new peak in critical acclaim. The \"Los Angeles Times\" thought the 29-year-old Moby was \"poised for greatness [...] to make that big crossover\" from a respected underground artist to a mainstream dance and rock musician. \"Billboard\" declared him \"King of techno\" and \"Spin\" named him \"the closest techno comes to a complete artist.\" In 1995, Moby was approached by Courtney Love to produce the next Hole album, but he declined. He directed the music video for \"Young Man's Stride\" by Mercury Rev. In 1995 and 1996, Moby put out a number of \"self-indulgent dance\" singles under the pseudonyms Lopez and DJ Cake on Trophy Records, his own Mute imprint, so he could release material that he was interested in without concern for its commercial impact. In 1996, Moby contributed \"Republican Party\" to the AIDS benefit album \"\" produced by the Red Hot Organization and released his second Voodoo Child album, \"The End of Everything\".\nWhile touring \"Everything Is Wrong\", Moby had grown bored with the electronic scene and felt the press had failed to understand his records and take them seriously. This marked a major stylistic change for his next album, \"Animal Rights\", combining guitar-driven rock songs with Moby on lead vocals and softer ambient tracks. Upon completing the album Moby said that it was \"weird, long, self-indulgent and difficult\". Its lead single is a cover version of \"That's When I Reach for My Revolver\" by post-punk group Mission of Burma. \"Animal Rights\" was released in September 1996 in the UK, where it peaked at No. 38, and in February 1997 in the US. It was poorly received by his dance fan base who felt Moby had abandoned them, creating doubts as to what kind of artist Moby really was. Moby pointed out that he had not abandoned his electronic music completely and had worked on dance and house mixes and film scores while making \"Animal Rights\".\nAfter \"Animal Rights\", Moby's manager recalled: \"We found ourselves struggling for even the slightest bit of recognition. He became a has-been in the eyes of a lot of people in the industry\". Despite the hit in sales and critical response, Moby promoted the album with a European tour with Red Hot Chili Peppers and Soundgarden, and headlined the Big Top tour with other dance and electronic DJs. He returned to the genre after liking the house music that a friend and DJ had played at a party. In October 1997, Moby displayed his range of music styles with the release of \"I Like to Score\", a compilation of his film soundtrack work with some re-recorded tracks. Among them are updated version of the \"James Bond Theme\" used for \"Tomorrow Never Dies\", music used in \"Scream\", and a cover of \"New Dawn Fades\" by Joy Division, an instrumental version of which appeared in \"Heat\". Late 1997 saw Moby start his first US tour in two years.\nIn 1998, Elektra granted Moby's request to be released from his deal on the condition that he paid to leave, which amounted to \"quite a lot\". He felt Elektra did little to capitalise on the critical success of \"Everything Is Wrong\", and that it was only interested in radio friendly hits. Left without an American distributor, his only deal remained with the UK-based Mute Records. Moby considered himself an artist that did not belong to a major label as his music did not fit with the genres that they promoted.\n1999\u20132004: \"Play\", worldwide success, and \"18\".\nMoby's fifth album, \"Play\", was released by Mute and V2 Records in May 1999. The project originated when a music journalist introduced Moby to the field recordings of Alan Lomax from the compilation album \"Sounds of the South: A Musical Journey From the Georgia Sea Islands to the Mississippi Delta\". Moby took an interest in the songs and formed samples from various tracks which he used to base new tracks of his own. Upon release in May 1999, \"Play\" had moderate sales but eventually sold over 10 million copies worldwide. Moby toured worldwide in support of the album, which lasted 22 months. Every track on \"Play\" was licensed to various films, advertisements, and television shows, as well as independent films and non-profit groups. The move was criticised and led to some to consider that Moby had become a sellout, but he later maintained that the licenses were granted mostly to independent films and non-profit projects, and agreed to them due to the difficulty of getting his music heard on the radio and television in the past. In 2007, \"The Washington Post\" published an article about a mathematical equation dubbed the \"Moby quotient\" that determined to what degree had a musical artist sold out. It was named in reference to his decision to license music from \"Play\".\nIn 2000, Moby contributed \"Flower\" to \"Gone in 60 Seconds\". He co-wrote \"Is It Any Wonder\" with Sophie Ellis-Bextor for her debut solo album, \"Read My Lips\". \"Moby: Play - The DVD\", released in 2001, features the music videos produced for the album, live performances, and other bonus features. It was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Long Form Music Video. In 2001, Moby founded the Area:One Festival which toured the US and Canada across 17 shows that summer with a range of artists. The set included Outkast, New Order, Incubus, Nelly Furtado, and Paul Oakenfold, with Moby headlining.\nMoby started on the follow-up to \"Play\" in late 2000. Prior to working on tracks for \"18\", he got friends to search for records with vocals that he could use and make samples from and went on to write over 140 songs for the album. At the same time, Moby familiarised himself with the ProTools software and made \"18\" with it. Released in May 2002, \"18\" went to No. 1 in the UK and eleven other countries, and No. 4 in the US. It went on to sell over four million copies worldwide. Moby toured extensively for both \"Play\" and \"18\", playing over 500 shows in the next four years. The tour included the Area2 Festival in the summer of 2002, featuring a line-up of Moby, David Bowie, Blue Man Group, Busta Rhymes, and Carl Cox. In December 2002, during a tour stop at Paradise Rock Club in Boston, Moby was punched in the face and sprayed with mace by two or three assailants while signing autographs outside the venue. The incident left him with multiple bruises and cuts.\nIn February 2002, Moby performed at the closing ceremony of the Winter Olympics. That month he hosted the half-hour MTV series \"Se\u00f1or Moby's House of Music\", presenting a selection of electronic and dance music videos. His song \"Extreme Ways\" was used in all five of the \"Bourne\" films, from 2002 to 2016. Moby said that after it was used for the first, the producers originally sought a different artist for the second but they had too little time to secure someone, leading them to pick \"Extreme Ways\" for the entire series. In 2002, rapper Eminem mocked Moby in his song \"Without Me\" and its music video, dressing up like him and calling him a \"thirty-six-year-old baldheaded fag\" and his techno music outdated. Eminem had also shot a mock figure of Moby on stage. Moby put the attack down to Eminem having \"this unrequited crush on me.\"\nIn 2003, Moby headlined the Glastonbury Festival on the final day. He co-wrote and produced \"Early Mornin'\" for Britney Spears' album \"In the Zone\" released that year. Moby returned to his dance and rave roots with the release of \"Baby Monkey\", the third album under his Voodoo Child moniker, in 2004. Later that year, he collaborated with Public Enemy on \"Make Love Fuck War\", a protest song against the Iraq War.\n2004\u20132010: \"Hotel\", \"Last Night\", and \"Wait for Me\".\nMoby's seventh album, \"Hotel\", was released in March 2005. The album contains little use of samples, which Moby reasoned to using different audio recording software which had a sampling function that was too difficult to learn, \"so it was me just being lazy\". He nonetheless said that \"Hotel\" is a more satisfying album as a result. The instruments were recorded live by Moby except for the drums, for which he enlisted his longtime live drummer Scott Frassetto. The album features vocals from six other performers, including Laura Dawn and Shayna Steele. In 2013, Moby looked back on the album as his least favourite of his career, pointing out that it was the only one not recorded at his home studio. The singles \"Lift Me Up\" and \"Slipping Away\" became top-10 hits across Europe. Early copies of the album included a bonus CD of remixes and ambient music entitled \"Hotel: Ambient\" that was released on its own in 2014.\nIn 2006, he accepted an offer to score the soundtrack for Richard Kelly's 2007 movie \"Southland Tales\", because he was a fan of Kelly's previous film, \"Donnie Darko\". In 2007, Moby also started a rock band, The Little Death with his friends Laura Dawn, Daron Murphy, and Aaron A. Brooks. Following the dissolution of V2 Records in 2007, Moby signed a new deal with Mute Records to handle his American distribution. In 2007 Moby produced and performed on a remake of \"The Bulrushes\" by The Bongos that appeared on the special anniversary edition of the group's debut album \"Drums Along the Hudson\", on Cooking Vinyl Records. From 2007 to 2008 he ran a series of New York club events titled \"Degenerates\".\nIn 2008, Moby released \"Last Night\", an electronic dance album inspired by a night out in his New York City neighborhood. The album was recorded in Moby's home studio and features various guest vocalists, including Wendy Starland, MC Grandmaster Caz, Sylvia of Kudu, MC Aynzli, and the Nigerian 419 Squad. The singles from \"Last Night\" include \"Alice\" and \"Disco Lies\".\nMoby wished for the follow-up to \"Last Night\" to be emotional, personal, and melodic. He felt creatively inspired by a David Lynch speech at the BAFTA Award ceremony in the UK which prompted him to write new material that he liked with little regard to its mainstream commercial success. He decided against recording in a professional studio as he wanted to record the entire album at home, and chose to have the album mixed using analogue equipment. \"Wait for Me\" was released on June 30, 2009. Moby and Lynch discussed the recording process of \"Wait for Me\" on Lynch's online channel, David Lynch Foundation Television Beta. The video to the first single, \"Shot in the Back of the Head\", offered as a free download, was directed by Lynch.\nMoby held a user-generated content competition to have fans create a video for \"Wait for Me\", the last single from the album, which was to be used as the official video. The winning entry was written and directed by Nimrod Shapira of Israel, and portrays the story of a girl who decides to invite Moby into her life. She attempts to do so by using a book called \"How to Summon Moby, A Guide for Dummies\", putting herself through bizarre and comical steps, each is a tribute to a different Moby video. The single was released in May 2010.\nThe \"Wait for Me\" tour featured a full band. Moby raised over $75,000 from three shows in California to help those affected by domestic violence after funding for the state's domestic violence program had been cut. The tour also saw Moby headline the Falls Festival in Australia and various Sunset Sounds festivals. An ambient version \"Wait for Me\" was released in late 2009 as \"\", which Moby did not produce.\nIn 2010, Moby enlisted vocalist Phil Costello as a songwriting partner for a new heavy metal band, Diamondsnake. After writing 13 songs, they recruited guitarist Dave Hill and a drummer named Tomato to complete the line-up. They recorded their self-titled debut album in one day and released it for free on their website. It was promoted with a series of gigs in New York City and Los Angeles. Moby contributed four songs to the soundtrack of \"The Next Three Days\", including the single \"Mistake\".\n2010\u20132015: \"Destroyed\" and \"Innocents\".\nIn January 2010, Moby announced that he had started work on a new album. He later summarised its style as: \"Broken down melodic electronic music for empty cities at 2 a.m.\" The album was promoted with an EP containing three tracks from the album, given free to those who had signed up to Moby's mailing list, entitled \"Be the One\", in February 2011. The album, \"Destroyed\", was released in May 2011. A same-titled book of Moby's photography was released around the time of the album. Moby took to an online poll to decide the next single from \"Destroyed\"; the fans picked \"Lie Down in Darkness\". This was followed by \"After\" and \"The Right Thing\", both influenced by what fans had picked. A limited edition remixed version of \"Destroyed\" was released in 2012 as \"Destroyed Remixed\" and includes new remixes by David Lynch, Holy Ghost! and System Divine, and a new 30-minute ambient track named \"All Sides Gone\".\nMoby toured worldwide throughout 2013, completing acoustic and DJ sets at various concerts and festivals. His DJ set at Coachella was produced in collaboration with NASA with various images from space projected onto screens during the performance. On Record Store Day in 2013, Moby released a 7-inch record, \"The Lonely Night\", featuring Screaming Trees vocalist Mark Lanegan. The track was subsequently released as a download with remixes by Moby, Photek, Gregor Tresher, and Freescha.\nIn October 2013, Moby released \"Innocents\". He had worked on the album for the previous 18 months and hired Spike Stent to produce it. Moby used several guest vocalists on the album, and picked Neil Young and \"Broken English\" by Marianne Faithfull as the biggest influences to the musical style on the album. As with \"Destroyed\", the photographs used for the artwork were all shot by Moby. The first single from the album was \"A Case for Shame\", followed by \"The Perfect Life\", which featured Wayne Coyne. A casting call for its video asked \"for obese Speedo-sporting bikers, nude rollerskating ghosts, and an S&amp;M gimp proficient in rhythmic gymnastics\". Moby promoted the album with three shows at the Fonda Theatre in Los Angeles, following his decision to undergo little touring from 2014. He wrote: \"Pretty much all I want to do in life is stay home and make music. So, thus: a 3 date world tour.\"\nSix of Moby's songs are feature in \"Charlie Countryman\" (2013). His music set the tone to \"Cathedrals of Culture\" (2014), a 3D documentary film about the soul of buildings, directed by Wim Wenders. In December 2014, Moby performed three shows of ambient music at the Masonic Lodge in Hollywood Forever Cemetery to support the release of \"Hotel: Ambient\". The performances were accompanied by visuals created by himself and with David Lynch.\n2016\u2013present: Recent albums and documentary.\nAfter \"Innocents\", Moby proceeded to make a new wave dance album with a choir, but realised the difficulty in recording a full choir in his home studio and resorted to multi-tracking vocals performed by himself and guests. He then decided against the new wave album and opted for one made by himself and seven guest vocalists he named the Void Pacific Choir. \"These Systems Are Failing\" was announced in September 2016 and coincided with the first single release, \"Are You Lost In The World Like Me?\". Its video, by animator Steve Cutts, addresses smartphone addiction which won a Webby Award. \"These Systems Are Failing\" was released on October 14, 2016. Moby's sole live performance of 2016 was at Circle V, a vegan food and music festival that he founded that took place on October 23 at the Fonda Theatre in Los Angeles. A second album with the Void Pacific Choir name followed in June 2017, entitled \"More Fast Songs About the Apocalypse\", influenced by the results of the 2016 United States presidential election. Released for free online, it was marketed from a spoof website using elected President Donald Trump's alleged PR alter-ego, John Miller.\nMoby announced his fifteenth studio album, \"Everything Was Beautiful, and Nothing Hurt\", in December 2017. The announcement coincided with the release of the first single, \"Like a Motherless Child\". In contrast to the politically inspired and punk nature of the two Void Pacific Choir records, the album explores themes of spirituality, individuality, and humanity. The album was released on March 2, 2018. The second single, \"Mere Anarchy\", was described by Moby as \"post apocalypse, people are gone, and my friend Julie and I are time traveling aliens visiting the empty Earth.\" \"This Wild Darkness\" was the third single, released in February 2018. Moby described the song as \"an existential dialog between me and the gospel choir: me talking about my confusion, the choir answering with longing and hope.\" Moby promoted the album with three live shows in March 2018 with a full band, one at The Echo in Los Angeles and two at Rough Trade in New York City. All profits from the album and gigs were donated to animal rights organizations.\nLater in 2024, \"This Wild Darkness\" would go on to be featured in the critically acclaimed \".\"\nIn 2018, Moby was a guest performer on \"A$AP Forever\" by American rapper A$AP Rocky which samples \"Porcelain\". This resulted in Moby's second ever appearance on the US \"Billboard\" Hot 100 singles chart, having previously charted for \"Southside\", 17 years prior. Moby contributed several songs to the comedy \"Half Magic\" (2018) directed by Heather Graham.\nIn March 2019, Moby released a follow-up to his first long ambient album, \"Long Ambients 2\".\nIn January 2020, Moby announced that his new studio album \"All Visible Objects\" will be released on May 15. The first single, \"Power is Taken\" featuring D. H. Peligro, was released on the same day as the announcement. All profits from the album will be given to charity.\nIn December 2020, Moby released another ambient album, \"Live Ambients \u2013 Improvised Recordings Vol. 1\". It features tracks recorded under three conditions that he set himself: improvise with nothing written beforehand, no editing of the pieces after recording, and that every part of the process was to be \"calming\". The album was released on digital streaming platforms, followed by videos of Moby performing each track on December 30 on his YouTube channel.\nMoby's next album, \"Reprise\", was also released that month on Deutsche Grammophon. It features orchestral versions of his greatest hits with multiple guest artists. The album charted in 16 countries and includes vocals by Gregory Porter, Kris Kristofferson, Jim James and more. In May 2022, Moby released \"Reprise Remixes\", featuring remixes of tracks from the \"Reprise\" from various artists, including Topic, Anfisa Letyago, Planningtorock, and Biscuits.\nOn June 1, 2022, Moby launched his new record label, Always Centered at Night. He established it to sign \"emerging and fascinating variety of singers to join with me in making music they might not have been able to make elsewhere.\" The first single, \"Medusa\", features Grammy nominated singer Aynzli Jones.\nOn January 1, 2023, Moby released a two-and-a-half-hour ambient album \"Ambient 23\". It was made almost exclusively with dated drum machines and synthesizers, with his \"early ambient heroes\" as sources of inspiration, including Brian Eno and Jean-Michel Jarre.\nOn June 14, 2024, Moby released A\"lways Centered At Night\"\".\" Featuring vocals from several artists including Brie O'Banion on the first single released on music platforms, \"We're Going Wrong\", serpentwithfeet, returning to the album Lady Blackbird on the second single \"Dark Days\", Benjamin Zephaniah on the third single \"Where Is Your Pride?\", Gaidaa on \"Transit\", Danae, J.P. Bimeni, Raquel Rodriguez, Aynzli Jones, Akemi Fox, Choklate on the fourth single \"Sweet Moon\", India Carney on the fifth and final single, \"Precious Mind\", and Jose James. Moby released the music videos for both \"Transit\" and \"Where is your Pride?\" on YouTube in June shortly after the album released. Rolling Stone praised the album on Moby for his \"creativity knows no boundaries\". Moby later release a complimentary remix album in mid September titled \"always centered at night (quiet home: remixes dj mix)\". Fans would go on to say the original album is \"like a sequel\" to Moby's smash hit \"Play\" released in 1999 going on to be his most recognized album.\nCollaborations.\nMoby has collaborated live with many of his heroes while on tour or at fundraisers. He has performed \"Walk on the Wild Side\" with Lou Reed, \"Me and Bobby McGee\" with Kris Kristofferson, \"Heroes\" and \"Cactus\" with David Bowie, \"Helpless\" with Bono and Michael Stipe, \"New Dawn Fades\" with New Order, \"Make Love, Fuck War\" with Public Enemy, \"Whole Lotta Love\" with Slash, and \"That's When I Reach For My Revolver\" with Mission of Burma.\nHe has performed two duets with the French singer Myl\u00e8ne Farmer (\"Slipping Away (Crier la vie)\" in 2006 and \"Looking for My Name\" in 2008) and produced seven songs on her eighth album, \"Bleu Noir\", released on December 6, 2010 and two songs on her twelfth album L'Emprise, released on November 25, 2022 . She also sang the vocals to the rework of the song \"Hyenas\" present on the Resound NYC album.\nIn 1992 he contributed vocals to song \"Curse\" on Recoil's \"Bloodline\" (Alan Wilder's solo project, he was Depeche Mode member at time of that recording). Moby arguably later used this inspiration for his breakthrough 1999 album, Play, for which he used several old field recordings by Alan Lomax, much as Wilder had used a 1937 recording of White's \"Shake 'Em On Down\".\nIn 2013, Moby was responsible for the soundtrack of the documentary \"The Crash Reel\", who tells the story of snowboarder Kevin Pearce.\nOn October 16, 2015, Jean Michel Jarre released his compilation album \"\", which included the track \"Suns have gone\" co-produced by Jarre and Moby.\nOn September 24, 2016, Moby announced the release of an album titled \"These Systems Are Failing\", released under the name Moby &amp; Void Pacific Choir. The followed the release of two singles from Moby &amp; The Void Pacific Choir in 2015, \"Almost Loved\" &amp; \"The Light Is Clear In My Eyes\".\nTV work.\nStarz aired a special episode of \"Blunt Talk,\" the Patrick Stewart comedy which involved Moby. He had been friends with Jonathan Ames for a long time, and \"when we both lived in NY we did a lot of really strange, cabaret, vaudeville type shows together, and we just sort of stayed friends over the years. I guess when he and the other writers were writing \"Blunt Talk\" one of them thought it would be funny to include me as Patrick Stewart's character's ex-wife's current boyfriend.\"\nMoby was one of the first musicians to have an episode on Netflix's new music documentary series titled \"Once In a Lifetime Sessions\"; where he records, discusses, and performs his music.\n\"Moby Doc\", a documentary about the artist's life was released on May 28, 2021.\nHis documentary \"Punk Rock Vegan Movie\" was released in February 2023.\nLittle Walnut.\nIn 2020, Moby established https://, a full-service production company dedicated to creating compelling stories that shed light on animal and human rights issues and environmental causes. He started the company with his creative partner, producer Lindsay Hicks. Little Walnut's inaugural feature documentary, \"https://,\" was released in May 2021. Their subsequent short animated film, \"Why I'm a Vegan,\" directed by Hicks, was showcased at several film festivals and received recognition at The New York Movie Awards, The Global Independent Film Awards, The DOC LA Los Angeles Documentary Film Festival, and The Malibu Film Festival, among others.\nIn January 2023, Little Walnut released its second documentary feature directed by Moby himself, \"https://,\" which examines the intersection of punk rock music and animal activism. Moby released the film for free on YouTube. \"Punk Rock Vegan Movie\" premiered as the opening night film at the prestigious Slamdance Film Festival in Park City, Utah, ultimately earning awards at the Awareness Festival and Santa Monica Film Festival.\nThe company has given funding and production assistance to independent documentary features such as \u201cMeat The Future\u201d directed by Liz Marshall, \u201cSlay\u201d directed by Rebecca Capelli, and \u201chttps://\u201d directed by Jason Goldman. They also helped produce the short film \u201chttps://\u201d by director/writer Dustin Brown. Little Walnut recently invested in the scripted feature film \u201chttps://\u201d starring Kit Harrington and Naomi Scott and directed by Yaniv Raz.\u00a0 In addition, Little Walnut has produced several music videos, including \u201cNatural Blues\u201d (featuring Gregory Porter and Amythyst Kiah), \"https://\" (featuring Lady Blackbird), and the award-winning animated video \"Are You Lost in the World Like Me?\" directed by Steve Cutts.\nLittle Walnut produces Moby's \"https://\" podcast, which premiered in late 2022. The podcast focuses on several topics: animal rights, climate change, creative expression, and mental health. It has featured guests as diverse as Hunter Biden (in one of his rare interviews), Ed Begley Jr., Lisa Edelstein, Dan Buettner, Peter Kalmus, Steve-O, and Joe Manganiello.\nLittle Walnut is currently in post-production on their first scripted feature, \u201chttps://,\u201d penned by Moby, directed by Mark Webber, and produced by Hicks and Teresa Palmer. The film is based on the activist culture of the Los Angeles animal rights community and is set to star Sarah Jeffery, Mena Massoud, and others.\nBusiness ventures.\nStarting around 2001, Moby launched a series of co-owned business ventures, with the two most prominent being the Little Idiot Collective\u2014a New York City bricks-and-mortar clothing store, comics store, and animation studio that sold the work of an \"illustrators collective\". In May 2002, he launched a small raw and vegan restaurant and tea shop called TeaNY in New York City with his then-girlfriend, Kelly Tisdale. In 2006, Moby said he had removed himself from any previous business projects.\nIn November 2015, Moby opened the vegan restaurant Little Pine in the Silver Lake neighborhood of Los Angeles. The restaurant served organic, vegan, Mediterranean-inspired dishes and had a retail section with art and books, curated by Moby himself. All profits were donated to animal welfare organizations. In May 2016, Moby estimated the year's donations at $250,000. In December 2019, Moby launched the Little Pine lifestyle range of products and merchandise, with all profits donated to six charities. Little Pine closed permanently in December 2022.\nOn August 23, 2016, Moby announced the inaugural Circle V Festival along with the official video for \"Don't Leave Me\", by Moby &amp; the Void Pacific Choir. The event took place at LA's Fonda Theatre and featured Blaqk Audio &amp; Cold Cave on the bill, amongs others, as well as talks and vegan food stalls. Moby described Circle V as \"the coming together of my life's work, animal rights and music. I couldn't be more excited about this event and am so proud to be head-lining.\"\nThe second Circle V event took place on November 18, this time at the Regent Theatre in Los Angeles. Moby headlined the event for the second year, with artists Waka Flocka Flame, Dreamcar, and Raury featuring on the bill.\nPersonal life.\nMoby lived in New York City for 21 years. From 1996 to 2010, he lived in an apartment on Mott Street where he also recorded his albums. He then relocated to the Hollywood Hills area of Los Angeles, spending almost $4 million to purchase a castle known as Wolf's Lair (built in 1927 by developer L. Milton Wolf), spending an additional $3.5 million to restore it. He also owns an apartment in Little Italy, Manhattan. In 2014, Moby sold the castle and downsized to a smaller home in the Los Feliz neighborhood of Los Angeles.\nIn June 2013, Moby and numerous other celebrities appeared in a video showing support for Chelsea Manning.\nMoby identifies himself as heterosexual and cisgender; in a 2018 interview with \"The Guardian\", he claims to have felt \"disappointed\" to be straight. He does date, but has stated that he feels more comfortable alone than in a relationship. In 2016 he was in a relationship, his first in ten years, that spanned at least eight months. He has no children.\nIn 2019, in his book \"Then It Fell Apart\", he claimed to have had a brief relationship with actress Natalie Portman in the late 1990s. In response, Portman denied the story and called Moby's account \"disturbing\" (she was 18 at the time, while he was 33), with Portman further describing their interactions as \"a much older man being creepy with me\". He later apologized to Portman, saying: \"I accept that given the dynamic of our almost 14 year age difference I absolutely should've acted more responsibly and respectfully.\"\nMoby practices meditation and has explored different types, including transcendental, Mett\u0101, and Vipassan\u0101.\nVeganism and animal rights.\nIn 1984, Moby was inspired to become a vegetarian by a cat named Tucker that he had found at a dump in Darien, Connecticut. \"My mom and I, with the help of George the dachshund, took care of Tucker and he grew up to be the happiest, healthiest cat I'd ever known\". In November 1987, while playing with Tucker, \"I decided that just as I would never do anything to harm Tucker, or any of our rescued animals, I also would never do anything to harm any animal, anywhere\", and became a vegan. He is a strong supporter of animal rights, and described it as his \"day job\" other than musical projects.\nIn March 2016, Moby supported the social media campaign #TurnYourNoseUp to end factory farming in association with the nonprofit organization Farms Not Factories.\nIn 2019, Moby had \"Vegan for life\" tattooed on his neck by his friend, tattoo artist Kat Von D. That November, he had \"Animal rights\" tattooed on his arms to commemorate the 32nd anniversary of being a vegan. He also had \"VX\" tattooed next to his right eye, the \"V\" standing for vegan and the \"X\" for straight edge, referencing his sobriety.\nIn February 2023 he released \"Punk Rock Vegan Movie\", his documentary about the relationship between the worlds of punk rock and animal rights. He says every time he visits San Francisco, he stops at Rainbow Grocery given his stance on \"ethical eating.\"\nIn May 2024 he announced collaboration on a new film project with director Mark Webber.\nDrug use.\nFrom 1987 to 1995, Moby described his life as a \"very clean\" one and abstained from drugs, alcohol, and \"for the most part\", sex. After taking LSD once at nineteen, he started to suffer from panic attacks which he continued to experience, but he learned to deal with them more effectively. Moby recalls that shortly after his mother died from lung cancer in 1997, he had \"an epiphany\" and began to experiment with alcohol, drugs, and sex. This continued for four years after the commercial success of \"Play\". He became a self-confessed \"old-timey alcoholic\". During his \"18\" tour in 2002, he found himself being argumentative and alienating close friends. At the end of the year, he wished to make amends and live a healthier lifestyle and promised a girlfriend that he would quit alcohol for one month; he lasted two weeks. Moby continued to drink to excess and would ask audiences at concerts to give him drugs. Matters culminated shortly after he turned 43 when he attempted suicide; he had his last drink on October 18, 2008, and has since attended Alcoholics Anonymous meetings. In 2016, he said of his sobriety: \"Since I stopped and reoriented myself towards things that have meaning, everything has gotten a million times better\".\nSpirituality and faith.\nMoby has adopted different faiths throughout his life. He identified himself as an atheist when he was growing up, followed by agnostic, then \"a good eight or ten years of being quite a serious Christian\", during which time he taught Bible studies. Around 1985, he read the teachings of Christ, including the New Testament and the Gospels and \"was instantly struck by the idea that Christ was somehow divine. When I say I love Christ and love the teachings of Christ, I mean that in the most simple and na\u00efve and subjective way. I'm not saying I'm right, and I certainly wouldn't criticize anyone else's beliefs.\"\nIn the liner notes of \"Animal Rights\" (1996), Moby wrote: \"I wouldn't necessarily consider myself a Christian in the conventional sense of the word, where I go to church or believe in cultural Christianity, but I really do love Christ and recognize him in whatever capacity as I can understand it as God. One of my problems with the church and conventional Christianity is it seems like their focus doesn't have much to do with the teachings of Christ, but rather with their own social agenda\". In 2014, Moby pointed out that if he needed to label himself, it would be as a \"Taoist\u2013Christian\u2013agnostic quantum mechanic.\" In 2019, Moby said that he is not a Christian, \"but my life is geared towards God [...] I have no idea who or what God might be.\"\nCharity.\nMoby is an advocate for a variety of causes, working with MoveOn.org, The Humane Society of the United States, and Farm Sanctuary, among others. He created MoveOn Voter Fund's Bush in 30 Seconds contest along with singer and MoveOn Cultural Director Laura Dawn and MoveOn Executive Director Eli Pariser. The music video for the song \"Disco Lies\" from \"Last Night\" has heavy anti-meat industrial themes. He also actively engages in nonpartisan activism and serves on the Board of Directors of Amend.org, a nonprofit organization that implements injury-prevention programs in Africa.\nMoby is a member of the board of directors of the Institute for Music and Neurologic Function (IMNF), a not-for-profit organization dedicated to advancing scientific inquiry into music and the brain and to developing clinical treatments to benefit people of all ages. He has also performed on various benefit concerts to help increase awareness for music therapy and raise funds for the institute. In 2004, he was honored with the IMNF's Music Has Power Award for his advocacy of music therapy and for his dedication and support to its recording studio program.\nHe is an advocate of net neutrality and testified before a United States House of Representatives committee debating the issue in 2006.\nIn 2007, Moby launched MobyGratis.com, a website of unlicensed music for filmmakers and film students to use in any independent, non-commercial, or non-profit film, video, or short. If a film is commercially successful, all revenue from commercial licence fees granted via Moby Gratis is donated to Humane Society of the United States.\nIn 2008, he participated in \"Songs for Tibet\", an album to support Tibet and the Dalai Lama Tenzin Gyatso. In a 2021 interview, he discussed the experience and called the Dalai Lama \"a wonderful inspired and inspiring man\".\nIn April 2009, Moby spoke about his personal experiences of Transcendental Meditation at the benefit concert Change Begins Within of the David Lynch Foundation in New York City. In April 2015, Moby performed \"Go\" at the evening of a David Lynch tribute event, hosted at the Theatre at Ace Hotel in Los Angeles, which highlighted the work of the David Lynch Foundation and raised funds to teach Transcendental Meditation to local youth.\nIn April 2018, Moby auctioned more than 100 pieces of musical equipment via Reverb.com to raise funds for the nonprofit organization Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine, thinking it was better to sell it for a good cause rather than keep it in storage. Moby held a second sale for the organization in June 2018 consisting of his personal record collection, including records that he used for DJ sets in his early career and his personal copies of his albums. A third was held in October 2018 that included the sale of almost 200 analog drum machines, 100 instruments, and his entire vinyl collection.\nIn 2018, Moby participated in Al Gore's 24-hour broadcast on climate change and other environmental issues.\nMoby is an advocate for Best Friends; he was part of the No-Kill Los Angeles (NKLA) launch celebration and directed a lyric video for his song \"Almost Home\" that features dogs and cats from the Best Friends Pet Adoption and Spay/Neuter Center in Mission Hills, California.\nPhotography.\nMoby developed an interest in photography at age ten when his uncle, a photographer for \"The New York Times\", gave him a Nikon F camera. He cites Edward Steichen as a major early influence. At 17 he set up a darkroom in his basement and pursued photography while at university. Moby kept his photography private until 2010, when he put some of his work on public display at the Clic Gallery and the Brooklyn Museum in New York City. In May 2011, Moby released a photography book called \"Destroyed\" containing pictures that were taken during the \"Wait for Me\" tour in 2010. It was released in conjunction with his same-titled album, and pictures from it were also put on display. From October to December 2014, Moby showcased his Innocents collection of large-scale photographs at the Fremin Gallery, featuring a post-apocalyptic theme and a cast of fictitious cult members wearing masks.\nBooks.\nIn March 2010, Moby and animal activist Miyun Park released \"Gristle: From Factory Farms to Food Safety (Thinking Twice About the Meat We Eat)\", a collection of ten essays by various people in the food industry that they edited to detail \"unbiased, factual information about the consequences of animal production\" and factory farming.\nIn 2014, Moby began writing an autobiography covering his life and career from his move to New York City in the late 1980s to the recording of \"Play\" in 1999. He enjoyed the experience, and wrote approximately 300,000 words before cutting it by half to reach a rough edit of the book. \"\" was released on May 17, 2016, by Penguin Press. Moby put out the compilation album \"Music from Porcelain\" to coincide the book's release, featuring his own tracks and a mixtape of tracks by other artists.\nHis second memoir, \"Then It Fell Apart\", was released on May 2, 2019, and covers his life and career from 1999 to 2009.\nIn September 2021, Moby published \"The Little Pine Cookbook\", featuring vegan recipes developed from his time owning his restaurant.\nPolitics.\nMoby endorsed Kamala Harris for the 2024 US Presidential election.\nDiscography.\nStudio albums\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAwards.\n! scope=\"col\" | Award\n! scope=\"col\" | Year\n! scope=\"col\" | Nominee(s)\n! scope=\"col\" | Category\n! scope=\"col\" | Result\n! scope=\"col\" class=\"unsortable\"| Ref.\n!scope=\"row\"|BDS Certified Spin Awards\n!scope=\"row\" |BMI Film &amp; TV Awards\n!scope=\"row\"|BMI Pop Awards\n!scope=\"row\"| Berlin Music Video Awards\n!scope=\"row\" rowspan=4 | Billboard Music Awards\n! scope=\"row\" rowspan=2|Billboard Music Video Awards\n!scope=\"row\" rowspan=2|Brit Awards\n!scope=\"row\"|Classic Pop Readers' Awards\n!scope=\"row\"|Clio Awards\n!scope=\"row\" rowspan=2| D&amp;AD Awards\n!scope=\"row\" rowspan=5|DanceStar Awards\n!scope=\"row\"|ECHO Awards\n!scope=\"row\" rowspan=2|\n!scope=\"row\" rowspan=6|Grammy Awards\n!scope=\"row\" rowspan=2|Hungarian Music Awards\n!scope=\"row\" rowspan=\"3\" |IFPI Platinum Europe Awards\n!scope=\"row\" rowspan=3|Lunas del Auditorio\n!scope=\"row\"|MTV Asia Awards\n! scope=\"row\" rowspan=8|MTV Europe Music Awards\n!scope=\"row\"|MTV Russian Music Awards\n!scope=\"row\" rowspan=3|MTV Video Music Awards\n!scope=\"row\"| MTV VMAJ\n!scope=\"row\" rowspan=9|MVPA Awards\n! scope=\"row\" rowspan=4|Music Television Awards\n!scope=\"row\" rowspan=3 | My VH1 Music Awards\n! scope=\"row\" rowspan=4|NME Awards\n!scope=\"row\" rowspan=3|NRJ Music Awards\n!scope=\"row\" rowspan=1|Online Music Awards\n!scope=\"row\" rowspan=2|Q Awards\n!scope=\"row\"|TMF Awards\n! scope=\"row\" rowspan=2|Teen Choice Awards\n!scope=\"row\"|Top of the Pops Awards\n!scope=\"row\" rowspan=\"3\"|UK Music Video Awards\n!scope=\"row\"|VH1/Vogue Fashion Awards\n! scope=\"row\" rowspan=3|Viva Comet Awards\n!scope=\"row\"| Veggie Awards\n!scope=\"row\"|Webby Awards\n!scope=\"row\" rowspan=14|\u017deb\u0159\u00edk Music Awards\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19362", "revid": "42316941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19362", "title": "ManiacMansion", "text": ""}
{"id": "19364", "revid": "51046044", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19364", "title": "M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce", "text": "American heavy metal band\nM\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce is an American heavy metal band formed in Hollywood, California, in 1981 by bassist Nikki Sixx and drummer Tommy Lee, with guitarist Mick Mars and lead vocalist Vince Neil joining right after. The band has sold over 100 million records worldwide. They have achieved seven platinum or multi-platinum certifications, nine Top 10 albums on the \"Billboard\" 200 chart (including 1989's \"Dr. Feelgood\", which is M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce's only studio album to reach number one), twenty-two Top 40 mainstream rock hits, and six Top 20 pop singles.\nThe members of M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce are often noted for their hedonistic lifestyles and the androgynous personae they maintained. Following the hard rock and heavy metal origins on the band's first two albums, \"Too Fast for Love\" (1981) and \"Shout at the Devil\" (1983), the release of its third album \"Theatre of Pain\" (1985) saw M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce joining the first wave of glam metal. The band employ elaborate live performances, which include flame thrower guitars, roller coaster drum kits, and the use of pyrotechnics such as fireworks and lighting Sixx on fire. M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce's most recent studio album, \"Saints of Los Angeles\", was released on June 24, 2008. What was planned to be the band's final show took place on New Year's Eve, December 31, 2015. The concert was filmed for a theatrical and Blu-ray release in 2016.\nAfter two and a half years of inactivity, Neil announced in September 2018 that M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce had reunited and was working on new material. On March 22, 2019, the band released four new songs on the soundtrack for its Netflix biopic \"The Dirt\", based on the band's \"New York Times\" best-selling autobiography of the same name. The soundtrack went to number one on the iTunes All Genres Album Chart, number 3 on the \"Billboard\" Top Album and Digital Album sales charts, number 10 on the \"Billboard\" 200, and Top 10 worldwide. The autobiography returned to the \"New York Times\" Best Seller list at number 6 on Nonfiction Print and number 8 on Nonfiction Combined Print &amp; E-Book. M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce embarked on its first major tour in seven years during the summer and fall of 2022, co-headlining a North American tour with Def Leppard.\nThe band has experienced several lineup changes over the years, leaving Sixx as the only constant member; these included the introduction of lead vocalist John Corabi (who was Neil's replacement from 1992 to 1996) and drummers Randy Castillo and Samantha Maloney, both of whom filled in for Lee following his departure from M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce in 1999; he returned to the band in 2004. In October 2022, after 41 years of service, Mars announced his retirement from touring with the band, with John 5 (formerly of David Lee Roth, Marilyn Manson and Rob Zombie) replacing him.\nHistory.\n1981\u20131983: Early history and \"Too Fast for Love\".\nThe nucleus of the group first came together in early 1981, when former Suite 19 guitarist/lead vocalist, and one-time member of Quiet Riot and Dokken, Greg Leon and drummer Tommy Lee decided to form a new band. They attended the farewell gig of a popular local band called London, and Lee was already impressed by the image and stage presence of their bassist, Nikki Sixx. Even before meeting Sixx, Lee claims he had posters of London on his bedroom walls. \"Tommy just loved how Nikki looked\", recalled Leon. \"He was gung-ho about him, saying, 'This is the guy we should get'.\" Sixx auditioned twice but Leon felt he was \"awful\", telling Lee \"He looks great. He's great on stage. But he can't play bass at all.\"\nLee subsequently became friends with Sixx and went to his Hollywood home to listen to new material he was working on. The music had been rejected by his London bandmates for being too heavy, and Lee says he immediately began banging on the table in time with the music and \"everything just seemed to mesh\". Lee subsequently hired Sixx for the new band, prompting guitarist/vocalist Leon to quit in protest. \"I never played a show with Nikki Sixx. Tommy and I played together many times, but I was gone as soon as Nikki entered the picture. But they couldn't find a guitar player or singer initially, so they kept calling me. But I refused,\" Leon has said of his time in the band. Sixx and Lee began a search for new members and soon met guitarists Robin Moore (Jeff Gill) and Bob Deal, better known as Mick Mars, after answering an advertisement that he placed in \"The Recycler\" that read: \"Loud, rude and aggressive guitar player available\". Mars auditioned for Sixx, Moore and Lee, and was subsequently hired while Moore was fired at the same session according to the band's biography \"The Dirt\".\nAlthough a lead vocalist named O'Dean Peterson was auditioned, Lee had known Vince Neil from their high school days at Charter Oak High School in Covina, California, and the two had performed in different bands on the garage band circuit. Upon seeing him perform with the band Rock Candy at the Starwood in Hollywood, California, Lee suggested they have Neil join the band. At first Neil refused the offer.\nOn the same day as Mars, lead vocalist Michael White, who previously played with Nikki Sixx in London, joined the band. But White eventually ended up leaving.\nAs the other members of Rock Candy started to think about moving in more of a New Wave direction and became involved in outside projects, Vince Neil grew anxious to try something else. Lee asked again; Neil was hired on April 1, 1981, and the band played its first gig at the Starwood nightclub on April 24.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n I wanted a band that would be like David Bowie and the Sex Pistols thrown in a blender with Black Sabbath.\n\u00a0\u2014Nikki Sixx\nThe newly formed band did not yet have a name. Neil has said that he told his bandmates that he was \"thinking about calling the band Christmas\". The other members were not very receptive to that idea. Then, while trying to find a suitable name, Mars remembered an incident that occurred when he was playing with a band called White Horse, when one of the other band members called the group \"a motley looking crew\". He had remembered the phrase and later copied it down as \"Mottley Cru\". After slight modification of the spelling, \"M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce\" was eventually selected as the band's name, with the stylistic decision suggested by Neil to add the two sets of metal umlauts, supposedly inspired by the German beer L\u00f6wenbr\u00e4u, which the members were drinking at the time. Other than the periods of February 1992 to September 1996 and of March 1999 to September 2004, and until October 2022, the lineup of Neil, Sixx, Lee, and Mars remained the same.\nThe band soon met its first manager, Allan Coffman, the thirty-eight-year-old brother-in-law of a friend of Mars's driver. The band's first release was the single \"Stick to Your Guns/Toast of the Town\", which was released on its own record label, Leath\u00fcr Records, which had a pressing and distribution deal with Greenworld Distribution in Torrance, California. On November 10, 1981, its debut album \"Too Fast for Love\" was self-produced and released on Leath\u00fcr, selling 20,000 copies. Coffman's assistant Eric Greif set up a tour of Canada, while Coffman and Greif used M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce's success in the Los Angeles club scene to negotiate with several record labels, eventually signing a recording contract with Elektra Records in early 1982. The debut album was then remixed by producer Roy Thomas Baker and re-released on August 20, 1982\u2014two months after its Canadian Warner Music Group release using the original Leath\u00fcr mixes\u2014to coincide with the tour.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Listening to Queen inspired M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce to work with Roy Thomas Baker on \"Too Fast for Love\". He would come in, \"Hello Darlings ...\" and listen for maybe thirty minutes or so and leave. And we're like, \"What?! Where's he going?\". But he produced Queen, so, man, we had to have him produce us, too.\n\u00a0\u2014Tommy Lee\nDuring the \"Cr\u00fcesing Through Canada Tour '82\", there were several widely publicized incidents. First, the band was arrested and then released at Edmonton International Airport for wearing their spiked stage wardrobe (considered \"dangerous weapons\") through customs, and for Neil arriving with a small carry-on filled with porn magazines (considered \"indecent material\"); both were staged PR stunts. Customs eventually had the confiscated items destroyed. Second, while playing Scandals Disco in Edmonton, a spurious \"bomb threat\" against the band made the front page of the \"Edmonton Journal\" on June 9, 1982; Lee and assistant band manager Greif were interviewed by police as a result. This too ended up being a staged PR stunt perpetrated by Greif. Lastly, Lee threw a television set from an upper story window of the Sheraton Caravan Hotel. Canadian rock magazine \"Music Express\" noted that the band was \"banned for life\" from the city. Despite the tour ending prematurely in financial disaster, it was the basis for the band's first international press.\nIn 1983, the band changed management from Coffman to Doug Thaler and Doc McGhee. McGhee is best known for managing Bon Jovi and later Kiss, starting with their reunion tour in 1996. Greif subsequently sued all parties in a Los Angeles Superior Court action that dragged on for several years, and coincidentally later resurfaced as manager of Sixx's former band, London. Coffman himself was sued by several investors to whom he had sold \"stock in the band\", including Michigan-based Bill Larson. Coffman eventually declared bankruptcy, as he had mortgaged his home at least three times to cover band expenses.\n1983\u20131991: International fame and addiction struggles.\nThe band became better known in the United States after playing at the US Festival on May 29, 1983. Their second album, \"Shout at the Devil\", was released on September 26, 1983. The album represented the band's mainstream breakthrough in America and would eventually be certified 4\u00d7 platinum. The album was mentioned by an ABC news reporter in a piece on conservative Christian groups complaining about modern Satanism. They gained the attention of Ozzy Osbourne, and became a support act on his 1984 tour for \"Bark at the Moon\". The band members were developing a reputation for their backstage antics, outrageous clothing, extreme high-heeled boots, heavily applied make-up, and seemingly endless abuse of alcohol and drugs.\nIn December 1984, Neil crashed his De Tomaso Pantera, killing his passenger, Hanoi Rocks drummer Nicholas \"Razzle\" Dingley. Neil, charged with a DUI and vehicular manslaughter, was sentenced to 30 days in jail (although he served only 18 days) and subsequently was sued for $2,500,000. The short jail term was negotiated by his lawyers, enabling Neil to tour and pay the civil suit.\nThe band's third album, \"Theatre of Pain\", was released on June 21, 1985, and dedicated in Dingley's honor, and it started a new glam metal phase in the band's style. \"Theatre of Pain\" was commercially successful, reaching number 6 on the \"Billboard\" album charts and eventually being certified quadruple platinum. However, the recording of the album was fraught with tension in the wake of Neil's accident and Sixx's growing addiction, and members of the band have said that they consider it a creative disappointment.\nM\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce spent most of the next year on a world tour in support of \"Theatre of Pain\". In February 1986, while in London, England, Sixx suffered a near-fatal heroin overdose, and the person who sold him the drugs dumped his unconscious body in a dumpster. The incident inspired Sixx to write the song \"Dancing on Glass\" for their next album.\nThe band's fourth album, \"Girls, Girls, Girls\", was released on May 15, 1987, and debuted at number 2 on the Billboard 200. Sixx has said in interviews that he believes the album would have debuted at number 1, if not for behind the scenes maneuvering by Whitney Houston's record label. The band again changed their look for the album and subsequent tour, trading the glam elements of the previous album for a biker aesthetic. The band faced many of the same personal issues that plagued the recording of \"Theatre of Pain\" and Sixx has complained that those issues compromised the album's quality, although he has spoken more positively about the record in subsequent years.\nOn December 23, 1987, Sixx suffered a heroin overdose. He was declared clinically dead on the way to the hospital, but the paramedic, who was a M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce fan, revived Sixx with two shots of adrenaline. His two minutes in death were the inspiration for the song \"Kickstart My Heart\", which peaked at No.\u00a016 on the Mainstream U.S. chart, and which was featured on 1989's \"Dr. Feelgood\", their first U.S. number one album. From 1986 to 1987, Sixx kept a daily diary of his heroin addiction and eventually entered rehab in January 1988, prompting the band to cancel their planned tour dates for that year.\nWhile 1988 was the first year that M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce did not tour, controversy again hit the band that year in the form of a lawsuit by Matthew Trippe. Trippe claimed that Sixx was hospitalized in 1983 after a car crash involving drugs and that he had been hired as Sixx's doppelg\u00e4nger. The suit was regarding the loss of royalties from his time in M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce and the case was not closed until 1993 when Trippe dropped his charges and disappeared from public view.\nTheir decadent lifestyles almost shattered the band until managers Thaler and McGhee pulled an intervention and refused to allow the band to tour in Europe, fearing that \"some [of them] would come back in bodybags\". Shortly after, all the band members jointly entered drug rehabilitation in an effort to move forward as a band.\nAfter finding sobriety, M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce reached its peak popularity with the release of their fifth album, the Bob Rock-produced \"Dr. Feelgood\", on September 1, 1989. Rock and the band recorded the album in Vancouver, with the band members recording their parts separately for the first time to reduce infighting and to focus on individual performance. Aerosmith lead singer Steven Tyler, who was recording the album \"Pump\" at the same studio, provided backing vocals. On October 14 of that year, it became a No.\u00a01 album and stayed on the charts for 114 weeks after its release. The band members each stated in interviews that, due in no small part to their collective push for sobriety, \"Dr. Feelgood\" was their most solid album musically to that point. The title track and \"Kickstart My Heart\" were both nominated for Grammys in the Best Hard Rock category in 1990 and 1991, respectively, but lost both years to songs by Living Colour. The band did find some success at the American Music Awards, as \"Dr. Feelgood\" was nominated twice for Favorite Hard Rock/Metal Award, losing once to Guns N' Roses' \"Appetite for Destruction\", but winning the following year, beating out Aerosmith's \"Pump\" and Poison's \"Flesh &amp; Blood\". M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce was nominated twice for Favorite Hard Rock/Metal Artist.\nIn 1989, McGhee was fired after the band alleged he had broken several promises that he made in relation to the Moscow Music Peace Festival, including giving his other band, Bon Jovi, advantages in terms of slot placement. Thaler then assumed the role of sole band manager.\nM\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce spent the fall of 1989 and most of 1990 on a massive world tour, the band's biggest to that point. It was a major financial success but left the band feeling burnt out. In April 1990, Lee suffered a concussion during a mishap involving a rappelling drum kit stunt during a live concert in New Haven, Connecticut.\nOn October 1, 1991, the band's first compilation album, \"Decade of Decadence 81\u201391\", was released. It peaked at No.\u00a02 on the \"Billboard\" 200 album chart. It was reportedly designed as \"just something for the fans\" while the band worked on the next \"all new\" album.\n1992\u20132003: Years of turmoil.\nNeil left the band in February 1992 following the release of \"Decade of Decadence\", during a period in which most other prominent glam metal bands of the 1980s were breaking up or otherwise seeing their popularity decline significantly amid the advent of grunge and alternative music. It remains unclear whether Neil was fired or quit the band. Sixx has long maintained that Neil quit, while Neil insists that he was fired. \"Any band has its little spats,\" Neil observed in 2000, \"and this one basically just stemmed from a bunch of 'fuck yous' in a rehearsal studio. It went from 'I quit' to 'You're fired' ... It was handled idiotically. The management just let one of the biggest bands in the world break up.\"\nIn the running for the vacant frontman position was Kik Tracee vocalist Stephen Shareaux. Ultimately Neil was replaced by John Corabi (formerly of Angora and the Scream). Although M\u00f6tley's self-titled March 1994 release made the \"Billboard\" top ten (No. 7), the album was a commercial failure. It prompted negative reactions from many fans due to Neil's absence and its sound. Corabi suggested the band bring back Neil, believing the latter would always be seen as the voice of the band. This eventually resulted in his own firing in 1996. Corabi spoke about his time with the band and his thoughts on the first record with M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce. Corabi said: \"my record was the first record that they had done that didn't go platinum, didn't make some sort of crazy noise, and everybody panicked\". During his time away from the band, Neil released a moderately successful solo album, \"Exposed\" in 1993, and a less commercially successful follow-up, \"Carved in Stone\" in 1995.\nAfter \"Rolling Stone\" magazine broke out the news in their November 26, 1996 issue, the band reunited with Neil in 1997, after their current manager, Allen Kovac, and Neil's manager, Bert Stein, set up a meeting between Neil, Lee, and Sixx. Agreeing to \"leave their egos at the door\", the band released \"Generation Swine\". Although it debuted at No.\u00a04, and in spite of a live performance at the American Music Awards, the album was a commercial failure, due in part to lack of support from their label.\nIn 1998, M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce's contractual ties with Elektra had expired, putting the band in total control of their future, including the ownership of the master recordings of all of their albums. Announcing the end of their relationship with Elektra, the band became one of the few groups to own and control their publishing and music catalog. They are one of only a handful of artists to own the masters to their material and reportedly did so by being the biggest pain they could be until Elektra got fed up and handed over the rights in order to get the band off their label. After leaving Elektra the band created their own label, M\u00f6tley Records.\nM\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce released their compilation \"Greatest Hits\" in late 1998, featuring two new songs, \"Bitter Pill\" and \"Enslaved\". In 1999, the band rereleased all their albums, dubbed as \"Cr\u00fccial Cr\u00fce\". These limited-edition digital remasters included demos, plus live, instrumental, and previously unreleased tracks. In 1999 the band released \"Supersonic and Demonic Relics\", an updated version of \"Decade of Decadence\" featuring the original songs from that album and several previously unreleased B-sides and remixes, as well as their first official live album \"\" (which was the original working title for the studio album \"Theatre of Pain\"). The band then went on a co-headlining tour with the Scorpions.\nIn 1999, Lee quit to pursue a solo career, due to increasing tensions with Neil. \"All we got was a call from his attorney saying he wasn't coming back,\" recalled the singer. \"He wasn't into rock 'n' roll anymore. He even said that rock is dead ... It all happened during a void in M\u00f6tley. We weren't even rehearsing, so it was no big deal.\"\nLee was replaced by a longtime friend of the band, former Ozzy Osbourne drummer Randy Castillo. The band released \"New Tattoo\" in July 2000. Before the ensuing tour commenced, Castillo became ill with a duodenal ulcer. The band brought in former Hole drummer Samantha Maloney for the Maximum Rock tour with Megadeth as Castillo concentrated on his health. However, while Castillo was recovering from stomach surgery, he was diagnosed with squamous cell carcinoma after finding a tumor on his jaw. He died on March 26, 2002. Soon afterward, the band went on hiatus.\nWhile the band was on hiatus, Sixx played in side projects 58 and Brides of Destruction. Neil was featured on the first season of VH1's reality show \"The Surreal Life\", and had his own special titled \"Remaking Vince Neil\", which focused on his solo career and attempts to get in better physical shape. Mars, who suffers from a hereditary form of arthritis which causes extensive spinal pain called ankylosing spondylitis, went into seclusion in 2001 dealing with health issues. Lee went on to form Methods of Mayhem, while performing as a solo artist at the same time.\nA 2001 autobiography titled \"The Dirt\", co-authored by all four of the band members and Neil Strauss, presented M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce as \"the world's most notorious rock band\". The book made the top ten on \"The New York Times\" Best Seller list and spent ten weeks there, and would return to the list after the film adaptation was released in spring 2019.\nIn 2003, the band released two box sets entitled ' and ', featuring the music from their entire career. The titles of the collections were heavily criticized by Hanoi Rocks singer Michael Monroe, among others, due to their possible reference to Neil and Razzle's fatal automobile accident, and that Neil was found guilty of manslaughter for the incident.\n2004\u20132007: Reunion and renewed success.\nA promoter in England, Mags Revell, began clamoring for a M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce reunion, ostensibly presenting himself as the voice of anxious fans waiting for more from the band. After meeting with management several times, in September 2004, Sixx announced that he and Neil had returned to the studio and had begun recording new material. In December 2004, the four original members announced a reunion tour, staging an announcement event in which they arrived at the Hollywood Palladium in a hearse. The tour began on February 14, 2005, in San Juan, Puerto Rico. The resulting compilation album, \"Red, White &amp; Cr\u00fce\", was released in February 2005. It features the band members' favorite original songs plus three new tracks, \"If I Die Tomorrow\", \"Sick Love Song\" (co-written by Sixx and James Michael), and a cover of the Rolling Stones' \"Street Fighting Man\". A small controversy was caused when it was suggested that neither Lee nor Mars played on the new tracks (duties were supposedly handled by Vandals drummer Josh Freese). However, a VH1 documentary of the band's reunion later showed that Lee did indeed play on some of the tracks. The Japanese release of \"Red, White &amp; Cr\u00fce\" includes an extra new track titled \"I'm a Liar (and That's the Truth)\". \"Red, White &amp; Cr\u00fce\" charted at No.\u00a06 and has since gone platinum.\nOn New Year's Eve 2004 the band appeared on a live episode of \"The Tonight Show\". Neil yelled an obscenity during the performance, leading to an FCC investigation. The NBC network responded by banning the band, leading to the band subsequently suing the network, claiming they were being unfairly punished. The lawsuit was eventually settled out of court and the band made several subsequent appearances on the network.\nIn 2005, M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce was involved in an animation-comedy spoof \"Disaster!\", which was written by Paul Benson and Matt Sullivan and which was used as the introduction film to concerts on their Carnival of Sins tour. That tour continued throughout 2005 and was commemorated with the release of a live album and DVD in 2006. In the fall of 2005 the band re-recorded \"Home Sweet Home\" as a duet with Linkin Park lead singer Chester Bennington and donated the proceeds to the victims of Hurricane Katrina.\nIn 2006, M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce went on the Route of All Evil Tour, co-headlining with Aerosmith and taking performers from Lucent Dossier Experience on the road with them. Paramount Pictures and MTV Films planned to adapt their autobiography, \"The Dirt\", into a movie, but the production was delayed for several years and the deal eventually fell through. In June 2007, M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce set out on a small European tour. A lawsuit was filed by Neil, Mars and Sixx against Carl Stubner, Lee's manager. The three sued him for contracting for Lee to appear on two unsuccessful reality shows the band claim hurt its image. It was later reported on Motley.com that the lawsuit had been settled.\nIn 2007, Sixx published his diaries as the bestselling autobiography \"\", covering the band's \"Girls, Girls, Girls\" world tour and his 1987 overdose, and Sixx's side project band released \"The Heroin Diaries Soundtrack\" as a musical parallel to the novel.\n2008\u20132010: \"Saints of Los Angeles\".\n Vince Neil (not the band) hosted the Motley Cruise from January 24 to 28 in 2008; this featured Ratt, Skid Row and Slaughter.\nOn June 11, 2008, M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce and manager Burt Stein filed suit against each other. Stein was Neil's personal manager and, according to the band and rival manager Kovac, served as the band's manager at one time. The band and Kovac sued in Los Angeles County Superior Court, claiming Stein was not entitled to a cut of M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce's earnings. Stein sued the same day in Nashville's federal court, saying he was entitled to 1.875 percent of what the band makes. Other litigation between the parties arose in Nevada. In July 2009, lawyers for both sides announced that the disputes had been \"amicably resolved\" through a \"global settlement\".\nM\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce's ninth studio album, titled \"Saints of Los Angeles\", was released in Japan on June 17, 2008, and in America on June 24, 2008. The album was originally titled \"The Dirt\", as it was loosely based on the band's autobiography of the same name, but the title was later changed. In the US, the album was released by Eleven Seven Music. Eleven Seven took over US distribution of their back catalog.\niTunes picked \"Saints of Los Angeles\" in their \"Best of 2008\" in the Rock category as the number one song. The song was nominated for a Grammy Award in the \"Best Hard Rock Performance\" category, but lost to \"Wax Simulacra\" by The Mars Volta. The song was released in the music game series \"Rock Band\" as downloadable content the day the single was released. It was briefly sold as a \"Rock Band\" exclusive, making M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce the first band to release a single exclusively through a video game. The song sold more units via \"Rock Band\" than it did via traditional streaming sites. Additionally, the entire \"Dr. Feelgood\" album was released as downloadable content in \"Rock Band\", excluding \"T.n.T. (Terror 'n Tinseltown)\".\nFrom July 1 to August 31, 2008, M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce headlined the popular Cr\u00fce Fest music festival, which included opening acts Buckcherry, Papa Roach, Trapt, and They then spent the fall and winter of that year on tour with Hinder, Theory of a Deadman and The Last Vegas.\nThe band made a guest appearance in the fourth season finale of the FOX crime dramedy \"Bones\" on May 14, 2009, entitled \"The End in the Beginning\", performing the song \"Dr. Feelgood\". The following month they performed at the Download Festival at the Donington Park motorsports circuit (June 12\u201314, 2009), playing on the second stage on Friday night.\nM\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce headlined the Cr\u00fce Fest 2 festival, which ran from July to September 2009. Supporting them were Godsmack, Theory of a Deadman, Drowning Pool, and Charm City Devils. The band's set celebrated the 20th anniversary of \"Dr. Feelgood\" by performing the album in its entirety on each night of the tour. They re-released the album as a special 20th anniversary deluxe edition.\nM\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce headlined Ozzfest in 2010, along with Ozzy Osbourne and Rob Halford. Neil released his third solo album and autobiography, both entitled \"Tattoos and Tequila\".\n2011\u20132015: The Final Tour and retirement from touring.\nM\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce co-headlined a mid-year tour with Poison and special guests New York Dolls in 2011 for the band's 30th Anniversary and Poison's 25th anniversary. On August 30, 2011, M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce, along with co-headliners Def Leppard and special guests Steel Panther, announced a UK Tour commencing in December 2011.\nIn February 2012 the band appeared along with supermodel Adriana Lima in a commercial for the Kia Optima, which premiered during Super Bowl XLVI. In the same month the band hosted its first residency at the Hard Rock Hotel and Casino in Las Vegas. In March 2012, M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce announced a co-headlining tour with Kiss. The tour kicked off July 20 in Bristow, Virginia, and ran through September 23. In the spring and summer of 2013 the band toured throughout Canada with Big Wreck. The band returned to Las Vegas for a second residency in the fall of 2013.\nOn January 28, 2014, at the conference inside Beacher's Madhouse Theater in Hollywood, M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce announced the full details of its retirement, including a tour initially spanning 70 North American dates, with Alice Cooper playing as a special guest. The tour commenced in Grand Rapids, Michigan, on July 2, 2014. The band members had signed a \"cessation of touring agreement\", which prevented them from touring under the M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce name beyond the end of 2015. In a later interview, Sixx talked about the possibility of releasing new music, saying that \"We have music written, [but] it's not put together yet\". He speculated that the band would release it in a song-by-song format as opposed to a full-length album format, elaborating with \"It's hard, to be honest with you, to spend six [or] nine months to write eleven songs\u2014all those lyrics ... everything ... the vocals, the guitars, the bass, the sonics, the mixing, the mastering, the artwork. ... You put it out and nothing [happens], because now people cherry-pick songs. So we go, 'Why don't we write songs and find vehicles to get one, two or four songs to ten million people rather than eleven songs to a hundred thousand people.\"\nDuring the tour the band played a new song, \"All Bad Things\", over the speakers throughout the venue before it took the stage. On November 22, 2014, in Spokane, Washington, at the Spokane Arena, M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce played the final concert of the first North American leg of The Final Tour.\nOn January 15, 2015, it was announced that the band's career would end with international concerts in Japan, Australia, Brazil and Europe before heading out for a second leg of North American concerts throughout 2015, ending with a concert at the MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas on December 27, followed by three concerts at Staples Center on December 28, 30 and 31, 2015. In May 2015, The Cr\u00fce and Alice Cooper announced a set of 12 concert dates for Europe at a conference in London.\nOn September 19, 2015, the band played the Rock in Rio festival on the main stage.\nM\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce performed, for what was then advertised to be the last time, at Staples Center in Los Angeles on December 31, 2015. The band reported that its New Year's Eve show was going to be released as a film in 2016; the movie was titled \"M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce: The End\".\n2018\u20132022: Reunion, \"The Dirt\" film and return to touring.\nIn 2017, frontman Vince Neil told host Sammy Hagar on the show \"Rock and Roll Road Trip\" that M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce were \"completely done\". However, on September 13, 2018, Neil announced via Twitter that M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce was recording four new songs; this was later confirmed by bassist Nikki Sixx, who said that the new material was recorded for the film adaptation of the band's biography, \"The Dirt\". Neil clarified that, though the band has signed a contract to no longer tour, they still plan to continue putting out new music for the future.\nNetflix released \"The Dirt\" biopic based on the book of the same name that coincided with an 18-song soundtrack on March 22, 2019. The film is directed by Jeff Tremaine (\"Jackass\"), produced by Julie Yorn and Erik Olsen, executive produced by Rick Yorn, and co-produced by Kovac, who is M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce's manager, CEO of Eleven Seven Label Group and founder of Tenth Street Entertainment. \"The Dirt\" stars Daniel Webber as Neil, Iwan Rheon (\"Game of Thrones\") as Mars, Douglas Booth as Sixx and Colson Baker (a.k.a. Machine Gun Kelly) as Lee. Also starring in the movie is Pete Davidson (\"Saturday Night Live\") as record executive Tom Zutaut. \"Rolling Stone\" wrote that \"The Dirt\" is \"a truly debauched movie that delves deep into their rise from the early Eighties Sunset Strip metal scene to their days as arena headliners.\" The film portrays many of the adventures the band went on including touring with Ozzy Osbourne and the \"Theatre of Pain\" tour.\nThe first new song from the soundtrack was \"The Dirt (Est.1981)\", which was released on February 22, 2019. The band wrote two other new songs, \"Ride With the Devil\" and \"Crash and Burn\", and covered Madonna's \"Like a Virgin\", on the album. The soundtrack additionally included fourteen previously released M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce songs. It was produced by Bob Rock, who produced \"Dr. Feelgood\", and was released on March 22, 2019, on M\u00f6tley Records and Eleven Seven Music. The soundtrack hit the Billboard Top 10 at No. 10, the first time M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce hit the Billboard Top 10 in over a decade.\nThe group's legacy was featured on a 2019 episode of the Reelz documentary series \"Breaking the Band\". Both Neil and Sixx had a negative reaction to how things were portrayed in the episode. Sixx said they would be pursuing legal action and called Reelz \"the bottom of the barrel\".\nIn November 2019, rumors started to circulate of the band reuniting for a 2020 tour with Def Leppard and Poison, following the success of Guns N' Roses' reunion tour. The band responded to an online petition rallying for the group's return, saying \"this is interesting...\". On November 18, \"Rolling Stone\" magazine reported that all four band members had agreed to come back together for the tour, utilizing a loophole in their \"Cessation of Touring\" contract. Later that same day, the band confirmed all reports with a statement on their website, posting a press release and a video of the contract being destroyed. On December 4, 2019, it was officially confirmed that M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce would embark on The Stadium Tour with Def Leppard, Poison and Joan Jett &amp; the Blackhearts in the summer of 2020. Also in December 2019 Mick Mars announced that his debut solo album would be released in the spring of 2020. On June 1, 2020, M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce announced that The Stadium Tour would be rescheduled to June\u2013September 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic; it was postponed once again to 2022, due to similar circumstances amid the pandemic. In January 2022, in the wake of the Omicron variant surge, Sixx was asked by a fan on Twitter if The Stadium Tour was still happening this year; his response was, \"We're 1000% hitting the road with Def Leppard for The Stadium Tour in mid-June...I can't f'ckin wait...\" M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce later joined Def Leppard again for another tour together in Europe in 2023.\nIn November 2021, M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce sold their entire back catalogue to BMG Rights Management.\nIn September 2022, Neil announced in an interview with the \"Las Vegas Review-Journal\" that the band would return for a US tour in 2023. In that same interview, he ruled out the possibility of further studio albums, stating that they were \"strictly a touring band\".\n2022\u2013present: Retirement of Mick Mars and \"Cancelled\".\nOn October 26, 2022, Mick Mars retired as a touring member of the band due to ongoing health issues, according to a statement released by Mars' publicist. The next day, the band confirmed that John 5 would take Mars' place as their new touring guitarist, although he was later confirmed as a permanent member of the band in April 2023. In a December interview with A Radio Rock in Brazil, Sixx confirmed that the band was not going away anytime soon, and stated that the band would be touring for eight more years.\nOn April 6, 2023, Mars sued the band, alleging that they were trying to remove him. In response to the lawsuit, the band issued a statement on the same day, denying that they had fired Mars, and that while he was still a member, had quit touring.\nOn April 19, 2023, the band announced that they were working on new music with record producer Bob Rock, ruling out the possibility of the band working with Mars again. Sixx later released a statement on a then-upcoming album on May 15, 2023, stating that it had finished production and the band had begun mixing the album. In June 2023, Neil confirmed that they were set to perform another stadium tour in 2024. In the following month, he confirmed that the band recorded three brand new songs. In September 2023, John 5 confirmed the title of a new song as \"Dogs of War\", and that the band recorded a cover of \"(You Gotta) Fight for Your Right (To Party!)\" by the Beastie Boys.\nOn April 23, 2024, it was announced that M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce had signed a deal with Big Machine Records, and three days later the band released \"Dogs of War\", their first song in five years and their first with John 5. Neil told \"Billboard\" that same month that additional music from M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce could be released by the end of 2024 or in 2025, though the new material would likely result in \"a few songs here, a few songs there\" rather than a full-length album. Lee did not rule out releasing a new M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce album, but stated that \"recording and writing some stuff that you're feeling right at the moment and releasing it is, for us, a lot more fun and sort of a time stamp of where we're at right now.\" Sixx said that the band had recorded two other new singles that were ready to be released. A new EP, titled \"Cancelled\", was released on October 4, 2024.\nFeuds and criticisms.\nMetallica.\nOften clashing during the early 1980s, both bands were fighting for dominance in the Los Angeles metal scene during Metallica's years prior to their relocation to the Bay Area. Both singer/guitarist James Hetfield and drummer Lars Ulrich expressed their hatred of the heavy metal scene in Los Angeles during the time and frequently attacked multiple up-and-coming local bands in multiple interviews, including M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce. Allegedly before a show in 1982, Ulrich claimed he drunkenly screamed \"Fuck M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce!\" at the band from outside the Troubadour in Hollywood, in which Sixx chased Ulrich in retaliation. Former lead guitarist Dave Mustaine during a 1983 interview, referred to their style of glam metal as an abbreviation for \"Gay LA Music\". Though despite their public disdain for glam metal, Metallica were impressed by the production and commercial success of \"Dr. Feelgood\" in 1989, later hiring the album's producer Bob Rock to produce their self-titled fifth album in 1991. Several years later, both Sixx and Ulrich would reignite the animosity after Ulrich accused M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce of performing to a backing track at the 1997 American Music Awards. Sixx responded via an online forum and would also attack Metallica's then-recent album \"Load\" insulting multiple members of the band for their change in sound and visual image. During a 2003 interview, Sixx would strangely defend Metallica's then-latest album \"St. Anger\" by claiming \"I have learned to have sympathy for the enemy\". In 2006, both Tommy Lee and former Metallica bassist Jason Newsted took part in a reality show entitled \"\" as they would both participate in creating a supergroup while the show's premise revolved around finding a frontman via contest. During a 2011 meet-and-greet in Mexico City, Hetfield was approached by a fan attacking M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce due to their public image and frequent appearances in tabloids. Hetfield refused to directly respond to the fan's comments towards M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce but did find humor in his insults toward the band. In 2015, Lee would reignite the feud when he posted a Tweet featuring a picture of Ulrich with the words \"Straight Outta Tempo\" superimposed over his face. Lee presumably used a meme maker intended to promote the 2015 N.W.A biopic\u00a0\"Straight Outta Compton\". Following the post by Lee, Vince Neil had stated online that he was unaware of the feud with Metallica; however, during a later interview with an Oregon radio show, Neil was again asked about the band's current relationship with Metallica and hung up on the show's host. Things were alleged to have calmed down by 2017, when Hetfield appeared on Sixx's radio show 'Sixx Sense'. During an interview in 2021, Sixx applauded Metallica's longevity and praised several of their releases during an interview.\nGuns N' Roses.\nThough Guns N' Roses were initially hired to open for M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce during the summer of 1987, things grew hostile between both sides in 1988 after Vince Neil alleged that then-Guns N' Roses guitarist Izzy Stradlin had assaulted his then-wife Sharise at the famed Cathouse club, according to Neil and club owner Riki Rachtman. Things came to a breaking point at the 1989 MTV Video Music Awards following M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce's presentation of the award for 'Best Metal Video' to Guns N' Roses; however, only bassist Duff McKagan and drummer Steven Adler appeared at the stage to accept it. Following their performance with Tom Petty, Neil rushed the side of the stage and threw a punch at Stradlin before being restrained by security. Guns N' Roses frontman Axl Rose was enraged with the incident, threatening Neil after security had separated the two. During an interview in August 1990, Rose later challenged Neil to a fight during an interview with Kurt Loder, claiming \"Anytime he wants it, Atlantic City, I don't care. We'll put money on it.\" Neil responded in early 1991 by challenging Rose to a fight: \"Axl if you are watching this, I want to challenge you to a fight. I'm gonna give you time and I'm gonna give you the place. There's no backing out now buddy. It's time to put up or shut up.\", later expressing his intent to possibly host the fight in an arena. Reportedly, Eddie Van Halen and then-current Van Halen singer Sammy Hagar had offered money to possibly host the fight at Madison Square Garden in New York City. However, for unknown reasons, neither Rose or Neil responded to the offer. Neil claims Stradlin had called him with an apology for the incident, but the 1991 Guns N' Roses track \"Shotgun Blues\" was allegedly a diss track aimed at Neil. Tensions were reported to have died down shortly afterwards when both Tommy Lee and former Guns N' Roses guitarist Gilby Clarke participated with former Metallica bassist Jason Newsted in a reality show entitled \"Rockstar: Supernova\", as they would contribute musical parts in the show's contest to find a vocalist of the newly formed supergroup. Things remained cordial until 2009 when Neil had lobbed insults towards Rose in response to Guns N' Roses' most recent album, \"Chinese Democracy\", calling the record a flop and criticizing Rose for his management of the band at the time. In 2014, \"Revolver\" magazine honored Rose by calling him \"The World's Greatest Singer\"; in response, Neil jokingly mocked the award on Twitter, but deleted his response shortly afterward.\nGodsmack.\nThe feud between alternative metal band Godsmack and M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce stems from the two sides clashing after Godsmack was hired as one of several supporting acts for M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce during the band's 2009 Cr\u00fce Fest 2 tour. Godsmack frontman Sully Erna and drummer Shannon Larkin have claimed the feud originated from M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce's treatment of the support bands on tour, particularly Godsmack's fans who allegedly often left venues early following their own performance. Larkin recalls in a 2011 interview with \"Loudwire\": \"M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce's security were real weird with our guests getting backstage, like our guests might want to look at M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce. Our guests were there to see us and they didn't care a shit about M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce. M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce is a legendary band that we all respect. When I was 17, I had 'Shout at the Devil' but it just kind of fronted us a little that they would think that our guests would be star-struck over them. So, that's where the bad blood came from.\" Erna allegedly penned the 2010 track \"Cryin' Like a Bitch\" about Sixx in regards to his behavior towards Godsmack during the tour, though Shannon Larkin claims the song was written about former San Diego Chargers quarterback Philip Rivers. Sixx continued in a war of insults with the band as he alleged that Godsmack had asked to appear on his radio show multiple times, due to initial allegations of it being written as a diss track aimed at Sixx. During a 2015 appearance on the \"Jasta Show\" (hosted by Hatebreed frontman Jamey Jasta), Erna would attack Sixx further by calling Sixx an \"old, fat, washed-up has-been\". Erna continued the tirade by even challenging Sixx to a fight, claiming: \"I'll say it straight out: I've never met a bigger fucking dick in my life than Nikki Sixx. He's a douchebag. He's straight-up a fucking douche, and I don't give a fuck what he says. He knows exactly where I am, and he knows exactly how he can find me anytime that motherfucker has the balls to come and look me up\". Sixx responded to Erna's comments on a Facebook livestream, calling him a \"baby\". Sixx would claim the band would refuse any future festival dates if they were booked on the same bill as Godsmack.\nSteel Panther.\nThe comedic glam metal band Steel Panther engaged in a feud with M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce following a tour between the two bands and Def Leppard in 2011. Numerous members of Steel Panther claim they were heavily influenced by M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce's music; however, touring with the band exhibited a hostile environment, particularly from Nikki Sixx and Tommy Lee. In the years following the tour, guitarist Satchel claimed Tommy Lee had been rather hostile towards multiple band members due to allegations that he and singer Michael Starr had sex with Lee's girlfriend at the time. Starr commented on M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce's other feud with Godsmack, claiming Sully Erna would severely beat Sixx in a fistfight. In a 2015 interview, Starr would claim the members of M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce take themselves too seriously given the comedic nature of Steel Panther's music. Sixx would respond in 2016 claiming he prioritized taking his musical contributions much more seriously. During a 2018 interview, Satchel claimed \"There are bands that hate our guts... We did a tour a few years ago with Def Leppard and M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce\". Things escalated in 2019 when drummer Stix Zadinia and Starr appeared in a video on the channel 'Little Punk People' where the two were asked which dead musicians they could revive; Starr jokingly claimed he wanted to bring back Vince Neil from the 1980s, enraging Sixx, who later attacked Starr on Twitter for his comment. Shortly following the response from Sixx, Steel Panther's band account replied with an interview M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce gave from 1994 (whilst Neil was not a part of the band), in which Sixx and guitarist Mick Mars mocked and joked at Neil's weight following a jet ski accident. Though M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce would not respond to the post, multiple band members of Steel Panther have praised M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce's music as influential in multiple interviews afterwards.\nFormer M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce members.\nMick Mars.\nOn October 27, 2022, co-founding guitarist Mick Mars publicly announced his retirement from touring with the band after 41 years due to complications with ankylosing spondylitis, a degenerative form of inflammatory arthritis leaving him unable to perform on tour. Shortly afterwards, the band announced longtime Rob Zombie guitarist John 5 would be his replacement during the ongoing tour. In an interview with \"Ultimate Guitar\" dated March 13, 2023, Carmine Appice, a friend of Mars', claimed that Mars, in addition to his declining health, had lost enjoyment for touring. Enraged with the comments, Nikki Sixx responded on Twitter, attacking Appice, referring to him as \"a washed up drummer.\" Following Sixx's comments, Mars began to attack the band during an interview with \"Variety\" published April 6, 2023, claiming the band's severance payout was \"laughable\" as his royalties had allegedly been cut to 7.5% as a result of his retirement. Mars further claimed he was forced to retire as opposed to being fired by the band based on their own displeasure with his medical ailments.\nOn April 7, 2023, Mars publicly filed a lawsuit against M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce in the Los Angeles County Superior Court for unpaid royalties, claiming the band had severely cut his touring royalty agreement from 25% to 5% as a direct result of his retirement. The band's representative Sasha Frid had revealed claims that a 2008 legal agreement signed by all four band members had documented that no resigning participants would receive the same compensation attributable to live performances or merchandise sales if a particular member had chosen to quit the band. Mars' attorney Ed McPherson publicly attacked the band in a statement due to their failure to reveal updated financial documents in regards to Mars' payout agreement following his retirement in October. According to Mars' accounts in the lawsuit, the band had forced him to sell off his remaining share in the band, labeling their behavior as \"bullying\". Nikki Sixx would make a public statement on Twitter expressing his disappointment with the lawsuit but offered his public support for Mars nonetheless. Following this statement Mars would further attack the band in a \"Variety\" article, taking aim at Lee and Neil for their previous legal incidents and alleged the band had been performing with a backing track throughout the tour.\nDuring an interview with \"Rolling Stone\" on July 3, 2023, Mars elaborated further by claiming he has refused to speak with any members of the band ever again, stating his intention to pursue his full royalty percentage. By September 2023, the matter remained in litigation.\nJohn Corabi.\nFollowing the firing of Vince Neil in 1992, M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce hired John Corabi as their new lead singer prior to the recording of their 1994 self-titled album. Fan reactions were mixed due to the uncharted nature of the band's change in sound with Corabi, in addition to their new stylistic direction of the 1990s. As the band began writing for their upcoming seventh album, \"Generation Swine\", tensions over the album's creative direction began to surface between the band and Corabi. Corabi blamed much of the poor songwriting and production on Nikki Sixx's leadership, while Sixx blamed Corabi for being unable to write songs fluidly. The band had previously hired new manager Allen Kovac in 1994 prior to the release of the self-titled album; however, the mixed response to the record in addition to backlash towards Corabi from longtime fans proved to be strenuous on the band's public image, resulting in the band firing Corabi during the recording of \"Generation Swine\". The band were forced by management and fan responses to rehire Neil, however; tensions with Corabi remained high for multiple years following the split. Corabi would later sue the band in 1997 due to removal of his songwriting credits on the album. Despite the tensions, Corabi took part in a short-lived supergroup with Sixx entitled Brides of Destruction with L.A. Guns guitarist Tracii Guns in 2003. Corabi later outlined his tensions with Sixx would resurface during the project and would attack Sixx during multiple public interviews for his poor leadership and even insulted his playing abilities. Following guitarist Mick Mars' lawsuit against the band in 2023, Corabi expressed his support for Mars while criticizing the band's poor financial decisions.\nMusical style and legacy.\nM\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce's musical style is most commonly described as heavy metal, glam metal, and hard rock. According to AllMusic, the band has \"a knack for melding pop hooks to heavy metal theatrics\". The band explored alternative metal and grunge sounds on \"M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce\" (1994) and industrial rock on \"Generation Swine\" (1997).\nMusic critic Martin Popoff's book \"The Top 500 Heavy Metal Songs of All Time\" lists seven of the band's songs in its ranking. M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce was ranked tenth on MTV's list of Top 10 Heavy Metal Bands of All-Time and ninth on VH1's All Time Top Ten Metal Bands. Music website \"Loudwire\" named the band the 22nd greatest metal band of all time. \"Spin\" named \"Shout at the Devil\" the 11th best metal album of all time. In 2013, \"LA Weekly\" named the band the third best hair metal band of all time. \"Rolling Stone\" named \"Too Fast For Love\" the 22nd best metal album of all time.\nIn 2006, the band received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.\nIn 2014, the tribute album \"\" was released, featuring country music stars including Rascal Flatts, LeAnn Rimes and Darius Rucker covering various M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce songs. The album debuted at number 2 on the \"Billboard\" Country Album chart and number 5 on the \"Billboard\" 200.\nBand members.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDiscography.\nStudio albums\nTours and residencies.\nConcert tours\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nConcert residencies\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19365", "revid": "1269591907", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19365", "title": "Maquis", "text": "Maquis initially referred to Maquis shrubland, a Mediterranean shrubland biome, and came to be associated with the armed resistance groups which hid in the terrain covered with that scrub growth.\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "19366", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19366", "title": "Mandrake (plant)", "text": ""}
{"id": "19367", "revid": "30327821", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19367", "title": "Mussolini", "text": ""}
{"id": "19368", "revid": "50514341", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19368", "title": "Mandriva Linux", "text": "Linux distribution\nMandriva Linux, a fusion of the French distribution Mandrake Linux and the Brazilian distribution Conectiva Linux, is a discontinued Linux distribution developed by Mandriva S.A.\nEach release lifetime was 18 months for base updates (Linux, system software, etc.) and 12 months for desktop updates (window managers, desktop environments, web browsers, etc.). Server products received full updates for at least five years after their release.\nThe last release of Mandriva Linux was in August 2011. Most developers who were laid off went to Mageia. Later on, the remaining developers teamed up with community members and formed OpenMandriva, a continuation of Mandriva.\nHistory.\nThe first release of Mandrake was based on Red Hat Linux (version 5.1) and K Desktop Environment 1 in July 1998. After that, it moved away from the Red Hat standard and Red Hat inspiration and influence on its own design and implementation, and became a completely separate distribution. Mandrake included a number of original tools that make system configuration less difficult. It was the brainchild of Ga\u00ebl Duval, who wanted to focus on ease of use for new users.\nThis goal was met as Mandrake Linux gained a reputation as \"one of the easiest to install and user-friendly Linux distributions\". Mandrake Linux earned praise as a Linux distribution that users could use all the time, without dual booting into Microsoft Windows for compatibility with web sites or software unavailable under Linux. CNET called the user experience of Mandrake Linux 8.0 the most polished available at that time.\nDuval became the co-founder of Mandrakesoft, but was laid off from the company in 2006 along with many other employees.\nName changes.\nFrom its inception until the release of version 8.0, Mandrake named its flagship distribution Linux-Mandrake. From version 8.1 to 9.2 the distribution name was reversed and called Mandrake Linux.\nIn February 2004, MandrakeSoft lost a court case against Hearst Corporation, owners of King Features Syndicate. Hearst contended that MandrakeSoft infringed upon King Features' trademarked character Mandrake the Magician. As a precaution, MandrakeSoft renamed its products by removing the space between the brand name and the product name and changing the first letter of the product name to lower case, thus creating one word. Starting from version 10.0, Mandrake Linux became known as mandrakelinux, and its logo changed accordingly. Similarly, MandrakeMove (a Live CD version) became Mandrakemove.\nIn April 2005, Mandrakesoft announced the corporate acquisition of Conectiva, a Brazilian-based company that produced a Linux distribution for Portuguese-speaking (Brazil) and Spanish-speaking Latin America. As a result of this acquisition and the legal dispute with Hearst Corporation, Mandrakesoft announced that the company was changing its name to Mandriva, and that their Linux distribution \"Mandrake Linux\" would henceforward be known as Mandriva Linux.\nForks.\nMandriva has been forked many times.\nFeatures.\nInstallation, control and administration.\nMandriva Linux contained the Mandriva Control Center, which eases configuration of some settings. It has many programs known as Drakes or Draks, collectively named drakxtools, to configure many different settings. Examples include MouseDrake to set up a mouse, DiskDrake to set up disk partitions and drakconnect to set up a network connection. They are written using GTK+ and Perl, and most of them can run in both graphical and text mode using the ncurses interface.\nDesktops.\nMandriva Linux 2011 was released only with KDE Plasma Desktop, whereas other desktop environments were available but not officially supported. Older Mandriva versions also used KDE as standard but others such as GNOME were also supported.\nPackage manager.\nMandriva Linux used a package manager called urpmi, which functions as a wrapper to the .rpm binaries. It is similar to apt from Debian &amp; Ubuntu, pacman from Arch Linux, yum or dnf from Fedora in that it allows seamless installation of a given software package by automatically installing the other packages needed. It is also media-transparent due to its ability to retrieve packages from various media, including network/Internet, CD/DVD and local disk. Urpmi also has an easy-to-use graphical front-end called rpmdrake, which is integrated into the Mandriva Control Center.\nLive USB.\nA Live USB of Mandriva Linux can be created manually or with UNetbootin.\nVersions.\nFrom 2007\u20132011, Mandriva was released on a 6-month fixed-release cycle, similar to Ubuntu and Fedora.\nLatest version.\nThe latest stable version is Mandriva Linux 2011 (\"Hydrogen\"), released on 28 August 2011.\nDevelopment version.\nThe development tree of Mandriva Linux has always been known as \"Cooker\". This tree is directly released as a new stable version.\nVersion history.\nThis table shows how Mandriva developed over time.\nEditions.\nEach release of Mandriva Linux was split into several different editions. Each edition is derived from the same master tree, most of which is available on the public mirrors: all free / open source software, and all non-free software which is under a license that allows unrestricted distribution to the general public, is available from the public mirrors. Only commercial software under a license that does not allow unrestricted distribution to the general public (but for which Mandriva has negotiated an agreement to distribute it with paid copies) is not available from public mirrors.\nMandriva Linux Free.\nMandriva Linux Free was a 'traditional' distribution (i.e. one that comes with a dedicated installer, to install the distribution to the computer before it is run). It was 'free' in both senses: it consists entirely of free and open-source software, and it was made available for public download at no charge. It was usually available in CD (three or four discs) and DVD editions for x86 32- and 64-bit CPU architectures. It was aimed at users to whom software freedom is important, and also at users who prefer a traditional installer to the installable live CD system used by One. The package selection was tailored towards regular desktop use. It consisted of a subset of packages from the 'main' and 'contrib' sections of the master tree. Mandriva Linux Free was phased in 2011 in favor of a single edition approach with Mandriva Desktop 2011.\nMandriva Linux One.\nMandriva Linux One was a free to download hybrid distribution, being both a Live CD and an installer (with an installation wizard that includes disk partitioning tools).\nSeveral Mandriva Linux One versions were provided for each Mandriva Linux release preceding Mandriva 2008. Users could choose between different languages, select either the KDE or GNOME desktops and include or exclude non-free software. The default version included the KDE desktop with non-free software included. The One images consist of a subset of packages from the 'main', 'contrib' and 'non-free' sections of the master tree, with the documentation files stripped from the packages to save space.\nMandriva Linux One 2008 has a smaller range of versions. There are KDE and GNOME versions with the default set of languages. There are also two KDE versions with alternative sets of languages. All versions include non-free software.\nMandriva Linux Powerpack.\nMandriva Linux Powerpack was a 'traditional' distribution (in other words, one that comes with a dedicated installer, DrakX, which is first used to install the distribution to the hard disk of the computer before it is run). It is the main commercial edition of Mandriva Linux, and as such, requires payment for its use. It contains several non-free packages intended to add value for the end user, including non-free drivers like the NVIDIA and ATI graphics card drivers, non-free firmware for wireless chips and modems, some browser plugins such as Java and Flash, and some full applications such as Cedega, Adobe Reader and RealPlayer. It was sold directly from the Mandriva Store website and through authorized resellers. It was also made available via a subscription service, which allowed unlimited downloads of Powerpack editions for the last few Mandriva releases for a set yearly fee. It consisted of a subset of packages from the 'main', 'contrib', 'non-free' and 'restricted' sections of the master tree.\nIn Mandriva Linux 2008, the Discovery and Powerpack+ editions were merged into Powerpack, which became Mandriva's only commercial offering. Users were able to choose between a novice-friendly Discovery-like setup or an installation process and desktop aimed at power users.\nMandriva Linux Discovery.\nMandriva Linux Discovery was a commercial distribution aimed at first-time and novice Linux users. It was sold via the Mandriva Store website and authorized resellers, or could be downloaded by some subscribers to the Mandriva Club. Mandriva Linux 2008 does not include a Discovery edition, having added optional novice-friendly features to the Powerpack edition.\nIn releases prior to Mandriva Linux 2007, Discovery was a 'traditional' distribution built on the DrakX installer. In Mandriva Linux 2007 and 2007 Spring, Discovery is a hybrid \"Live DVD\" which can be booted without installation or installed to hard disk in the traditional manner.\nDiscovery was a DVD rather than a CD, allowing all languages to be provided on one disc. It consisted of a subset of packages from the 'main', 'contrib', 'non-free' and 'non-free-restricted' sections of the master tree. The package selection was tailored towards novice desktop users. A theme chosen to be appealing to novice users was used, and the 'simplified' menu layout in which applications are described rather than named and not all applications are included was the default (for all other editions, the default menu layout was the 'traditional' layout, where all graphical applications installed on the system were included and were listed by name).\nMandriva Linux Powerpack+.\nMandriva Linux Powerpack+ was a version of Powerpack with additional packages, mostly commercial software. Like Powerpack, it was sold directly from the Mandriva Store website and through authorized resellers; it was also a free download for Mandriva Club members of the Gold level and above. Powerpack+ was aimed at SOHO (small office / home office) users, with the expectation that it could be used to run a small home or office server machine as well as desktop and development workstations. The package selection was tailored with this in mind, including a wide range of server packages. It consisted of a subset of packages from the 'main', 'contrib', 'non-free' and 'restricted' sections of the master tree.\nMandriva 2008 no longer includes a Powerpack+ edition; instead, the Powerpack edition includes all the available packages.\nDerivatives.\nDerivatives are distributions that are based on Mandriva Linux, some by Mandriva itself, others by independent projects. Some maintain compatibility with Mandriva Linux, so that installing a Mandriva Linux .rpm also works on the offspring.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19369", "revid": "48496808", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19369", "title": "Matteo Carcassi", "text": "Italian guitarist (1796\u20131853)\nMatteo Carcassi (8 April 1792 \u2013 16 January 1853) was an Italian guitarist, teacher and composer.\nBiography.\nCarcassi was born in Florence, Italy, and first studied the piano, but learned guitar when still a child. He quickly gained a reputation as a virtuoso concert guitarist before the age of twenty.\nAround 1810, he moved to Germany gaining almost immediate success. From 1811, he may have served as a musician in the French army during the Napoleonic Wars until 1815. By 1815, he had settled in Paris, where he earned his living as a teacher of both the piano and the guitar.\nOn a concert tour in Germany in 1819, he met his friend Jean-Antoine Meissonnier for the first time. Also a well-known guitarist, Meissonnier published many of Carcassi's works in his Paris publishing house. For Meissonnier, he also arranged a number of popular songs for guitar that were originally written for piano, including works by Th\u00e9odore Labarre and Lo\u00efsa Puget.\nFrom 1820 on, Carcassi spent the majority of his time in Paris. In 1823, he performed an extremely successful series of concerts in London that earned him great fame, both as a performing artist and as a teacher. However, in Paris, a long time passed before his talents were truly recognized, partly because of the presence of Ferdinando Carulli.\nCarcassi was in Germany again during autumn 1824. Afterwards he performed in London, where his reputation now gave him access to more prestigious concert halls. Finally he returned to Paris. For several years, he made concert trips from here to the important musical centres of Europe. After a short return to performing in 1836, he quit his concert practice around 1840 and died in Paris in 1853.\nMusic.\nCarcassi wrote a method for guitar (Op. 59), first published with Schott in Mainz in 1836. Which is still valuable, relevant and interesting. He even wrote at the close of the preface: \"I can assert that any intelligent person who will attentively study this book from beginning to end will acquire a perfect knowledge of the mechanism of the guitar.\"\nHis most famous works are collected in his 25 \u00c9tudes, Op. 60. In these, he managed to blend technical skills with brilliant Romantic music. This is the reason his music is still played by so many classical guitarists today. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19370", "revid": "49712887", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19370", "title": "Mazda", "text": "Japanese multinational automaker\n is a Japanese multinational automotive manufacturer headquartered in Fuch\u016b, Hiroshima, Japan. The company was founded on January 30, 1920, as Toyo Cork Kogyo Co., Ltd., a cork-making factory, by Jujiro Matsuda. The company then acquired Abemaki Tree Cork Company. It changed its name to Toyo Kogyo Co., Ltd. in 1927 and started producing vehicles in 1931.\nMazda is known for its innovative technologies, such as the Wankel engine, the SkyActiv platform, and the Kodo Design language. It also has a long history of motorsport involvement, winning the 24 Hours of Le Mans in 1991 with the rotary-powered Mazda 787B. In the past and present, Mazda has been engaged in alliances with other automakers. From 1974 until the late 2000s, Ford was a major shareholder of Mazda. Other partnerships include Toyota, Nissan, Isuzu, Suzuki and Kia. In 2023, it produced 1.1\u00a0million vehicles globally.\nThe name Mazda was derived from Ahura Mazda, the god of harmony, intelligence and wisdom in Zoroastrianism, as well as from the surname of the founder, Matsuda.\nHistory.\nCreation.\nMazda began as the Toyo Cork Kogyo Co., Ltd, as a cork-making factory founded in Hiroshima, Japan, January 30, 1920. Toyo Cork Kogyo renamed itself to Toyo Kogyo Co., Ltd. in 1927. In the late 1920s the company had to be saved from bankruptcy by Hiroshima Saving Bank and other business leaders in Hiroshima.\nIn 1931, Toyo Kogyo moved from manufacturing machine tools to vehicles with the introduction of the Mazda-Go auto rickshaw. The name \"Mazda\" came into existence with the production of the company's first three-wheeled trucks. Other candidates for a model name included \"Sumera-Go\", \"Tenshi-Go\", and more.\nOfficially, the company states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; Mazda comes from Ahura Mazda, the god of harmony, intelligence and wisdom from the earliest civilization in West Asia. Key members of Toyo Kogyo interpreted Mazda as a symbol of the beginning of the East and the West civilization, but also a symbol of the automotive civilization and culture.\"\nThe company's website further notes that the name also derives from the name of the company's founder, Jujiro Matsuda. The alternative proposed names mean \"god\" (\"Sumera\") and \"angel\" (\"Tenshi\"); both indicate Matsuda's strong interest in human faith.\nThe Mazda lettering was used in combination with the corporate emblem of Mitsubishi Motors, which was responsible for sales, to produce the Toyo Kogyo three-wheeled truck registered trademark.\nToyo Kogyo produced weapons for the Japanese military throughout the Second World War, most notably the series 30 through 35 Type 99 rifle. The company formally adopted the Mazda name in 1984, though every automobile sold from the beginning bore that name. The Mazda R360 was introduced in 1960, followed by the Mazda Carol in 1962 and were sold at a specific retail dealership that sold passenger cars called \"Mazda Auto Store\" whereas commercial products were sold at \"Mazda Store\". As Mazda continued to offer passenger cars like the Savanna, Familia, Luce, Cosmo and Capella, they were added to the \"Mazda Auto Store\" network only.\nWankel engine adoption.\nBeginning in the 1960s, Mazda was inspired by the NSU Ro 80 and decided to put a major engineering effort into development of the Wankel rotary engine as a way of differentiating itself from other Japanese auto companies. The company formed a business relationship with German company NSU and began with the limited-production Cosmo Sport of 1967, and continuing to the present day with the Pro Mazda Championship, Mazda has become the sole manufacturer of Wankel-type engines for the automotive market, mainly by way of attrition. (NSU and Citro\u00ebn both gave up on the design during the 1970s, and prototype Corvette efforts by General Motors never made it to production.)\nThis effort to bring attention to itself apparently helped, as Mazda rapidly began to export its vehicles. Both piston-powered and rotary-powered models made their way around the world. The rotary models quickly became popular for their combination of good power and light weight when compared to piston-engined competitors that required heavier V6 or V8 engines to produce the same power. The R100 and the RX series (RX-2, RX-3, and RX-4) led the company's export efforts.\nDuring 1968, Mazda started formal operations in Canada (MazdaCanada) although Mazdas were seen in Canada as early as 1959. In 1970, Mazda formally entered the American market (Mazda North American Operations) and was very successful there, going so far as to create the Mazda Rotary Pickup (based on the conventional piston-powered B-Series model) solely for North American buyers. To this day, Mazda remains the only automaker to have produced a Wankel-powered pickup truck. Additionally, it is also the only brand to have ever offered a rotary-powered bus (the Mazda Parkway, offered only in Japan) or station wagon (within the RX-3 and RX-4 lines for certain markets). After nine years of development, Mazda finally launched its new model in the U.S. in 1970.\nMazda's rotary success continued until the onset of the 1973 oil crisis. As American buyers (as well as those in other nations) quickly turned to vehicles with better fuel efficiency, the relatively thirsty rotary-powered models began to fall out of favor. Combined with being the least-efficient automaker in Japan (in terms of productivity), inability to adjust to excess inventory and over-reliance on the U.S. market, the company suffered a huge loss in 1975. An already heavily indebted Toyo Kogyo was on the verge of bankruptcy and was only saved through the intervention of Sumitomo keiretsu group, namely Sumitomo Bank, and the company's subcontractors and distributors. However, the company had not totally turned its back on piston engines, as it continued to produce a variety of four-cylinder models throughout the 1970s. The smaller Familia line in particular became very important to Mazda's worldwide sales after 1973, as did the somewhat larger Capella series.\nMazda refocused its efforts and made the rotary engine a choice for the sporting motorist rather than a mainstream powerplant. Starting with the lightweight RX-7 in 1978 and continuing with the modern RX-8, Mazda has continued its dedication to this unique powerplant. This switch in focus also resulted in the development of another lightweight sports car, the piston-powered Mazda MX-5 Miata (sold as the Eunos and later Mazda Roadster in Japan), inspired by the concept 'jinba ittai'. Introduced in 1989 to worldwide acclaim, the Roadster has been widely credited with reviving the concept of the small sports car after its decline in the late 1970s.\nPartnership with Ford.\nFrom 1974 to 2015, Mazda had a partnership with the Ford Motor Company, which acquired a 24.5% stake in 1979, upped to a 33.4% ownership of Mazda in May 1995. Under the administration of Alan Mulally, Ford gradually divested its stake in Mazda from 2008 to 2015, with Ford holding 2.1% of Mazda stock as of 2014 and severing most production as well as development ties.\nThis partnership with Ford began owing to Mazda's financial difficulties during the 1960s. Starting in 1979 by expanding their 7\u00a0percent financial stake to 24.5%, Ford expanded an existing partnership with Mazda, resulting in various joint projects. The cooperation had begun in 1971 when the Mazda B-Series spawned a Ford Courier variant for North America, a version which was later offered in other markets as well. Mazda's Bongo and Titan cab-over trucks were sold with Ford badging in mainly Asia and the Pacific region beginning in 1976. These included large and small efforts in all areas of the automotive landscape, most notably in the realm of pickup trucks and smaller cars. Mazda began supplying manual transaxles to Ford in the spring of 1980. Mazda's Familia platform was used for Ford models like the Laser and Escort beginning in 1980, while the Capella architecture found its way into Ford's Telstar sedan and Probe sports models.\nDuring the 1980s, Ford-badged Mazda products replaced much of their own European-sourced lineup, especially in the Asia-Pacific markets, with the Laser replacing the Escort and the Telstar replacing the Cortina. In some cases, such as New Zealand and South Africa, these were assembled alongside their Mazda-badged equivalents, the Mazda 323 (Familia) and 626 (Capella).\nFollowing the closure of its own assembly plant in New Zealand, Mazda established a joint venture with Ford New Zealand known as Vehicle Assemblers of New Zealand (VANZ), while in South Africa, Ford's local subsidiary merged with Sigma Motor Corporation, which already assembled Mazdas in the country, to form Samcor, although the sharing of models proved unpopular with both Ford and Mazda customers. In other markets such as Australia, however, the 323 and 626 were always fully imported, with only the Laser and Telstar assembled locally. In Japan, the Laser and Telstar were also sold alongside their Mazda-badged brethren, but the Festiva was not sold as a Mazda 121 on the Japanese market.\nIn North America, the Probe was built in a new Mazda company plant in Flat Rock, Michigan, along with the mainstream 626 sedan and a companion Mazda MX-6 sports coupe. Ford also lent Mazda some of its capacity when needed: the Mazda 121 sold in Europe and South Africa was, for a time, a variant of the Ford Fiesta built in plants in Europe and South Africa. Mazda also made an effort in the past to sell some of Ford's cars in Japan, mainly through its Autorama dealer group.\nMazda also helped Ford develop the 1991 Explorer, which Mazda sold as the 2-door only Mazda Navajo from 1991 through 1994. However, Mazda's version was unsuccessful, while the Ford (available from the start as a 4-door or 2-door model) instantly became the best-selling sport-utility vehicle in the United States and kept that title for over a decade. Mazda has used Ford's Ranger pickup as the basis for its North American\u2013market B-Series trucks, starting in 1994 and continuing through 2010, when Mazda discontinued the B-Series trucks to North America.\nFollowing its long-held fascination with alternative engine technology, Mazda introduced the first Miller cycle engine for automotive use in the Millenia luxury sedan of 1995. Though the Millenia (and its Miller-type V6 engine) were discontinued in 2002, the company introduced a much smaller Miller-cycle four-cylinder engine for use in its Demio in 2008.\nFurther financial difficulties at Mazda during the 1990s caused Ford to increase its stake to a 33.4-percent controlling interest in May 1996. In June 1996, Henry Wallace was appointed president, and he set about restructuring Mazda and setting it on a new strategic direction. He laid out a new direction for the brand including the design of the present Mazda marque; he laid out a new product plan to achieve synergies with Ford, and he launched Mazda's digital innovation program to speed up the development of new products. At the same time, he started taking control of overseas distributors, rationalized dealerships and manufacturing facilities, and driving much-needed efficiencies and cost reductions in Mazda's operations. Much of his early work put Mazda back into profitability and laid the foundations for future success. Wallace was succeeded by James Miller in November 1997, followed in December 1999 by Ford executive Mark Fields, who has been credited with expanding Mazda's new product lineup and leading the turnaround during the early 2000s. Ford's increased influence during the 1990s allowed Mazda to claim another distinction in history, having maintained the first foreign-born head of a Japanese car company, Henry Wallace.\nIn Thailand, Mazda and Ford jointly established a manufacturing plant called AutoAlliance Thailand. The facility broke ground in 1995 and started production in 1998.\nDivestment by Ford.\nAmid the world financial crisis in the fall of 2008, reports emerged that Ford was contemplating a sale of its stake in Mazda as a way of streamlining its asset base. \"BusinessWeek\" explained the alliance between Ford and Mazda has been a very successful one, with Mazda saving perhaps $90\u00a0million a year in development costs and Ford \"several times\" that, and that a sale of its stake in Mazda would be a desperate measure. On November 18, 2008, Ford announced that it would sell a 20% stake in Mazda, reducing its stake to 13.4%, thus surrendering control of the company, which it held since 1996. The following day, Mazda announced that, as part of the deal, it was buying back 6.8% of its shares from Ford for about US$185 million while the rest would be acquired by business partners of the company. It was also reported that Hisakazu Imaki would be stepping down as chief executive, to be replaced by Takashi Yamanouchi.\nOn November 18, 2010, Ford reduced its stake further to 3%, citing the reduction of ownership would allow greater flexibility to pursue growth in emerging markets, and Sumitomo Mitsui Financial Group was believed to become its largest shareholder. Ford and Mazda remained strategic partners through joint ventures and exchanges of technological information.\nOn September 30, 2015, when Ford's shares had sunk to a little over 2% due to stock dilution, Ford sold its remaining shares in Mazda.\nPost-Ford efforts.\nIn 2011, Mazda raised more than 150 billion yen (US$1.9 billion) in a record share sale to replenish capital, as it suffered its biggest annual loss in 11 years. Part of the proceeds were used to build a manufacturing plant in Salamanca, Mexico. The Mexican plant was built jointly by the company and Sumitomo Corporation.\nIn 2011, Mazda also announced the Skyactiv, a branding for several technologies developed by Mazda such as engines, transmissions, and chassis. The concept of Skyactiv features a revised suspension geometry, improved automatic and manual transmission, and various improvements to Mazda's existing engines to increase fuel efficiency and engine output. Mazda introduced its first model to feature the \"Kodo\" design language, the Mazda CX-5, in October 2011 at the Tokyo Motor Show. The CX-5 subsequently became the company's best-selling model from 2014 onwards, and consistently outselling other Mazda products. By March 2022, cumulative sales of the CX-5 reached around 3.5 million units.\nIn 2012, Mazda discontinued the Mazda RX-8, its last production model equipped with a rotary engine, due to declining sales and stricter emissions standards.\nIn May 2015, the company signed an agreement with Toyota to form a \"long-term partnership\", that would, among others, see Mazda supply Toyota with fuel-efficient Skyactiv gasoline and diesel engine technology in exchange for hydrogen fuel cell systems. In August 2017, Mazda entered a \"business and capital alliance\" with Toyota. Toyota bought 31,928,500 new shares worth 50 billion yen from Mazda, giving the company a 5.05% ownership in Mazda. In return, Mazda acquired an equivalent value of Toyota shares, giving Mazda a 0.25% ownership in Toyota.\nIn 2016, Mazda announced that it intends to end the production of minivan/MPV models, including the Mazda Premacy (Mazda5), Mazda MPV (Mazda8), and Mazda Biante, due to the increase of popularity of SUV models. Production of the MPV/Mazda 8 ended in 2016, while the Premacy/Mazda5 and Biante followed in early 2018.\nIn July 2016, Mazda entered into an agreement with Isuzu for the supply of pickup trucks. Mazda would move away from its previous alliance with Ford in the pickup truck segment. The third-generation Mazda BT-50 pickup truck, based on the Isuzu D-Max and produced by Isuzu Motor Thailand, was unveiled in Australia in June 2020.\nIn January 2018, Toyota and Mazda announced a joint venture plant called Mazda Toyota Manufacturing USA that will produce vehicles in Huntsville, Alabama, US, starting in 2021. Construction of the facility started in November 2018. The plant began operations in September 2021, building the Toyota Corolla Cross. Production of the Mazda CX-50 started in the plant in January 2022.\nMazda began producing its first mass-production electric car, the Mazda MX-30 EV, in May 2020, after its debut in October 2019 at the Tokyo Motor Show.\nIn November 2020, Mazda revealed a series of inline-six engines with 48-volt mild hybrid, plug-in hybrid, petrol, diesel and Skyactiv-X applications. The company confirmed that these engines would be paired their upcoming 'Large' architecture, which would be a longitudinal rear-wheel drive platform. The engines and the platform debuted with the Mazda CX-60 in March 2022, which forms the Large Product Group that were joined by the CX-90, CX-70 and CX-80.\nIn April 2024, Mazda introduced the Mazda EZ-6, an electric sedan jointly developed with Chinese manufacturer Changan Automobile. In October 2024, Mazda and Changan announced a 10 billion yuan (US$1.4 billion) investment to jointly develop and produce electric vehicles in China by 2027. In April 2025, Mazda shipped its first batch of the EZ-6 EV, marketed globally as the Mazda 6e, from China for export to Europe.\nBrands.\nMazda tried using a number of different brands in the Japanese (and occasionally Australian) markets in the 1990s, including Autozam, Eunos, and \u025b\u0303fini. The motivation was brought on by market competition from other Japanese automakers efforts in offering vehicles at multiple Japanese dealership networks offered by Toyota, Nissan, and Honda. Mazda's implementation of brand diversification reflected a Japanese engineering philosophy, called Kansei engineering, which was used as an advertising slogan in North America.\nOne of the most niche sub-brands was M2, used on three rare variants of the Eunos Roadster (the M2-1001, M2-1002 and M2-1028) and one of the Autozam AZ-1 (M2-1015). M2 even had its own avant-garde company headquarters, but was shut down after a very short period of operation.\nIn early 1992, Mazda planned to release a luxury brand, Amati, to challenge Acura, Infiniti, and Lexus in North America, which was to begin selling in late 1993. The initial Amati range would have included the Amati 500 (which became the Eunos 800 in Japan and Australia, Mazda Millenia in the U.S., and Mazda Xedos 9 in Europe), a rebadged version of the Mazda Cosmo and the Amati 1000 (a rear-wheel drive V12 competitor to the Lexus LS400). The Amati brand was eventually scrapped before any cars hit the market.\nIn Europe, the Xedos name was also associated with the Mazda Xedos 6, the two models were in production from 1992 until 1997. The Xedos line was marketed under the Mazda brand, and used the Mazda badge from the corresponding years.\nThis diversification stressed the product development groups at Mazda past its limits. Instead of having a half-dozen variations on any given platform, developers were asked to work on dozens of different models at the same time. Consumers were confused as well by the explosion of similar new models. This selective marketing experiment was ended in the mid-1990s due to economic conditions, largely attributed to the collapse of the Japanese asset price bubble in 1991.\nMarkets.\nAs of January\u00a02022[ [update]], the United States is Mazda's biggest market, followed by China and Japan. Mazda's market share in the U.S. fell to a 10-year low of 1.7 percent in 2016. Mazda's brand loyalty was 39 percent in 2016, below the industry average of 53 percent. On October 24, 2022, Mazda decided to get rid of assets in Russia, with the company transferring a stake in a joint venture in Vladivostok to Sollers JSC for 1 euro.\nEnvironmental efforts.\nMazda has conducted research in hydrogen-powered vehicles for several decades. Mazda has developed a hybrid version of its Premacy compact minivan using a version of its signature rotary engine that can run on hydrogen or gasoline named the Mazda Premacy Hydrogen RE Hybrid. Despite plans to release it in 2008, as of 2010 the vehicle is in limited trials.\nIn 2010, Toyota and Mazda announced a supply agreement for the hybrid technology used in Toyota's Prius model.\nBio-car.\nMazda is finding uses for biomaterials in its vehicles, including both plastics and fabrics made from corn starch, as it aims to become more environmentally-friendly. Mazda introduced some of these innovations (bioplastic internal consoles and bio-fabric seats) in its Mazda5 model at EcoInnovasia 2008, at the Queen Sirikit National Convention Center in Bangkok. Up to 30% of the interior parts in the Mazda5 are made of biomaterial components.\nSkyActiv technology.\nSkyActiv technology is an umbrella name for a range of technologies used in certain new Mazda vehicles. These vehicles include the Mazda2/Demio, Mazda3/Axela, Mazda6/Atenza, and CX-5. Together these technologies increase fuel economy to a level similar to a hybrid drivetrain. Engine output is increased and emission levels are reduced. These technologies include high compression ratio gasoline engines (13.0 to 1), reduced compression diesel engines (14.0 to 1) with new 2-stage turbocharger design, highly efficient automatic transmissions, lighter weight manual transmissions, lightweight body designs and electric power steering. It is also possible to combine these technologies with a hybrid drivetrain for even greater fuel economy.\nMotorsport.\nIn the racing world, Mazda has had substantial success with both its signature Wankel-engine cars (in two-rotor, three-rotor, and four-rotor forms) as well as its piston-engine models. Mazda vehicles and engines compete in a wide variety of disciplines and series around the world. In 1991, Mazda became the first Japanese automaker to win the 24 Hours of Le Mans overall.\nInternational competition.\nMazda's competition debut was on October 20, 1968, when two Mazda Cosmo Sport 110S coupes entered the 84-hour Marathon de la Route ultra-endurance race at the N\u00fcrburgring, one finishing in fourth place and the other breaking an axle after 81 hours. The next year, Mazda raced Mazda Familia R100 M10A coupes. After winning the Singapore Grand Prix in April 1969 and coming in fifth and sixth in the Spa 24 Hours (beaten only by Porsche 911s), on October 19, 1969, Mazda again entered the 84 hour N\u00fcrburgring race with four Familias. Only one of these finished, taking fifth place.\nThe first racing victory by a Wankel-engined car in the United States was in 1973, when Pat Bedard won an IMSA RS race at Lime Rock Park in a Mazda RX-2.\nIn 1976, Ray Walle, owner of Z&amp;W Mazda, drove a Cosmo (Mazda RX-5) from the dealership in Princeton, New Jersey, to Daytona, won the Touring Class Under 2.5 Liters at the 24 Hours of Daytona, and drove the car back to New Jersey. The Cosmo placed 18th overall in a field of 72. The only modifications were racing brake pads, exhaust, and safety equipment.\nAfter substantial successes by the Mazda RX-2 and Mazda RX-3, the Mazda RX-7 has won more IMSA races in its class than any other model of automobile, with its hundredth victory on September 2, 1990. Following that, the RX-7 won its class in the IMSA 24 Hours of Daytona race ten years in a row, starting in 1982. The RX-7 won the IMSA Grand Touring Under Two Liter (GTU) championship each year from 1980 through 1987, inclusive.\nIn 1991, a four-rotor Mazda 787B (2622\u00a0cc actual, rated by FIA formula at 4708 cc) won the 24 Hours of Le Mans auto race outright. The 787B's triumph remains unparalleled, as it remains the only non-piston-engined car ever to win at Le Mans, and Mazda is the first Japanese brand to have won overall at Le Mans. This led to a ban on rotary engines in the Le Mans race starting in 1992, which has since been rescinded. After the 1991 race, the winning engine was publicly dismantled for internal examination, which demonstrated that despite 24 hours of extremely hard use it had accumulated very little wear.\nThe Le Mans win in 1991 followed a decade of class wins from other Mazda prototypes, including the 757 and 767. The Sigma MC74 powered by a Mazda 12A engine was the first engine and team from outside Western Europe or the United States to finish the entire 24 hours of the Le Mans race, in 1974. Mazda is also the most reliable finisher at Le Mans (with the exception of Honda, which has entered only three cars in only one year), with 67% of entries finishing. Mazda returned to prototype racing in 2005 with the introduction of the Courage C65 LMP2 car at the American Le Mans Series race at Road Atlanta. This prototype racer uses the Renesis Wankel from the RX-8.\nMazdas have also enjoyed substantial success in World Land Speed competition, SCCA competition, drag racing, pro rally competition (the Familia appeared in the WRC several times during the late '80s and early '90s), the One Lap of America race (winning SUV &amp; truck in a MazdaSpeed5), and other venues. Wankel engines have been banned for some time from international Formula One racing, as well as from United States midget racing, after Gene Angelillo won the North East Midget Racing Association championship in 1985 with a car powered by a 13B engine, and again in 1986 in a car powered by a 12A engine.\nSpec series.\nThe Cooper Tires Atlantic Championship powered by Mazda is a North American open wheel racing series. It is the top level of the MAZDASPEED ladder, a driver development program which rewards season winners of one level with automatic rides at the next level. Since 2006, the Atlantic Championship has been run exclusively with Swift 016.a chassis powered by Mazda-Cosworth MZR 2300 cc (2.3L) DOHC inline-4 engines producing . The cars are capable of speeds in excess of .\nFormula Mazda features open wheel race cars with Mazda engines, adaptable to both oval tracks and road courses, on several levels of competition. Since 1991, the professionally organized Pro Mazda Championship has been the most popular format for sponsors, spectators, and upward bound drivers. It is the second-highest level on the aforementioned Mazdaspeed driver development ladder. Engines for the Star Mazda series are all built by one engine builder, certified to produce the prescribed power, and sealed to discourage tampering. They are in a relatively mild state of racing tune, so that they are extremely reliable and can go years between motor rebuilds.\nSpec Miata has become one of the most popular and most affordable road racing classes in North America. The Spec Miata (SM) class is intended to provide the opportunity to compete in low-cost, production-based cars with limited modifications, suitable for racing competition. The rules are intentionally designed to be more open than the Showroom Stock class but more restricted than the Improved Touring class.\nSpec RX-7 is also a popular club racing class primarily due to the availability of first-generation RX-7 cars and the low startup cost.\nSponsorships.\nMazda is a major sponsor to several professional sports teams, including:\nThe company also sponsors various marathon and relay race events in Japan, such as the Hiroshima International Peace Marathon and the Hiroshima Prefectural Ekiden Race, along with numerous other sporting and charity endeavors in Hiroshima and Hofu. Mazda was also the league sponsor for the now-defunct Australian Rugby Championship.\nMazda maintained sponsorship of the Laguna Seca racing course in California from 2001 until February 2018, going so far as to use it for its own automotive testing purposes as well as the numerous racing events (including several Mazda-specific series) that it used to host, as well as for the 2003 launch of the Mazda RX-8. Since April 2018, the venue's primary corporate sponsor is WeatherTech.\nMazda also sponsors the Western New York Flash, a professional women's soccer team that plays in the WPA and has some of the best players in the world, including world player of the year.\nMazda has been a sponsor of Club Deportivo Universidad Cat\u00f3lica's basketball team of the Liga Nacional de B\u00e1squetbol de Chile.\nMarketing.\nMazda's past advertising slogans included: \"The more you look, the more you like\" (1970s to early 1980s); \"Experience Mazda\" (mid-1980s); \"You'll be aMAZed at a MAZda\" (UK, 1980s); \"An intense commitment to your total satisfaction, that's The Mazda Way\" (late 1980s); \"It Just Feels Right\" along with advertising describing Mazda's use of Kansei engineering (1990\u20131995); \"Passion for the road\" (1996); \"Get in. Be moved.\" (1997\u20132000). Another marketing slogan was \"Sakes Alive!\", for its truck line.\nSince 2000, Mazda has used the phrase \"Zoom-Zoom\" to describe what it calls the \"emotion of motion\" that it claims is inherent in its cars. Extremely successful and long-lasting (when compared to other automotive marketing taglines), the Zoom-Zoom campaign has now spread around the world from its initial use in North America.\nThe Zoom-Zoom campaign has been accompanied by the \"Zoom-Zoom-Zoom\" song in many television and radio advertisements. The original version, performed by Jibril Serapis Bey (used in commercials in Europe, Japan and South Africa), was recorded long before it became the official song for Mazda as part of a soundtrack to the movie \"Only The Strong\" (released in 1993). The Serapis Bey version is a cover of a traditional Capoeira song, called \"Capoeira Mata Um\". In 2010, its current slogan is \"Zoom Zoom Forever\". The longer slogan (Used in TV ads) is \"Zoom Zoom, Today, Tomorrow, Forever\".\nEarly ads in the Zoom-Zoom campaign also featured a young boy (Micah Kanters) whispering the \"Zoom-Zoom\" tagline.\nSince 2011, Mazda has still used the Zoom-Zoom tagline in another campaign called \"What Do You Drive?\". The punchline for this is \"We believe if it's not worth driving, it's not worth building. We build Mazdas. What do you drive?\"\nIn 2015, Mazda had launched a new campaign under a new tagline, \"Driving Matters\", coinciding with the release of the redesigned MX-5. This campaign was meant to solidify Mazda's \"Zoom Zoom\" slogan. A 60-second long advertisement titled \"A Driver's Life\", coincided with the new tagline on the following week.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19372", "revid": "10274643", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19372", "title": "Minute", "text": "Unit of time equal to 60 seconds\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nA minute is a unit of time defined as equal to 60 seconds.\nIt is not a unit in the International System of Units (SI), but is accepted for use with SI. The SI symbol for minutes is min (without a dot). The prime symbol \u2032 is also sometimes used informally to denote minutes.\nIn the UTC time standard, a minute on rare occasions has 61 seconds, a consequence of leap seconds; there is also a provision to insert a negative leap second, which would result in a 59-second minute, but this has never happened in more than 40 years under this system.\nHistory.\nAl-Biruni first subdivided the hour sexagesimally into minutes, seconds, thirds and fourths in 1000 CE while discussing Jewish months.\nHistorically, the word \"minute\" comes from the Latin \"pars minuta prima\", meaning \"first small part\". This division of the hour can be further refined with a \"second small part\" (Latin: \"pars minuta secunda\"), and this is where the word \"second\" comes from. For even further refinement, the term \"third\" (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204460 of a second) was once used, but most modern usage subdivides seconds by using decimals. The symbol notation of the prime for minutes and double prime for seconds can be seen as indicating the first and second cut of the hour (similar to how the foot is the first cut of the yard or perhaps chain, with inches as the second cut). In 1267, the medieval scientist Roger Bacon, writing in Latin, defined the division of time between full moons as a number of hours, minutes, seconds, thirds, and fourths (\"horae\", \"minuta\", \"secunda\", \"tertia\", and \"quarta\") after noon on specified calendar dates. Jost B\u00fcrgi was the first clock maker to include a minute hand on clock for astronomer Tycho Brahe in 1577. The introduction of the minute hand into watches was possible only after the invention of the hairspring by Thomas Tompion, an English watchmaker, in 1675.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19373", "revid": "50524334", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19373", "title": "Maurice Merleau-Ponty", "text": "French phenomenological philosopher (1908\u20131961)\nMaurice Jean Jacques Merleau-Ponty ( ; ; 14 March 1908 \u2013 3 May 1961) was a French phenomenological philosopher, strongly influenced by Edmund Husserl and Martin Heidegger. The constitution of meaning in human experience was his main interest and he wrote on perception, art, politics, religion, biology, psychology, psychoanalysis, language, nature, and history. He was the lead editor of \"Les Temps modernes\", the leftist magazine he established with Jean-Paul Sartre and Simone de Beauvoir in 1945.&lt;ref name=\"iep.utm.edu/\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nAt the core of Merleau-Ponty's philosophy is a sustained argument for the foundational role that perception plays in the human experience of the world. Merleau-Ponty understands perception to be an ongoing dialogue between one's lived body and the world which it perceives, in which perceivers passively and actively strive to express the perceived world in concert with others. He was the only major phenomenologist of the first half of the twentieth century to engage extensively with the sciences. It is through this engagement that his writings became influential in the project of naturalising phenomenology, in which phenomenologists use the results of psychology and cognitive science.\nMerleau-Ponty emphasised the body as the primary site of knowing the world, a corrective to the long philosophical tradition of placing consciousness as the source of knowledge, and maintained that the perceiving body and its perceived world could not be disentangled from each other. The articulation of the primacy of embodiment (\"corpor\u00e9it\u00e9\") led him away from phenomenology towards what he was to call \"indirect ontology\" or the ontology of \"the flesh of the world\" (\"la chair du monde\"), seen in his final and incomplete work, \"The Visible and Invisible\", and his last published essay, \"Eye and Mind\".\nMerleau-Ponty engaged with Marxism throughout his career. His 1947 book, \"Humanism and Terror\", has been widely misunderstood as defense of the Moscow Trials, for instance by Marxist philosopher Slavoj \u017di\u017eek. In his \"Author's Preface\", Merleau-Ponty explains how his essay avoids the definitive endorsement of a view on the Soviet Union, but instead engages with the Marxist theory of history as a critique of liberalism, in order to reveal an unresolved antinomy in modern politics, between humanism and terror: if human values can only be achieved through violent force, and if liberal ideas hide illiberal realities, how is just political action to be decided?\nLife.\nMaurice Merleau-Ponty was born in 1908 in Rochefort-sur-Mer, Charente-Inf\u00e9rieure (now Charente-Maritime), France. His father died in 1913 when Merleau-Ponty was five years old. After secondary schooling at the Lyc\u00e9e Louis-le-Grand in Paris, Merleau-Ponty became a student at the \u00c9cole Normale Sup\u00e9rieure, where he studied alongside Jean-Paul Sartre, Simone de Beauvoir, Simone Weil, Jean Hyppolite, and Jean Wahl. As Beauvoir recounts in her autobiography, she developed a close friendship with Merleau-Ponty and became smitten with him, but ultimately found him too well-adjusted to bourgeois life and values for her taste. He attended Edmund Husserl's \"Paris Lectures\" in February 1929. In 1929, Merleau-Ponty received his DES degree (\"dipl\u00f4me d'\u00e9tudes sup\u00e9rieures\", roughly equivalent to a M.A. thesis) from the University of Paris, on the basis of the (now-lost) thesis \"La Notion de multiple intelligible chez Plotin\" (\"Plotinus's Notion of the Intelligible Many\"), directed by \u00c9mile Br\u00e9hier. He passed the agr\u00e9gation in philosophy in 1930.\nMerleau-Ponty was raised as a Roman Catholic. He was friends with the Christian existentialist author and philosopher Gabriel Marcel and wrote articles for the Christian leftist journal \"Esprit\", but he left the Catholic Church in 1937 because he felt his socialist politics were not compatible with the social and political doctrine of the Catholic Church.\nAn article published in the French newspaper \"Le Monde\" in October 2014 makes the case of recent discoveries about Merleau-Ponty's likely authorship of the novel \"Nord. R\u00e9cit de l'arctique\" (Grasset, 1928). Convergent sources from close friends (Beauvoir, Elisabeth \"Zaza\" Lacoin) seem to leave little doubt that Jacques Heller was a pseudonym of the 20-year-old Merleau-Ponty.\nMerleau-Ponty taught first at the Lyc\u00e9e de Beauvais (1931\u201333) and then got a fellowship to do research from the Caisse nationale de la recherche scientifique. From 1934 to 1935 he taught at the Lyc\u00e9e de Chartres. He then in 1935 became a tutor at the \u00c9cole Normale Sup\u00e9rieure, where he tutored a young Michel Foucault and Tr\u1ea7n \u0110\u1ee9c Th\u1ea3o and was awarded his doctorate on the basis of two important books: \"La structure du comportement\" (1942) and \"Ph\u00e9nom\u00e9nologie de la Perception\" (1945). During this time, he attended Alexandre Koj\u00e8ve's influential seminars on Hegel and Aron Gurwitsch's lectures on Gestalt psychology. Merleau-Ponty possessed extensive knowledge in psychology, neurology, and psychiatry.\nIn the spring of 1939, he was the first foreign visitor to the newly established Husserl Archives, where he consulted Husserl's unpublished manuscripts and met Eugen Fink and Herman Van Breda. In the summer of 1939, as France declared war on Nazi Germany, he served on the frontlines in the French Army, where he was wounded in battle in June 1940. Upon returning to Paris in the fall of 1940, he married Suzanne Jolibois, a Lacanian psychoanalyst, and founded an underground resistance group with Jean-Paul Sartre called \"Under the Boot\". He participated in an armed demonstration against the Nazi forces during the liberation of Paris. After teaching at the University of Lyon from 1945 to 1948, Merleau-Ponty lectured on child psychology and education at the Sorbonne from 1949 to 1952. He was awarded the Chair of Philosophy at the Coll\u00e8ge de France from 1952 until his death in 1961, making him the youngest person to have been elected to a chair.\nBesides his teaching, Merleau-Ponty was also political editor for the leftist journal \"Les Temps modernes\" from its founding in October 1945 until December 1952. In his youth, he had read Karl Marx's writings and Sartre even claimed that Merleau-Ponty converted him to Marxism. E. K. Kuby states that while Merleau-Ponty was not a member of the French Communist Party and did not identify as a Communist, he laid out an argument justifying the Moscow Trials and political violence for progressive ends in general in the work \"Humanism and Terror\" in 1947. Kuby states that, about three years after that, however, he renounced his earlier support for political violence, rejected Marxism, and advocated a liberal left position in \"Adventures of the Dialectic\" (1955). His friendship with Sartre and work with \"Les Temps modernes\" ended because of that, since Sartre still had a more favourable attitude towards Soviet communism. Merleau-Ponty was subsequently active in the French non-communist left and in particular in the Union of the Democratic Forces.\nMerleau-Ponty died suddenly of a stroke in 1961 at age 53, apparently while preparing for a class on Ren\u00e9 Descartes, leaving an unfinished manuscript which was posthumously published in 1964, along with a selection of Merleau-Ponty's working notes, by Claude Lefort as \"The Visible and the Invisible\". He is buried in P\u00e8re Lachaise Cemetery in Paris with his mother Louise, his wife Suzanne and their daughter Marianne.\nThought.\nConsciousness.\nIn his \"Phenomenology of Perception\" (first published in French in 1945), Merleau-Ponty develops the concept of the body-subject (\"le corps propre\") as an alternative to the Cartesian \"cogito\". This distinction is especially important in that Merleau-Ponty perceives the essences of the world existentially. Consciousness, the world, and the human body as a perceiving thing are intricately intertwined and mutually \"engaged\". The phenomenal thing is not the unchanging object of the natural sciences, but a correlate of the human body and its sensory-motor functions. Taking up and \"communing with\" (Merleau-Ponty's phrase) the sensible qualities it encounters, the body as incarnated subjectivity intentionally elaborates things within an ever-present world frame, through use of its pre-conscious, pre-predicative understanding of the world's makeup. The elaboration, however, is \"inexhaustible\" (the hallmark of any perception according to Merleau-Ponty). Things are that upon which the body has a \"grip\" (\"prise\"), while the grip itself is a function of human connaturality with the world's things. The world and the sense of self are emergent phenomena in an ongoing \"becoming\".\nThe essential partiality of the view of things, their being given only in a certain perspective and at a certain moment in time does not diminish their reality, but on the contrary establishes it, as there is no other way for things to be copresent in the world and with other things than through such \"Abschattungen\" (sketches, faint outlines, adumbrations). The thing transcends perception, but is manifest precisely by presenting itself to a range of possible views. The object of perception is immanently tied to its background\u2014to the nexus of meaningful relations among objects within the world. Because the object is inextricably within the world of meaningful relations, each object reflects the other (much in the style of Leibniz's monads). Through involvement in the world \u2013 being-in-the-world \u2013 the perceiver tacitly experiences all the perspectives upon that object coming from all the surrounding things of its environment, as well as the potential perspectives that that object has upon the beings around it.\nEach object is a \"mirror of all others\". The perception of the object through all perspectives is not that of a propositional, or clearly delineated, perception; rather, it is an ambiguous perception founded upon the body's primordial involvement and understanding of the world and of the meanings that constitute the landscape's perceptual \"Gestalt\". Only after an integration within the environment so as to perceive objects as such can attention be turned toward particular objects within the landscape so as to define them more clearly. This attention, however, does not operate by clarifying what is already seen, but by constructing a new \"Gestalt\" oriented toward a particular object. Because the bodily involvement with things is always provisional and indeterminate, meaningful things are encountered in a unified though ever open-ended world.\nThe primacy of perception.\nFrom the time of writing \"Structure of Behaviour\" and \"Phenomenology of Perception\", Merleau-Ponty wanted to show, in opposition to the idea that drove the tradition beginning with John Locke, that perception was not the causal product of atomic sensations. This atomist-causal conception was being perpetuated in certain psychological currents of the time, particularly in behaviourism. According to Merleau-Ponty, perception has an active dimension, in that it is a primordial openness to the lifeworld (the \"Lebenswelt\").\nThis primordial openness is at the heart of his thesis of the primacy of perception. The slogan of Husserl's phenomenology is \"all consciousness is consciousness of something\", which implies a distinction between \"acts of thought\" (the noesis) and \"intentional objects of thought\" (the noema). Thus, the correlation between noesis and noema becomes the first step in the constitution of analyses of consciousness. However, in studying the posthumous manuscripts of Husserl, who remained one of his major influences, Merleau-Ponty remarked that, in their evolution, Husserl's work brings to light phenomena which are not assimilable to noesis\u2013noema correlation. This is particularly the case when one attends to the phenomena of the body (which is at once body-subject and body-object), subjective time (the consciousness of time is neither an act of consciousness nor an object of thought) and the other (the first considerations of the other in Husserl led to solipsism).\nThe distinction between \"acts of thought\" (noesis) and \"intentional objects of thought\" (noema) does not seem, therefore, to constitute an irreducible ground. It appears rather at a higher level of analysis. Thus, Merleau-Ponty does not postulate that \"all consciousness is consciousness of something\", which supposes at the outset a noetic-noematic ground. Instead, he develops the thesis according to which \"all consciousness is perceptual consciousness\". In doing so, he establishes a significant turn in the development of phenomenology, indicating that its conceptualisations should be re-examined in the light of the primacy of perception, in weighing up the philosophical consequences of this thesis.\nCorporeity.\nTaking the study of perception as his point of departure, Merleau-Ponty was led to recognize that one's own body (\"le corps propre\") is not only a thing, a potential object of study for science, but is also a permanent condition of experience, a constituent of the perceptual openness to the world. He therefore underlines the fact that there is an inherence of consciousness and of the body of which the analysis of perception should take account. The primacy of perception signifies a primacy of experience, so to speak, insofar as perception becomes an active and constitutive dimension.\nMerleau-Ponty demonstrates a corporeity of consciousness as much as an intentionality of the body, and so stands in contrast with the dualist ontology of mind and body in Descartes, a philosopher to whom Merleau-Ponty continually returned, despite the important differences that separate them. In the \"Phenomenology of Perception\" Merleau-Ponty wrote: \"Insofar as I have hands, feet, a body, I sustain around me intentions which are not dependent on my decisions and which affect my surroundings in a way that I do not choose\" (1962, p.\u00a0440).\nSpatiality.\nThe question concerning corporeity connects also with Merleau-Ponty's reflections on space (\"l'espace\") and the primacy of the dimension of depth (\"la profondeur\") as implied in the notion of \"Being-in-the-world\" (\"\u00eatre au monde\"; to echo Heidegger's \"In-der-Welt-sein\") and of one's own body (\"le corps propre\"). Reflections on spatiality in phenomenology are also central to the advanced philosophical deliberations in architectural theory.\nLanguage.\nThe highlighting of the fact that corporeity intrinsically has a dimension of expressivity which proves to be fundamental to the constitution of the ego is one of the conclusions of \"The Structure of Behaviour\" (1942) that is constantly reiterated in Merleau-Ponty's later works. Following this theme of expressivity, he goes on to examine how an incarnate subject is in a position to undertake actions that transcend the organic level of the body, such as in intellectual operations and the products of one's cultural life.\nHe carefully considers language, then, as the core of culture, by examining in particular the connections between the unfolding of thought and sense\u2014enriching his perspective not only by an analysis of the acquisition of language and the expressivity of the body, but also by taking into account pathologies of language, painting, cinema, literature, poetry, and music.\nThis work deals mainly with language, beginning with the reflection on artistic expression in \"The Structure of Behavior\"\u2014which contains a passage on El Greco that prefigures the remarks that he develops in \"C\u00e9zanne's Doubt\" (1945) and follows the discussion in \"Phenomenology of Perception\". The work, undertaken while serving as the Chair of Child Psychology and Pedagogy at the University of the Sorbonne, is not a departure from his philosophical and phenomenological works, but rather an important continuation in the development of his thought.\nAs the course outlines of his Sorbonne lectures indicate, during this period he continues a dialogue between phenomenology and the diverse work carried out in psychology, all in order to return to the study of the acquisition of language in children, as well as to broadly take advantage of the contribution of Ferdinand de Saussure to linguistics, and to work on the notion of structure through a discussion of work in psychology, linguistics and social anthropology.\nArt.\nMerleau-Ponty distinguishes between primary and secondary modes of expression. This distinction appears in \"Phenomenology of Perception\" (p.\u00a0207, 2nd note [Fr. ed.]) and is sometimes repeated in terms of spoken and speaking language () (\"The Prose of the World\", p.\u00a010). Spoken language (), or secondary expression, returns to the speaker's linguistic baggage and cultural heritage, as well as the brute mass of relationships between signs and significations. Speaking language (), or primary expression, such as it is, is language in the production of a sense, language at the advent of a thought, at the moment where it makes itself an advent of sense.\nIt is speaking language, that is to say, primary expression, that interests Merleau-Ponty and which keeps his attention through his treatment of the nature of production and the reception of expressions, a subject which also overlaps with an analysis of action, of intentionality, of perception, as well as the links between freedom and external conditions.\nThe notion of style occupies an important place in his essay \"Indirect Language and the Voices of Silence\" (the first chapter of \"Signes\", 1960). In spite of certain similarities with Andr\u00e9 Malraux, Merleau-Ponty distinguishes himself from Malraux in respect to three conceptions of style, the last of which is employed in Malraux's \"The Voices of Silence\". Merleau-Ponty remarks that in this work \"style\" is sometimes used by Malraux in a highly subjective sense, understood as a projection of the artist's individuality. Sometimes it is used, on the contrary, in a very metaphysical sense (in Merleau-Ponty's opinion, a mystical sense), in which style is connected with a conception of an \"\u00fcber-artist\" expressing \"the Spirit of Painting\". Finally, it sometimes is reduced to simply designating a categorization of an artistic school or movement. (However, this account of Malraux's notion of style\u2014a key element in his thinking\u2014is open to serious question.)\nFor Merleau-Ponty, it is these uses of the notion of style that lead Malraux to postulate a separation between the objectivity of Italian Renaissance painting and the subjectivity of painting in his own time, a conclusion that Merleau-Ponty disputes. According to Merleau-Ponty, it is important to consider the heart of this problematic, by recognizing that style is first of all a demand owed to the primacy of perception, which also implies taking into consideration the dimensions of historicity and intersubjectivity. (However, Merleau-Ponty's reading of Malraux has been questioned in a recent major study of Malraux's theory of art which argues that Merleau-Ponty seriously misunderstood Malraux.) For Merleau-Ponty, style is born of the interaction between two or more fields of being. Rather than being exclusive to individual human consciousness, consciousness is born of the pre-conscious style of the world, of Nature.\nScience.\nIn his essay \"C\u00e9zanne's Doubt\" (1945), in which he identifies Paul C\u00e9zanne's impressionistic theory of painting as analogous to his own concept of radical reflection, the attempt to return to, and reflect on, prereflective consciousness, Merleau-Ponty identifies science as the opposite of art. In Merleau-Ponty's account, whereas art is an attempt to capture an individual's perception, science is anti-individualistic. In the preface to his \"Phenomenology of Perception\", Merleau-Ponty presents a phenomenological objection to positivism: that it can reveal nothing about human subjectivity. All that a scientific text can explain is the particular individual experience of that scientist, which cannot be transcended. For Merleau-Ponty, science neglects the depth and profundity of the phenomena that it endeavors to explain.\nMerleau-Ponty understood science to be an \"ex post facto\" abstraction. Causal and physiological accounts of perception, for example, explain perception in terms that are arrived at only after abstracting from the phenomenon itself. Merleau-Ponty chastised science for taking itself to be the area in which a complete account of nature may be given. The subjective depth of phenomena cannot be given in science as it is. This characterizes Merleau-Ponty's attempt to ground science in phenomenological objectivity and, in essence, to institute a \"return to the phenomena\".\nInfluence.\nAnticognitivist cognitive science.\nMerleau-Ponty's critical position with respect to science was stated in his Preface to the \"Phenomenology\": he described scientific points of view as \"always both naive and at the same time dishonest\". Despite, or perhaps because of, this view, his work influenced and anticipated the strands of modern psychology known as post-cognitivism. Hubert Dreyfus has been instrumental in emphasising the relevance of Merleau-Ponty's work to current post-cognitive research, and its criticism of the traditional view of cognitive science.\nDreyfus's seminal critique of cognitivism (or the computational account of the mind), \"What Computers Can't Do\", consciously replays Merleau-Ponty's critique of intellectualist psychology to argue for the irreducibility of corporeal know-how to discrete, syntactic processes. Through the influence of Dreyfus's critique and neurophysiological alternative, Merleau-Ponty became associated with neurophysiological, connectionist accounts of cognition.\nWith the publication in 1991 of \"The Embodied Mind: Cognitive Science and Human Experience\", by Francisco Varela, Evan Thompson, and Eleanor Rosch, this association was extended, if only partially, to another strand of \"anti-cognitivist\" or post-representationalist cognitive science: embodied or enactive cognitive science, and later in the decade, to neurophenomenology. In addition, Merleau-Ponty's work has also influenced researchers trying to integrate neuroscience with the principles of chaos theory.\nIt was through this relationship with Merleau-Ponty's work that cognitive science's affair with phenomenology was born, which is represented by a growing number of works, including\nFeminist philosophy.\nMerleau-Ponty has also been picked up by Australian and Nordic philosophers inspired by the French feminist tradition, including Rosalyn Diprose and Sara Hein\u00e4maa.\nHein\u00e4maa has argued for a rereading of Merleau-Ponty's influence on Simone de Beauvoir. (She has also challenged Dreyfus's reading of Merleau-Ponty as behaviorist, and as neglecting the importance of the phenomenological reduction to Merleau-Ponty's thought.)\nMerleau-Ponty's phenomenology of the body has also been taken up by Iris Young in her essay \",\" and its follow-up, \"'Throwing Like a Girl': Twenty Years Later\". Young analyzes the particular modalities of feminine bodily comportment as they differ from that of men. Young observes that while a man who throws a ball puts his whole body into the motion, a woman throwing a ball generally restricts her own movements as she makes them, and that, generally, in sports, women move in a more tentative, reactive way. Merleau-Ponty argues that people experience the world in terms of the \"I can\" \u2013 that is, oriented towards certain projects based on capacity and habituality. Young's thesis is that in women, this intentionality is inhibited and ambivalent, rather than confident, experienced as an \"I cannot\".\nEcophenomenology.\nEcophenomenology can be described as the pursuit of the relationalities of worldly engagement, both human and those of other creatures (Brown &amp; Toadvine 2003).\nThis engagement is situated in a kind of middle ground of relationality, a space that is neither purely objective, because it is reciprocally constituted by a diversity of lived experiences motivating the movements of countless organisms, nor purely subjective, because it is nonetheless a field of material relationships between bodies. It is governed exclusively neither by causality, nor by intentionality. In this space of in-betweenness, phenomenology can overcome its inaugural opposition to naturalism.\nDavid Abram explains Merleau-Ponty's concept of \"flesh\" (\"chair\") as \"the mysterious tissue or matrix that underlies and gives rise to both the perceiver and the perceived as interdependent aspects of its spontaneous activity\", and he identifies this elemental matrix with the interdependent web of earthly life. This concept unites subject and object dialectically as determinations within a more primordial reality, which Merleau-Ponty calls \"the flesh\" and which Abram refers to variously as \"the animate earth\", \"the breathing biosphere\" or \"the more-than-human natural world\". Yet this is not nature or the biosphere conceived as a complex set of objects and objective processes, but rather \"the biosphere as it is experienced and \"lived from within\" by the intelligent body \u2014 by the attentive human animal who is entirely a part of the world that he or she experiences. Merleau-Ponty's ecophenemonology with its emphasis on holistic dialog within the larger-than-human world also has implications for the ontogenesis and phylogenesis of language; indeed he states that \"language is the very voice of the trees, the waves and the forest\".\nMerleau-Ponty himself refers to \"that primordial being which is not yet the subject-being nor the object-being and which in every respect baffles reflection. From this primordial being to us, there is no derivation, nor any break...\" Among the many working notes found on his desk at the time of his death, and published with the half-complete manuscript of \"The Visible and the Invisible\", several make it evident that Merleau-Ponty himself recognized a deep affinity between his notion of a primordial \"flesh\" and a radically transformed understanding of \"nature\". Hence, in November 1960 he writes: \"Do a psychoanalysis of Nature: it is the flesh, the mother.\" And in the last published working note, written in March 1961, he writes: \"Nature as the other side of humanity (as flesh, nowise as 'matter').\" This resonates with the conception of space, place, dwelling, and embodiment (in the flesh and physical, vs. virtual and cybernetic), especially as they are addressed against the background of the unfolding of the essence of modern technology. Such analytics figure in a Heideggerian take on \"econtology\" as an extension of Heidegger's consideration of the question of being (\"Seinsfrage\") by way of the fourfold (\"Das Geviert\") of earth-sky-mortals-divinities (\"Erde und Himmel, Sterblichen und G\u00f6ttlichen\"). In this strand of \"ecophenomenology\", ecology is co-entangled with ontology, whereby the worldly existential analytics are grounded in earthiness, and environmentalism is orientated by ontological thinking.\nBibliography.\nThe following table gives a selection of Merleau-Ponty's works in French and English translation.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
