{"id": "19113", "revid": "47868408", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19113", "title": "Telecommunications in Malaysia", "text": "Telecommunications in Malaysia fall under the oversight of the Malaysian Communications and Multimedia Commission (MCMC). Established under the Communications and Multimedia Act 1998, the MCMC issues licences for broadcasting, postal, and digital signature services, and enforces industry standards nationwide. The commission is also responsible for implementing the regulations set out in the Postal Services Act 2012 and the Digital Signature Act 1997.\nAt the state level, Sarawak's telecommunications sector is co-regulated by the Sarawak Multimedia Authority (SMA), established under Section 3 of the Sarawak Multimedia Authority Ordinance 2017. Since its establishment, the SMA and MCMC have cooperated on developing and implementing digital economy initiatives and overseeing the rollout of telecommunications infrastructure in Sarawak. In 2022, Sarawak's Ministry of Public Utilities (later renamed the Ministry of Utility and Telecommunication) created a dedicated Telecommunication Division to manage sector reporting directly to the Sarawak Legislative Assembly.\nHistory.\nFor more than a century, Malaysia's telecommunications system has developed from colonial-era telegraph lines into a modern IP-based network. The British colonial administration, present in the region from the 18th century, established the earliest telecommunications facilities. Telegraph services were consolidated under the Posts and Telegraphs Department in the 1800s, with manual magneto-operated telephones introduced in Perak in the 1880s, followed by the establishment of the first public telephone exchange in Ipoh in 1902.\nKuala Lumpur received telephone service in 1891, and at the turn of the century a major telephone line was constructed linking Province Wellesley (Seberang Prai) in Penang to Johor Bahru. In 1915, the first underground cable was laid, connecting the central Perak towns of Taiping, Kampar, and Teluk Anson.\nAs trade expanded and townships developed, the number of telephone subscribers in Peninsular Malaysia increased substantially. By 1930, an automated magneto exchange was commissioned in Kuala Lumpur on Jalan Weld to accommodate rising call volumes. During the 1930s, all telephone exchanges in the Malayan Trunk System were capable of communicating with exchanges in Java, the Philippines, the United States, Canada, and Mexico through shortwave radio-telephone transmitters. Towards the end of the decade, a Marconi radio terminal was installed at the Kuala Lumpur Telephone Exchange to manage overseas calls.\nMuch of the telecommunications infrastructure was damaged during World War II and the Japanese occupation. In 1946, after re-establishing their administration in Malaya, the British repaired trunk routes, restored fallen telephone poles, and replaced damaged or stolen copper wires. During the occupation, the Posts and Telegraphs Department had been divided into two separate units. The British initially reunified these entities, but the arrangement was short-lived. With the formation of the Malayan Union on 1 April 1946, the Malaysian Telecommunications Department and Postal Services Department were established; the former managed telegraph, telephone, and wireless services, while the latter handled mail, money orders, and savings accounts.\nTelephones system.\nBy 2019, fixed-line telephone subscriptions totalled approximately 6.47 million, while mobile cellular subscriptions reached 44.60 million, corresponding to penetration rates of roughly 20% and 135% respectively. In March 2021, Digital Nasional Berhad was launched to deploy 5G infrastructure, with nationwide 5G coverage expected to reach 80% of populated areas by the end of 2024.\nTelephone system.\nDomestic communication services in Peninsular Malaysia and East Malaysia are supported by both fixed and wireless infrastructure, including fibre networks, Asymmetrical Digital Subscriber Line networks, mobile base stations, earth stations, and microwave link stations. Intercity communication (backhaul) in both regions primarily relies on fibre-optic connections and fixed wireless systems such as microwave links. Very-small-aperture terminal (VSAT) systems are also used to provide services in rural and remote areas. Major telecommunications operators in Malaysia include CelcomDigi Berhad, Maxis Berhad, U Mobile Sdn Bhd, Telekom Malaysia, YTL Communications, and TIME dotCom.\nInternational connectivity is delivered through submarine cables linked to Tier 1 networks, which can reach all other networks on the Internet via settlement-free interconnection. Major submarine cable providers in Malaysia include Telekom Malaysia and TIME dotCom. Satellite services, operated by MEASAT, provide additional international coverage.\nBroadband.\nTotal broadband subscriptions reached 43.378 million in 2019, resulting in a broadband penetration rate of 131.7% per 100 inhabitants.\nFixed broadband development.\nIn 2019, fixed broadband accounted for 6.79% of the total broadband market, with 2.947 million subscriptions (up from 2.7 million in 2018).\nFixed broadband services are offered through technologies such as Asymmetrical Digital Subscriber Line, symmetric digital subscriber line (SDSL), Very-high-bit-rate Digital Subscriber Line, Fiber-to-the-Home (FTTH), satellite broadband, Fixed Wireless Access (FWA), and Evolution-Data Optimized (EVDO).\nThe High-Speed Broadband (HSBB) project, introduced in 2008, aimed to enhance broadband quality and enable users in major cities and high-impact economic zones to access speeds of up to 100 Mbit/s. The Suburban Broadband (SUBB) and Rural Broadband (RBB) programmes provide speeds of up to 20 Mbit/s for suburban and rural communities.\nOn 28 August 2019, the government approved the National Fiberisation and Connectivity Plan (NFCP) for implementation from 2019 to 2023.\nThe NFCP targeted:\nMobile broadband development.\nIn 2019, mobile broadband accounted for 93.21% of the total broadband market, with 40.431 million subscriptions as of Q4 2019 (up from 36.8 million in 2018).\nUpgrading and expansion of network coverage.\nThe Time 3 and Time 3 Extension initiatives oversaw the construction of 1,833 new communications towers in rural areas across Malaysia. In addition, 4,895 base stations at existing towers were upgraded from 2G to 3G/4G to support higher broadband speeds in rural regions.\nMalaysian Submarine Cable System (MSCS).\nIntroduced in 2014 through a public\u2013private partnership between the MCMC and Telekom Malaysia (TM), the MSCS project was completed in 2017. It provides redundancy to existing domestic submarine cable systems, which have been operating since 1995, and was designed to meet increasing bandwidth demand between Peninsular Malaysia and East Malaysia.\nSubmarine Cable System to Islands.\nLaunched in 2017 and completed in 2018, this project upgraded communications infrastructure networks and submarine cable systems connecting the mainland with the islands of Perhentian, Tioman, and Pangkor.\nMobile cellular.\nThe major service providers for mobile cellular services in Malaysia are CelcomDigi Berhad, Maxis Berhad, YTL Communications, and U Mobile Sdn Bhd. As of Q4 2019, mobile cellular subscriptions totalled 44.601 million, with a penetration rate of 135.4% per 100 inhabitants.\nMobile cellular services are also provided by mobile virtual network operators (MVNOs). As of Q4 2019, ten MVNOs were operating in Malaysia.\nIn March 2021, Digital Nasional Berhad was launched to develop 5G infrastructure and networks nationwide. Malaysia targets achieving 80% coverage of populated areas (COPA) for 5G services by the end of 2024.\nAs of Q3 2024, 4G mobile coverage in Sarawak stands at 93.87%.\nInternet.\nAs of 2018, Malaysia had approximately 28.304 million internet users.2 The country's top-level domain is .my. In Q3 2024, internet coverage in Sarawak reached 90.09% in populated areas.\nNotes.\n1 Network that can reach every other network on the Internet without purchasing IP transit or paying for peering\n2 Internet user population is calculated from the Internet Users Survey 2018 (IUS 2018) based on 87.4% of the total population of Malaysia in 2018 (32.385 million). Population data from the Department of Statistics Malaysia (DoSM).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19114", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19114", "title": "Transport in Malaysia", "text": " \nTransportation in Malaysia started to develop during British colonial rule, and the country's transport network is now diverse and developed. Malaysia's road network is extensive, covering 290,099.38 kilometres, including 2,016.05\u00a0km of expressways (in 2021). The main highway of the country extends over 800\u00a0km, reaching the Thai border from Singapore. Peninsular Malaysia has an extensive road network, whilst the road system in East Malaysia is not as well-developed. The main modes of transport in Peninsular Malaysia include buses, trains, cars and to an extent, commercial travel on airplanes.\nMalaysia has six international airports, and two container ports ranked among the top 20 busiest in the world. The official airline of Malaysia is Malaysia Airlines, providing international and domestic air service alongside two other carriers. Most of the major cities are connected by air routes. The railway system is state-run, and covers a total of 1,849\u00a0km. Popular within the cities are commuter rail and rapid transit, which reduces the traffic load on other systems, and is considered safe, comfortable and reliable.\nLand.\nRoads.\nMalaysia's road network covers , of which is paved/unpaved roads, and is expressways. The longest highway of the country, the North\u2013South Expressway, extends over between the Thai border and Singapore. The Second longest highway is East-Coast Highway (LPT-E8) Spanning almost 500\u00a0km from Kuala Lumpur to state capital of Terengganu, Kuala Terengganu. The road systems in Sabah and Sarawak are less developed and of lower quality in comparison to that of Peninsular Malaysia. Recently, the construction of Pan-Borneo Highway is approved under 2015 Malaysian Budget. The highway project spans 1,663\u00a0km (936\u00a0km in Sarawak, 727\u00a0km in Sabah) mostly mirror the existing trunk road, and it involves the widening of the present three-metre-wide single-carriageway into a dual-carriageway. Driving on the left has been compulsory since the introduction of motor vehicles in Federated Malay States in 1903 during British colonial era. It is estimated that 9,432,023 passenger cars are actively using this road network in 2018.\nRailways.\nThe railway system is state-run, and covers a total of . Most of the railway lines are consisted of ballasted setup, along with concrete sleepers, which serves better in wet and humid tropical condition, compared to wooden sleepers which can rot over time. As early as 1980s, due to the need for local suppliers of such products, a few local Malaysian rail manufacturing companies had been formed by collaboration with foreign technology partners.\n of it is metre gauge, while is standard gauge. Seven hundred and sixty-seven kilometres of metre gauge tracks and all of the standard gauge tracks are electrified. Intra-city travel is through relatively inexpensive rapid transit systems. Commuter rail and electric train service are available for most major only Kuala Lumpur and its neighbouring states, development of such efficient transportation have not been made in other states that really needs them. Malaysia already approved its first Kuala Lumpur\u2013Singapore High Speed Rail project spanning 375\u00a0km between Kuala Lumpur and Singapore. This rapid development had spurred growth of local Malaysian rail service Companies which cater to these niche needs.\nAir.\nMalaysia has 62 airports, of which 38 are paved. Malaysia Airlines, as the national carrier, offers extensive international and domestic routes. Major international routes and domestic routes crossing between West Malaysia and East Malaysia are served by Malaysia Airlines, AirAsia, Firefly, and Batik Air Malaysia while smaller domestic and regional routes are supplemented by smaller airlines like MASwings, Firefly and SKS Airways. Cargo airlines such as MASkargo, Teleport, World Cargo Airlines, Kargo Xpress, and Raya Airways play a crucial role in enhancing connectivity between West and East Malaysia and Malaysia to the world.\nAirports.\nKuala Lumpur International Airport is the primary and busiest airport in Malaysia. In 2018, it was the world's 12th-busiest airport by international passenger traffic, recording over 43.5 million international passenger traffic. Other major airports include Kota Kinabalu International Airport, which is also Malaysia's second-busiest airport and busiest airport in East Malaysia with over 8.6 million passengers in 2018, and Penang International Airport, which serves Malaysia's second-largest urban area, with over 7.99 million passengers in 2018.\nAirports with paved runways.\ntotal: 38 \nover 3,047 m: 5 \n2,438 to 3,047 m: 7 \n1,524 to 2,437 m: 10 \n914 to 1,523 m: 9 \nunder 914 m: 7 (2004 est.)\nHeliports.\n2 (2006 est.)\nAirlines.\nNational airline:\nOther airline:\nWaterways.\nMalaysia has of waterways, most of them rivers. Of this, are in Peninsular Malaysia, are in Sabah, and are in Sarawak.\nPorts and harbours.\nMalaysia is strategically located on the Strait of Malacca, one of the most important shipping lanes in the world. Malaysia has two ports that are listed in the top 20 busiest ports in the world, Port Klang and Port of Tanjung Pelepas, which are, respectively, the second- and third-busiest ports in Southeast Asia after the Port of Singapore. Port Klang is Malaysia's busiest port, and the thirteenth-busiest port in the world in 2013, handling over 10.3 million TEUs. Port of Tanjung Pelepas (PTP) is Malaysia's second-busiest port and the largest transshipment hub, and the 15th busiest port in the world in 2023, handling over 11 million TEUs. PTP is also the most efficient port in Malaysia and ranked fifth in the world.\nThis is a list of Malaysian ports and harbours:\nMerchant Marine.\nTotal: 360 ships (1,000 GT or over) 5,389,397 GT/\u00a0tonnes deadweight (DWT)\nby type: bulk 59, cargo 100, chemical tanker 38, container 66, liquefied gas 25, livestock carrier 1, passenger 2, petroleum tanker 56, roll on/roll off 5, vehicle carrier 8\nForeign-owned: China 1, Germany 2, Hong Kong 8, Indonesia 2, Japan 2, South Korea 1, Liberia 1, Monaco 1, Norway 1, Philippines 2, Singapore 81, Vietnam 1 \nregistered in other countries: 75 (2009 est.)\nPipelines.\nMalaysia has of condensate pipeline, of gas pipeline, of oil pipeline, and of refined products pipelines.\nSee also.\nRegulation:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19115", "revid": "5666248", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19115", "title": "Malaysian Armed Forces", "text": "Combined military forces of Malaysia\nThe Malaysian Armed Forces (Abbr.: MAF; ; Jawi: ), are the armed forces of Malaysia, consists of three branches; the Malaysian Army, Royal Malaysian Navy and the Royal Malaysian Air Force. The number of MAF active personnel is 113,000 along with reserve forces at 51,600. \nThe Supreme Commander of the Malaysian Armed Forces is the \"Yang di-Pertuan Agong;\" the King of Malaysia.\nBackground.\nMalaysia's armed forces were created from the unification of military forces which arose during the first half of the 20th century when Malaya and Singapore were the subjects of British colonial rule, before Malaya achieved independence in 1957. The primary objective of the armed forces in Malaysia is to defend the country's sovereignty and protect it from any and all types of threats.\nIt is responsible for assisting civilian authorities to overcome all international threats, preserve public order, assist in natural disasters and participate in national development programs. It is also sustaining and upgrading its capabilities in the international sphere to uphold the national foreign policy of being involved under the guidance of the United Nations (UN).\nTheater of operation.\nThe main theaters of operations were within Malaysian borders, primarily to fight an insurgency led by the Communist Party of Malaya (CPM) in what was known as the Emergency. The only foreign incursion of Malaysian territory in modern times were in World War II by Japan (Malaya was then not a unified political entity and consisted of the British Crown Colony of the Straits Settlements, and the British protected Federated Malay States and Unfederated Malay States) and during the Indonesia-Malaysia confrontation by Indonesia under the leadership of President Sukarno. Operations on foreign soil have mainly been peacekeeping operations under the auspices of the United Nations.\nOther limited participation under UNPKO are United Nations International Police Force (UNIPTF) since December 1995; United Nations Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) since June 1999; United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) since October 1999; United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) since September 1999 and United Nations Organisation Mission in Democratic Republic of Congo (MONUC) since February 2000. 18 Malaysian Armed Forces personnel have been killed during UN peacekeeping operations.\nPresent development.\nMalaysian defence requirements are assigned to the Malaysian Armed Forces (Angkatan Tentera Malaysia \u2013 ATM). The armed forces has three branches, the Malaysian Army (Tentera Darat Malaysia \u2013 TDM), Royal Malaysian Navy (Tentera Laut Diraja Malaysia \u2013 TLDM) and the Royal Malaysian Air Force (Tentera Udara Diraja Malaysia \u2013 TUDM). Malaysia does not have conscription, and the required minimum age for voluntary military service is 18.\nIn the early 1990s, Malaysia undertook a major program to expand and modernise its armed forces. However, budgetary constraints imposed by the 1997 Asian financial crisis held back many of its procurements. The recent economic recovery may lead to a relaxation of budgetary constraints and a resumption of major weapons purchases. In October 2000, the Defence Minister also announced a review of national defence and security policy to bring it up to date. The review addressed new security threats that have emerged in the form of low intensity conflicts, such as the kidnapping of Malaysians and foreigners from resort islands located off the east coast of the state of Sabah and the rising risk of territory disputes with several neighbouring countries. Currently, 1.4% of Malaysia's GDP is spent on the military, and employing 1.23% of Malaysia's manpower.\nMalaysian Army.\nSince the recovery from the 1997 economic crisis, the army's modernisation program has gained momentum. The acquisition of Main Battle Tanks (MBT), Armoured Personnel Carriers (APC), Infantry Fighting Vehicles (IFV) and modern artillery make the Malaysian Army one of the most potent powers in the region.\nRoyal Malaysian Navy.\nFollowing the completion of the New Generation Patrol Vessel (NGPV) program, RMN has moved on to its next program called the Second Generation Patrol Vessel (SGPV). RMN is also looking to purchase more submarines as well as a batch of Littoral Mission Ships (LMS) namely Keris-class littoral mission ship and Ada-class corvette. RMN also planned to add Multi Role Support Ship (MRSS) for its support role. In addition to this, an upgrade program called Service Life Extension Program (SLEP) for the aging ships will keep the fleet modern with the latest technologies needed.\nRoyal Malaysian Air Force.\nThe Royal Malaysian Air Force (RMAF) has historically sourced most of its aircraft from Western suppliers, particularly the United States and Europe. Restrictions on the transfer of advanced technology to the region by the United States, however, led Malaysia to diversify its procurement to include Russia and other non-traditional suppliers. As a result, the RMAF currently operates a mixed fleet of American, European (including Turkish), and Russian aircraft.\nAs of 2025, Malaysia is seeking to expand its fighter aircraft fleet. Plans were made to acquire second-hand F/A-18 Hornets from the Kuwait Air Force, a purchase which received approval from the United States. However, delays in the process prompted Malaysian defence authorities to reconsider the acquisition and instead explore the possibility of procuring fifth-generation fighter aircraft. Malaysia has expressed interest in fifth-generation platforms offered by European, Russian, and American manufacturers, with the procurement process expected to commence in the near future. The RMAF's long-term objective is to fully replace its ageing fleet by 2040.\nFormation of a Marine Corps.\nOn 10 October 2013, the Minister of Defence, Hishammuddin Tun Hussein, announced plans to establish a marine corps to conduct amphibious operations. The proposed formation was intended to draw personnel from all three branches of the Malaysian Armed Forces, with the core element expected to come from one of the three parachute battalions of the 10th Parachute Brigade (10 PARA BDE), which would have been re-designated as a marine battalion. Both the 9th Battalion Royal Malay Regiment (Parachute) and the 8th Battalion Royal Ranger Regiment (Parachute) had previously undertaken amphibious warfare training as a secondary role, including participation in the Cooperation Afloat Readiness and Training (CARAT) exercises with the United States Marine Corps and other joint amphibious exercises with foreign armed forces.\nAs of 2025, the plan was most probably scrapped as the absence of marine unit was filled by the 10 PARA BDE. In December 2024, around 130 personnel from the brigade were retrained as trainers/instructors in amphibious warfare to trained future brigade's candidates in amphibious warfare.\nDefence industry.\nAfter independence, Malaysia moved forward by establishing and developing its own defence industry. Malaysia has improved its defence industry through its defence companies by locally manufacturing and producing weapons, such as ammunition, rifles, armoured cars, warships and light aircraft including unmanned aerial vehicles for the armed forces. DefTech, Mildef International Technologies, Weststar Defence Industries and Cendana Auto are among the local companies that emphasize on the maintenance and manufacturing of military land vehicles and the automotive sector. While the Sapura, Mindmatics and Ikramatic Systems focuses more on military electronics and systems integration such as; communication systems, tactical systems, command and control systems, training and simulation systems and surveillance systems. Following the Malaysia's National Defence Policy, Malaysian Armed Forces has adopted locally made weapons such as DefTech ACV-300 Adnan, DefTech AV-8 Gempita, DefTech AV-4 Lipanbara, Weststar GK-M1/M2 and Handalan. In January 2021, Mildef International Technologies has launched its new Mildef Tarantula HMAV intended for the local market and export. At the Defence Services Asia (DSA) 2022, Mildef International Technologies has launched its second armoured vehicle called Mildef Rentaka. The third armoured vehicle called Mildef Ribat HMLTV was launched at the Defence Services Asia (DSA) 2024. Another local company, Cendana Auto also introduced its new Cendana Auto 4x4 which is ready to deliver to the Malaysian Army.\nAs a country with vast maritime area, Malaysia has long had a great shipbuilding industry since the Malacca Sultanate. During which, the country had been the main shipbuilders in the region. Nowadays, Malaysia houses many shipbuilding companies, giving its reputation as a country with great maritime expertise and facilities. Through local companies such as Lumut Naval Shipyard, Boustead Heavy Industries Corporation, Destini and Gading Marine, Malaysia was able to locally build their own major surface combatants and combat boats such as Maharaja Lela-class frigate, Kedah-class offshore patrol vessel, Jerung-class gunboat, Gagah Samudera-class training ship, Sri Tiga-class fast troop vessel, Gading Marine G2000-18m class combat boat and Sandakan Jaya Teknik-class boat. In addition to this, local companies such as Labuan Shipyard and Engineering, Malaysia Marine and Heavy Engineering, Shin Yang, Grade One Marine Shipyard and others were also able to execute minor and major maintenance and overhaul to the naval grade vessels locally, without needing to send them abroad. Some of these great achievements were put on display when Malaysia succeeded in completing major overhaul of its Scorpene-class submarines. The upgrade program was done locally by BHIC Submarine Engineering Services and Boustead DCNS Naval Corporation at the RMN submarine base in Labuan, Sabah. Malaysia also already exports their naval vessels to foreign navies such as the Shin Yang-made Al-Quwaisat-class LST to the United Arab Emirates navy and Northern Shipyard / KN Aluminium &amp; Engineering-made P38 Sea Eagles patrol craft and Manta MkII-class fast interdiction combat boat to the Nigerian navy. This particular patrol craft and combat boat was marketed under the Singapore-based company, Suncraft Private Limited.\nIn aerospace sector, Malaysia is one of the aerospace hubs in the region. Since 1990, Malaysia has witness a growing in aerospace industry when received a lot of foreign direct investment from major foreign aerospace players. In 1998, Boeing enters Malaysia aerospace industry by acquired 50% stake in Aerospace Composites Malaysia and set up the plant in Bukit Kayu Hitam, Kedah. In 2024, Boeing relaunches this manufacturing facility as Boeing Composites Malaysia. Another two major foreign aerospace company namely Spirit AeroSystems and Honeywell Aerospace Technologies also set up their plant in Subang and Penang respectively. Airbus and BAE Systems invested in Malaysian aerospace industry by outsourcing theirs aerostructures components from Malaysian companies. Since 1990s, Malaysia, through SME Aerospace and CTRM has been manufacturing aircraft components such as wing parts, nacelles, composites structures and helicopter parts for the Airbus. These include parts for the A320, A330, A350, A380, A400 and Airbus helicopters. Other than that, SME Aerospace also manufactures pylons for the BAE Systems Hawk AJT for worldwide customers. Although Malaysia does not build major aircraft locally or through any partnerships, Malaysia already has experience in building light aircraft such as the SME Aero Tiga and CTRM Eagle Aircraft Eagle 150. In addition to this, CTRM also built their indigenous unmanned aerial vehicle called the CTRM Aludra. In 2005, UPECA Aerotech joined the club by manufacturing and supplying aircraft components for both Boeing and Airbus. In 2021, Turkish Aerospace Industries open its engineering and design centre in Malaysia to train local engineer and share its technologies in local defence industry and aviation fields. Besides aerostructures manufacturing, Malaysia also expand its MRO market share. AIROD is one of the only companies to have received a certificate from the United States (US) based defence company, Lockheed Martin as a C-130 MRO centre outside the US. In 2015, the United States Marine Corps awarded AIROD for MRO operations on its 13 units of C-130 aircraft that were based in Japan. Besides the C-130, AIROD also had an expertise in servicing other types of commercial and military aircraft and had served other customers across the region. Like AIROD, another local aerospace company named ATSC has also played an important role in the aerospace industry in Malaysia. This company focuses more on MRO services for Russian-built aircraft such as the Sukhoi Su-30, MiG-29 and Mil Mi-17. In 2017, ATSC was awarded a contract to do a major overhaul and upgrade on the RMAF Sukhoi Su-30 MKM fleet. For other local aerospace players, BHIC AeroServices, UMW Aerospace, UMW Aero Assets, Destini Prima, Destini Avia Technique and Galaxy Aerospace is some of the local company that contributed to the MRO segments.\nIn 1969, Malaysia set up a firearms manufacturing company, SME Ordnance to supply the local armed forces. Starting out by manufacturing ammunition locally, SME Ordnance moved on to also manufacture advanced high-tech firearms. By 1991, SME Ordnance had acquired a licence to manufacture the Austrian-made Steyr AUG rifles locally. In 2001, SME Ordnance moved on to acquire a licence to locally manufacture the US-made M4 Carbine assault rifle. Both locally manufactured Steyr AUG and M4 assault rifles are currently used by the Malaysian Armed Forces and other government agencies. Additionally, SME Ordnance also provides a wide range of NATO standard munitions, including 5.56\u00a0mm to 155\u00a0mm calibre ammunition, mines, explosions and rockets. Another local firearms company; Aegis Malinnov also developed indigenous pistols called the Malinnov M1P intended to be used by Malaysian government agencies. In conjunction of LIMA 2023, the Edge Group in United Arab Emirates had signed an agreement with Malaysian-company Ketech Asia for the production of CARACAL firearms locally through the transfer of technology.\nMalaysia also has its own defence technology research statutory board. The Science Technology Research Institute for Defence (STRIDE) is the statutory board under the Ministry of Defence (Malaysia) and is responsible for performing research and development related to defence technologies for the Malaysian Ministry of Defence and Malaysian Armed Forces.\nInternational action.\nThe Five Power Defence Arrangement (FPDA) between Malaysia, Singapore, Australia, New Zealand and the United Kingdom is a regional security initiative which has been in place for more than 45 years. It involves joint military exercises held between the five countries.\nMalaysia also actively takes part in international exercises such as CARAT, RIMPAC and COPE. Joint exercises and war games also have been held with Brunei, Indonesia, France and the United States. Besides that, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand and Vietnam have agreed to host joint security force exercises to secure their maritime borders and tackle issues such as illegal immigration, piracy and smuggling.\nPreviously, there were fears that extremist militants activities in the Muslim areas of the southern Philippines and southern Thailand could spill over into Malaysia. In response, Malaysia began to strengthen its border security.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19116", "revid": "7447121", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19116", "title": "Foreign relations of Malaysia", "text": " \nMalaysia is an active member of various international organisations, including the Commonwealth of Nations, the United Nations, the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, and the Non-Aligned Movement. It has also in recent times been an active proponent of regional co-operation.\nForeign Policy 1957\u20131969.\nMalaysia has been a member of the Commonwealth since independence in 1957, when it entered into the Anglo-Malayan Defence Agreement (AMDA) with the United Kingdom whereby Britain guaranteed the defence of Malaya (and later Malaysia). The presence of British and other Commonwealth troops were crucial to Malaysia's security during the Malayan Emergency (1948\u20131960) and the Indonesian Confrontation (1962\u20131966), which was sparked by Malaya's merger with the British colonies of Singapore, Sarawak and North Borneo to form Malaysia in 1963.\nThe British defence guarantee ended following Britain's decision in 1967 to withdraw its forces east of Suez, and was replaced in 1971 with the Five Power Defence Arrangements (FPDA) by which Britain, Australia, New Zealand, Malaysia and Singapore agreed to co-operate in the area of defence, and to \"consult\" in the event of external aggression or the threat of attack on Malaysia or Singapore. The FPDA continues to operate, and the Five Powers have a permanent Integrated Area Defence System based at RMAF Butterworth, and organise annual naval and air exercises.\nUnder the leadership of Prime Minister Tunku Abdul Rahman (up to 1970), Malaysia pursued a strongly pro-Commonwealth anti-communist foreign policy. Nonetheless, Malaysia was active in the opposition to apartheid that saw South Africa quit the Commonwealth in 1961, and was a founding member of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) in 1967 and the Organisation of the Islamic Conference (OIC) in 1969, with the Tunku as its first Secretary-General in 1971.\nForeign policy since 1969.\nUnder Prime Minister Abdul Razak Hussein, Malaysia shifted its policy towards non-alignment and neutrality. Malaysia's foreign policy is officially based on the principle of neutrality and maintaining peaceful relations with all countries, regardless of their ideology or political system, and to further develop relations with other countries in the region. In 1971, ASEAN issued its neutralist and anti-nuclear \"Zone of Peace, Freedom and Neutrality\" (ZOPFAN) Declaration. In the same year, Malaysia joined the Non-Aligned Movement. Consistent with this policy Malaysia established diplomatic relations with the People's Republic of China in 1974.\nThis policy shift was continued and strengthened by Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad, who pursued a regionalist and pro-South policy with at times strident anti-Western rhetoric. He long sought to establish an East Asian Economic Group as an alternative to APEC, excluding Australia, New Zealand and the Americas, and during his premiership Malaysia signed up to an ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA) and ASEAN+3, a regional forum with China, Japan and South Korea.\nA strong tenet of Malaysia's policy is national sovereignty and the right of a country to control its domestic affairs.\nMalaysia views regional co-operation as the cornerstone of its foreign policy. It attaches a high priority to the security and stability of Southeast Asia, and has tried to strengthen relations with other Islamic states. Malaysia was a leading advocate of expanding ASEAN's membership to include Laos, Vietnam, and Burma, arguing that \"constructive engagement\" with these countries, especially Burma, will help bring political and economic changes. Malaysia is also a member of G-15 and G-77 economic groupings.\nDespite Mahathir's frequently anti-Western rhetoric he worked closely with Western countries, and led a crackdown against Islamic fundamentalists after the 11 September attacks. The current Minister of Foreign Affairs is Dato' Seri Hishamuddin Hussein, who assumed office on 10 March 2020. with Kamaruddin Jaafar was deputy minister.\nMalaysia has never recognised Israel and has no diplomatic ties with it, with the country ever condemning the Israelis action during their raid over a Gaza humanitarian mission and request the International Criminal Court to take any action against them. Malaysia has stated it will only establish an official relations with Israel once a peace agreement with the State of Palestine been reached and called for both parties to find a quick resolution. Malaysian peacekeeping forces have contributed to many UN peacekeeping missions, such as in Namibia, Cambodia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Somalia, East Timor and Lebanon. On July 29, 2024, Malaysia officially applied to join the BRICS economic bloc and geopolitical organization.\nInternational affiliations.\nMalaysia is a founding member of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the Organisation of the Islamic Conference (now the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation). It is also a member of the Non-Aligned Movement. Kuala Lumpur was the site of the first East Asia Summit in 2005, and Malaysia has chaired ASEAN, the OIC, and the NAM in the past. A former British colony, it is also a member of the Commonwealth.\nMalaysia is affiliated with the United Nations and many of its specialised agencies, including UNESCO, World Bank, International Monetary Fund, International Atomic Energy Agency; General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. It is also a member of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation, the Developing 8 Countries. Asian Development Bank, Five-Power Defense Arrangement, G-77, and South Centre. On 31 October 2011 Malaysia became a party to the Antarctic Treaty.\nInternational disputes.\nThe policy towards territorial disputes by the Malaysian government is one of pragmatism, solving disputes in a number of ways, including some resolved in the International Court of Justice.\nSpratly and other islands in the South China Sea.\nMalaysia has asserted sovereignty over the Spratly Islands together with China, the Philippines, Taiwan, Vietnam, and Brunei. Tensions have eased since 2002 \"Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea\". However, it is not the legally binding code of conduct sought by some parties. Malaysia was not party to a March 2005 joint accord among the national oil companies of China, the Philippines and Vietnam on conducting marine seismic activities in the Spratly Islands. Malaysia long maintained a low-key approach to the dispute, maintaining positive relations with China due to strong economic ties, a large ethnic Chinese population, and a desire for a balance of power in the region. However, as Chinese fishing vessels and coast guard ships have become increasingly assertive, Malaysia has increased its diplomatic and military responses.\nLigitan, Sipadan and Ambalat.\nThe ICJ awarded Ligitan and Sipadan islands to Malaysia over Indonesia but left the maritime boundary in the hydrocarbon-rich Celebes Sea in dispute, culminating in hostile confrontations in March 2005 over concessions to the Ambalat oil block.\nSingapore.\nSingapore was a part of Malaysia for two years (1963\u201365), but it ultimately was asked by Tunku to secede after increased racial tensions due to the election campaigns in 1964. Today, disputes continue among other things, over the pricing of deliveries of raw untreated water to Singapore, Singapore's land reclamation causing a negative environmental impact in Malaysian waters, a new bridge to replace the Johor-Singapore Causeway which Singapore does not want to pay for, maritime boundaries, the redevelopment of Malayan Railway lands in Singapore and Pedra Branca. Both parties however, agreed to ICJ arbitration on the island dispute. On 24 May 2008, the International Court of Justice ruled that Pedra Branca belonged to Singapore with the nearby Middle Rocks going to Malaysia. Regarding railway land in Singapore, see also Malaysia-Singapore Points of Agreement of 1990. On introducing budget flights between Singapore and Kuala Lumpur, the stumbling block appears to be Malaysia's sympathy towards flag carrier Malaysia Airlines, and preference for the existing near duopoly with Singapore Airlines.\nThe Philippines.\nThe Philippines has a dormant claim to eastern Sabah.\nBrunei.\nMalaysia's land boundary with Brunei around Limbang is no longer in dispute. On 16 March 2009, Brunei announced its decision to drop a long-standing claim to Sarawak's Limbang district. This was the result of the two countries resolving their various land and sea territorial disputes. This issue was resolved along with several other disputes with the sealing and signing of letters of exchange by Abdullah and the Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah of Brunei at Istana Nurul Iman. As of 2010, the two countries are working towards resolving disputes over their maritime boundaries.\nThailand.\nAccording to a source, the areas around Ko Kra and Ko Losin in present-day Thailand are once disputed with Malaysia.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Malaysia maintains diplomatic relations with: \nMalaysia and the Commonwealth of Nations.\nThe Federation of Malaya became an independent native elective monarchy within the Commonwealth on 31 August 1957 with the Yang di-Pertuan Agong as head of state.\nMalaya united with North Borneo (now Sabah), Sarawak, and Singapore to form Malaysia on 16 September 1963.\nSingapore was expelled from Malaysia on 9 August 1965, and became an independent republic in the Commonwealth of Nations.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19117", "revid": "33408448", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19117", "title": "Maldives", "text": "Island country in South Asia\nMaldives, officially the Republic of Maldives, and historically known as the Maldive Islands, is an archipelagic country in South Asia, located in the eastern Arabian Sea, within the northern Indian Ocean. Maldives is southwest of Sri Lanka and India, about from the Asian continent's mainland. Maldives' chain of 26 atolls stretches across the equator from Ihavandhippolhu Atoll in the north to Addu Atoll in the south.\nMaldives is the smallest country in Asia. Its land area is only , but this is spread over roughly of the sea, making it one of the world's most spatially dispersed sovereign states. With a population of 515,132 in the 2022 census, it is the second least populous country in Asia and the ninth-smallest country by area, but also one of the most densely populated countries. Maldives has an average ground-level elevation of around above sea level, and a highest natural point of only , making it the world's lowest-lying country. Some sources state the highest point, Mount Villingili, as .\nMal\u00e9 is the capital and the most populated city, traditionally called the \"King's Island\", where the ancient royal dynasties ruled from its central location. Maldives has been inhabited for over 2,500 years. Documented contact with the outside world began around 947 AD when Arab travellers began visiting the islands. In the 12th century, partly due to the importance of the Arabs and Persians as traders in the Indian Ocean, Islam reached the Maldivian Archipelago. Maldives was soon consolidated as a sultanate, developing strong commercial and cultural ties with Asia and Africa. From the mid-16th century, the region came under the increasing influence of European colonial powers, with Maldives becoming a British protectorate in 1887. Independence from the United Kingdom came in 1965, and a presidential republic was established in 1968 with an elected People's Majlis. The ensuing decades have seen political instability, efforts at democratic reform, and environmental challenges posed by climate change and rising sea levels. Maldives became a founding member of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC).\nFishing has historically been the dominant economic activity, and remains the second largest sector, behind the rapidly growing tourism industry. Maldives rates \"high\" on the Human Development Index, with a \"per capita\" income significantly higher than other SAARC nations. The World Bank classifies Maldives as having an upper-middle income economy.\nMaldives is a member of the United Nations, the Commonwealth of Nations, the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, and the Non-Aligned Movement, and is a Dialogue Partner of the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation. It temporarily withdrew from the Commonwealth in October 2016 after being threatened with expulsion from the organisation for its human rights infringements and democratic backsliding. It was readmitted to the Commonwealth on 1 February 2020 after showing evidence of reform and functioning democratic processes.\nEtymology.\nAccording to legends, the first settlers of Maldives were people known as Dheyvis. The first Kingdom of Maldives was known as Kingdom of Dheeva Maari. During the 3rd century BCE visit of emissaries, it was noted that Maldives was known as Dheeva Mahal.\nDuring c.\u20091100 \u2013 1166, Maldives was also referred to as Diva Kudha, and the Laccadive archipelago which was a part of Maldives was then referred to as Diva Kanbar by the scholar and polymath al-Biruni.\nThe name \"Maldives\" may also derive from Sanskrit (garland) and (island), or \"Maala Divaina\" (\"Necklace Islands\") in Sinhala. The Maldivian people are called . The word (archaic Dhivehi, related to Sanskrit , ) means \"island\", and () means \"islanders\" (i.e., Maldivians). In Tamil, \"Garland of Islands\" can be translated as ().\nThe venerable Sri Lankan chronicle Mahavamsa mentions an island designated as (\"Island of Women\", ) in Pali, likely arising from an erroneous translation of the Sanskrit term, signifying \"garland\".\nJan Hogendorn, professor of economics at Colby College, theorised that the name Maldives derives from the Sanskrit (), meaning \"garland of islands\". In Malayalam, \"Garland of Islands\" can be translated as (). In Kannada, \"Garland of Islands\" can be translated as (). None of these names are mentioned in any literature, however, classical Sanskrit texts dating back to the Vedic period mention the \"Hundred Thousand Islands\" (), a generic name which would include not only Maldives, but also the Laccadives, Aminidivi Islands, Minicoy, and the Chagos island groups.\nMedieval Muslim travellers such as Ibn Battuta called the islands ' () from the Arabic word ' (\"palace\"), which must be how the Berber traveller interpreted the name of Mal\u00e9, having been through Muslim North India, where Perso-Arabic words were introduced to the local vocabulary. This is the name currently inscribed on the scroll in Maldives state emblem. The classical Persian/Arabic name for Maldives is . The Dutch referred to the islands as the (), while the British anglicised the local name for the islands first to the \"Maldive Islands\" and later to \"Maldives\".\nIn a conversational book published in 1563, Garcia de Orta writes: \"I must tell you that I have heard it said that the natives do not call it Maldiva but Nalediva. In the Malabar language, \"nale\" means four, and \"diva\" means island. So that in that language, the word signifies 'four islands', while we, corrupting the name, call it Maldiva.\"\nThe local name for Maldives by the Maldivian people in Dhivehi language is , ().\nHistory.\nAncient history and settlement.\nIn the 6th\u20135th century BCE, Maldives already had their kingdoms. The country has an established history of over 2,500 years according to historical evidence and legends.\nThe \"Mah\u0101va\u1e43sa\" (300 BCE) has records of people from Sri Lanka emigrating to Maldives. Assuming that cowrie shells come from Maldives, historians believe that there may have been people living in Maldives during the Indus Valley civilisation (3300\u20131300 BCE). Several artefacts show the presence of Hinduism in the country before the Islamic period.\nAccording to the book () (\"On the Ancient Ruins of Meedhoo\"), written in the 17th century in Arabic by Allama Ahmed Shihabuddine (Allama Shihab al-Din) of Meedhoo in Addu Atoll, the first settlers of Maldives were people known as Dheyvis. They came from the Kalibanga in India. The time of their arrival is unknown but it was before Emperor Asoka's kingdom in 269\u2013232 BCE. Shihabuddin's story tallies remarkably well with the recorded history of South Asia and that of the copperplate document of Maldives known as Loamaafaanu.\nThe ancient history of Maldives is told in copperplates, ancient scripts carved on coral artefacts, traditions, language, and different ethnicities of Maldivians. The \"Maapanansa\", the copper plates on which were recorded the history of the first Kings of Maldives from the Solar Dynasty, were lost quite early on.\nA 4th-century notice written by Ammianus Marcellinus (362 CE) speaks of gifts sent to the Roman emperor Julian by a deputation from the nation of Divi. The name Divi is very similar to Dheyvi who were the first settlers of Maldives.\nThe first Maldivians did not leave any archaeological artefacts. Their buildings were probably built of wood, palm fronds, and other perishable materials, which would have quickly decayed in the salt and wind of the tropical climate. Moreover, chiefs or headmen did not reside in elaborate stone palaces, nor did their religion require the construction of large temples or compounds.\nComparative studies of Maldivian oral, linguistic, and cultural traditions confirm that the first settlers were people from the southern shores of the neighbouring Indian subcontinent, including the Giraavaru people, mentioned in ancient legends and local folklore about the establishment of the capital and kingly rule in Mal\u00e9.\nA strong underlying layer of Dravidian and North Indian cultures survives in Maldivian society, with a clear Elu substratum in the language, which also appears in place names, kinship terms, poetry, dance, and religious beliefs. The North Indian system was brought by the original Sinhalese from Sri Lanka. Malabar and Pandya seafaring culture led to the settlement of the Islands by Tamil and Malabar seafarers.\nBuddhist period.\nDespite being just mentioned briefly in most history books, the 1,400\u00a0year-long Buddhist period has a foundational importance in the history of Maldives. It was during this period that the culture of Maldives both developed and flourished, a culture that survives today. The Maldivian language, early Maldive scripts, architecture, ruling institutions, customs, and manners of the Maldivians originated at the time when Maldives were a Buddhist kingdom.\nBuddhism probably spread to Maldives in the 3rd\u00a0century\u00a0BCE at the time of Emperor Ashoka's expansion and became the dominant religion of the people of Maldives until the 12th\u00a0century. Archeological evidence from an ancient Buddhist monastery in Kaashidhoo has been dated between 205 and 560 AD, based on the radiocarbon dating of shell deposits unearthed from the foundations of stupas and other structures in the monastery. The ancient Maldivian Kings promoted Buddhism, and the first Maldive writings and artistic achievements, in the form of highly developed sculpture and architecture, originate from that period. Nearly all archaeological remains in Maldives are from Buddhist stupas and monasteries, and all artefacts found to date display characteristic Buddhist iconography.\nIslamic period.\nThe importance of the Arabs as traders in the Indian Ocean by the 12th century may partly explain why the last Buddhist king of Maldives, Dhovemi, converted to Islam in 1153 (or 1193). Adopting the Muslim title of Sultan Muhammad al-Adil, he initiated a series of six Islamic dynasties that lasted until 1932 when the sultanate became elective. The formal title of the sultan up to 1965 was, \"Sultan of Land and Sea, Lord of the twelve-thousand islands and Sultan of Maldives\" which came with the style \"Highness\".\nA Moroccan traveller named Abu al-Barakat Yusuf al-Barbari is traditionally cited for this conversion. According to the story told to Ibn Battutah, a mosque was built with the inscription: 'The Sultan Ahmad Shanurazah accepted Islam at the hand of Abu al-Barakat Yusuf al-Barbari.' The folk tale regarding the spread of Islam by al-Barbari involved a local belief to an oceanic deity named Rannamaari. According to the legend, Rannamaari demanded sacrifice of a female virgin each month from the locals. This tradition practiced for long time, until al-Barbari visit Maldives and managed to convert the local ruler and convinced him along with his subjects to abandon the Rannamari worship. According to modern Norwegian archaeologist Egil Mikkelsen, it is likely the myth of Rannamari was heavily influenced by Buddhist tantric rituals and beliefs that were practiced in the islands at the time.\nSome scholars have suggested the possibility of Ibn Battuta misreading Maldive texts, and having a bias towards the North African, Maghrebi narrative of this Shaykh, instead of the Persian origins account that was known as well at the time. Others have it that he may have been from the Persian town of Tabriz. This interpretation, held by the more reliable local historical chronicles, Raadavalhi and Taarikh, is that Abu al-Barakat Yusuf al-Barbari was Abdul Barakat Yusuf Shams ud-D\u012bn at-Tabr\u012bz\u012b, also locally known as Tabr\u012bzugef\u0101nu. In the Arabic script the words al-Barbari and al-Tabrizi are very much alike, since at the time, Arabic had several consonants that looked identical and could only be differentiated by overall context (this has since changed by the addition of dots above or below letters to clarify pronunciation. For example, the letter \"B\" in modern Arabic has a dot below, whereas the letter \"T\" looks identical except there are two dots above it). \"\u066e\u0648\u0633\u06a1 \u0627\u0644\u066e\u066e\u0631\u066e\u0631\u0649\u200e\" could be read as \"Yusuf at-Tabrizi\" or \"Yusuf al-Barbari\".\nThe venerated tomb of the scholar now stands on the grounds of Medhu Ziyaaraiy, across the street from the Friday Mosque, or Hukuru Miskiy, in Mal\u00e9. Originally built in 1153 and re-built in 1658, this is one of the oldest surviving mosques in Maldives. Following the Islamic concept that before Islam there was the time of Jahiliya (ignorance), in the history books used by Maldivians the introduction of Islam at the end of the 12th century is considered the cornerstone of the country's history. Nonetheless, the cultural influence of Buddhism remains, a reality directly experienced by Ibn Battuta during his nine months there sometime between 1341 and 1345, serving as a chief judge and marrying into the royal family of Omar I. For he became embroiled in local politics and left when his strict judgements in the laissez-faire island kingdom began to chafe with its rulers. In particular, he was angered at the local women going about with no clothing above the waist\u2014 a cultural epithet of the region at the time- was seen as a violation of Middle Eastern Islamic rules of modesty\u2014and the locals taking no notice when he complained.\nCompared to the other areas of South Asia, the conversion of Maldives to Islam happened relatively late. Maldives remained a Buddhist kingdom for another 500 years. Arabic became the prime language of administration (instead of Persian and Urdu), and the Maliki school of jurisprudence was introduced, both hinting at direct contact with the core of the Arab world.\nMiddle Eastern seafarers had just begun to take over the Indian Ocean trade routes in the 10th century and found Maldives to be an important link in those routes as the first landfall for traders from Basra sailing to Southeast Asia. Trade involved mainly cowrie shells\u2014widely used as a form of currency throughout Asia and parts of the East African coast\u2014and coir fibre. The Bengal Sultanate, where cowrie shells were used as legal tender, was one of the principal trading partners of Maldives. The Bengal\u2013Maldives cowry shell trade was the largest shell currency trade network in history.\nThe other essential product of Maldives was coir, the fibre of the dried coconut husk, resistant to saltwater. It stitched together and rigged the dhows that plied the Indian Ocean. Maldivian coir was exported to Sindh, China, Yemen, and the Persian Gulf.\nProtectorate period.\nIn 1558, the Portuguese established a small garrison with a (), or overseer of a factory (trading post) in Maldives, which they administered from their main colony in Goa. Their attempts to forcefully impose Christianity with the threat of death provoked a local revolt led by Muhammad Thakurufaanu al-A'u\u1e93am, his two brothers, and Dhuvaafaru Dhandahele, who fifteen years later drove the Portuguese out of Maldives. This event is now commemorated as Qaumee Dhuvas (lit.\u2009'National Day'). It is celebrated on the 1st of Rabi' al-Awwal, the third month of Hijri (Islamic) calendar.\nIn the mid-17th century, the Dutch, who had replaced the Portuguese as the dominant power in Ceylon, established hegemony over Maldivian affairs without involving themselves directly in local matters, which were governed according to centuries-old Islamic customs.\nThe British expelled the Dutch from Ceylon in 1796 and included Maldives as a British protectorate. The status of Maldives as a British protectorate was officially recorded in an 1887 agreement in which the sultan Muhammad Mueenuddeen II accepted British influence over Maldivian external relations and defence while retaining home rule, which continued to be regulated by Muslim traditional institutions in exchange for an annual tribute. The status of the islands was akin to other British protectorates in the Indian Ocean region, including Zanzibar and the Trucial States.\nIn the British period, the Sultan's powers were taken over by the Chief Minister, much to the chagrin of the British Governor-General who continued to deal with the ineffectual Sultan. Consequently, Britain encouraged the development of a constitutional monarchy, and the first Constitution was proclaimed in 1932. However, the new arrangements favoured neither the Sultan nor the Chief Minister, but rather a young crop of British-educated reformists. As a result, angry mobs were instigated against the Constitution which was publicly torn up.\nMaldives remained a British crown protectorate until 1953 when the sultanate was suspended and the First Republic was declared under the short-lived presidency of Mohamed Amin Didi. While serving as prime minister during the 1940s, Didi nationalised the fish export industry. As president, he is remembered as a reformer of the education system and an advocate of women's rights. Conservatives in Mal\u00e9 ousted his government, and during a riot over food shortages, Didi was beaten by a mob and died on a nearby island.\nBeginning in the 1950s, the political history in Maldives was largely influenced by the British military presence on the islands. In 1954, the restoration of the sultanate perpetuated the rule of the past. Two years later, the United Kingdom obtained permission to reestablish its wartime RAF Gan airfield in the southernmost Addu Atoll, employing hundreds of locals. In 1957, however, the new prime minister, Ibrahim Nasir, called for a review of the agreement. Nasir was challenged in 1959 by a local secessionist movement in the three southernmost atolls that benefited economically from the British presence on Gan. This group cut ties with Maldives government and formed an independent state, the United Suvadive Republic with Abdullah Afeef as president and Hithadhoo as its capital. One year later the Suvadive Republic was scrapped after Nasir sent gunboats from Mal\u00e9 with government police, and Abdullah Afeef went into exile. Meanwhile, in 1960 Maldives allowed the United Kingdom to continue to use both the Gan and the Hithadhoo facilities for thirty years, with the payment of \u00a3750,000 from 1960 to 1965 for Maldives' economic development. The base was closed in 1976 as part of the larger British withdrawal of permanently stationed forces 'East of Suez'.\nIndependence and republic.\nWhen the British became increasingly unable to continue their colonial hold on Asia and were losing their colonies to the indigenous populations who wanted freedom, on 26 July 1965 an agreement was signed on behalf of the Sultan by Ibrahim Nasir Rannabandeyri Kilegefan, Prime Minister, and on behalf of the British government by Sir Michael Walker, British Ambassador-designate to the Maldive Islands, which formally ended the British authority on the defence and external affairs of Maldives. The islands thus achieved independence, with the ceremony taking place at the British High Commissioner's Residence in Colombo. After this, the sultanate continued for another three years under Sir Muhammad Fareed Didi, who declared himself King upon independence.\nOn 15 November 1967, a vote was taken in parliament to decide whether Maldives should continue as a constitutional monarchy or become a republic. Of the 44 members of parliament, 40 voted in favour of a republic. On 15 March 1968, a national referendum was held on the question, and 93.34% of those taking part voted in favour of establishing a republic. The republic was declared on 11 November 1968, thus ending the 853-year-old monarchy, which was replaced by a republic under the presidency of Ibrahim Nasir. As the King had held little real power, this was seen as a cosmetic change and required few alterations in the structures of government.\nTourism began to be developed on the archipelago by the beginning of the 1970s. The first resort in Maldives was Kurumba Maldives which welcomed the first guests on 3 October 1972. The first accurate census was held in December 1977 and showed 142,832 people living in Maldives.\nPolitical infighting during the 1970s between Nasir's faction and other political figures led to the 1975 arrest and exile of elected prime minister Ahmed Zaki to a remote atoll. Economic decline followed the closure of the British airfield at Gan and the collapse of the market for dried fish, an important export. With support for his administration faltering, Nasir fled to Singapore in 1978, with millions of dollars from the treasury.\nMaumoon Abdul Gayoom began his 30-year role as president in 1978, winning six consecutive elections without opposition. His election was seen as ushering in a period of political stability and economic development given Maumoon's priority to develop the poorer islands. Tourism flourished and increased foreign contact spurred development. However, Maumoon's rule was controversial, with some critics saying Maumoon was an autocrat who quelled dissent by limiting freedoms and practising political favouritism.\nA series of coup attempts (in 1980, 1983, and 1988) by Nasir supporters and business interests tried to topple the government without success. While the first two attempts met with little success, the 1988 coup attempt involved a roughly 80-strong mercenary force of the PLOTE who seized the airport and caused Maumoon to flee from house to house until the intervention of 1,600 Indian troops airlifted into Mal\u00e9 restored order.\nThe November 1988 coup d'\u00e9tat was headed by Ibrahim Lutfee, a businessman, and Sikka Ahmed Ismail Manik, the father of the former first lady of Maldives Fazna Ahmed. The attackers were defeated by then National Security Services of Maldives. On the night of 3 November 1988, the Indian Air Force airlifted a parachute battalion group from Agra and flew them over to Maldives. By the time Indian armed forces reached Maldives, the mercenary forces has already left Mal\u00e9 on the hijacked ship MV Progress Light. The Indian paratroopers landed at Hulhul\u00e9 and secured the airfield and restored the government rule at Mal\u00e9 within hours. The brief operation labelled \"Operation Cactus\", also involved the Indian Navy that assisted in capturing the freighter MV Progress Light and rescued the hostages and crew.\n21st century.\nMaldives were devastated by a tsunami on 26 December 2004, following the Indian Ocean earthquake. Only nine islands were reported to have escaped any flooding, while fifty-seven islands faced serious damage to critical infrastructure, fourteen islands had to be totally evacuated, and six islands were destroyed. A further twenty-one resort islands were forced to close because of tsunami damage. The total damage was estimated at more than US$400\u00a0million, or some 62% of the GDP. 102 Maldivians and 6 foreigners reportedly died in the tsunami. The destructive impact of the waves on the low-lying islands was mitigated by the fact there was no continental shelf or land mass upon which the waves could gain height. The tallest waves were reported to be high.\nDuring the later part of Maumoon's rule, independent political movements emerged in Maldives, which challenged the then-ruling Dhivehi Rayyithunge Party (Maldivian People's Party, MPP) and demanded democratic reform. The dissident journalist and activist Mohamed Nasheed founded the Maldivian Democratic Party (MDP) in 2003 and pressured Maumoon into allowing gradual political reforms. In 2008, a new constitution was approved and the first direct presidential elections occurred, which were won by Nasheed in the second round. His administration faced many challenges, including the huge debt left by the previous government, the economic downturn following the 2004 tsunami, overspending using overprinting of local currency (the rufiyaa), unemployment, corruption, and increasing drug use. Taxation on goods was imposed for the first time in the country, and import duties were reduced on many goods and services. Universal health insurance (Aasandha) and social welfare benefits were given to those aged 65 years or older, single parents, and those with special needs.\nSocial and political unrest grew in late 2011, following opposition campaigns in the name of protecting Islam. Nasheed controversially resigned from office after a large number of police and army mutinied in February 2012. Nasheed's vice-president, Mohamed Waheed Hassan Manik, was sworn in as president.\nNasheed was later arrested, convicted of terrorism, and sentenced to 13 years. The trial was widely seen as flawed and political. The UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention called for Nasheed's immediate release.\nThe 2013 Maldivian presidential election results were highly contested. Former president Nasheed won the most votes in the first round, but the Supreme Court annulled it despite the positive assessment of international election observers. In the re-run vote Abdulla Yameen, the half-brother of the former president Maumoon, assumed the presidency. Yameen survived an assassination attempt in late 2015. Vice-president Mohamed Jameel Ahmed was removed from office after a no confidence motion from the People's Majlis, it was alleged that he was conspiring with opposition political parties and planning riots. Vice-president Ahmed Adeeb was later arrested together with 17 supporters for \"public order offences\" and the government instituted a broader crackdown against his accomplices. A state of emergency was later declared ahead of a planned anti-government rally, and the People's Majlis (parliament) accelerated the removal of Adeeb.\nIn the 2018 election, Ibrahim Mohamed Solih won the most votes, and was sworn in as Maldives' new president in November 2018. Adeeb was freed by courts in Male in July 2019 after his conviction on charges of terrorism and corruption was overruled but was placed under a travel ban after the state prosecutor appealed the order in a corruption and money laundering case. Adeeb escaped in a tugboat to seek asylum in India. It is understood that the Indian Coast Guard escorted the tugboat to the International Maritime Boundary Line (IMBL) and he was then \"transferred\" to a Maldivian Coast Guard ship, where officials took him into custody.\nFormer president Abdulla Yameen was sentenced to five years in prison in November 2019 for money laundering. The High Court upheld the jail sentence in January 2021. However, Supreme Court overturned Yameen's conviction in November 2021.\nIn the 2023 election, People's National Congress (PNC) candidate Mohamed Muizzu won the second-round runoff of Maldives presidential election, beating incumbent president, Ibrahim Solih, with 54% of the vote. On 17 October 2023, Mohamed Muizzu was sworn in as the eighth President of the Republic of Maldives. Mohamed Muizzu is widely seen to be pro-China, souring relations with India. In 2024, ex-President Abdulla Yameen Abdul Gayoom was freed from his 11-year conviction and the High Court ordered a new trial.\nGeography.\nMaldives consists of 1,192 coral islands grouped in a double chain of 26 atolls, that stretch along a length of north to south, east to west, spread over roughly , of which only is dry land, making this one of the world's most dispersed countries. It lies between latitudes 1\u00b0S and 8\u00b0N, and longitudes 72\u00b0 and 74\u00b0E. The atolls are composed of live coral reefs and sand bars, situated atop a submarine ridge long that rises abruptly from the depths of the Indian Ocean and runs north to south.\nOnly near the southern end of this natural coral barricade do two open passages permit safe ship navigation from one side of the Indian Ocean to the other through the territorial waters of Maldives. For administrative purposes, the Maldivian government organised these atolls into 21 administrative divisions. The largest island of Maldives is that of Gan, which belongs to Laamu Atoll or Hahdhummathi Maldives. In Addu Atoll, the westernmost islands are connected by roads over the reef (collectively called Link Road), and the total length of the road is .\nMaldives is the lowest country in the world, with maximum and average natural ground levels of only and above sea level, respectively. In areas where construction exists, however, this has been increased to several metres. More than 80 per cent of the country's land is composed of coral islands which rise less than one metre above sea level. As a result, Maldives are in danger of being submerged due to rising sea levels. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has warned that, at current rates, sea-level rise would be high enough to make Maldives uninhabitable by 2100.\nClimate.\nMaldives has a tropical monsoon climate (Am) under the K\u00f6ppen climate classification, which is affected by the large landmass of South Asia to the north. Because Maldives has the lowest elevation of any country in the world, the temperature is constantly hot and often humid. The presence of this landmass causes differential heating of land and water. These factors set off a rush of moisture-rich air from the Indian Ocean over South Asia, resulting in the southwest monsoon. Two seasons dominate Maldives' weather: the dry season associated with the winter northeastern monsoon and the rainy season associated with the southwest monsoon which brings strong winds and storms.\nThe shift from the dry northeast monsoon to the moist southwest monsoon occurs during April and May. During this period, the southwest winds contribute to the formation of the southwest monsoon, which reaches Maldives at the beginning of June and lasts until the end of November. However, the weather patterns of Maldives do not always conform to the monsoon patterns of South Asia. The annual rainfall averages in the north and in the south.\nThe monsoonal influence is greater in the north of Maldives than in the south, more influenced by the equatorial currents.\nThe average high temperature is 31.5 degrees Celsius and the average low temperature is 26.4 degrees Celsius.\nSea level rise.\nIn 1988, Maldivian authorities claimed that sea rise would \"completely cover this Indian Ocean nation of 1,196 small islands within the next 30 years.\"\nThe Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change's 2007 report predicted the upper limit of the sea level rise will be by 2100, which means that most of the republic's 200 inhabited islands may need to be abandoned. According to researchers from the University of Southampton, Maldives are the third most endangered island nation due to flooding from climate change as a percentage of population.\nIn 2008, Nasheed announced plans to look into purchasing new land in India, Sri Lanka, and Australia because he was concerned about global warming, and the possibility of much of the islands being inundated with water from rising sea levels. The purchase of land will be made from a fund generated by tourism. The president explained his intentions: \"We do not want to leave Maldives, but we also do not want to be climate refugees living in tents for decades\".\nAt the 2009 International Climate Talks, Nasheed stated that:For us swearing off fossil fuels is not only the right thing to do, but it is also in our economic self-interest... Pioneering countries will free themselves from the unpredictable price of foreign oil; they will capitalise on the new green economy of the future, and they will enhance their moral standing giving them greater political influence on the world stage.\nFormer president Mohamed Nasheed said in 2012 \"If carbon emissions continue at the rate they are climbing today, my country will be underwater in seven years.\" He has called for more climate change mitigation action while on the American television shows \"The Daily Show\" and the \"Late Show with David Letterman\", and hosted \"the world's first underwater cabinet meeting\" in 2009 to raise awareness of the threats posed by climate change. Concerns over rising sea levels have also been expressed by Nasheed's predecessor, Maumoon Abdul Gayoom.\nIn 2020, a three-year study at the University of Plymouth which looked at Maldives and the Marshall Islands, found that tides move sediment to create a higher elevation, a morphological response that the researchers suggested could help low-lying islands adjust to sea level rise and keep the islands habitable. The research also reported that sea walls were compromising islands' ability to adjust to rising sea levels and that island drowning is an inevitable outcome for islands with coastal structures like sea walls. Hideki Kanamaru, natural resources officer with the Food and Agriculture Organization in Asia-Pacific, said the study provided a \"new perspective\" on how island nations could tackle the challenge of sea-level rise, and that even if islands can adapt naturally to higher seas by raising their own crests, humans still needed to double down on global warming and protection for island populations.\nEnvironment.\nEnvironmental issues other than sea level rise include bad waste disposal and sand theft. Although Maldives are kept relatively pristine and little litter can be found on the islands, most waste disposal sites are often substandard. The bulk of the waste from Mal\u00e9 and nearby resorts in Maldives is disposed of at Thilafushi, an industrial island on top of a lagoon reclaimed in the early '90s to sort waste management issues which had plagued the capital and surrounding islands.\n31 protected areas are administered by the Ministry of Climate Change, Environment and Energy and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) of Maldives.\nMarine ecosystem.\nThe waters surrounding Maldives contain diverse marine life, including various corals, over 2,000 species of fish, and rare species of biological and commercial significance, with tuna fisheries representing a longstanding traditional resource. Freshwater fish such as the milkfish (Chanos chanos) and various smaller species thrive within ponds, marshes and other limited freshwater habitats. In the 1970s, a United Nations agency facilitated the introduction of the tilapia or mouth-breeder.\nMaldives have different habitats including deep sea, shallow coast, and reef ecosystems, fringing mangroves, wetlands, and dry land. 187 species of coral form the coral reefs. This area of the Indian Ocean, alone, houses 1,100 species of fish, 5 species of sea turtle, 21 species of whale and dolphin, 400 species of mollusc, and 83 species of echinoderms. The area is also populated by several crustacean species: 120 copepods, and 15 amphipods, as well as more than 145 crab and 48 shrimp species.\nAmong the many marine families represented are pufferfish, fusiliers, jackfish, lionfish, oriental sweetlips, reef sharks, groupers, eels, snappers, bannerfish, batfish, humphead wrasse, spotted eagle rays, scorpionfish, lobsters, nudibranches, angelfish, butterflyfish, squirrelfish, soldierfish, glassfish, surgeonfish, unicornfish, triggerfish, Napoleon wrasse, and barracuda.\nThese coral reefs are home to various marine ecosystems that include species such as planktonic organisms and whale sharks. Five species of sponge have displayed anti-tumor and anti-cancer properties.\nIn 1998, sea-temperature warming of as much as due to a single El Ni\u00f1o phenomenon event caused coral bleaching and killed two-thirds of the nation's coral reefs.\nTo induce the regrowth of the reefs, scientists placed electrified cones anywhere from below the surface to provide a substrate for larval coral attachment. In 2004, scientists witnessed corals regenerating. Corals began to eject pink-orange eggs and sperm. The growth of these electrified corals was five times faster than untreated corals. Scientist Azeez Hakim stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAgain, in 2016, the coral reefs of Maldives experienced a severe bleaching incident. Up to 95% of coral around some islands have died, and, even after six months, 100% of young coral transplants died. The surface water temperatures reached an all-time high in 2016, at 31 degrees Celsius in May.\nRecent scientific studies suggest that the faunistic composition can vary greatly between neighbour atolls, especially in terms of benthic fauna. Differences in terms of fishing pressure (including poaching) could be the cause.\nWildlife.\nThe wildlife of Maldives includes the flora and fauna of the islands, reefs, and the surrounding ocean. Recent scientific studies suggest that the fauna varies greatly between atolls following a north\u2013south gradient, but important differences between neighbouring atolls were also found (especially in terms of sea animals), which may be linked to differences in fishing pressure \u2013 including poaching.\nThe terrestrial habitats of Maldives are confronted with a significant threat as extensive development encroaches swiftly upon the limited land resources. Once seldom frequented, previously uninhabited islands now teeter on the brink of extinction, virtually devoid of untouched expanses. Over recent decades of intensive development, numerous natural environments crucial to indigenous species have suffered severe endangerment or outright destruction.\nCoral reef habitats have been damaged, as the pressure for land has brought about the creation of artificial islands. Some reefs have been filled with rubble with little regard for the changes in the currents on the reef shelf and how the new pattern would affect coral growth and its related life forms on the reef edges. Mangroves thrive in brackish or muddy regions of Maldives. The archipelago hosts fourteen species spanning ten genera, among which is the fern Acrostichum aureum, indigenous to these islands.\nDue to their diminutive size, land-dwelling reptiles are scarce on the Maldivian islands. Among the limited terrestrial reptilian inhabitants are a species of gecko and the oriental garden lizard (Calotes versicolor), alongside the white-spotted supple skink (Riopa albopunctata), the Indian wolf snake (Lycodon aulicus), and the Brahmin blind snake (Ramphotyphlops braminus).\nIn the surrounding seas, however, a more diverse array of reptilian life thrives. Maldivian beaches serve as nesting grounds for the green sea turtle (Chelonia mydas), the hawksbill sea turtle, and the leatherback sea turtle. Furthermore, saltwater crocodiles have been reported to occasionally reach the islands, taking residence in marshy regions.\nThe location of this Indian Ocean archipelago means that its avifauna is mainly restricted to pelagic birds. Most of the species are Eurasian migratory birds, only a few being typically associated with the Indian sub-continent. Some, like the frigatebird, are seasonal. Some birds dwell in marshes and island bush, like the grey heron and the moorhen. White terns are found occasionally on the southern islands due to their rich habitats.\nGovernment and politics.\nMaldives is a presidential constitutional republic, with extensive influence of the president as head of government and head of state. The president heads the executive branch and appoints the cabinet which is approved by the People's Majlis (Parliament). He leads the armed forces. The current president serving since 17 November 2023 is Mohamed Muizzu. President of Maldives and Members of the unicameral Majlis serve five-year terms. The total number of members are determined by atoll populations. At the 2024 parliamentary election, the People's National Congress (PNC) won a super-majority over the 93 constituencies.\nThe republican constitution came into force in 1968 and was amended in 1970, 1972, and 1975. On 27 November 1997 it was replaced by another Constitution assented to by then-President Maumoon. This Constitution came into force on 1 January 1998. The current Constitution of Maldives was ratified by President Maumoon on 7 August 2008, and came into effect immediately, replacing and repealing the constitution of 1998. This new constitution includes a judiciary run by an independent commission, and independent commissions to oversee elections and fight corruption. It also reduces the executive powers vested under the president and strengthens the parliament. All state that the president is head of state, head of government, and Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces of Maldives.\nIn 2018, the then ruling Progressive Party of Maldives (PPM)'s tensions with opposition parties and the subsequent crackdown was termed as an \"assault on democracy\" by the UN Human Rights chief.\nIn the April 2019 parliamentary election The Maldivian Democratic Party (MDP) of President Ibrahim Mohamed Solih won a landslide victory. It took 65 of 87 seats of the parliament. This was the first time a single party was able to get such a high number of seats in the parliament in Maldivian history.\nOrder of Nishanizzuddeen is Maldives' highest civilian honour that can be bestowed upon a person. It is awarded by the president, usually in an elaborate ceremony.\nIn April 2024, President Mohamed Muizzu's pro-China People's National Congress (PNC) won 66 seats in the 2024 Maldivian parliamentary election, while its allies took nine, giving the president the backing of 75 legislators in the 93-member house, meaning a super-majority and enough to change the constitution.\nLaw.\nAccording to the Constitution of Maldives, \"the judges are independent, and subject only to the Constitution and the law. When deciding matters on which the Constitution or the law is silent, judges must consider Islamic Shari'ah\".\nIslam is the official religion of Maldives and open practice of any other religion is forbidden. The 2008 constitution says that the republic \"is based on the principles of Islam\" and that \"no law contrary to any principle of Islam can be applied\". Non-Muslims are prohibited from becoming citizens.\nThe requirement to adhere to a particular religion and prohibition of public worship following other religions is contrary to Article 18 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and Article 18 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights to which Maldives has recently become party and was addressed in Maldives' reservation in adhering to the Covenant claiming that \"The application of the principles set out in Article 18 of the Covenant shall be without prejudice to the Constitution of the Republic of Maldives.\"\nA new penal code came into effect on 16 July 2015, replacing the 1968 law, the first modern, comprehensive penal code to incorporate the major tenets and principles of Islamic law.\nSame-sex relations are illegal in Maldives, although tourist resorts typically operate as exceptions to this law.\nForeign relations.\nSince 1996, Maldives has been the official progress monitor of the Indian Ocean Commission. In 2002, Maldives began to express interest in the commission but as of 2008[ [update]] had not applied for membership. Maldives' interest relates to its identity as a small island state, especially economic development and environmental preservation, and its desire for closer relations with France, a main actor in the IOC region.\nMaldives is a founding member of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC). The republic joined the Commonwealth in 1982, some 17 years after gaining independence from the United Kingdom. In October 2016, Maldives announced its withdrawal from the Commonwealth in protest at allegations of human rights abuse and failing democracy. Maldives enjoys close ties with Commonwealth members Seychelles and Mauritius. Maldives and Comoros are also both members of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation. Following his election as president in 2018, Ibrahim Mohamed Solih's administration sought to rejoin the Commonwealth after showing evidence of democratic reform, leading to its readmission on 1 February 2020.\nAs a result of sanctions imposed upon the Russian oligarchs by the West in response to Russia's invasion of Ukraine in February 2022, many of them sought refuge for their mega-yachts in Maldives due to the absence of an extradition treaty with the United States and other countries.\nFollowing a cabinet meeting, in June 2024, the government of Maldives decided to ban Israeli passport holders from entering the country, as a response to the ongoing Gaza war.\nMilitary.\nMaldives National Defence Force is the combined security organisation responsible for defending the security and sovereignty of Maldives, having the primary task of being responsible for attending to all internal and external security needs of Maldives, including the protection of the Exclusive economic zone (EEZ) and the maintenance of peace and security. The MNDF component branches are the Coast Guard, Marine Corps, Special Forces, Service Corps, Defence Intelligence Service, Military Police, Corps of Engineers, Special Protection Group, Medical Corps, Adjutant General's Corps, Air Corps, and Fire and Rescue Service. Maldives has an arrangement with India allowing cooperation on radar coverage.\nAs a water-bound nation, much of its security concerns life at sea. Almost 99% of the country is covered by sea and the remaining 1% land is scattered over an area of \u00d7 , with the largest island being not more than . Therefore, the duties assigned to the MNDF of maintaining surveillance over Maldives' waters and providing protection against foreign intruders poaching in the EEZ and territorial waters, are immense tasks from both logistical and economic viewpoints. \nThe Coast Guard plays a vital role in carrying out these functions. To provide timely security its patrol boats are stationed at various MNDF Regional Headquarters. The Coast Guard is also assigned to respond to maritime distress calls and to conduct search and rescue operations promptly.\nIn 2019, Maldives signed the UN treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons.\nHuman rights.\nHuman rights in Maldives is a contentious issue. In its 2011 Freedom in the World report, Freedom House declared Maldives \"Partly Free\", claiming a reform process that had made headway in 2009 and 2010 had stalled. The United States Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor claims in their 2012 report on human rights practices in the country that the most significant problems are corruption, lack of religious freedom, abuse, and unequal treatment of women.\nAdministrative divisions.\nMaldives has twenty-six natural atolls and few island groups on isolated reefs, all of which have been divided into twenty-one administrative divisions (17 administrative atolls and cities of Mal\u00e9, Addu, Fuvahmulah, Thinadhoo, and Kulhudhuffushi).\nEach atoll is administered by an elected Atoll Council. The islands are administered by an elected Island Council.\nIn addition to a name, every administrative division is identified by the Maldivian code letters, such as \"Haa Alif\" for Thiladhunmati Uthuruburi (Thiladhunmathi North); and by a Latin code letter. The first corresponds to the geographical Maldivian name of the atoll; the second is a code adopted for convenience. As certain islands in different atolls have the same name, for administrative purposes this code is quoted before the name of the island, for example: Baa Funadhoo, Kaafu Funadhoo, Gaafu-Alifu Funadhoo. Since most atolls have very long geographical names it is also used whenever the long name is inconvenient, for example in the atoll website names.\nThe introduction of code-letter names has been a source of much puzzlement and misunderstanding, especially among foreigners. Many people have come to think that the code letter of the administrative atoll is its new name and that it has replaced its geographical name. Under such circumstances, it is hard to know which is the correct name to use.\nEconomy.\nHistorically, Maldives provided enormous quantities of cowry shells, an international currency of the early ages. From the 2nd century CE, the islands were known as the 'Money Isles' by the Arabs. \"Monetaria moneta\" was used for centuries as a currency in Africa, and huge amounts of Maldivian cowries were introduced into Africa by western nations during the period of slave trade. The cowry is now the symbol of Maldives Monetary Authority.\nIn the early 1970s and 1980s, Maldives was one of the world's 20 poorest countries, with a population of 100,000. The economy at the time was largely dependent on fisheries and trading local goods such as coir rope, ambergris (Maavaharu), and coco de mer (Tavakkaashi) with neighbouring countries and East Asian countries.\nThe Maldivian government began a largely successful economic reform programme in the 1980s, initiated by lifting import quotas and giving more opportunities to the private sector. At that time, the tourism sector was in its infant stage but would later play a significant role in the nation's development. Agriculture and manufacturing continue to play lesser roles in the economy, constrained by the limited availability of cultivable land and the shortage of domestic labour.\nTourism.\nMaldives remained largely unknown to tourists until the early 1970s. Only 200 islands are home to its 382,751 inhabitants. The other islands are used entirely for economic purposes, of which tourism and agriculture are the most dominant. Tourism accounts for 28% of the GDP and more than 60% of Maldives' foreign exchange receipts. Over 90% of government tax revenue comes from import duties and tourism-related taxes.\nThe development of tourism fostered the overall growth of the country's economy. It created direct and indirect employment and income generation opportunities in other related industries. The first tourist resorts were opened in 1972 with Bandos Island Resort and Kurumba Village (the current name is Kurumba Maldives), which transformed Maldives' economy.\nAccording to the Ministry of Tourism, the emergence of tourism in 1972 transformed the economy, moving rapidly from dependence on fisheries to tourism. In just three and a half decades, the industry became the main source of income. Tourism was also the country's biggest foreign currency earner and the single largest contributor to the GDP. As of 2008[ [update]], 89 resorts in Maldives offered over 17,000 beds and hosted over 600,000 tourists annually. In 2019, over 1.7\u00a0million visitors came to the islands.\nThe number of resorts increased from 2 to 92 between 1972 and 2007. As of 2007[ [update]], over 8,380,000 tourists had visited Maldives.\nThe country has six heritage Maldivian coral mosques listed as UNESCO tentative sites.\nVisitors.\nVisitors to Maldives do not need to apply for a visa pre-arrival, regardless of their country of origin, provided they have a passport with at least 1 month validity, a complete travel itinerary (including return journey confirmed tickets, prepaid confirmed booking at a registered facility, proof of financial means for sufficient funds to support the stay in Maldives, and entry requirements for their onward destinations\u2014such as visa and passport validity), a Traveller Declaration form (which must be filled out and submitted by all foreigners arriving in Maldives within 96 hours of the flight), and a Yellow Fever Vaccination Certificate, if applicable. However, entry is denied to Israeli passports.\nMost visitors arrive at Velana International Airport, on Hulhul\u00e9 Island, adjacent to the capital Mal\u00e9. The airport is served by flights to and from India, Sri Lanka, Doha, Dubai, Abu Dhabi, Singapore, Dhaka, Istanbul, and major airports in South-East Asia like Kuala Lumpur International in Malaysia, as well as charters from Europe like Charles De Gaulle in France. Gan Airport, on the southern atoll of Addu, also serves an international flight to Malpensa in Milan several times a week. British Airways offers direct flights to Maldives from Heathrow Airport.\nFishing industry.\nFor many centuries the Maldivian economy was entirely dependent on fishing and other marine products. Fishing remains the main occupation of the people and the government gives priority to the fisheries sector.\nThe mechanisation of the traditional fishing boat called \"dhoni\" in 1974 was a major milestone in the development of the fisheries industry. A fish canning plant was installed on Felivaru in 1977, as a joint venture with a Japanese firm. In 1979, a Fisheries Advisory Board was set up with the mandate of advising the government on policy guidelines for the overall development of the fisheries sector. Manpower development programmes began in the early 1980s, and fisheries education was incorporated into the school curriculum. Fish aggregating devices and navigational aids were located at various strategic points. Moreover, the opening up of the exclusive economic zone (EEZ) of Maldives for fisheries has further enhanced the growth of the fisheries sector.\nAs of 2010[ [update]], fisheries contributed over 15% of the country's GDP and engaged about 30% of the country's workforce. Fisheries were also the second-largest foreign exchange earner after tourism.\nDemographics.\nThe largest ethnic group in the country are Maldivians (), native to the historic region of the Maldive Islands comprising today's Republic of Maldives and the island of Minicoy in Union territory of Lakshadweep, India. They share the same culture and speak the Dhivehi language. They are principally an Indo-Aryan people, having traces of Middle Eastern, South Asian, Austronesian and African genes in the population.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Bar chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn the past, there was also a small Tamil population known as the Giraavaru people. This group has now been almost completely assimilated into the larger Maldivian society but were native to the island of Giraavaru, which was evacuated in 1968 due to heavy erosion of the island. A small Sinhalese population in Maldives also made up about 0.7% of the total population in 2000.\nSome social stratification exists on the islands. It is not rigid, since rank is based on varied factors, including occupation, wealth, Islamic virtue, and family ties. Instead of a complex caste system, there was merely a distinction between noble (b\u0113fulhu) and common people in Maldives. Members of the social elite are concentrated in Mal\u00e9.\nThe population doubled by 1978, and the population growth rate peaked at 3.4% in 1985. By the 2006 census, the population had reached 298,968, although the census in 2000 showed that the population growth rate had declined to 1.9%. Life expectancy at birth stood at 46 years in 1978, and later rose to 72. Infant mortality has declined from 12.7% in 1977 to 1.2% today, and adult literacy reached 99%. Combined school enrolment reached the high 90s. The population was projected to have reached 317,280 in 2010.\nThe 2022 Population, Housing and Economic Census listed the total population in Maldives as 515,132 of which 382,639 were resident Maldivians and 132,493 were resident foreigners, with the foreign-born population comprising 26% of the total population. The six largest nationalities among migrants were Bangaldeshi (56.4 percent), Indian (24.9 percent), Sri Lankan (8.6 percent), Nepali (3.9 percent), Indonesian (1.7 percent), and Filipino (1.3 percent).\nAn increasing share of the Maldivian population is concentrated in Male. In 2022, approximately 41% of the population resided in the capital, compared to just 27% in 2000.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReligion.\nAfter the long Buddhist period of Maldivian history, Muslim traders introduced Islam. Maldivians converted to Islam by the mid-12th century. The islands have had a long history of Sufic orders, as can be seen in the history of the country such as the building of tombs. They were used until as recently as the 1980s for seeking the help of buried saints. They can be seen next to some old mosques and are considered a part of Maldives's cultural heritage.\nOther aspects of tassawuf, such as ritualised dhikr ceremonies called Maul\u016bdu (Mawlid) \u2013 the liturgy of which included recitations and certain supplications in a melodic tone \u2013 existed until very recent times. These Maul\u016bdu festivals were held in ornate tents specially built for the occasion. At present Islam is the official religion of the entire population, as adherence to it is required for citizenship.\nAccording to Arab traveller Ibn Battuta, the person responsible for this conversion was a Sunni Muslim visitor named Abu al-Barakat Yusuf al-Barbari, sailing from what is today Morocco. He is also referred to as Tabrizugefaanu. His venerated tomb now stands on the grounds of Medhu Ziyaaraiy, across the street from the Friday Mosque, or Hukuru Miskiy, in Mal\u00e9. Originally built in 1153 and re-built in 1658, this is one of the country's oldest surviving mosques.\nFelix Wilfred notes that the number of Christians in Maldives as 1,400 or 0.4% of the country's population.\nSince the adoption of the 2008 constitution, Islam is established as the country's state religion and Maldivian citizens are required by law to follow Sunni Islam. However, in 2020, independent studies found that approximately 0.29% of the population is Christian (roughly split between Catholic and Protestant).\nLanguages.\nThe official and national language is Dhivehi, an Indo-Aryan language closely related to the Sinhala language of Sri Lanka. The first known script used to write Dhivehi is the \"eveyla akuru\" script, which is found in the historical recording of kings (\"raadhavalhi\"). Later a script called \"Dhives Akuru\" was used for a long period. The present-day script is called Thaana and is written from right to left. Thaana is derived from a mix of the old indigenous script of Dhives Akuru and Arabic abjad. Thaana is said to have been introduced during the reign of Mohamed Thakurufaanu.\nEnglish is widely spoken by the locals of Maldives: \"Following the nation's opening to the outside world, the introduction of English as a medium of instruction at the secondary and tertiary levels of education, and its government's recognition of the opportunities offered through tourism, English has now firmly established itself in the country. As such, Maldives are quite similar to the countries in the Gulf region... The nation is undergoing vast societal change, and English is part of this.\"\nOtherwise, Arabic is taught in schools and mosques, as Sunni Islam is the state religion. The Maldivian population has formal or informal education in the reading, writing, and pronunciation of the Arabic language, as part of the compulsory religious education for all primary and secondary school students.\nThikijehi Thaana\nThese additional letters were added to the Thaana alphabet by adding dots () to existing letters, to allow for transliteration of Arabic loanwords, as previously Arabic loanwords were written using the Arabic script. Their usage is inconsistent, and becoming less frequent as the spelling changes to reflect pronunciation by Maldivians, rather than the original Arabic pronunciation, as the words get absorbed into the Maldivian language.\nHealth.\nThe Human Rights Measurement Initiative reports that Maldives is meeting 5.1 out of 10 of the expected fulfilment for the right to health considering its income level. Specifically for children's health rights, Maldives attains 98.0% of the anticipated level based on its current income. Regarding adult health rights, the country achieves 99.7% of the expected fulfilment considering its income level. However, in terms of reproductive health rights, Maldives falls into the \"very bad\" category, as it fulfills only 18.2% of the expected achievement based on its available resources.\nLife expectancy at birth in Maldives was 77 years in 2011. Infant mortality fell from 34 per 1,000 in 1990 to 15 in 2004. There is an increasing disparity between health in the capital and on the other islands. There is also a problem of malnutrition. Imported food is expensive.\nOn 24 May 2021, Maldives had the world's fastest-growing COVID-19 outbreak, with the highest number of infections per million people over the prior 7 and 14 days, according to data compiled by Bloomberg. Doctors warned that increasing demand for COVID-19 care could hinder their ability to handle other health emergencies in Maldives. The reason for the outbreak was the Delta variant.\nTransportation.\nVelana International Airport is the principal gateway to Maldives; it is adjacent to the capital city Mal\u00e9 and is connected by Sinamal\u00e9 Bridge. International travel is available on government-owned Island Aviation Services (branded as Maldivian), which operates DHC-6 Twin Otter seaplanes and to nearly all Maldivian domestic airports with several Bombardier Dash 8 aircraft, and one Airbus A320 with international service to India, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Malaysia, Thailand, and China.\nIn Maldives, there are three main ways to travel between islands: by domestic flight, by seaplane, or by boat. For several years two seaplane companies were operating: TMA (Trans Maldivian Airways) and Maldivian Air Taxi, but these merged in 2013 under the name TMA. The seaplane fleet is entirely made up of DHC-6 Twin Otters. There is also another airline, Villa Air, which operates using ATR planes to domestic airports, principally Villa-Maamigili, Dharavandhoo and some others. Manta Air began its first scheduled seaplane service in 2019. Its seaplane fleet is made up of DHC-6 Twin Otter aircraft. In addition to the seaplane service, Manta Air uses ATR 72\u2013600 aircraft to operate domestic flights to Dhaalu Airport, Dharavandhoo Airport and Kooddoo Airport from the main Velana International Airport. Depending on the distance of the destination island from the airport, resorts organise speedboat transfers or seaplane flights directly to the resort island jetty for their guests. Several daily flights operate from Velana International Airport to the 18 domestic and international airports in the country. Scheduled ferries also operate from Mal\u00e9 to many of the atolls. The traditional Maldivian boat is called a dhoni, one of the oldest known sea vessels in Maldives. Speedboats and seaplanes tend to be more expensive, while travel by dhoni, although slower, is relatively cheaper and convenient.\nEducation.\nThe Maldives National University is one of the country's institutions of higher education. In 1973, the Allied Health Services Training Centre (the forerunner of the Faculty of Health Sciences) was established by the Ministry of Health. The Vocational Training Centre was established in 1974, providing training for mechanical and electrical trades. In 1984, the Institute for Teacher Education was created and the School of Hotel and Catering Services was established in 1987 to provide trained personnel for the tourist industry. In 1991, the Institute of Management and Administration was created to train staff for public and private services. In 1998, Maldives College of Higher Education was founded. The Institute of Shar'ah and Law was founded in January 1999. In 2000 the college launched its first-degree programme, Bachelor of Arts. On 17 January 2011, Maldives National University Act was passed by the President of Maldives; Maldives National University was named on 15 February 2011. In 2015 under a Presidential decree the College of Islamic Studies was changed into the Islamic University of Maldives (IUM).\nThe Maldivian government now offers 3 different scholarships to students who have completed their higher secondary education with results above a certain threshold, with ranks of the scholarship received depending on the merits achieved by students on their year 12 examinations.\nCulture.\nThe culture of Maldives is influenced by the cultures of the people of different ethnicities who have settled on the islands throughout the times.\nSince the 12th century AD, there were also influences from Arabia in the language and culture of Maldives because of the conversion to Islam and its location as a crossroads in the central Indian Ocean. This was due to the long trading history between the far east and the middle east.\nReflective of this is the fact that Maldives has had the highest national divorce rate in the world for many decades. This, it is hypothesised, is due to a combination of liberal Islamic rules about divorce and the relatively loose marital bonds that have been identified as common in non- and semi-sedentary peoples without a history of fully developed agrarian property and kinship relations.\nMedia.\nPSM news serves as the country's main media, owned by the government of Maldives. The newspaper was founded on 3 May 2017, in the celebration of World Press Freedom Day. Maldives has been ranked one\u2013hundred in the World Press Freedom Index 2023 and 106 in 2024. The country's first daily newspaper, Haveeru Daily News was the first and longest\u2013serving newspaper in the history of Maldives, which was registered on 28 December 1978, and dissolved in 2016.\nArticle 28 of Maldives Constitution guarantees freedom of the press and stipulates that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;No person shall be compelled to disclose the source of any information that is espoused, disseminated, or published by that person.\nHowever, this protection is compromised by the Evidence Act, which came into effect in January 2023 and grants courts the authority to compel journalists to reveal their confidential sources. Maldives Media Council (MMC) and Maldives Journalists Association (MJA) serve as crucial watchdogs in addressing and combating these threats. Newspapers \"Sun Online\", \"Mihaaru\" and its English edition named \"The Edition,\" and \"Avas\" serve as well\u2013known private news outlets.\nSports.\nSports are deeply ingrained in the culture of Maldives, with various activities based on traditional pastimes and modern sporting pursuits. Given its geography of scattered islands surrounded by the Indian Ocean, water sports naturally hold a prominent position. Surfing, in particular, has gained international recognition. Locations such as the atolls of North and South Mal\u00e9, Thulusdhoo, and Himmafushi offer ideal surfing conditions. Additionally, diving and snorkelling are immensely popular.\nFootball in Maldives is one of the most widely played and passionately-followed sports in the country. Maldives national football team competes in regional and international tournaments. The country has its own domestic football league, the Dhivehi Premier League, featuring clubs from various atolls vying for supremacy. Matches often draw large crowds. Futsal is also popular, especially among younger generations, with numerous indoor facilities providing spaces for friendly matches and competitive leagues.\nBodu Beru, a rhythmic drumming and dance performance, often accompanies events for traditional sports such as \"Baibalaa\", a game resembling volleyball but played with a woven ball made from dried coconut palm leaves, and \"Fenei Bashi\", a form of wrestling.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19118", "revid": "37752040", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19118", "title": "History of the Maldives", "text": "The history of the Maldives is intertwined with the history of the broader Indian subcontinent and surrounding areas in South Asia and the Indian Ocean. The Maldives is formed of 26 natural atolls, comprising 1,194 islands.\nThe Maldives historically has held strategic importance due to its location on the major marine routes of the Indian Ocean. Its closest neighbours are the British Indian Ocean Territory, Sri Lanka, and India. The United Kingdom, Sri Lanka, and some Indian kingdoms in the past have had deep cultural and economic ties with the Maldives for centuries. Maldivians also traded with Aceh and many other kingdoms in what is now Indonesia and Malaysia. The Maldives were a primary source of cowrie shells, which were then used as currency throughout Asia and parts of the East African coast.\nThe Maldives were influenced by the Kalingas of ancient India. The Kalingas were the earliest region of India to trade with Sri Lanka and the Maldives; thus, they were responsible for the spread of Buddhism. Stashes of Chinese crockery found buried in various locations in the Maldives also show that there was direct or indirect trade contact between China and the Maldives. In 1411 and 1430, the Chinese admiral Zheng He (\u912d\u548c) visited the Maldives; the Republic of China (Taiwan) later became the first country to establish a resident embassy in Mal\u00e9 in 1966.\nDuring the 16th century, when sea faring European colonial powers gained prominence in the Indian Ocean, the Maldives were contacted by the Portuguese the Dutch, and then the French. The Portuguese had occupied the country from 1558 to 1573. \nThe Maldives became a British protectorate in the 19th century. The Maldivian monarchy was granted a degree of self-governance while the British ruled over the country\u2019s external affairs.\nThe Maldives gained independence from the British and became a republic on 26 July 1965. The British continued to operate an air base on the island of Gan in the southernmost atoll which it leased from the Maldivian government until 1976. The British departure in 1976, at the height of the Cold War, almost immediately triggered foreign speculation about the future of the air base. The Soviet Union requested the use of the base, but the Maldives refused.\nThe republic's greatest challenge in the early 1990s was the need for rapid economic development and modernisation given the country's limited resource base in fishing and tourism. Concern was also evident over a projected long-term sea level rise which would prove disastrous to the Maldives' low-lying coral islands.\nEarly Age.\nMuch of the history of the Maldives is unknown. However, based on legend and actual data, it can be deduced that the islands have been inhabited for over 2,500 years according to an old folklore from the Maldives' southern atoll.\nDuring Sultan Ibrahim Iskandar I's rule in the 17th century, Allama Shihabuddine, of Meedhoo on Addu Atoll, wrote the book \"Kitab Fi al-Athari Midu al-Qadimiyyah\" (\"On the Ancient Ruins of Meedhoo\") in Arabic. The account is strikingly consistent with known South Asian history, referencing India's legendary Emperor Asoka. It also backs up excerpts found in old Maldivian records and the Loamaafaanu copper plates. Legends from the past, copper plate inscriptions, ancient engravings on coral-stone artefacts, and stories passed down through oral traditions have also helped flesh out the Maldives' history.\nCompared to the southern islands, up to 800 kilometres away, the northern islands may have had a different migratory and settlement history.\nThe first settlers to the southern Maldives.\nA delegation from the Divi people sent gifts to the Roman Emperor Julian according to a fourth-century note published by Ammianus Marcellinus in 362 AD (1937, Rolfe). (\"Divi\" is remarkably similar to \"Dheyvi,\" and thus they may refer to the same people.)\nThe Redi and the Kunibee, from India's Maharashtra area, were among the later settlers. The people from northern India arrived in the Maldives roughly during the sixth to fifth centuries B.C.\u2014three centuries before Emperor Asoka built his state in India. According to folklore, they were not native to India and had arrived from another country. Hinduism was also brought to the Maldives during this period (Shihabuddine, c. 1650\u20131687).\nDheeva Maari.\nThe Dheyvis found Suvadinmathi (the Huvadhu Atoll) after their first settlement in Isdhuva in Isduvammathi (the Haddhunmathi Atoll) according to Shihabuddine. These people gave the term \"duva\" to each island where they first lived and discovered. They went on to establish the Kingdom of Dheeva Maari.\nThe first known monarch of the Dheevis.\nThe kingdom of Adeetta Vansa was formed in Dheeva Maari by Sri Soorudasaruna Adeettiya. He was the first known monarch of the Dheyvis of Dheeva Maari. He had been the exiled prince of Kalinga kingdom before he founded the kingdom of Adeetta Vansa, and this founding preceded the creation of the kingdom of Malik Aashooq.\nOnce, a group from Bairat came to Dheeva Mahal to preach the beliefs and works of Buddha. (Dheeva Mahal was the name given to Dheeva Maari during the time.)\nThe first settlers to the northern Maldives.\nFolklore indicates that northern atolls of the Maldives were populated by other tribes from southern India with darker skin colours. According to legends, the islands they populated were named Nolhivaram, Kuruhinnavaram, and Giravaram (Shihabuddine, c. 1650\u20131687). These islands are now known as Nolhivaramu, Hinnavaru, and Giravaru. (The names likely evolved over many centuries to their current form.)\nComparative studies of Maldivian oral, linguistic, and cultural traditions and customs indicate that some of the earliest settlers to the northern Maldives were descendants of fishermen from the southwest coasts of present-day India and the northwestern shores of Sri Lanka. One such community is the Giraavaru people. They are mentioned in ancient legends and local folklore, specifically in regards to the establishment and kingly rule of the capital, Mal\u00e9.\nSome argue, from the presence of Jat Gujjar titles and Gotra names, that the Sindhis also accounted for an early influx of migration. Seafaring from Debal began during the Indus Valley civilisation, and the Jatakas and Puranas show abundant evidence of their maritime trade; the use of similar traditional boatbuilding techniques in Northwestern South Asia and the Maldives, as well as the presence of silver punch mark coins from both regions, lends additional weight to this view. Additionally, there are hints that Southeast Asian settlers ended up in Madagascar after getting separated from a main group of Austronesian reed boat seafarers.\nKingdom of Adeetta Vansa.\nThe Kingdom of Adeetta Vansa (Solar dynasty), formed in Dheeva Maari, ruled until the establishment of the Kingdom of Soma Vansa (Lunar dynasty). Soma Vansa was born in Kalinja; Adeetta Vansa was born in Kalinja as well. The Kingdom of Soma Vansa was founded by the son of a Soma Vansa monarch who ruled in Kalinja at the time. (Sri Balaadeettiya was the first king of Soma Vansa, while Queen Damahaar, his wife, was the final queen of Adeetta Vansa. Therefore, while the dynasty's name was altered to Soma Vansa, the monarchs were still related to both Soma Vansa and Adeetta Vansa.) Dheeva Maari turned to Islam over a century and a half later.\nKingdom of Soma Vansa.\nAt the start of the Soma Vansa dynasty, the Indian ruler Raja Dada invaded Dheeva Maari's northern two atolls, Malikatholhu and Thiladunmathi, and took control of them. Sri Loakaabarana, Sri Maha Sandura, Sri Bovana Aananda, as well as his son and brother, were the most recent five monarchs of Soma Vansa before the advent of Islam. After Sri Maha Sandura died, Raja Dada ascended to the crown.\nMahapansa.\nSri Maha Sandura's daughter, Kamanhaar (sometimes spelled Kamanaar), and Rehendihaar were exiled to the island of Is Midu. With her, she took \"Maapanansa\", a book that contained the history of Adeetta Vansa's kings. In his work, Al Muhaddith Hasan claims to have read the entire \"Maapanansa\", which was written on copper. He also claims to have buried all of \"Maapanansa\"'s parts. Sri Mahaabarana Adeettiya (Sri Bovana Aananda's son) ascended to the throne after him, after which he defeated the Indians who controlled Malikatholhu and Thiladunmathi. (The Indians belonged to the same tribe as Raja Dada, who was the first to conquer these two atolls.) Afterward, Sri Mahaabarana Adeettiya was given the title of monarch over 14 atolls and 2,000 islands. Malikaddu Dhemedhu, between Minicoy and Addu, became his Dheeva Mahal.\nArchaeological remains of the first settlers.\nThe first Maldivians haven't been known to leave any archaeological remains. It is speculated that their buildings were likely built of wood, palm fronds, and other perishable materials which would have quickly decayed in the salt and wind of the tropical climate. Moreover, chiefs or headmen didn't reside in elaborate stone palaces, nor did their religion require the construction of large temples or compounds.\nEarliest written history.\nThe earliest written history of the Maldives is marked by the arrival of Sinhalese people. They were descendants of the exiled Vanga Prince Vijaya from the ancient city known as Sinhapura in northeast India. He and his party of several hundred landed in Sri Lanka; some ended up in the Maldives circa 543\u2013483 B.C. According to the \"Maapanansa\", one of the ships that sailed with Prince Vijaya, who went to Sri Lanka around 500 B.C., went adrift and arrived at an island called Mahiladvipika, which has since been identified as the Maldives. It is also said that at that time, the people from Mahiladvipika used to travel to Sri Lanka.\nThe Sinhalese settlement in Sri Lanka and the Maldives marks a significant change in demographics and the development of the Indo-Aryan language Dhivehi, which is most similar in grammar, phonology, and structure to Sinhala and especially to the more ancient Elu Prakrit, with has less Pali influences. \nAlternatively, it is believed that Vijaya and his clan came from western India. This claim has been supported by linguistic and cultural features, as well as specific descriptions in the epics themselves, e.g. the detail that Vijaya visited Bharukaccha (Bharuch in Gujarat) in his ship on a southward voyage.\nPhilostorgius, a Greek historian of late antiquity, wrote of a hostage among the Romans who hailed from the island called Diva, which is presumed to be the Maldives; his name was Theophilus. Theophilus was sent around the year 350 to convert the Himyarites to Christianity and went to his homeland from Arabia; he returned to Arabia, visited Axum, and settled in Antioch.\nCaste system in Maldives.\nThe Maldivian society serves as an example of a social structure which has shed a lot of stratification-related characteristics, though it still holds onto certain remnants of its former caste society.\nBuddhist period.\nDespite being just mentioned briefly in most history books, the 1,400-year-long Buddhist period has foundational importance in the history of the Maldives. It was during this period that much of the culture of the Maldives developed and flourished. The Maldivian language, the first Maldive scripts, the architecture, the ruling institutions, and the customs and manners of the Maldivians originated from the time when the Maldives were a Buddhist kingdom.\nBefore embracing Buddhism as their way of life, Maldivians had practised an ancient form of Hinduism, specifically ritualistic traditions known as \u015arauta in the form of venerating the Surya (the ancient ruling caste were of Aadheetta or Suryavanshi origins).\nBuddhism likely spread to the Maldives in the third century B.C., the time of A\u015boka. Nearly all archaeological remains in the Maldives are from Buddhist stupas and monasteries, and all artefacts found to date display characteristic Buddhist iconography. Archeological evidence from an ancient Buddhist monastery in Kaashidhoo has been dated between 205 and 560 AD, based on the radiocarbon dating of shell deposits unearthed from the foundations of stupas and other structures in the monastery.\nMaldivian Buddhist (and Hindu) temples were mandala-shaped and oriented according to the four cardinal points, with the main gate facing the east. Ancient Buddhist stupas are locally called \"havitta,\" \"hatteli,\" or \"ustubu\" depending on the atoll; these stupas and other archaeological remains, like foundations of Vih\u0101ra, with compound walls and stone baths, are found on many islands of the Maldives. They usually lie buried under mounds of sand and are covered by vegetation. Local historian Hassan Ahmed Maniku counted as many as 59 islands with Buddhist archaeological sites in a provisional list he published in 1990. The largest monuments of the Buddhist era are in the islands fringing the eastern side of the Haddhunmathi Atoll.\nIn the early 11th century, the Minicoy and Thiladhunmathi, and possibly other northern Atolls, were conquered by the medieval Chola Tamil emperor Raja Raja Chola I, after which they became a part of the Chola Empire.\nThe unification of the archipelago is traditionally attributed to King Koimala. According to a legend from Maldivian folklore, in the early 12th century A.D., a medieval prince named Koimala, who was a nobleman of the Lion Race from Sri Lanka, sailed to Rasgetheemu island (literally \"Town of the Royal House\" or figuratively \"King's Town\") in the North Maalhosmadulu Atoll. From there, he sailed to Mal\u00e9 and established a kingdom named Dheeva Mari.\nBy then, the Aaditta (Sun dynasty, from the Suryavanshi ruling caste) had ceased to rule in Mal\u00e9, possibly because of invasions by the Cholas of southern India in the 10th century. Koimala, who reigned as King Mahaabarana, was a king of the Homa (Lunar dynasty, from the Chandravanshi ruling caste), which some historians call the House of Theemuge. The Homa sovereigns intermarried with the Aaditta sovereigns. This is why the formal titles of Maldivian kings, until 1968, contained references to \"kula sudha ira\", meaning \"descended from the Moon and the Sun\". No official record exists of the Aaditta dynasty's reign.\nSince Koimala's reign, the Maldives' throne was known as the Singaasana or Lion Throne. Before then, and in some situations since, it was also known as the Saridhaaleys or Ivory Throne. Some historians credit Koimala with freeing the Maldives from Chola rule.\nWestern interest in the archaeological remains of early cultures in the Maldives began with the work of H.C.P. Bell, a British commissioner of the Ceylon Civil Service. Bell was first ordered to the islands in late 1879 and returned several times to the Maldives to investigate ancient ruins. He studied the ancient mounds, called havitta or ustubu (names derived from chaitiya and stupa), which were found on many of the atolls. Notably, there's one Havitta on Fuvahmulah.\nEarly scholars\u2014like Bell, who resided in Sri Lanka for most of his life\u2014have claimed that Buddhism came to the Maldives from Sri Lanka and that the ancient Maldivians followed Theravada Buddhism. Since then, new archaeological discoveries point to Mahayana and Vajrayana Buddhist influences as well, which are likely to have come to the islands straight from the Indian subcontinent. An urn discovered in Maalhos (the Ari Atoll) in the 1980s had a Vishvavajra inscribed with Protobengali script. This text was in the same script used in the ancient Buddhist centers of learning in Nalanda and Vikramashila.\nLater, in the mid-1980s, the Maldivian government allowed Norwegian explorer Thor Heyerdahl to excavate ancient sites. Heyerdahl studied the ancient mounds, or Havitta, found on many atolls. Some of his archaeological discoveries of stone figures and carvings from pre-Islamic civilisations are today exhibited in a side room of the small National Museum. Heyerdahl's research indicates that as early as 2,000 B.C., the Maldives were a part of the maritime trading routes of early Egyptian, Mesopotamian, and Indus Valley civilisations.\nIn the National Museum, there is also a small porites stupa; on it, the directional Dhyani Buddhas (Jinas) were etched in its four cardinal points in the Mahayana tradition. Some coral blocks with fearsome heads of guardians also displayed Vajrayana Iconography. Additionally, Buddhist remains have been found in Minicoy Island, once part of a Maldivian kingdom, by the Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) in the latter half of the 20th century. Among these remains were a Buddha head and stone foundations of a Vihara.\nIslamic period.\nIntroduction of Islam.\nThe importance of the Arabs as traders in the Indian Ocean during the 12th century may partly explain why the last Buddhist king of Maldives, Dhovemi, converted to Islam in the year 1153 (or 1193, as certain copper plate grants give a later date). The king adopted the Muslim title and name of Sultan Muhammad al Adil, thus initiating a series of six dynasties consisting of 84 sultans and sultanas that lasted until 1932 when the sultanate became elective. The formal title of the Sultan up to 1965 was, Sultan of Land and Sea, Lord of the Twelve-Thousand Islands, and Sultan of the Maldives, which came with the address of highness.\nThe person traditionally deemed responsible for this religious conversion in the Maldives was a Sunni Muslim visitor named Abu al-Barakat Yusuf al-Barbari. His venerated tomb now stands on the grounds of Medhu Ziyaaraiy, across the street from the Hukuru Mosque in the capital Mal\u00e9. Built in 1656, this remains the oldest mosque in Mal\u00e9.\nIn Maldivian history books, the introduction of Islam at the end of the 12th century is considered the cornerstone of the country's history. The time before Islam is designated the time of Jahiliyyah, or ignorance.\nCompared to other areas of South Asia, the conversion of the Maldives to Islam happened relatively late. Arab Traders had converted populations in the Malabar Coast since the seventh century, and the Arab conqueror Muhammad Bin Q\u0101sim had converted large swathes of Sindh to Islam at around the same time. Meanwhile, the Maldives remained a Buddhist kingdom for another five hundred years, perhaps the southwest most Buddhist country, until its eventual conversion to Islam.\nCertain artefacts, known as Dhanbidh\u016b L\u014dm\u0101f\u0101nu, give information about the suppression of Buddhism in the southern Haddhunmathi Atoll, previously a major center of that religion. Monks were taken to Mal\u00e9 and beheaded, and the Satihirutalu (the Chatravali crowning a stupa) were broken to disfigure the numerous stupas; additionally, the statues of Vairocana, the transcendent Buddha of the middle world region, were destroyed. \nArab interest in Maldives was also reflected in Ibn Battutah's residence there in the 1340s. A well-known North African traveller, he wrote how a Moroccan, Abu al-Barakat Yusuf al-Barbari, was believed to have been responsible for spreading Islam in the islands, reportedly convincing the local king after having subdued Ranna Maari, a demon coming from the sea. Even though this report has been contested in later sources, some find that it does explain some crucial aspects of Maldivian culture. For instance, Arabic has historically been the prime language of administration in the Maldives rather than the Persian and Urdu languages used in the nearby Muslim states. Another link to North Africa is possibly the Maliki school of jurisprudence, used throughout most of North Africa, which was the official one of the Maldives until the 17th century.\nBerber Muslim Abu al-Barakat Yusuf al-Barbari is traditionally credited for the Maldives' Islamic conversion. According to a story told to Ibn Battutah, a mosque was built with the inscription: \"The Sultan Ahmad Shanurazah accepted Islam at the hand of Abu al-Barakat Yusuf al-Barbari.\" Some scholars also have suggested the possibility of Ibn Battuta misreading Maldivian texts and having a bias towards the North African, Maghrebi narrative of this Shaykh, instead of the East African or Persian origins account that was also well known at the time.\nScholars have posited another scenario where Abu al-Barakat Yusuf al-Barbari might have been a native of Barbera, a significant trading port on the northwestern coast of Somalia. This is evidenced by, during his visit to Mogadishu, Ibn Batuta's mentioning that the Sultan at that time, Abu Bakr ibn Shaikh Omar, was a Berber. Ibn Batuta also stated the Maldivian king was converted by Abu al-Barakat Yusuf al-Barbari.\nAnother interpretation, held by more reliable local historical chronicles, \"Raadavalhi\" and \"Taarikh\", is that Abu al-Barakat Yusuf al-Barbari was Abdul Barakat Yusuf Shams ud-D\u012bn at-Tabr\u012bz\u012b, also locally known as Tabr\u012bzugef\u0101nu. In the Arabic script, the words al-Barbari and al-Tabrizi are very much alike, since at the time, Arabic had several consonants that looked identical and could only be differentiated by overall context. (This has since changed by addition of dots above or below letters to clarify pronunciation. For example, the letter \"B\" in modern Arabic has a dot below, whereas the letter \"T\" looks identical except there are two dots above it.) In sum, \"\u066e\u0648\u0633\u06a1 \u0627\u0644\u066e\u066e\u0631\u066e\u0631\u0649\" could be read as \"Yusuf at-Tabrizi\" or \"Yusuf al-Barbari.\"\nCowrie shells and coir trade.\nInhabitants of the Middle East became interested in the Maldives due to its strategic location. Middle Eastern seafarers had just begun to take over the Indian Ocean trade routes in the 10th century and found the Maldives to be an important link to those routes. Specifically, the Maldives was the first landfall for traders from Basra sailing to Sri Lanka or Southeast Asia. Bengal was one of the principal trading partners of the Maldives. Trade between these regions involved mainly cowrie shells and coir fibre.\nThe Maldives had an abundant supply of cowry shells, a form of currency that was widely used throughout Asia and parts of the East African coast. Shell currency imported from the Maldives was used as legal tender in the Bengal Sultanate and Mughal Bengal alongside gold and silver. In exchange for cowry shells, the Maldives received rice; the Bengal-Maldives cowry shell trade was the largest shell currency trade network in history. The local name for cowry shells is Boli. There are several hundreds of these shells found on the beaches of the islands even today.\nThe other essential product of the Maldives was coir, the fibre of the dried coconut husk. Cured in pits, beaten, spun, and then twisted into cordage and ropes, coir's salient quality is its resistance to saltwater. It was used to stitch together and rig the dhows that plied the Indian Ocean. Maldivian coir was exported to Sindh, China, Yemen, and the Persian Gulf. \"It is stronger than hemp,\" wrote Ibn Battuta, \"and is used to sew together the planks of Sindhi and Yemeni dhows, for this sea abounds in reefs, and if the planks were fastened with iron nails, they would break into pieces when the vessel hit a rock. The coir gives the boat greater elasticity, so that it doesn't break up.\"\nColonial period.\nPortuguese colonisation and local revolt.\nIn 1558, the Portuguese Empire established a colony in the Maldives, which they administered from their main colony in Goa. This colony included the west coast of modern-day Kerala, Karnataka, and Ceylon. The Portuguese tried to impose Christianity on the locals; one native ruler converted to Christianity during this period and married D. Francisca de Vasconcelos, an \u00f3rf\u00e3s do rei.\nIn 1573, a local leader named Muhammad Thakurufaanu-al-A'uzam and his two brothers, Ali and Hassan, from Utheemu of North Thiladhumathi Atoll, organised a popular revolt to drive out the Portuguese from the islands. The three brothers landed on a different island every night; they would fight the Portuguese and return to Utheemu before daybreak. On the first day of Rabi' al-Awwal, the brothers reached Mal\u00e9. It had been rumoured that the Portuguese garrison of Andreas Andre (locally known as Andhiri Andhirin, meaning \"dark dark\" or, in English, \"Andrew Andrew\") had planned to come to the island and forcibly convert the local Maldivians into Christianity the night after. Knowing this, the local fighters were ready to die for their faith and people, to liberate their people from the outsiders. According to reports, Andreas Andre was killed by a musket shot by Muhammad Thakurufaanu himself. This eventually resulted in the surrender of the Portuguese troops, who thus left the islands. Afterwards, the local islanders chose Muhammad Thakurufaanu to be their sultan in 1573, thus putting the Utheemu dynasty in power until 1697.\nEvery first day of Rabi' al-Awwal, the Maldives observes the Gaumee Dhuvas, or Maldives National Day, in remembrance of Muhammad Thakurufaanu. His home in Utheemu is known locally as Utheemu Ganduvaru or Utheemu Palace. Many pieces of furniture that were inside the house are now located inside the Maldives National Museum in Mal\u00e9. A memorial center is also located near Utheemu Ganduvaru.\nDutch hegemony.\nIn the mid-17th century, the Dutch came to take over the Maldives, and in the late 1650s (around 1658), the Dutch colonised the islands. They administered their colony in Ceylon, which in turn was administered by the Dutch East India Company. They then established hegemony over Maldivian affairs without directly involving themselves in local matters, which remained governed according to centuries-old Islamic customs.\nIn 1796, the local revolt disrupted the colonists; with British interference and pressure, the Dutch stepped down from the islands.\nBritish protectorate.\nThe British expelled the Dutch from Ceylon in 1796, after which they designated Maldives as a British-protected area. Britain had gotten involved with the Maldives as a result of domestic disturbances which targeted the settler community of Bora merchants, who were British subjects in the 1860s. The rivalry between two dominant families, the Athireege clan and the Kakaage clan, was resolved with the former winning the favour of the British authorities in Ceylon. The status of Maldives as a British protectorate was officially recorded in an 1887 agreement.\nOn 16 December 1887, the Sultan of the Maldives Muhammad Mueenuddeen II signed a contract with the British Governor of Ceylon, turning the Maldives into a British-protected state and thus giving up the islands' sovereignty in matters of foreign policy but retaining internal self-government. The British government promised military protection and non-interference in local administration, which continued to be regulated by Muslim traditional institutions, in exchange for an annual tribute. The status of the islands thus was akin to other British protectorates in the Indian Ocean region, i.e.Zanzibar and the Trucial States.\nDuring the British era, which lasted until 1965, the Maldives continued to be ruled by a succession of sultans. It was a period during which the Sultan's authority and powers were increasingly and decisively taken over by the Chief Minister, much to the chagrin of the British Governor-General, who continued to deal with the ineffectual Sultan. Consequently, Britain encouraged the development of a constitutional monarchy, and thus the Maldives' first Constitution was proclaimed in 1932. However, the new arrangements favoured neither the Sultan nor the Chief Minister but rather a young crop of British-educated reformists. As a result, angry mobs were instigated against the Constitution, which was publicly torn up.\nThe Maldives were only marginally affected by the Second World War. The Italian auxiliary cruiser Ramb I was sunk off Addu Atoll in 1941. In March 1944, the German submarine U-183 fired through the Gan channel, torpedoing the oil tanker \"British Loyalty\" that had been anchored in the Addu lagoon. The tanker was damaged but not sunk, and its oil spilt out into the lagoon and beaches. Over time, the \"British Loyalty\" was repaired and remained in the atoll for storage through the rest of the war. It was finally scuttled in January 1946 inside the atoll southeast of Hithadhoo.\nAfter the death of Sultan Majeed Didi and his son, the members of the parliament elected Mohamed Amin Didi as the next person in line to succeed him as Sultan. However, Didi refused to take up the throne. Afterwards, a referendum was held in 1952, and the Maldives became a republic with Amin Didi as the first elected president, marking the abolition of the 812-year-old sultanate.\nWhile serving as prime minister during the 1940s, Didi nationalised the fish export industry. He has also been remembered as a reformer of the education system and a promoter of women's rights. However, while he was in Ceylon for medical treatment, a revolution was instigated by the people of Mal\u00e9, headed by his deputy Velaanaagey Ibraahim Didi. When Amin Didi returned, he was confined to Dhoonidhoo Island. He escaped to Mal\u00e9 and tried to take control of Bandeyrige but was beaten by an angry mob. He died soon after.\nAfter the fall of Didi, a referendum was held in 1953. Ultimately, 98% of the people voted in favour of restoration of the monarchy, so the country was once again declared a Sultanate. A new parliament was elected, as the former had been dissolved after the end of the revolution. The new parliament members decided to take a secret vote to elect a sultan, after which Prince Muhammad Fareed Didi was elected as the 84th Sultan in 1954. His first Prime Minister was Ibraahim Ali Didi, later known as Ibraahim Faamuladheyri Kilegefaan. On 11 December 1957, the Prime Minister was forced to resign, and Velaanagey Ibrahim Nasir was elected in his place the following day.\nBritish military presence and Suvadive secession.\nBeginning in the 1950s, political history in Maldives was largely influenced by the British military presence in the islands. In 1954, the restoration of the sultanate still perpetuated the rule of the past. Two years later, however, the United Kingdom obtained permission to reestablish its wartime RAF Gan airfield in Addu Atoll. The Maldives then granted the British a 100-year lease on Gan that required them to pay a year and around 440,000 square meters on Hitaddu for radio installations. This served as a staging post for British military flights to the east and Australia, replacing RAF Mauripur in Pakistan (which had been relinquished in 1956).\nIn 1957, Nasir called for a review of the agreement in the interest of shortening the lease and increasing the annual payment. He also announced a new tax on boats. However, Nasir was challenged in 1959 by a local secessionist movement in the southern atolls which benefited economically from the British presence on Gan. This group cut ties with the Maldives government and formed an independent state, the United Suvadive Republic, with Abdullah Afeef as president. The short-lived state (1959\u201363) had a combined population of 20,000 inhabitants scattered over Huvadu, Addu and Fua Mulaku.\nAfeef pleaded for support and recognition from Britain in the 25 May 1959 edition of \"The Times of London\". However, the initial lukewarm support from the British for the small breakaway nation was withdrawn in 1961 when the British signed a treaty with the Maldive Islands without involving Afeef. Following that treaty, the Suvadives had to endure an economic embargo. Furthermore, in 1962, Nasir sent gunboats from Mal\u00e9, with government police on board, to eliminate elements opposed to his rule. One year later, the United Suvadive Republic was scrapped, and Abdullah Afif went into exile to the Seychelles where he later died in 1993.\nMeanwhile, in 1960, the Maldives had allowed the United Kingdom to continue to use both the Gan and the Hitaddu facilities for a 30-year period with a payment of over the period of 1960\u20131965 for the purpose of Maldives' economic development. The base was eventually closed in 1976 as part of the larger British withdrawal of permanently stationed forces, \"East of Suez,\" initiated by Harold Wilson's government.\nIndependence.\nOn 26 July 1965, Maldives gained independence under an agreement signed with United Kingdom. However, the British government retained the use of the Gan and Hithadhoo facilities. Later, in a national referendum in March 1968, Maldivians abolished the sultanate and established a republic.\nIn line with the broader British policy of decolonisation on 26 July 1965, an agreement was signed on behalf of His Majesty the Sultan by Ibrahim Nasir Rannabandeyri Kilegefan, Prime Minister, and on behalf of Her Majesty The Queen by Sir Michael Walker, British ambassador designate to the Maldive Islands. This ended the British responsibility for the \"Defence and External Affairs\" of the Maldives. The islands thus achieved full political independence, with the ceremony taking place at the British High Commissioner's Residence in Colombo. After this, the sultanate continued for another three years under Muhammad Fareed Didi, who declared himself King rather than Sultan.\nOn 15 November 1967, a vote was taken in parliament to decide whether the Maldives should continue as a constitutional monarchy or become a republic. Of the 44 members of parliament, 40 voted in favour of a republic. On 15 March 1968, a national referendum was held on the question, and 81.23% of those taking part voted in favour of establishing a republic. The republic was declared on 11 November 1968, thus ending the 853-year-old monarchy. Ibrahim Nasir, the former prime minister, became the republic's first president. Under the new constitution, Nasir was elected indirectly to a four-year presidential term by the Majlis (legislature) and his candidacy later ratified by referendum. He appointed Ahmed Zaki as the new prime minister. As the Maldives' king had held little real power before, this was seen as a cosmetic change and required few alterations in the structures of government.\nNasir presidency.\nIn 1973, Nasir was elected to a second term under the constitution as amended in 1972, which extended the presidential term to five years and also provided for the election of the prime minister by the parliament. In March 1975, Zaki was arrested in a bloodless coup and was banished to a remote atoll. Observers suggested that Zaki had been becoming too popular and hence posed a threat to the Nasir faction.\nNasir is widely credited with modernising the long-isolated and nearly unknown Maldives by introducing new avenues to connect with the rest of the world, including the development of its first international airport (Mal\u00e9 International Airport) in 1966 and ushering the Maldives into United Nations membership. He also strengthened the economic foundations of the nation by modernising the fisheries industry with mechanised vessels and triggered the tourism industry\u2014the two prime drivers of today's Maldivian economy. Tourism in the Maldives developed further through the 1970s; the first resort was Kurumba Maldives which welcomed its first guests on 3 October 1972.\nNasir was additionally credited with many other improvements such as introducing an English-based modern curriculum to government-run schools and granting Maldivian women the right to vote in 1964. He also brought television and radio to the country with formation of \"Television Maldives\" and \"Radio Maldives\" for broadcasting radio signals nationwide. Furthermore, he abolished Vaaru, a tax on the people living on islands outside Mal\u00e9. The first accurate census was held in December 1977 and showed 142,832 persons residing in Maldives.\nHowever, during the 1970s, the economic situation in Maldives suffered a setback when the Sri Lankan market for Maldives' main export of dried fish collapsed. Additionally, the British closed its airfield on Gan in 1975. A steep commercial decline followed its evacuation. As a result, the popularity of Nasir's government suffered. Furthermore, Nasir was generally criticised for his authoritarian methods against opponents, as well as for his iron-fisted methods in handling an insurrection by the Addu islanders who formed a short-lived breakaway government, the United Suvadives Republic, with closer ties to the British. Additionally, Nasir's hasty introduction of the Latin alphabet (Mal\u00e9 Latin) in 1976, instead of the local Thaana script, which was reportedly done to promote the use of telex machines in the local administration, was widely criticised. Clarence Maloney, a Maldives-based US anthropologist, lamented the inconsistencies of the \"Dhivehi Latin\" which ignored all previous linguistic research on the Maldivian language and didn't follow the modern Standard Indic transliteration. At the time of romanisation, every island's officials were required to use only one script, making them illiterate overnight. (Officials were relieved when the T\u0101na script was reinstated by President Maumoon Abdul Gayoom shortly after he took power in 1978. However, Mal\u00e9 Latin continues to be widely used.)\nMaldives's 20-year period of authoritarian rule under Nasir ended in 1978 when he fled to Singapore. A subsequent investigation revealed that he had absconded with millions of dollars from the state treasury. When Nasir relinquished power, Maldives was debt-free and the national shipping line with more than 40 ships remained a source of national pride.\nMaumoon presidency.\nAs Ibrahim Nasir's second term was coming to an end, he decided not to pursue re-election. Thus, in June 1978, the Maldives' legislative body, the Majlis, convened to nominate a presidential candidate. Nasir received 45 votes (despite his stated intention to not seek re-election), with the remaining 3 votes cast for Maumoon Abdul Gayoom, a former university lecturer and Maldivian ambassador to the United Nations. Another ballot was called on 16 June. Maumoon received 27 votes, emerging as the sole candidate.\nFive months later, Maumoon was elected the new President of the Maldives with 92.96% of the votes. (He would be later re-elected five times as the sole candidate). The peaceful election was seen as ushering in a period of political stability and economic development due to Maumoon's stated priority to develop rural islands. In 1978, Maldives joined the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. Tourism also increased in importance to the local economy; the country had more than 120,000 visitors in 1985. The local populace appeared to benefit from increased tourism, as well as the corresponding increase in foreign contacts involving various development projects.\nThere were three attempts to overthrow Maumoon's government during the 1980s: in 1980, 1983, and 1988. Whereas the 1980 and 1983 coup attempts against Maumoon's presidency weren't considered serious, the third coup attempt in November 1988 alarmed the international community, as about 80 armed mercenaries of the PLOTE Tamil militant group landed on Mal\u00e9 aboard used cargo vessels before dawn; they had taken almost 2 days to arrive Male' and failed to take over the capital city. Their plan was ill-prepared, and by noon, the PLOTE militants and their Maldivian allies fled the country, realising they had already lost. Soon after the militants had left, the Indian Military arrived on the request of President Gayoom, and their gun ships chased the fleeing militant vessels. 19 people died in the ensuing fight, including several hostages held by the militants, when the Indian gun ships opened fire. Many mercenaries along with the mastermind of the attempted coup were tried and sentenced to death, and committed to life in prison. Some were eventually pardoned.\nDespite coup attempts, Maumoon served three more presidential terms. In the 1983, 1988, and 1993 elections, Maumoon received more than 95% of the vote. Although the government didn't allow any legal opposition, Maumoon was opposed in the early 1990s by the growth of Islamist radicalisation, as well as by some powerful local business leaders.\nMaumoon's tenure was marked by several allegations of corruption, autocratic rule, human rights abuses, and corruption. Maumoon's opponents and international human rights groups continuously accused him of employing terror tactics against dissidents, such as arbitrary arrests, detention without trial, employing torture, forced confessions, and politically motivated killings.\n21st century.\nDemocratization.\nDuring the later part of Maumoon's rule, independent political movements emerged in Maldives which challenged the then-ruling Dhivehi Rayyithunge Party (Maldivian People's Party, MPP) and demanded democratic reform.\nDissident journalist Mohamed Nasheed founded the Maldivian Democratic Party (MDP) in 2003 while in exile. He had been imprisoned a total of 16 times under Maumoon's rule. His activism, as well as other events of civil unrest that year, pressured Maumoon into allowing for gradual political reforms.\n2003 civil unrest.\nSince 2003, following the death in custody of a prisoner, Hassan Evan Naseem, the Maldives experienced several anti-government demonstrations calling for political reforms, more freedoms, and an end to torture and oppression. Naseem had been killed in Maafushi Prison after suffering torture by prison staff. An attempt to cover up the death was foiled when the mother of the deceased discovered evidence of torture on his body and made the knowledge public, which triggered widespread protests.\nA subsequent disturbance at the prison resulted in three deaths when police guards at the prison opened fire on unarmed inmates. Several government buildings were set on fire during the riots. As a result of pressure from reformists, the junior prison guards responsible for Naseem's death were subsequently tried, convicted and sentenced in 2005 in what was believed to be a show trial that avoided the senior officers involved being investigated. The report of an inquiry into the prison shootings was heavily censored by the Government, citing \"national security\" grounds. Pro-reformists claim this was to cover-up the chain of authority and circumstances that led to the killings.\nBlack Friday protests.\nThere were fresh protests in the capital city of Maldives, Mal\u00e9 on 13 August 2004, known as Black Friday, which appeared to have begun as a demand for the release of four political activists from detention.\nBeginning on 12 August 2004, up to 5,000 demonstrators got involved. This unplanned and unorganised demonstration was the largest such protest in the country's history. Protesters initially demanding the freeing of the pro-reformists were arrested that afternoon. As the protest continued to grow, people demanded the resignation of president Maumoon Abdul Gayoom, who had been in power since 1978.\nWhat started as a peaceful demonstration ended after 22 hours, marking the country's darkest day in recent history. Several people were severely injured as personnel from the Maldivian National Security Service (NSS)\u2014later known as the Maldivian National Defence Force\u2014used riot batons and teargas on unarmed civilians. After two police officers were reportedly stabbed, allegedly by government agents provocateur, President Maumoon declared a State of Emergency and suppressed the demonstration, suspending all human rights guaranteed under the Constitution and thus banning demonstrations and the expression of views critical of the government. At least 250 pro-reform protesters were arrested. As part of the state of emergency, and to prevent independent reporting of events, the government shut off internet access and some mobile telephony services to Maldives on 13\u201314 August.As a result of these activities, political parties were eventually allowed in June 2005. The main parties registered in Maldives are: the Maldivian Democratic Party (MDP), the Dhivehi Raiyyithunge Party (DRP), the Islamic Democratic Party (IDP), and the Adhaalath Party (AP). The first party to register was the MDP, headed by popular opposition figures such as Nasheed (Anni) and Mohamed Latheef (Gogo). The next was the Dhivehi Raiyyithunge Party (DRP), headed by Maumoon.\n2005 protests.\nNew civil unrest broke out in Mal\u00e9 on Gaafu Dhaalu Atoll, as well as Addu Atoll, on 12 August 2005, which led to events that supported the democratic reform of the country. This unrest was provoked by Nasheed's arrest and the subsequent demolition of the Dhunfini tent used by the members of the Maldivian Democratic Party (MDP) for their gatherings.\nSupporters of MDP were quick to demonstrate. They started calling for the resignation of Maumoon soon after Nasheed's arrest. The tent's demolition complicated the situation further provoking the unrest. Several arrests were made on the first night. The unrest grew violent on the third night, on 14 August 2005, due to the methods used in the attempts by the authority to stop the demonstration. The unrest lasted from 12 to 14 August 2005, and by 15 August 2005, the uprising was controlled with the presence of heavy security around Mal\u00e9. Almost a fourth of the city had to be cordoned off during the unrest.\nTsunami impact.\nOn 26 December 2004, following the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake, the Maldives were devastated by a tsunami. Only nine islands were reported to have escaped any flooding, while 57 islands faced serious damage to critical infrastructure. 14 islands had to be totally evacuated, and six islands were destroyed. A further 21 resort islands were forced to close because of serious damage. The total damage was estimated at more than US$400\u00a0million, or around 62% of the country's GDP. 102 Maldivians and 6 foreigners reportedly died in the tsunami.\nThe destructive impact of the waves on the low-lying islands was mitigated by the absence of a continental shelf or land mass upon which the waves could gain height. The tallest waves were reported to be high.\nNasheed presidency.\nA new Constitution was ratified in August 2008, paving the way for the Maldives' first multi-party presidential election two months later. Standing as the DRP candidate, Maumoon lost in the election's second round; he received 45.75% of the vote against 54.25% for his opponents. The MDP's candidate, Nasheed, accordingly succeeded Maumoon as president on 11 November 2008, with Gaumee Itthihaad's candidate Mohamed Waheed Hassan in the new post of Vice-president.\nOne year later, the 2009 parliamentary election saw the Maldivian Democratic Party, headed by Nasheed, receive the most votes with 30.81%, thus gaining 26 seats. However, Maumoon's MPP, with 24.62% of the vote, received the most seats with 28.\nNasheed's government faced many challenges including the huge debt left by the previous government, the economic downturn following the 2004 tsunami, overspending (by means of overprinting of local currency rufiyaa) during his regime, as well as national issues pertaining to unemployment, corruption, and increasing drug use. Additionally, taxation on goods was imposed for the first time in the country, and import duties were reduced in many goods and services. Social welfare benefits were given to those above 65 years of age, single parents, and those with special needs.\nOn 10 November 2008, Nasheed announced an intent to create a sovereign wealth fund with money earned from tourism that could be used to purchase land elsewhere for the Maldives people to relocate in the event that rising sea levels, due to climate change, inundated the country. The government reportedly considered locations in Sri Lanka and India due to cultural and climate similarities, as well as faraway locations like Australia. An October 2009 cabinet meeting was held underwater (ministers wore scuba gear and communicated with hand signals) to publicise the threat of global warming on the low-lying islands of the Maldives.\nPolitical crisis.\nA series of peaceful protests broke out in the Maldives on 1 May 2011. They eventually escalated into the resignation of Nasheed amid disputed circumstances in February 2012.\nThe primary cause for the protests had been rising commodity prices and a poor economic situation in the country. Demonstrators protested what they considered the government's mismanagement of the economy, thus calling for Nasheed's ouster. The main political opposition party in the country, the MPP, led by Maumoon, accused President Nasheed of \"talking about democracy but not putting it into practice.\"\nWaheed presidency.\nNasheed resigned on 7 February 2012 following weeks of protests after he ordered the military to arrest Abdulla Mohamed, the Chief Justice of the Criminal Court, on 16 January. The Chief Justice was released from detention after Nasheed resigned from his post.\nThe Maldives police had joined protesters after refusing to use force on them and took over a state-owned television station, after which they forcibly switched the broadcast to Maumoon's call for people to come out to protest. The Maldives Army then clashed with police and other protesters who were with the police. All this time, none of the protesters tried to invade any security facility, including headquarters of MNDF.\nShortly after, Vice-president Mohamed Waheed Hassan was sworn as the new president of Maldives. Nasheed's supporters clashed with security personnel during a rally on 12 July 2012; they sought the ouster of President Waheed. Nasheed then stated the following day that he was forced out of office at gunpoint, though Waheed supporters maintained that the transfer of power was voluntary and constitutional.\nA later British Commonwealth meeting concluded that it could not \"determine conclusively the constitutionality of the resignation of President Nasheed\" but called for an international investigation. The Maldives' Commission of National Inquiry, appointed to investigate the matter, found that there was no evidence to support Nasheed's version of events. Many countries, including the United States and the United Kingdom, were subsequently quick to sideline Nasheed, instead endorsing his successor. (The United States backtracked in late 2012 in response to widespread criticism.) On 23 February 2012, the Commonwealth suspended the Maldives from its democracy and human rights watchdog while the ousting was being investigated; it also backed Nasheed's call for elections before the end of 2012.\nOn 8 October 2012, Nasheed was arrested after failing to appear in court to face charges that he had ordered the illegal arrest of a judge while in office. However, his supporters have claimed that this detention was politically motivated to prevent him from campaigning for the 2013 presidential elections.\nLater, in March 2013, Nasheed was convicted under the country's terrorism laws for ordering the arrest of an allegedly corrupt judge in 2012 and jailed for 13 years. Maldives' international partners\u2014including the EU, US, UK and the United Nations\u2014have said that Nasheed's rushed trial was seriously flawed following a UN panel ruling in the former president's favour. The UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention called for his immediate release. Nasheed also appealed to the Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi.\nYameen presidency.\nDuring Nasheed's imprisonment, Waheed announced that a presidential election would be held in 2013. The elections in late 2013 ended up being highly contested. Nasheed won the most votes in the first round, but contrary to the assessment of international election observers, the Supreme Court cited irregularities and annulled it. In the end, the opposition merged to gain a majority. Abdulla Yameen Abdul Gayoom, half-brother of Maumoon, won the election.\nYameen implemented a foreign policy shift toward increased engagement with China, improving diplomatic relations between the two countries. Additionally, Yameen employed Islam as a tool of identity politics, framing religious mobilisation as the solution to perceived Western attempts to undermine Maldivian national sovereignty. Yameen's policy of conflating Islamic views with anti-Western rhetoric represented a new paradigm shift in the country.\nOn 11 May 2013, Yameen's first vice-president, Mohamed Jameel Ahmed, was removed from office via a no confidence motion by parliament after Yameen's party accused him of plotting to overthrow him.\nOn 28 September 2015, there was an attempt to assassinate Yameen when he returned from the hajj pilgrimage in Saudi Arabia. As his speedboat was docking at Mal\u00e9, there was an explosion on board. The right-hand door of the boat was blasted off the hinges and slammed onto the jetty as thick smoke billowed from the cabin, screams renting the air. Three people were injured, including the First Lady. Yameen remained unscathed. Following a probe on the incident, Vice-president Ahmed Adeeb Abdul Ghafoor was arrested on 24 October 2015 at the airport upon his return from a conference in China. 17 of Adeeb's supporters were also arrested for \"public order offences.\" The government subsequently began instituting a broader crackdown against political dissent.\nOn 4 November 2015, Yameen declared a 30-day state of emergency ahead of a planned anti-government rally. The next day, the People's Majlis fast-paced the process to remove Adeeb from office with a no confidence vote that had been submitted by PPM-majority parliament. The no confidence vote passed with a majority of 61 members favouring it, thus ending Adeeb's role as vice-president. On 10 November 2015, President Yameen revoked the state of emergency, citing no imminent threats in the country.\nIn 2016, an investigation led by Al Jazeera exposed the Maldives Marketing and Public Relations Corporation scandal in which over US$79,000,000 was embezzled. In the same year, the Maldives left the Commonwealth due to alleged human rights abuses and corruption.\nGrowth of Islamic radicalism.\nIn the late 1990s, Wahhabism began challenging more traditional moderate practices. Saudi-funded preachers gained influence soon after the 2004 tsunami. Within just a decade, fundamentalist practices began dominating the culture.\nScores of Maldivian youth were radicalised and some even enlisted to fight for Islamic State militants in the Middle East. In 2015, \"The Guardian\" estimated that 50\u2013100 fighters from the Maldives have joined ISIS and al-Qaeda. \"The Financial Times\" put the number at 200. Most radicals were found to be young men who suffer from lethargy, unemployment, drug abuse, and the need to affirm their masculinity. Radicalization also occur in jail where the \"only thing to read is the Qur'an or religious literature. There are also lots of older militants and young guys look up to them.\"\nSolih presidency.\nIbrahim Mohamed Solih was selected as the new presidential candidate for the coalition of opposition parties in the 2018 election after Nasheed changed his mind about running. In the 2018 elections, Solih won the most votes and was sworn in as the new president on 17 November 2018 after Yameen's five-year term expired. Solih was the seventh president of the Maldives and the country's third democratically elected president. He promised to fight against widespread corruption and investigate the human rights abuses of the previous regime.\nSolih also ushered in a change in foreign relations. Yameen had been politically very close to China with some \"anti-India\" attitude, but Solih reaffirmed the Maldives' previous India-First Policy, after which the Maldives and India strengthened their close relationship.\nOn 19 November 2018, Solih announced that the Maldives was set to return to the Commonwealth of Nations, a decision recommended by his Cabinet, considering that the Maldives was a republic in the Commonwealth of Nations from 1982 to 2016. On 1 February 2020, Maldives officially re-joined the Commonwealth.\nIn the 2019 parliamentary election, the MDP won a landslide victory. It took 65 of 87 seats of the parliament. This was the first time in Maldivian history that a single party was able to get such a high number of seats in the parliament. Additionally, Yameen was sentenced to five years in prison in November for money laundering. The High Court upheld the jail sentence in January 2021. Later, the Supreme Court acquitted Yameen from the charges on 30 November 2021 due to the lack of substantial evidence.\nMuizzu presidency.\nOn 17 July 2020, Yameen was selected as the PPM's presidential candidate for the election. However, the Supreme Court rejected Yameen's candidacy because of his sentence. As a result, Mohamed Muizzu was elected as a backup candidate for the Progressive Congress Coalition (Progressive Party of Maldives and People's National Congress, PNC) on 3 August 2023.\nOn 30 September 2023, Muizzu won the second-round runoff of the Maldives presidential election, beating Solih with 54% of the vote. On 17 November 2023, Muizzu was sworn in as the eighth President of the Republic of Maldives. Mohamed Muizzu has been widely seen as pro-China, thus souring the country's relations with India.\nIn the 2024 parliamentary election, Muizzu's PNC party won a landslide in the parliament. It won 70 out of the 93 seats in parliament, making it the second time that a single party was able to get a high number of seats in Maldivian history. As a result, the party earned a super-majority\u2014enough seats to make constitutional changes. In the same year, the High Court overturned Yameen's conviction and ordered a new trial.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19120", "revid": "49380818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19120", "title": "Demographics of the Maldives", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThis is a demography of the population of Maldives, including population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.\nPopulation size and structure.\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population by Sex and Age Group (Census 21.III.2006) (Total population is taken as de facto and de jure together.):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2013) :\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2020) (Based on the results of the 2014 Population Census. Data refer to resident population which includes resident Maldivians and resident foreigners.): \nVital statistics.\nRegistered births and deaths.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nDemographic and Health Surveys.\nFertility Rate (TFR) (Wanted Fertility Rate) and CBR (Crude Birth Rate):\nTotal fertility rate.\nThe total fertility rate differs greatly from as low as 2.05 children per woman in Mal\u00e9 to a maximum of 3.88 children in Faafu. \nLife expectancy at birth.\nSource: \"UN World Population Prospects\"\nEthnic groups.\nThe largest ethnic group is Dhivehin, native to the historic region of the Maldive Islands comprising today's Republic of Maldives and the island of Minicoy in Union territory of Lakshadweep, India. They share the same culture and speak the Dhivehi language. They are principally an Indo-Aryan people, closely related to the Sinhalese and having traces of Middle Eastern, South Asian, Austronesian and African genes in the population.\nIn the past there was also a small Tamil population known as the Giraavaru people. This group have now been almost completely absorbed into the larger Maldivian society but were once native to the island of Giraavaru (Kaafu Atoll). This island was evacuated in 1968 due to heavy erosion of the island.\nFilipinos in the Maldives numbered 3,000 in 2018.\nLanguages.\nDhivehi, an Indo-Aryan language closely related to the Sinhala language of Sri Lanka, and written in a specialized Arabic script (Thaana), is the official language and is spoken by virtually the whole population. English is also spoken as a second language by many.\nReligion.\nSunni Islam is the state religion. Historically, the Maldives were converted to Islam from Buddhism in the 12th century. \nUnder the 2008 constitution Islam is the official religion of the entire population, as adherence to it is required for citizenship.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19121", "revid": "46505346", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19121", "title": "Politics of the Maldives", "text": " \nThe politics of the Maldives take place in the framework of a presidential representative democratic republic, whereby the President is the Head of Government. Executive power is exercised by the government. The President heads the executive branch and appoints the Cabinet; like many presidential democracies, each member of the cabinet need to be approved by the Parliament. The President, along with their pick for vice-president, is directly elected by the denizens to a five-year term by a secret ballot. Once in office, they could be re-elected to a second 5-year term, which is the limit allowed by the Constitution. The current President of the Maldives is Mohamed Muizzu, when his predecessor, Ibrahim Mohamed Solih lost the 2023 Maldivian presidential election.\nThe unicameral Majlis of the Maldives is composed of 93 members serving a five-year term. The total number of the members representing each constituency depends on the total population of that constituency. The last parliamentary election was held on 21 April 2024.\nThe Maldivian legal system is derived mainly from the traditional Islamic law. There is a Supreme Court with 5 judges including the Chief Justice. The Chief Justice is appointed by the President, with the recommendation of the Judicial Service Commission. Parliament is required to approve the appointment before he assumes office. Excluding the Supreme Court, there also exists the High Court (two branches), a Criminal Court, Civil Court, Family Court, Juvenile Court, Drug Court and many Lower Courts in each Atoll/Island. An Attorney General is part of the Cabinet and also needs the approval of Parliament before taking office.\nUnder the new 2008 constitution, the function of Local Government is devolved to an Atoll Council to administer each atoll and an Island Council to administer each inhabited island. Island councillors are elected by the people of each island, and the Atoll Councilors are in turn elected by the Island Councilors.\nThe Constitution of the Maldives requires the following for a president: be a Maldivian citizen born to parents who are Maldivian citizens, and who is not also a citizen of a foreign country; be a Muslim and a follower of a Sunni school of Islam;\nMaldives was 2023 the 9th most electoral democratic country in Asia according to V-Dem Democracy indices.\nHistory.\nA 1968 referendum approved a constitution making Maldives a republic with executive, legislative, and judicial branches of government. The constitution was amended in 1970, 1972, 1975, and 1997 and again in 2008.\nIbrahim Nasir, Prime Minister under the pre-1968 sultanate, became president and held office from 1968 to 1978. He was succeeded by Maumoon Abdul Gayoom, who was elected president in 1978 and re-elected in 1983, 1988, 1993, 1998, and 2003. At the end of his presidency in 2008, he was the longest serving leader in Asia.\nSince 2003, following the death in custody of a prisoner, Naseem, the Maldives experienced several anti-government demonstrations calling for political reforms, more freedoms, and an end to torture and oppression. As a result of these activities, political parties were eventually allowed in June 2005. The main parties registered in Maldives are: the Maldivian Democratic Party (MDP), the Dhivehi Raiyyithunge Party (DRP), the Islamic Democratic Party (IDP) and the Adhaalath Party. The first party to register was the MDP headed by popular opposition figures such as Mohamed Nasheed (Anni) and Mohamed Latheef (Gogo). The next was the Dhivehi Rayyithunge Party (DRP) headed by then-President Gayoom.\nA new Constitution was ratified in August 2008, paving the way for the country's first multi-party presidential election two months later.\nThe Maldives have scored poorly on some indices of freedom. The \"Freedom in the World\" index, a measure of political rights and civil liberties published by Freedom House, judged Maldives as \"not free\" until May 1, 2009, when it was raised to \"partly free\". The \"Worldwide Press Freedom Index\", published by Reporters Without Borders, ranks Maldives 106 out of 180 in terms of press freedom as of 2024.\nOn 30 September 2023, PNC/PPM candidate Mohamed Muizzu won the 2023 Maldives presidential election, beating incumbent president Ibrahim Solih with 54% of the vote. On 17 October 2023, Mohamed Muizzu was sworn in as the eighth President of the Republic of Maldives.\nIn April 2024, President Mohamed Muizzu's pro-China People's National Congress (PNC) won 66 seats in the 2024 Maldivian parliamentary election, while its allies took nine, giving the president the backing of 75 legislators in the 93-member house, meaning a super-majority and enough to change the constitution.\nExecutive branch.\nThe Cabinet of the Maldives presided by the President, contains the vice-president and ministers. there are currently 19 ministers that lead their respective ministries, they are:\nLegislative branch.\nThe People's Majlis has 93 members elected by the people under first-past-the-post voting.\nPolitical parties and elections.\nOn a national level, Maldives elects a head of state \u2013 the president \u2013 and a legislature. The president is elected for a five-year term by the people since 2008. Until 2005 (after the election), no legal parties existed. The results of the most recent legislative elections held in 2024 are:The Maldivian parliament voted unanimously for the creation of a multiparty system on June 2, 2005. Prior to June 2005, the Maldivian political system was based on the election of individuals, rather than the more common system of election according to party platform. In June 2005, as part of an ongoing programme of democratic reform, new regulations were promulgated to formally recognised political parties within the framework of the electoral system.\nThe Maldivian Democratic Party was already active. New parties created within a few years after this included those such as the Dhivehi Rayyithunge Party, the Jumhooree Party, and the Adhaalath Party.\nThere are now 10 registered political parties in the Maldives:\nOn October 8, 2008, the country held its first ever multi-party presidential election.\nIn the 2019 parliamentary election, MDP won 65 seats in the 87 seat parliament. This was the first time a single party was able to get such a high number of seats in the parliament in Maldivian history.\nIn the 2024 parliamentary election, PNC won 66 seats in the 93 seat parliament, meanwhile MDP received 12.\nJudicial branch.\nThe legal system is based on Islamic law with admixtures of English common law primarily in commercial matters. Maldives has not accepted compulsory International Court of Justice jurisdiction.\nAdministrative divisions.\n20 atolls (\"atholhu\", singular and plural): Alif Alif, Alif Dhaal, Baa, Dhaalu, Faafu, Gaafu Alifu, Gaafu Dhaalu, Gnaviyani, Haa Alifu, Haa Dhaalu, Laamu, Lhaviyani, Kaafu, Meemu, Noonu, Raa, Seenu, Shaviyani, Thaa, Vaavu, and one first-order administrative city (Mal\u00e9).\nInternational organisation participation.\nThe Maldives is a member of many international organisations, some of which include:\nThe ADB, Commonwealth of Nations, CP, ESCAP, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IFAD, IFC, International Monetary Fund, IMO, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, IsDB, ITU, NAM, OIC, OPCW, SAARC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, World Health Organization, WCO, WIPO, WMO, and the WTO.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19122", "revid": "47925335", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19122", "title": "Economy of the Maldives", "text": "In ancient times, Maldives were renowned for cowries, coir rope, dried tuna fish (Maldive fish), ambergris (\"maavaharu\") and coco de mer (\"tavakkaashi\"). Local and foreign trading ships used to load these products in the Maldives and bring them abroad.\nNowadays, the mixed economy of Maldives is based on the principal activities of tourism, fishing and shipping. This results from the Maldives' strategic geographic positioning near crucial sea routes essential for China's energy provisions. Consequently, China has persistently utilised its economic resources to enhance its sway over the Maldivian government.\nTourism is the largest industry in the Maldives, accounting for 28% of GDP and more than 60% of the Maldives' foreign exchange receipts. It powered the current GDP per capita to expand 265% in the 1980s and a further 115% in the 1990s. Over 90% of government tax revenue flows in from import duties and tourism-related taxes.\nFishing is the second leading sector in the Maldives. The economic reform program by the government in 1989 lifted import quotas and opened some exports to the private sector. Subsequently, it has liberalised regulations to allow more foreign investment.\nAgriculture and manufacturing play a minor role in the economy, constrained by the limited availability of cultivable land and shortage of domestic labour. Most staple foods are imported.\nIndustry in the Maldives consists mainly of garment production, boat building, and handicrafts. It accounts for around 18% of GDP. Maldivian authorities are concerned about the impact of erosion and possible global warming in the low-lying country.\nAmong the 1,190 islands in the Maldives, only 198 are inhabited. The population is scattered throughout the country, and the greatest concentration is on the capital island, Mal\u00e9. Limitations on potable water and arable land, plus the added difficulty of congestion are some of the problems faced by households in Mal\u00e9.\nDevelopment of the infrastructure in the Maldives is mainly dependent on the tourism industry and its complementary tertiary sectors, transport, distribution, real estate, construction, and government. Taxes on the tourist industry have been plowed into infrastructure and it is used to improve technology in the agricultural sector.\nMacro-economic trend.\nThis is a chart of trend of gross domestic product of Maldives at market prices estimated http:// by the International Monetary Fund with figures in millions of rufiyaa.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt; \nThe Maldives has experienced relatively low inflation throughout the recent years. Real GDP growth averaged about 10% in the 1980s. It expanded by an exceptional 16.2% in 1990, declined to 4% in 1993, and, over the 1995\u20132004 decade, real GDP growth averaged just over 7.5% per year. In 2005, as a result of the tsunami, the GDP contracted by about 5.5%; however, the economy rebounded in 2006 with a 13% increase.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132020.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt; \nEconomic sectors.\nIndustry.\nThe industrial sector provides only about 7% of GDP. Traditional industry consists of boat building and handicrafts, while modern industry is limited to a few tuna canneries, five garment factories, a bottling plant, and a few enterprises in the capital producing PVC pipe, soap, furniture, and food products. There are no patent laws in the Maldives.\nFinancial.\nThe banking industry dominates the small financial sector of the Maldives. The country's seven banks are regulated by the Maldives Monetary Authority.\nWhile formerly the Maldives had no income, sales, property, or capital-gains taxes, and was considered to have the simplest tax code in the world, now taxation is regulated by the Maldives Inland Revenue Authority (MIRA). In 2011, the Tax Justice Network gave the Maldives a \"secrecy score\" of 92 on its Financial Secrecy Index - the highest score in that category of any actively-ranked country; however by 2022 with a secrecy score of 75, no longer ranked in the top ten. However, in both 2011 and 2022, the Maldives' minor market share put it near the bottom of the overall weighted lists.\nA recurrent trend of Beijing leveraging its economic influence to attain geopolitical goals is observable. This pattern is not confined solely to small island nations in the Indian Ocean, like the Maldives and Sri Lanka, but extends to the wider Indo-Pacific region, encompassing countries with sizeable and advanced economies as well. The Maldives government is grappling with concerns about falling into a potential debt entrapment with China.\nShipping.\nBeginning in the 1990s, the Port of Male received over \u00a310 million in loans from the Asian Development Bank designated for infrastructure upgraded. The ADB notes that from 1991 to 2011, due to the loans, the ports annual throughput in freight tons equalled 273,000. By 2011 that number reached 1 million. The ADB also provided training for port authority staff to increase efficiency. ADB and the Government of Maldives, in a joint report address ship turn-around, \"What used to take about 10 days in 1991 was achieved in 3.8 days by 1997, and about 2.6 days by 2014\".\nEnvironmental concerns.\nThere is growing concern towards the coral reef and marine life due to coral mining (used for building and jewellery making), sand dredging, solid waste pollution and oil spills from boats. Mining of sand and coral has destroyed the natural coral reef that once protected several important islands, now making them highly susceptible to the erosive effects of the sea. The destruction of large coral beds due to heat is also a growing concern.\nIn April 1987, high tides swept over the Maldives, inundating much of Mal\u00e9 and nearby islands which prompted Maldivian authorities to take global climatic changes seriously. An INQUA research in 2003 found that actual sea levels in the Maldives had dropped in the 1970s and forecasts little change in the next century. There is also concern over the questionable shark fishing practices in place in the island. Shark fishing is forbidden by law, but these laws are not enforced. The population of sharks has sharply decreased in recent years.\nThe Asian brown cloud hovering in the atmosphere over the northern Indian Ocean is also another concern. Studies show that decreased sunshine and increased acid rain source from this cloud.\nEnergy.\nWhile electricity in the Maldives has historically come entirely from diesel generators, solar power has been increasingly adopted to avoid high fuel costs. The resort on Dhiddhoofinolhu claims to have the world's largest oceanic floating solar plant, with 678\u00a0kW enough to supply peak demand. The country's Environment Ministry has deployed solar\u2013battery\u2013diesel hybrid systems across the outer islands to reduce subsidies for imported diesel and promote low-carbon energy independence.\nPoverty, income and gender inequality.\nMaldives achieved their Millennium Development Goal (MDG) of halving the proportion of people living under the poverty line to 1% as of 2011. Starvation is non-existent, HIV rates have fallen and malaria has been eradicated. Despite these accomplishments and progressive economic growth, developmental issues remain. In particular, the country needs to address income and gender disparities. Development in Maldives has occurred predominantly in the capital Mal\u00e9; islands outside the capital continue to encounter high poverty vulnerability, lower per-capita income, lower employment and limited access to social services. A country-wide household income survey in 1997-1998 showed that the average income in the capital Mal\u00e9 was 75% higher than in surrounding islands. Maldives's Gini co-efficient stands at 0.41.\nPoverty and Income Disparity.\nThe factors that have led to Maldivians falling into or remaining in poverty are:\nThe difficulty of accessing social services and infrastructure in the outer atolls has meant that geography is a key reason for poverty and income disparity in Maldives. In islands far from the capital, there tends to be lack of production, inadequate use of fishery resources, low value chain development and insufficient credit for small-scale producers and entrepreneurs. The scarcity of land and water, the underdeveloped farming practices and absence of support services in atolls has meant low production and thus low incomes in these regions.\nCurrent Efforts.\nThe government has recognised these issues of income and gender disparities and with the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), Maldives has implemented policies that directly address these issues. In 2011, President Nasheed said, \"The most important facility for a country's development is its people... and since women are half of the population in any country, for a certainty their full participation will speed up the pace of development.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19123", "revid": "736651", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19123", "title": "Telecommunications in the Maldives", "text": "Telecommunications in the Maldives is under the control and supervision of the Communications Authority of Maldives (CAM). The Maldives is served by three telecommunications operators, Dhiraagu, Ooredoo Maldives and Raajj\u00e9 Online.\nTelephones.\nMobile network operators (MNOs): 2, Dhiraagu and Ooredoo Maldives (2020)\nTelephones \u2013 Fixedline's in use:\n21,000 (1999)\nTelephones \u2013 Mobile Cellular:\n344,000 (2007)\nTelephone system:\n\"domestic:\" interatoll communication through microwave links; all inhabited islands are connected with telephone and fax service.\n\"international:\" satellite earth station \u2013 3 Intelsat (Indian Ocean)\nRadio and television.\nRadio broadcast stations:\nAM 1, FM 5, shortwave 1 (2008)\nRadios:\n35,000 (1999)\nTelevision broadcast stations:\n9 (2009)\nTelevisions:\n10,000 (1999)\nInternet.\nInternet Service Providers (ISPs):\n3, Dhiraagu, Ooredoo Maldives and Raajj\u00e9 Online (2020)\nInternet users:\n20,000 (2008)\nCountry code (Top level domain): .mv\nMV Domain registrar: https://"}
{"id": "19124", "revid": "39471746", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19124", "title": "Transport in the Maldives", "text": "Transport in the Maldives is highly facilitated by road, bridges, highways, air and water networks. The country has no railways. Transportation in the Maldives primarily revolves around its maritime and air travel systems, given the archipelagic nature of the country, which consists of 26 atolls and over 1,000 coral islands. The absence of extensive road networks between islands necessitates a heavy reliance on boats and seaplanes for inter-island connectivity. Dhoni, traditional Maldivian wooden boats, and modern speedboats are widely used for short distances and local travel, while ferries provide regular services between inhabited islands. For longer journeys, the Maldives domestic airlines operate seaplane and airplane services that link the capital, Mal\u00e9, with outlying atolls, enhancing both passenger and cargo transport across the islands.\nMal\u00e9, the capital city, serves as the central hub for the country\u2019s transportation network. Velana International Airport, located on nearby Hulhul\u00e9 Island, is the primary gateway for international travel, with frequent connections to major global destinations. This airport also handles a significant volume of domestic traffic, alongside other regional airports dispersed across the atolls. For intra-city travel within Mal\u00e9 and its nearby islands, roads and a network of causeways and bridges facilitate movement. Notably, the Sinamal\u00e9 Bridge connects Mal\u00e9 to Hulhul\u00e9 Island, improving accessibility to the international airport. Overall, the transportation infrastructure of the Maldives is crucial for its tourism-driven economy and the mobility of its residents.\nRoad transport.\nRoad infrastructure in the Maldives is relatively limited due to the country's unique geography of dispersed atolls and islands. Most of the roads are found in the capital city of Mal\u00e9, Hulhumal\u00e9, and a few other larger islands like Addu Atoll. The road network in Mal\u00e9 is characterized by narrow streets and heavy traffic congestion, reflective of the city's high population density. The Sinamal\u00e9 Bridge, also known as the China\u2013Maldives Friendship Bridge, is a significant development that connects Mal\u00e9 with Hulhul\u00e9 Island, where the Velana International Airport is located, and the planned city of Hulhumal\u00e9. This bridge has greatly improved road connectivity and facilitated easier movement between these key areas. Outside of these urban centers, most islands rely on footpaths, bicycles, and motorcycles for local transport, with very few roads available due to the small size of the islands and the prioritization of maritime and air travel for longer distances.\nIn the capital city of Mal\u00e9, the majority of roads are paved with concrete cobblestones, while some are paved with tarmac. In Addu City, many roads are surfaced with tarmac. A notable feature in Aduu Atoll is a highway known as \"Addu link road\", connects four islands, Hithadhoo, Maradhoo, Maradhoo\u2013Feydhoo, Feydhoo.\nPorts and harbours.\nPorts and harbors in the Maldives are crucial to the nation's economy, given the country's geographic composition as an archipelago of over 1,000 islands. In Mal\u00e9 city, there are several regional ports and harbors that facilitate inter-island transportation and support local economies, including Kulhudhuffushi Harbor and Hithadhoo Regional Port. These ports handle a mix of conventional and containerized cargo, essential for importing goods and exporting local products. The development and maintenance of these maritime facilities are vital for the Maldives, ensuring the efficient movement of goods and supporting the tourism industry, which is a significant contributor to the national GDP.\nMal\u00e9 Commercial Harbour is the primary hub of maritime activities and commerce in the Maldives. Located in the capital city of Mal\u00e9, the port offers a range of essential services including marine pilotage, wharfage, and mooring. It is equipped to handle both conventional and containerized cargo, providing facilities for cargo handling, as well as stuffing and un-stuffing services. As the main port of the Maldives, Mal\u00e9 Commercial Harbour plays a critical role in the nation's economy by facilitating the import and export of goods, thereby supporting the archipelago's trade and logistics infrastructure.\nAir transport.\nThe archipelago has 18 airports. Two had paved runways. One stretched over . Another was in the range . Three airports had unpaved runways of . Five of the 18 airports schedule international flights.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19125", "revid": "302393014", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19125", "title": "Military of the Maldives", "text": ""}
{"id": "19127", "revid": "3632083", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19127", "title": "Mali", "text": "Country in West Africa\nMali, officially the Republic of Mali, is a landlocked country in West Africa. It is the eighth-largest country in Africa and the 23rd largest country in the world, with an area of over . The country is bordered to the north by Algeria, to the east by Niger, to the northwest by Mauritania, to the south by Burkina Faso and Ivory Coast, and to the west by Guinea and Senegal. The population of Mali is about 23.29 million, 47.19% of which are estimated to be under the age of 15 in 2024. Its capital and largest city is Bamako. The country has 13 official languages, of which Bambara is the most commonly spoken.\nThe sovereign state's northern borders reach deep into the middle of the Sahara Desert. The country's southern part, where the majority of inhabitants live, is in the Sudanian savanna and has the Niger and Senegal rivers running through it. The country's economy centres on agriculture and mining with its most prominent natural resources including gold (of which it is the third largest producer in Africa) and salt.\nMali was part of three successive powerful and wealthy West African empires that controlled trans-Saharan trade: the Ghana Empire (for which Ghana is named), the Mali Empire (for which Mali is named), and the Songhai Empire. At its peak in 1300, the Mali Empire was the wealthiest country in Africa with its 14th-century emperor Mansa Musa believed to be one of the wealthiest individuals in history. Besides being a hub of trade and mining, medieval Mali was a centre of Islam, culture and knowledge, with Timbuktu becoming a renowned place of education with its university, one of the oldest in the world and still active. The expanding Songhai Empire absorbed the empire in 1468, followed by a Saadian army which defeated the Songhai in 1591.\nIn the late 19th century, during the Scramble for Africa, France seized control of Mali, making it a part of French Sudan; as the Sudanese Republic, a brief federation with Senegal was formed, achieving independence in 1960. After Senegal's withdrawal, the Republic of Mali was established. After a long period of one-party rule, a coup in 1991 led to a new constitution and the establishment of Mali as a democratic, multi-party state.\nIn January 2012, an armed conflict broke out in northern Mali, in which Tuareg rebels took control of a territory in the north, and in April declared the secession of a new state, Azawad. The conflict was complicated by a military coup in March 2012 and later fighting between Tuareg and other rebel factions. In response to territorial gains, the French military launched Operation Serval in January 2013. A month later, Malian and French forces recaptured most of the north, although the conflict continued. Presidential elections were held on 28 July 2013, with a second-round run-off held on 11 August, and legislative elections were held on 24 November and 15 December 2013. In 2020 and 2021, two coups led by Colonel Assimi Go\u00efta overthrew the Mali government. A military junta led by Go\u00efta has since ruled Mali. In May 2025, the junta dissolved all political parties. In July 2025, the transitional parliament granted Go\u00efta a five-year presidential term, renewable without elections. In September 2025 the al-Qaeda affiliate JNIM imposed a blockade on fuel imports to major cities in the south, including the capital Bamako, causing economic disruption.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Mali\" is taken from the name of the Mali Empire. It means \"the place where the king lives\" and carries a connotation of strength.\nFourteenth-century Maghrebi traveller Ibn Battuta reported that the capital of the empire was called Mali. One Mandinka tradition tells that the legendary first emperor Sundiata Keita changed himself into a hippopotamus upon his death in the Sankarani River and that it was possible to find villages in the area of this river called \"old Mali\". A study of Malian proverbs noted that in old Mali, there is a village called Malikoma, which means \"New Mali\", and that \"Mali\" could have formerly been the name of a city.\nAnother theory suggests that \"Mali\" is a Fulani pronunciation of the name of the Mande peoples. It is suggested that a sound shift led to the change, whereby in Fulani the alveolar segment shifts to and the terminal vowel denasalizes and raises, leading \"Manden\" to shift to .\nHistory.\nBefore colonization.\nThe rock art in the Sahara suggests that northern Mali has been inhabited since 10,000 BC, when the Sahara was fertile and rich in wildlife. Early ceramics have been discovered at the central Malian site of Ounjougou dating to about 9,400 BC, and are believed to represent an instance of the independent invention of pottery in the region. Farming took place by 5000 BC and iron was used by around 500 BC.\nIn the first millennium BC, early cities and towns were created by Mande peoples related to the Soninke people, along the middle Niger River in central Mali, including Dia which began from around 900 BC, and reached its peak around 600 BC, and Djenne-Djenno, which lasted from around 300 BC to 900 AD. Through approximately 6th century BC and 4th century BC, the lucrative trans-Saharan trade in pack-animals, gold, salt and slaves had begun, facilitating the rise of West Africa's great empires.\nThere are a few references to Mali in early Islamic literature. Among these are references to \"Pene\" and \"Malal\" in the work of al-Bakri in 1068, the story of the conversion of an early ruler, known to Ibn Khaldun (by 1397) as Barmandana, and a few geographical details in the work of al-Idrisi.\nMali was once part of three famed West African empires which controlled trans-Saharan trade in gold, salt, other precious commodities, and slaves majorly during the reign of Mansa Musa from c. 1312 \u2013 c. 1337. These Sahelian kingdoms had neither rigid geopolitical boundaries nor rigid ethnic identities. The earliest of these empires was the Ghana Empire, which was dominated by the Soninke, a Mande-speaking people. The empire expanded throughout West Africa from the eighth century until 1078, when it was conquered by the Almoravids.\nThe Battle of Kirina in 1235, culminated in a victory for the Mandinka under the command of the exiled prince Sundiata Keita, which led to the downfall of the Sosso Empire.\nThe Mali Empire later formed on the upper Niger River, and reached the height of power in the 14th century. Under the Mali Empire, the ancient cities of Djenn\u00e9 and Timbuktu were centers of both trade and Islamic learning. The empire later declined as a result of internal intrigue, ultimately being supplanted by the Songhai Empire. The Songhai had long been a major power in West Africa subject to the Mali Empire's rule.\nIn the late 14th century, the Songhai gradually gained independence from the Mali Empire and expanded, ultimately subsuming the entire eastern portion of the Mali Empire. The Songhai Empire's eventual collapse was largely the result of the Moroccan invasion of 1591 under the command of Judar Pasha. The fall of the Songhai Empire marked the end of the region's role as a trading crossroads. Following the establishment of sea routes by the European powers, the trans-Saharan trade routes lost significance. At that time, the Mali Empire's abundance in wealth expanded its commercial assets of salt and gold.\nOne of the worst famines in the region's recorded history occurred in the 18th century. According to John Iliffe, \"The worst crises were in the 1680s, when famine extended from the Senegambian coast to the Upper Nile and 'many sold themselves for slaves, only to get a sustenance', and especially in 1738\u20131756, when West Africa's greatest recorded subsistence crisis, due to drought and locusts, reportedly killed half the population of Timbuktu.\"\nFrench colonial rule.\nMali fell under the control of France during the Scramble for Africa in the late 19th century. By 1905, most of the area was under firm French control as a part of French Sudan. \nIn November 1915, a large anti-French uprising broke out among the tribes in the regions of present-day Mali and Burkina Faso. The last resistance was suppressed only in September 1916. During the suppression of the uprising, over 100 villages were destroyed by French colonial troops.\nOn 24 November 1958, French Sudan (which changed its name to the Sudanese Republic) became an autonomous republic within the French Community. In January 1959, Mali and Senegal united to become the Mali Federation.\nIndependence.\nThe Mali Federation gained independence from France on 20 June 1960. Senegal withdrew from the federation in August 1960, which allowed the Sudanese Republic to become the independent Republic of Mali on 22 September 1960, and that date is now the country's Independence Day.\nModibo Ke\u00efta was elected the first president. He quickly established a one-party state, adopted an independent African and socialist orientation with close ties to the East, and implemented extensive nationalization of economic resources. In 1960, the population of Mali was reported to be about 4.1\u00a0million. On 19 November 1968, following progressive economic decline, the Ke\u00efta regime was overthrown in a bloodless military coup led by Moussa Traor\u00e9, a day which is now commemorated as Liberation Day.\nMoussa Traor\u00e9 regime.\nThe subsequent military-led regime, with Traor\u00e9 as president, attempted to reform the economy. His efforts were frustrated by political turmoil and a devastating drought from 1968 to 1974, in which famine killed thousands of people. The Traor\u00e9 regime faced student unrest beginning in the late 1970s and three coup attempts. The Traor\u00e9 regime repressed all dissenters until the late 1980s.\nOpposition to the corrupt and dictatorial regime of General Moussa Traor\u00e9 grew during the 1980s. During this time strict programs, imposed to satisfy demands of the International Monetary Fund, brought increased hardship upon the country's population, while elites close to the government supposedly lived in growing wealth. The government continued to attempt economic reforms, and the populace became increasingly dissatisfied. In response to growing demands for multi-party democracy, the Traor\u00e9 regime allowed some limited political liberalization in the late 1980s, but refused to usher in a full-fledged democratic system. \nIn 1990, cohesive opposition movements began to emerge, and was complicated by the turbulent rise of ethnic violence in the north following the return of many Tuaregs who had migrated to Algeria and Libya during the drought. Peaceful student protests in January 1991 were brutally suppressed, with mass arrests and torture of leaders and participants. Scattered acts of rioting and vandalism of public buildings followed, but most actions by the dissidents remained nonviolent.\nFrom 22 March through 26 March 1991, mass pro-democracy rallies and a nationwide strike was held in both urban and rural communities, which became known as \"les \u00e9venements\" (\"the events\") or the March Revolution. In Bamako, in response to mass demonstrations organized by university students and later joined by trade unionists and others, soldiers opened fire indiscriminately on the nonviolent demonstrators. Riots broke out briefly following the shootings. Barricades as well as roadblocks were erected and Traor\u00e9 declared a state of emergency and imposed a nightly curfew. Despite an estimated loss of 300 lives over the course of four days, nonviolent protesters continued to return to Bamako each day demanding the resignation of the dictatorial president and the implementation of democratic policies.\nBy 26 March, the growing refusal of soldiers to fire into the largely nonviolent protesting crowds turned into a full-scale tumult. Military soldiers clashed with peaceful protesters, resulting in the massacre of dozens under the orders of Traor\u00e9. That afternoon, Lieutenant Colonel Amadou Toumani Tour\u00e9 announced on the radio that he had arrested the dictatorial president, Moussa Traor\u00e9. He and three associates were, tried, convicted and received the death sentence for their role in this massacre. The date is now a national holiday in Mali. The coup is remembered as Mali's March Revolution of 1991.\nMulti-party democracy.\nOpposition parties were legalized, a transitional government was formed and a national congress of civil and political groups met to draft a new democratic constitution to be approved by a national referendum. In 1992, Alpha Oumar Konar\u00e9 won Mali's first democratic, multi-party presidential election, before being re-elected for a second term in 1997, which was the last allowed under the constitution. Amadou Toumani Tour\u00e9, a retired general who had been the leader of the military aspect of the 1991 democratic uprising, was elected in 2002. During this democratic period Mali was regarded as one of the most politically and socially stable countries in Africa.\nSlavery persists in Mali today with as many as 200,000 people held in direct servitude to a master. In the Tuareg Rebellion of 2012, ex-slaves were a vulnerable population with reports of some slaves being recaptured by their former masters.\nNorthern Mali conflict.\nIn January 2012 a Tuareg rebellion began in northern Mali, led by the National Movement for the Liberation of Azawad (MNLA). In March, military officer Amadou Sanogo seized power in a coup d'\u00e9tat, citing Tour\u00e9's failures in quelling the rebellion, and leading to sanctions and an embargo by the Economic Community of West African States. The MNLA quickly took control of the north, declaring its independence as Azawad. However, Islamist groups, including Ansar Dine and Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM), who had helped the MNLA defeat the government, turned on the Tuareg and took control of the north with the goal of implementing sharia in Mali.\nOn 11 January 2013, the French Armed Forces intervened at the request of the interim government of president Dioncounda Traor\u00e9. On 30 January, the coordinated advance of the French and Malian troops claimed to have retaken the last remaining Islamist stronghold of Kidal, which was also the last of three northern provincial capitals. On 2 February, French president Fran\u00e7ois Hollande joined Dioncounda Traor\u00e9 in a public appearance in recently recaptured Timbuktu.\nIn August 2013, Ibrahim Boubacar Keita was elected as the new president of Mali in the second round of the election.\nConflict in Central Mali.\nIn the central Mali province of Mopti, conflict has escalated since 2015 between agricultural communities like the Dogon and the Bambara, and the pastoral Fula (or Fulani) people. Historically, the two sides have fought over access to land and water, factors which have been exacerbated by climate change as the Fula move into new areas. The Dogon and the Bambara communities have formed \"self-defense groups\" to fight the Fula. They accuse the Fula of working with armed Islamists linked to al-Qaeda. While some Fula have joined Islamist groups, Human Rights Watch reports that the links have been \"exaggerated and instrumentalized by different actors for opportunistic ends\".\nAdded a top Mali military commander:I\u2019ve discussed the growing violence with my commanders and with village chiefs from all sides. Yes, sure, there are jihadists in this zone, but the real problem is banditry, animal theft, score settling \u2013 people are enriching themselves using the fight against terrorists as a cover.\nThe conflict has seen the creation and growth of Dogon and Bambara militias. The government of Mali is suspected of supporting some of these groups under the guise of being proxies in the war against Islamists in the Northern Mali conflict. The government denies this. One such militia is the Dogon group Dan Na Ambassagou, created in 2016.\nIn the 2018 Malian presidential election held on 29 July 2018, no candidate received more than 50% of the vote in the first round. A runoff was held on 12 August 2018 between the top two candidates, incumbent president Ibrahim Boubacar Ke\u00efta of the Rally for Mali and Souma\u00efla Ciss\u00e9 of the Union for the Republic and Democracy, and Ke\u00efta was re-elected with 67% of the vote.\nIn September 2018, the Centre for Humanitarian Dialogue negotiated a unilateral ceasefire with Dan Na Ambassagou \"in the context of the conflict which opposes the group to other community armed groups in central Mali\". However, the group has been blamed for the 24 March 2019 massacre of 160 Fula villagers. The group denied the attack, but afterwards Malian president Keita ordered the group to disband. The UN Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, Adama Dieng, warned of a growing ethnicization of the conflict. By 2020, more than 600,000 people had been displaced by the conflict in Mali. The United Nations reported that the number of children killed in the conflict in the first six months of 2019 was twice as many for the entire year of 2018. Many of the children have been killed in intercommunal attacks attributed to ethnic militias, with the majority of attacks occurring around Mopti. It is reported that around 900 schools have closed down and that armed militias are recruiting children.\nDuring the first week of October 2019, two jihadist attacks in the towns of Boulikessi and Mondoro killed more than 25 Mali soldiers near the border with Burkina Faso. President Ke\u00efta declared that \"no military coup will prevail in Mali\", continuing by saying that he does not think it \"is on the agenda at all and cannot worry us\". On 1 November 2019, the IS-GS militants killed at least 50 soldiers in the 2019 Indelimane attack in the M\u00e9naka Region of Mali. In February 2020, Human Rights Watch documented atrocities against civilians in Central Mali and said that at least 456 civilians were killed, while hundreds were injured from January 2019 until November.\n2020s coups and Assimi Go\u00efta junta.\nPopular unrest began on 5 June 2020 following irregularities in the March and April parliamentary elections, including outrage against the kidnapping of opposition leader Souma\u00efla Ciss\u00e9. Between 11 and 23 deaths followed protests that took place from 10 to 13 June. In July, President Ke\u00efta dissolved the constitutional court.\nMembers of the military led by Colonel Assimi Go\u00efta and Colonel-Major Isma\u00ebl Wagu\u00e9 in Kati, Koulikoro Region, began a mutiny on 18 August 2020. President Ibrahim Boubacar Ke\u00efta and Prime Minister Boubou Ciss\u00e9 were arrested, and shortly after midnight Ke\u00efta announced his resignation, saying he did not want to see any bloodshed. Wagu\u00e9 announced the formation of the National Committee for the Salvation of the People (CNSP) and promised elections in the future. A curfew was begun and the streets of Bamako were quiet. The Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) condemned the coup and demanded that Ke\u00efta be reinstated as president.\nOn 12 September 2020, the CNSP agreed to an 18-month political transition to civilian rule. Shortly after, Bah N'daw was named interim president by a group of 17 electors, with Go\u00efta being appointed vice president. The government was inaugurated on 25 September 2020. On 18 January 2021, the transitional government announced that the CNSP had been disbanded, almost four months after had been promised under the initial agreement.\nTensions between the civilian transitional government and the military ran high after the handover of power in September 2020. The tensions came to a head on 24 May 2021 after a cabinet reshuffle, where two leaders of the 2020 military coup \u2013 Sadio Camara and Modibo Kone \u2013 were replaced by N'daw's administration. Later that day, journalists reported that three key civilian leaders \u2013 President N'daw, Prime Minister Moctar Ouane and Defence Minister Souleymane Doucour\u00e9, were being detained in a military base in Kati, outside Bamako. On 7 June 2021, Mali's military commander Assimi Go\u00efta was sworn into office as the new interim president.\nIn 2022 and 2023, the Islamic State in the Greater Sahara saw major gains in the Mali War, occupying large swathes of territory in southeastern Mali. Ansongo and Tiderm\u00e8ne were also captured by the group. By mid-2023, the militant group had doubled the amount of territory it controlled since the overthrow of the previous government and establishment of the junta.\nOn 10 January 2022, Mali announced the closure of its borders and recalled several ambassadors to ECOWAS countries in response to sanctions placed on Mali for deferring elections for four years. On 4 February, France's ambassador was expelled. According to Human Rights Watch, Malian troops and suspected Russian mercenaries from the Wagner Group executed around 300 civilian men in central Mali in March 2022. France had started withdrawing French troops from Mali in February 2022, commencing the end of Operation Barkhane. On 2 May, the military government announced breaking its defence accords concluded in 2013 with France, constituting an additional step in the deterioration of Malian\u2013French relations. This latest announcement has been criticized by French authorities and considered as \"illegitimate\". A UN panel reported that in the first three months of 2022, 543 civilians were killed and 269 wounded, warning the 2015 peace agreement between the government and pro-independence groups was threatened by a potential risk of confrontation for the first time in five years. The report also noted a sharp increase in the number of people needing humanitarian assistance over the previous year.\nIn June 2023, Mali removed French as an official language with the approval of a new constitution by 97% of voters in a referendum conducted by the junta.\nOn 7 September 2023, al-Qaeda linked JNIM militants attacked a vessel on the Niger River, killing at least 154 civilians.\nIn July 2024, CSP-DPA rebels and JNIM militants killed dozens of Russian mercenaries and Malian government forces during the Battle of Tinzaouaten. On 5 August 2024 the Republic of Mali announced that it was severing diplomatic relations with Ukraine.\nOn 17 September 2024, al-Qaeda linked JNIM militants attacked several locations across Bamako, killing at least 77 people and injuring 255 others. \nIn July 2025, JNIM began a strategy to blockade the government-controlled cities from foreign fuel imports and to cut them off from each other. Mali depends on foreign fuel imports, receiving 95% of its fuel from Senegal or Ivory Coast. Starting from 1 July, JNIM attacks cut off connections to Mauritania and Senegal, and they were followed by similar attacks in the south near Ivory Coast and Guinea. From 3 September, JNIM imposed a blockade against cities in southern Mali, including the capital Bamako, after the government had stopped fuel sales in rural areas. This increased fuel prices in the capital by 500% and has led to economic disruption, lines at gas stations, school closures, and cancellations of flights from the Bamako International Airport. In early September the Malian truckers' union stopped operations for two weeks due to the dangerous conditions along roads in southern Mali, leaving 1,000 fuel trucks waiting in Ivory Coast. On 28 October, the U.S. Embassy advised all American citizens to leave the country immediately because of increasing instability, and to do so by plane, because of \"terrorist attacks along national highways\".\nGeography.\nMali is a landlocked country in West Africa, located southwest of Algeria. It lies between latitudes 10\u00b0 and 25\u00b0N, and longitudes 13\u00b0W and 5\u00b0E. Mali borders Algeria to the north-northeast, Niger to the east, Burkina Faso to the south-east, Ivory Coast to the south, Guinea to the south-west, and Senegal to the west and Mauritania to the north-west.\nAt , Mali is the 24th-largest country in the world and the eighth-largest country in Africa. It is comparable in size to South Africa or Angola. Most of the country lies in the southern Sahara Desert, which produces an extremely hot, dust-laden Sudanian savanna zone. Mali is mostly flat, rising to rolling northern plains covered by sand. The Adrar des Ifoghas massif lies in the northeast.\nMali lies in the torrid zone and is among the hottest countries in the world. The thermal equator, which matches the hottest spots year-round on the planet based on the mean daily annual temperature, crosses the country. Most of Mali receives negligible rainfall and droughts are very frequent. Late April to early October is the rainy season in the southernmost area. During this time, flooding of the Niger River is common, creating the Inner Niger Delta. The vast northern desert part of Mali has a hot desert climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"BWh\") with long, extremely hot summers and scarce rainfall which decreases northwards. The central area has a hot semi-arid climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"BSh\") with very high temperatures year-round, a long, intense dry season and a brief, irregular rainy season. The southern areas have a tropical wet and dry climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Aw\"). \nMali has considerable natural resources, with gold, uranium, phosphates, kaolinite, salt and limestone being most widely exploited. Mali is estimated to have in excess of 17,400 tonnes of uranium (measured + indicated + inferred). In 2012, a further uranium mineralized north zone was identified. Mali faces numerous environmental challenges, including desertification, deforestation, soil erosion, and inadequate supplies of potable water.\nBiodiversity.\nFive terrestrial ecoregions lie within Mali's borders: Sahelian Acacia savanna, West Sudanian savanna, Inner Niger Delta flooded savanna, South Saharan steppe and woodlands, and West Saharan montane xeric woodlands. The country had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 7.16/10, ranking it 51st globally out of 172 countries.\nPolitics and government.\nGovernment.\nUntil the military coup of 22 March 2012, Mali was a constitutional democracy governed by the Constitution of 12 January 1992, which was amended in 1999. The constitution provides for a separation of powers among the executive, legislative, and judicial branches of government. The system of government can be described as \"semi-presidential\". Executive power is vested in a president, who is elected to a five-year term by universal suffrage and is limited to two terms.\nThe president serves as a chief of state and commander in chief of the armed forces. A prime minister appointed by the president serves as head of government and in turn appoints the Council of Ministers. The unicameral National Assembly is Mali's sole legislative body, consisting of deputies elected to five-year terms. Following the 2007 elections, the Alliance for Democracy and Progress held 113 of 160 seats in the assembly. The assembly holds two regular sessions each year, during which it debates and votes on legislation that has been submitted by a member or by the government.\nMali's constitution provides for an independent judiciary, but the executive continues to exercise influence over the judiciary by virtue of power to appoint judges and oversee both judicial functions and law enforcement. Mali's highest courts are the Supreme Court, which has both judicial and administrative powers, and a separate Constitutional Court that provides judicial review of legislative acts and serves as an election arbiter. Various lower courts exist, though village chiefs and elders resolve most local disputes in rural areas.\nThe transition government pushed back the timetable for a new election, initially to be held in February 2022, to February 2024. In exchange for the government's commitment to a 2024 election, ECOWAS agreed to lift sanctions on the country.\nAccording to International IDEA\u2019s Global State of Democracy (GSoD) Indices and Democracy Tracker, Mali performs in the low range on overall democratic measures, with particular weaknesses in political representation and rule of law.\nForeign relations.\nUntil 2012, Mali's foreign policy orientation had become increasingly pragmatic and pro-Western over time. Since the institution of a democratic form of government in 2002, Mali's relations with the West in general and with the United States in particular have improved significantly. Mali has a longstanding yet ambivalent relationship with France, a former colonial ruler. Mali was active in regional organizations such as the African Union until its suspension over the 2012 Malian coup d'\u00e9tat.\nWorking to control and resolve regional conflicts, such as in Ivory Coast, Liberia, and Sierra Leone, is one of Mali's major foreign policy goals. Mali feels threatened by the potential for the spillover of conflicts in neighboring states, and relations with those neighbors are often uneasy. General insecurity along borders in the north, including cross-border banditry and terrorism, remain troubling issues in regional relations.\nIn early 2019, Al Qaeda claimed responsibility for an attack on a United Nations base in Mali that killed 10 peacekeepers from Chad. 25 people were reported to have been injured in the attack.\nMilitary.\nThe Malian Armed Forces (FAMa) consist of the Army and the Air Force, numbering 19,000 and 2,000 personnel respectively, as of 2024. The Army is organized into nine motorized infantry battalions and several support and special forces units. There are also paramilitary forces with 20,000 personnel, including 6,000 in the Gendarmerie, 10,000 in the National Guard, 1,000 in the National Police, and 3,000 in the Militia. The Malian military is under-equipped and has a limited capability for manufacturing and maintenance of equipment.\nRegions and cercles.\nSince 2016, Mali has been divided into ten regions and the District of Bamako. Each region has a governor. The implementation of the two newest regions, Taoud\u00e9nit (formerly part of Tombouctou Region) and M\u00e9naka (formerly M\u00e9naka Cercle in Gao Region), has been ongoing since January 2016; a governor and transitional council has been appointed for both regions. \nSince 2023, Mali has added nine new regions to its administrative structure, bringing the total to 19 regions plus the district of Bamako. This reorganization aims to improve governance and bring public services closer to local populations. This initiative continues the decentralization efforts that began with the creation of the Taoud\u00e9nit and M\u00e9naka regions in 2016. The nineteen regions in turn are subdivided into 159 \"cercle\"s and 815 \"communes\".\nThe \"r\u00e9gions\" and Capital District are:\nEconomy.\nThe Central Bank of West African States handles the financial affairs of Mali and additional members of the Economic Community of West African States. Mali is considered one of the poorest countries in the world. The average worker's annual salary is approximately US$1,500.\nMali underwent economic reform, beginning in 1988 by signing agreements with the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. During 1988 to 1996, Mali's government largely reformed public enterprises. Since the agreement, sixteen enterprises were privatized, 12 partially privatized, and 20 liquidated. In 2005, the Malian government conceded a railroad company to the Savage Corporation. Two major companies, Societ\u00e9 de Telecommunications du Mali (SOTELMA) and the Cotton Ginning Company (CMDT), were expected to be privatized in 2008.\nBetween 1992 and 1995, Mali implemented an economic adjustment programme that resulted in economic growth and a reduction in financial imbalances. The programme increased social and economic conditions, and led to Mali joining the World Trade Organization on 31 May 1995.\nMali is also a member of the Organization for the Harmonization of Business Law in Africa (OHADA). The gross domestic product (GDP) has risen since. In 2002, the GDP amounted to US$3.4\u00a0billion, and increased to US$5.8\u00a0billion in 2005, which amounts to an approximately 17.6% annual growth rate.\nMali is a part of the \"Franc Zone\" (\"Zone Franc\"), which means that it uses the CFA franc. Mali is connected with the French government by agreement since 1962 (creation of BCEAO). Today all seven countries of BCEAO (including Mali) are connected to French Central Bank.\nBefore the August 2020 coup, U.S. foreign assistance to Mali exceeded $135 million in FY 2020, aiming to bolster fragile peace, democratic governance and regional security, while addressing social and economic vulnerabilities. Post-coup, assistance is restricted under U.S. law, but ongoing programs focus on stability, public trust in government, community resilience and socio-economic prosperity.\nMali was ranked 135th out of 139 in the Global Innovation Index in 2025.\nAgriculture.\nMali's key industry is agriculture. Cotton is the country's largest crop export and is exported west throughout Senegal and Ivory Coast. During 2002, 620,000 tons of cotton were produced in Mali but cotton prices declined significantly in 2003. In addition to cotton, Mali produces rice, millet, corn, vegetables, tobacco, and tree crops. Gold, livestock, and agriculture amount to 80% of Mali's exports.\nEighty percent of Malian workers are employed in agriculture. 15% of Malian workers are employed in the service sector. Seasonal variations lead to regular temporary unemployment of agricultural workers.\nMining.\nIn 1991, with the assistance of the International Development Association, Mali relaxed the enforcement of mining codes which led to renewed foreign interest and investment in the mining industry. Gold is mined in the southern region and Mali has the third highest gold production in Africa (after South Africa and Ghana). In 2015, the country has produced 41 metric tonnes of gold.\nThe emergence of gold as Mali's leading export product since 1999 has helped mitigate some of the negative impact of the cotton and Ivory Coast crises. Other natural resources include kaolin, salt, phosphate, and limestone.\nEnergy.\nElectricity and water are maintained by the Energie du Mali, or EDM, and textiles are generated by Industry Textile du Mali, or ITEMA. Mali has made efficient use of hydroelectricity, consisting of over half of Mali's electrical power. In 2002, 700 GWh of hydroelectric power were produced in Mali.\nEnergie du Mali is an electric company that provides electricity to Mali citizens. Only 55 percent of the population in cities have access to EDM.\nTransport infrastructure.\nIn Mali, there is a railway that connects to bordering countries. There are also approximately 29 airports, of which 8 have paved runways. Urban areas are known for their large quantity of green and white taxicabs. A significant sum of the population is dependent on public transportation.\nDemographics.\nIn 2021, Mali's population was an estimated \u00a0million. Mali's population grew from 7.7\u00a0million in 1982 to 19.9\u00a0million in 2018. The population is predominantly rural (68% in 2002), and 5%\u201310% of Malians are nomadic. More than 90% of the population lives in the southern part of the country, especially in Bamako, which has over 2\u00a0million residents.\nIn 2024, about 47% of Malians were 14 years old or younger, 50% were 15\u201364 years old, and 3% were 65 and older. The median age was 16.4 years. The birth rate in 2024 was 40 births per 1,000, and the total fertility rate in 2024 was 5.35 children per woman. The death rate in 2024 was 8.1 deaths per 1,000. Life expectancy at birth was 63.2 years total (60.9 for males and 65.6 for females). Mali has one of the world's highest rates of infant mortality, with 57.4 deaths per 1,000 live births in 2024.\nLargest cities in Mali.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEthnic groups.\nMali's population encompasses a number of sub-Saharan ethnic groups. The Bambara are by far the largest single ethnic group, making up a third of the population. The largest ethnic groups are Bambara (33.3%), Fulani (Peuhl) (13.3%), Sarakole/Soninke/Marka (9.8%), Senufo/Manianka (9.6%), Malinke (8.8%), Dogon (8.7%), Sonrai (5.9%), Bobo (2.1%), Tuareg/Bella (1.7%), other Malian (6%), from members of Economic Community of West Africa (0.4%), other (0.3%) (2018 est.). In Mali and in Niger, the Moors are also known as Azawagh Arabs, named after the Azawagh region of the Sahara. They speak mainly Hassaniya Arabic, one of the regional varieties of Arabic.\nIn the far north, there is a division between Berber-descended Tuareg nomad populations and the darker-skinned Bella or Tamasheq people, due to the historical spread of slavery in the region. An estimated 800,000 people in Mali are descended from slaves. Slavery has persisted in Mali for centuries. The Arabic population kept slaves well into the 20th century, until slavery was suppressed by French authorities around the mid-20th century. There still persist certain hereditary servitude relationships, and according to some estimates, even today approximately 200,000 Malians are still enslaved.\nSome mixed European/African descendants of Muslims of Spanish, as well as French, Irish, Italian and Portuguese origin, live in Mali, where they are known as the Arma people (1% of the nation's population).\nAlthough Mali has enjoyed reasonably good inter-ethnic relationships based on a long history of coexistence, some hereditary servitude and bondage relationship exist, as well as ethnic tension between settled Songhai and nomadic Tuaregs of the north. Due to a backlash against the northern population after independence, Mali is now in a situation where both groups complain about discrimination on the part of the other group. This conflict also plays a role in the continuing Northern Mali conflict where there is a tension between both Tuaregs and the Malian government, and the Tuaregs and radical Islamists who are trying to establish sharia law.\nThere is also a small Jewish community in Mali.\nLanguages.\nIn January 2022, due to deteriorating relations between Mali and the French government, the Mali government announced making Bambara the official language. In July 2023, French was dropped as an official language, becoming instead a working language. At the same time, the 13 national languages, namely Bambara, Bobo, Bozo, Dogon, Fula, Hassaniya Arabic, Kassonke, Maninke, Minyanka, Senufo, the Songhai, Soninke and Tamasheq, became official languages. The \"lingua franca\" in Mali is mainly Bambara, which about 80 percent of the population can communicate in. Over 40 other African languages are spoken by the various ethnic groups of Mali.\nAccording to the 2009 census, the languages spoken natively in Mali were Bambara by 51.5%, Fula (8.3%), Dogon (6.6%) Sonink\u00e9 (5.7%), Songhai (5.3%), Mandinka (5.2%), Minianka (3.8%), Tamasheq (3.2%), S\u00e9noufo (2%), Bobo (1.9%), Tieyaxo Bozo (1.6%), Kassonk\u00e9 (1.1%), Maure or Hassaniya Arabic (1%), Dafing (0.4%), Samogo (0.4%), Arabic (other dialects) (0.3%), other Malian languages (0.5%), other African languages (0.2%), and other non-African languages (0.2%); 0.7% did not declare their first language.\nReligion.\nIslam was introduced to West Africa in the 11th century and remains the predominant religion in much of the region. An estimated 90% of Malians are Muslim (mostly non-denominational and Sunni), approximately 5% are Christian (about two-thirds Roman Catholic and one-third Protestant) and the remaining 5% adhere to traditional African religions such as the Dogon religion. Atheism and agnosticism are believed to be rare among Malians, most of whom practise their religion daily.\nThe constitution establishes a secular state and provides for freedom of religion, and the government largely respects this right.\nIslam as historically practised in Mali has been malleable and adapted to local conditions; relations between Muslims and practitioners of minority religious faiths have generally been amicable.\nAfter the 2012 imposition of sharia rule in northern parts of the country, however, Mali came to be listed high (number 7) in the Christian persecution index published by Open Doors, which described the persecution in the north as severe.\nEducation.\nPublic education in Mali is in principle provided free of charge and is compulsory for nine years between the ages of seven and sixteen. The system encompasses six years of primary education beginning at age 7, followed by six years of secondary education. Mali's actual primary school enrolment rate is low, in large part because families are unable to cover the cost of uniforms, books, supplies, and other fees required to attend.\nIn 2017, the primary school enrolment rate was 61% (65% of males and 58% of females). In the late 1990s, the secondary school enrolment rate was 15% (20% of males and 10% of females). The education system is plagued by a lack of schools in rural areas, as well as shortages of teachers and materials.\nEstimates of literacy rates in Mali range from 27\u201330 to 46.4%, with literacy rates significantly lower among women than men. The University of Bamako, which includes four constituent universities, is the largest university in the country and enrols approximately 60,000 undergraduate and graduate students.\nHealth.\nMali faces numerous health challenges related to poverty, malnutrition, and inadequate hygiene and sanitation. Mali's health and development indicators rank among the worst in the world. Life expectancy at birth is estimated to be 63.2 years in 2024. In 2000, 62\u201365% of the population was estimated to have access to safe drinking water and only 69% to sanitation services of some kind. In 2001, the general government expenditures on health totaled about US$4 per capita at an average exchange rate.\nEfforts have been made to improve nutrition, and reduce associated health problems, by encouraging women to make nutritious versions of local recipes. For example, the International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT) and the Aga Khan Foundation, trained women's groups to make \"equinut\", a healthy and nutritional version of the traditional recipe \"di-d\u00e8gu\u00e8\" (comprising peanut paste, honey and millet or rice flour). The aim was to boost nutrition and livelihoods by producing a product that women could make and sell, and which would be accepted by the local community because of its local heritage.\nMedical facilities in Mali are very limited, and medicines are in short supply. Malaria and other arthropod-borne diseases are prevalent in Mali, as are a number of infectious diseases such as cholera and tuberculosis. Mali's population also suffers from a high rate of child malnutrition and a low rate of immunization. An estimated 1.9% of the adult and children population was afflicted with HIV/AIDS that year, among the lowest rates in Sub-Saharan Africa. An estimated 85%\u201391% of Mali's girls and women have had female genital mutilation (2006 and 2001 data).\nIn 2024, approximately 7.1 million people in Mali, including over 3.8 million children, require urgent humanitarian assistance due to escalating conflict and climate crises. UNICEF is amplifying its efforts to provide essential services like health, education, and protection, while appealing for $133.5 million to address these needs. The situation is dire, with over 522,000 children lacking access to education and millions at risk of malnutrition amid underfunded humanitarian responses. Urgent action is needed to mitigate the impacts of violence, insecurity and climate change on vulnerable populations in Mali.\nGender inequality.\nIn 2017, Mali ranked 157th out of 160 countries in the gender inequality index as reported by the United Nations Development Programme. The Malian Constitution states that it protects women's rights, however many laws exist that discriminate against women. Provisions in the laws limit women's decision-making power after marriage, in which the husband becomes superior to his wife. Women are blamed for not maintaining the appearance of their husbands and are also blamed for the actions of their children if they misbehave, which encourages the cultural attitude that women are inferior to men. The lack of participation of women in politics is due to the idea that politics is associated with men and that women should avoid this sector. Education is also an area in which boys dominate, since it is a better investment for the parents. As traditional values and practices have contributed to gender inequality in Mali, conflict and lawlessness have also influenced the growing gap in gender through gender-based violence. The unstable government of Mali has led to organizations like USAID attempting to improve the lives of the people, mainly women and girls' rights in order to re-engage the development of the country.\nReligion, the patriarchal norms, and gender-based violence are major negative factors shaping the life of women in Mali. Patriarchal norms cause major gender inequalities and lead to male domination within the household. Girls learn household activities like chores, cooking, childcare, etc. at a young age and are expected to take the main responsibility of household chores throughout their life. This hampers women's ability to enter the formal workforce and leads to a lack of education of girls. Gender-based violence in Mali happens both on a national and a family level. At the national level, in 2012 the conflict in the Northern part of the country increased cases of kidnappings and rapes. The conflict also reduced women's access to resources, economy, and opportunities. At the household level, Malian women face gender-based violence through domestic violence, forced marriages, and marital rape. The Demographic Health Survey for Mali in 2013 stated that 76% of women and 54% of men believed physical harm towards women was acceptable if the women burnt food, argued back, went out without notifying her husband, or refused sexual relations with her husband. In 2024, Mali officials approved a bill criminalising intimate relations between same-sex couples.\nAfter adjusting the entrance requirements and access to education, girls still have lower enrollment rates and less access to formal education. Drop-out rates for girls are 15% higher than that of boys because they have a higher responsibility at home and most parents refuse to allow all their children to go to school, so boys tend to become educated. Similarly, technical and vocational education has a lower numbers of girls participating and are inadequately distributed in the country because the training centers are focused in the urban cities. Finally, higher education for girls consist of short programs because early marriages prevent most girls from pursuing a longer term education program like those in science. Although women do not have the same access of education, in recent decades women have been entering and representing in decision-making positions in the Public Administration sector. Out of 147 members of Parliament, 15 were women in 2010. Recent decades show that women are slowly joining important decision-making positions which is changing the attitude and status of women in Mali, which has led to the promotion of women's rights in the political sphere.\nLegislation at the international and national levels have been implemented over the decades to help promote women's rights in Mali. At the international, Mali signed the Beijing Platform for Action which suggest that women should participate in decision-making and the convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women which is the foundation to women's rights promotion. At the national level, Mali's Constitution has the Decree No. 092-073P-CTSP that claims equality to all Malian citizens and discrimination is prohibited, which has not been followed. The Poverty Reduction Strategy Programme (PRSP) and the Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy Programme under the Malian Government seek to improve the well-being of the citizens, and changes to governance and gender in the country. The Ministry for Advancement of Women, Children and the Family was created specifically for women and children so that their basics rights and needs get met under the law. Although there exists legislation and policy for gender equality the institutionalization of the National Gender Policy of Mali is necessary to support the importance of women's rights. Strengthening and the support of girls' and women's access to education and training is recommended to improve gender equality in Mali. The involvement of international organizations like USAID assist Mali financially to enhance their development through the efforts of the improvement of women's rights.\nCulture.\nThe varied everyday culture of Malians reflects the country's ethnic and geographic diversity. Most Malians wear flowing, colorful robes called boubous that are typical of West Africa. Malians frequently participate in traditional festivals, dances, and ceremonies.\nMusic.\nMalian musical traditions are derived from the griots, who are known as \"Keepers of Memories\". Malian music is diverse and has several different genres. Some famous Malian influences in music are kora virtuoso musician Toumani Diabat\u00e9, the ngoni with Bassekou Kouyate the virtuoso of the electric jeli ngoni, the late roots and blues guitarist Ali Farka Tour\u00e9, the Tuareg band Tinariwen, Khaira Arby, and several Afro-pop artists such as Salif Keita, the duo Amadou et Mariam, Oumou Sangare, Fatoumata Diawara, Rokia Traore, and Habib Koit\u00e9. Dance also plays a large role in Malian culture. Dance parties are common events among friends, and traditional mask dances are performed at ceremonial events.\nLiterature.\nThough Mali's literature is less famous than its music, Mali has always been one of Africa's liveliest intellectual centers. Mali's literary tradition is passed mainly by word of mouth, with \"jalis\" reciting or singing histories and stories known by heart. Amadou Hamp\u00e2t\u00e9 B\u00e2, Mali's best-known historian, spent much of his life writing these oral traditions down for the world to remember.\nThe best-known novel by a Malian writer is Yambo Ouologuem's \"Le devoir de violence\", which won the 1968 but whose legacy was marred by accusations of plagiarism. Other well-known Malian writers include Baba Traor\u00e9, Modibo Sounkalo Keita, Massa Makan Diabat\u00e9, Moussa Konat\u00e9, and Fily Dabo Sissoko.\nSport.\nThe most popular sport in Mali is association football, which became more prominent after Mali hosted the 2002 African Cup of Nations. Most towns and cities have regular games; the most popular teams nationally are Djoliba AC, Stade Malien, and Real Bamako, all based in the capital. Informal games are often played by youths using a bundle of rags as a ball.\nBasketball is another major sport; the Mali women's national basketball team, led by Hamchetou Maiga, competed at the 2008 Beijing Olympics. Traditional wrestling (\"la lutte\") is also somewhat common, though popularity has declined in recent years. The game wari, a mancala variant, is a common pastime.\nMali featured a men's national team in beach volleyball that competed at the 2018\u20132020 CAVB Beach Volleyball Continental Cup.\nCuisine.\nRice and millet are the staples of Malian cuisine, which is heavily based on cereal grains. Grains are generally prepared with sauces made from edible leaves, such as spinach or baobab, with tomato peanut sauce, and may be accompanied by pieces of grilled meat (typically chicken, mutton, beef, or goat). Malian cuisine varies regionally. Other popular dishes include fufu, jollof rice, and maafe.\nMedia.\nIn Mali, there are several newspapers such as \"Les Echos\", \"L'Essor\", \"Info Matin\", \"Nouvel Horizon\", and \"Le R\u00e9publicain\". Office de Radiodiffusion-T\u00e9l\u00e9vision du Mali is the state-owned service. Telecommunications in Mali include 869,600 mobile phones, 45,000 televisions and 414,985 Internet users.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19128", "revid": "50142103", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19128", "title": "History of Mali", "text": "The history of Mali can be divided into several major periods:\nMali's present-day borders largely follow those of French Sudan, established in 1891. These colonial boundaries brought together diverse Sudanian and Saharan regions into a single political unit. As a result, Mali developed into a multi-ethnic society, with the Mand\u00e9 peoples forming a significant part of its cultural and historical identity.\nThroughout its history, Mali's position at the crossroads of Trans-Saharan trade routes played a crucial role in its development. The city of Timbuktu, situated near the Niger River on the southern edge of the Sahara, became an important center of commerce, Islamic scholarship, and culture from the 13th century onward.\nThis prosperity peaked during the rise of the Mali Empire, followed by the expansion of the Songhai Empire, both of which established Mali as a major power in West African history.\nPrehistory.\nPaleolithic.\nThe Sahara has experienced significant climatic fluctuations throughout its history, with periods of both drier and wetter climates than today. It was inhospitable to human life between 325,000 and 290,000 years ago and again between 280,000 and 225,000 years ago, except for a few favorable refuges like Lake Tihoda\u00efne in the water-retaining Tassili n'Ajjer region. During these arid phases, the desert expanded far beyond its present-day boundaries, leaving behind sand dunes that stretch well beyond the modern Sahara. Human occupation is primarily linked to the wetter \"green\" phases when ecological conditions were more suitable for settlement and migration.\nIt is possible that anatomically modern humans, who may have emerged in isolation south of the Sahara between 300,000 and 200,000 years ago, already inhabited the humid, water-rich regions during a prolonged green phase over 200,000 years ago. Around 125,000 to 110,000 years ago, an extensive network of rivers and lakes enabled the northward spread of fauna, followed by human hunter-gatherer groups. Among these water systems was Mega Lake Chad, which, at its largest extent, covered over 360,000\u00a0km2. However, during a subsequent arid phase between 70,000 and 58,000 years ago, the Sahara once again became a formidable barrier to migration. Another green period followed between 50,000 and 45,000 years ago.\nIn present-day Mali, archaeological evidence is less abundant than in northern neighboring regions. However, excavations at the Ounjougou complex on the Dogon Plateau, near Bandiagara, have revealed signs of human presence dating back over 150,000 years. Evidence of continuous habitation is firmly established for the period between 70,000 and 25,000 years ago. The Paleolithic period in Mali ended relatively early, likely due to the onset of another extremely arid phase \u2013 the Ogolia \u2013 around 25,000 to 20,000 years ago, which transformed the region back into a dry savannah landscape.\nNeolithic.\nFollowing the Last Glacial Maximum and the retreat of northern ice sheets, the climate in the Sahara region was significantly more humid than it is today. The Niger River formed a vast inland lake near Timbuktu and Araouane, while a similarly large body of water developed in the Lake Chad basin. During this period, which began around 9500 BCE, the landscape of northern Mali resembled the savannah ecosystems found in southern Mali today. The humid phase that followed the Younger Dryas (a cold climatic episode) was eventually replaced by increasing aridity around 5000 BCE.\nThe Neolithic period, marked by a transition from foraging to food production, developed during this wetter era. It is usually divided into three phases, separated by distinct dry intervals. Sorghum and millet were among the earliest cultivated crops, and by 8000 BCE, large herds of cattle \u2013 closely related to modern zebus \u2013 grazed across what is now the Sahara. Sheep and goats were introduced much later from West Asia, whereas cattle were likely first domesticated within Africa.\nPottery appeared independently at several sites, including Ounjougou in central Mali, with ceramics dated to around 9400 BCE \u2013 one of the earliest known examples in West Africa. Some of the earliest Neolithic cultures practiced a productive way of life without fully developed agriculture or animal husbandry. At the Ravin de la Mouche site (part of the Ounjougou complex), origin dates between 11,400 and 10,200 years ago have been recorded. Other nearby sites, such as Ravin du Hibou 2, date to between 8000 and 7000 BCE. However, a hiatus in occupation is evident between 7000 and 3500 BCE, likely due to unfavorable climatic conditions that hunter-gatherers could not withstand.\nArchaeological and paleoenvironmental data suggest a return of nomadic pastoralists around 4000 BCE, just prior to the end of the last humid phase, which waned around 3500 BCE. Sites like Karkarichinkat (ca. 2500\u20131600 BCE) and possibly Village de la Fronti\u00e8re (3590 BCE), along with sediment layers at Lake Fati, illustrate this period of climatic transition. Lake Fati existed between 10,430 and 4660 BP, with a 16-centimeter sand layer indicating a desiccation event around 4500 BP \u2013 approximately 1,000 years later than comparable changes on the Mauritanian coast. Increasing aridity peaked about a millennium later, prompting southward migrations of cattle-herding populations into Mali as northern lakes dried up.\nThis late Neolithic period also saw further immigration from the Sahara around 2500 BCE, as the region transitioned into an increasingly arid desert. Archaeological surveys based on ceramic typology identified three cultural groups living around M\u00e9ma, the , and Wind\u00e9 Koroji (near the Mauritanian border) around 2000 BCE. Key excavation sites include Kobadi (1700\u20131400 BCE), MN25 (near Hassi el Abiod), and Kirkissoy near Niamey, Niger (1500\u20131000 BCE). These suggest a southward movement of populations, culminating in the introduction of agriculture, including the cultivation of pearl millet (Pennisetum glaucum) and possibly wheat and emmer \u2013 grains domesticated much earlier in eastern Sahara, now reaching Mali. Ecological evidence implies tillage began as early as the 3rd millennium BCE, though this phase ended abruptly around 400 BCE due to severe drought.\nThe use of ochre in funerary practices \u2013 sometimes extending to animals \u2013 persisted into the 1st millennium BCE. A striking example is the burial of a horse at Tel Matamata, west of the Inland Niger Delta near Thial in the Tenenkou Cercle, where the remains were covered with ochre. Rock art, including both symbolic and anthropomorphic depictions, is found across Mali in areas such as Boucle du Baoul\u00e9 National Park (Fanfanny\u00e9g\u00e8n\u00e9), the Dogon Plateau, and along the Niger River Delta (Aire Soroba).\nFurther excavations at Karkarichinkat Nord (KN05) and Karkarichinkat Sud (KS05) \u2013 located in a fossil riverbed roughly 70\u00a0km north of Gao \u2013 revealed the earliest known evidence in West Africa south of the Sahara for ritual tooth modification among women, dating to ca. 4500\u20134200 BP. These practices, which included tooth filing and extractions resulting in pointed teeth, resemble similar customs documented in the Maghreb. The modification was predominantly observed in female remains, and similar traditions continued in the region into the 19th century.\nIsotopic analysis from these sites showed that 85% of dietary carbon came from C4 plants, particularly grasses, indicating either the consumption of wild cereals (like wild millet) or early domesticated species. These results offer some of the earliest evidence of agriculture and cattle herding in West Africa, around 2200 cal BP.\nThe Dhar Tichitt tradition (1800\u2013800/400 BCE), centered in the M\u00e9ma region \u2013 a former river delta west of today's Inland Niger Delta (sometimes called the \"dead delta\") \u2013 represents another major cultural development. Settlements ranged from 1 to 8 hectares but were not continuously occupied, likely due to environmental limitations. The tsetse fly, prevalent during the rainy season, posed a significant obstacle to cattle rearing and limited expansion to the south.\nBy contrast, the Kobadi tradition, which developed in the mid-2nd millennium BCE, relied primarily on fishing, gathering wild grasses, and hunting, and remained relatively sedentary. Both traditions used copper sourced from Mauritania and maintained interregional exchanges, as evidenced by material culture and stylistic similarities in ceramics.\nEarlier Iron Age.\nA number of early towns and cities were established by Mand\u00e9-speaking peoples related to the Soninke, along the middle Niger River in what is now Mali. Among the earliest was Dia, which was settled around 900 BCE and reached its peak around 600 BCE. Another major site was Djenn\u00e9-Djenno, occupied from approximately 250 BCE to 800 CE. Djenn\u00e9-Djenno formed a substantial urban complex, consisting of 40 mounds spread across a 4-kilometer radius. The site itself likely extended over 33 hectares (82 acres) and participated in both local and long-distance trade networks.\nDuring Djenn\u00e9-Djenno's second phase \u2013 which occurred during the first millennium CE \u2013 the site expanded significantly, possibly covering over 100,000 square meters. This period also saw the emergence of permanent mud-brick architecture, including the construction of a city wall. The wall, built using cylindrical mud-brick technology, was approximately 3.7 meters wide at its base and extended for nearly two kilometers around the town.\nReferences to Mali appear sporadically in early Islamic literature. The 11th-century geographer al-Bakri (writing in 1068 CE) mentions the regions of \"Pene\" and \"Malal,\" which may correspond to areas within early Mali. The historian Ibn Khaldun, writing in the late 14th century, recounts the conversion to Islam of an early Malian ruler known as Barmandana. Additional geographical details are found in the 12th-century works of al-Idrisi.\nEmpires.\nGhana Empire.\nAfter Soumaoro Kant\u00e9's defeat in the Battle of Kirina in 1235, the Ghana Empire became permanent allies with the Mali Empire. The Ghana Empire later submitted to the Mali Empire's increasing dominance and became a submissive state.\nMali Empire.\nBeginning in 1230, the Mali Empire was the largest empire in West Africa and profoundly influenced the culture of the region through the spread of its language, laws, and customs along the Niger River.\nThe empire was founded by Sundiata Ke\u00efta and became known for the wealth of its rulers, especially Mansa Musa I. It extended over a large area and consisted of numerous vassal kingdoms and provinces. Until the 19th century, the city of Timbuktu remained important as an outpost at the southwestern fringe of the Muslim world and a hub of the trans-Saharan slave trade. \nThe empire was known for its abundant gold resources, which were used to finance the construction of impressive architecture, such as the famous Great Mosque of Djenn\u00e9. The Mali Empire was also known for its thriving trade network, which stretched across the Sahara Desert and into North Africa and the Middle East.\nThe modern countries included are Mali, Senegal, Gambia, Guinea, Mauritania, and parts of Niger and Burkina Faso, with Mali itself being the centre of the empire.\nSonghai Empire.\nIn the fifteenth century, with the Mali Empire weakening, the Songhai, led by Sunni Ali Ber asserted their independence. The Songhai made Gao their capital and began an imperial expansion across the Niger River valley, west to Senegal and east to Agades. At this time, the Songhai also seized control of Timbuktu.\nAfter the empires (1591\u20131892).\nThe Songhai empire eventually collapsed under pressure from the Moroccan Saadi dynasty. The turning point was the Battle of Tondibi of March 13, 1591. Morocco subsequently controlled Gao, Timbuktu, Djenn\u00e9 (also seen as Jenne), and related trade routes with much difficulty until around the end of the 17th century.\nAfter the collapse of the Songhai Empire, no single state controlled the region. The Moroccans only succeeded in occupying a few portions of the country, and even in those locations where they did attempt to rule, their hold was weak and challenged by rivals. Several small successor kingdoms arose. The most notable in what is now Mali were the following:\nBambara Empire or the Kingdom of Segou.\nThe Bambara Empire existed as a centralized state from 1712 to 1861. It was based at S\u00e9gou and Timbuktu (also seen as Segu), and ruled parts of central and southern Mali. It existed until El Hadj Umar Tall, a Toucouleur conqueror swept across West Africa from Futa Tooro. Umar Tall's mujahideen readily defeated the Bambara, seizing S\u00e9gou itself on March 10, 1861, and declaring an end to the empire.\nKingdom of Kaarta.\nA split in the Coulibaly dynasty in S\u00e9gou led to the establishment of a second Bambara state, the kingdom of Kaarta, in what is now western Mali, in 1753. It was defeated in 1854 by Umar Tall, leader of Toucouleur Empire, before his war with S\u00e9gou.\nKenedougou Kingdom.\nThe Senufo Kenedugu Kingdom originated in the 17th century in the area around what is now the border of Mali and Burkina Faso. In 1876 the capital was moved to Sikasso. It resisted the effort of Samori Ture, leader of Wassoulou Empire, in 1887, to conquer it, and was one of the last kingdoms in the area to fall to the French in 1898.\nMaasina.\nAn Islamic-inspired uprising in the largely Fula Inner Niger Delta region against rule by S\u00e9gou in 1818 led to the establishment of a separate state. It later allied with Bambara Empire against Umar Tall's Toucouleur Empire and was also defeated by it in 1862.\nToucouleur Empire.\nThis empire, founded by El Hadj Umar Tall of the Toucouleur peoples, beginning in 1864, ruled eventually most of what is now Mali until the French conquest of the region in 1890. This was a turbulent period, with ongoing resistance in Messina and increasing pressure from the French.\nWassoulou Empire.\nThe Wassoulou or Wassulu Empire was a short-lived (1878\u20131898) empire, led by Samori Ture in the predominantly Malink\u00e9 area of what is now upper Guinea and southwestern Mali (Wassoulou). It later moved to Ivory Coast before being conquered by the French.\nFrench Sudan (1892\u20131960).\nMali fell under French colonial rule in 1892. By 1893, the French appointed a civilian governor of the territory they called \"Soudan Fran\u00e7ais\" (French Sudan), but active resistance to French rule continued. By 1905, most of the area was under firm French control.\nFrench Sudan was administered as part of the Federation of French West Africa and supplied labor to France's colonies on the coast of West Africa. In 1958 the renamed Sudanese Republic obtained complete internal autonomy and joined the French Community. In early 1959, the Sudanese Republic and Senegal formed the Federation of Mali. On March 31, 1960, France agreed to the Federation of Mali becoming fully independent. On June 20, 1960, the Federation of Mali became an independent country and Modibo Ke\u00efta became its first President.\nIndependence (1960\u2013present).\nFollowing the withdrawal of Senegal from the federation in August 1960, the former Sudanese Republic became the Republic of Mali on September 22, 1960, with Modibo Ke\u00efta as president.\nPresident Modibo Ke\u00efta, whose Sudanese Union-African Democratic Rally (US/RDA) party had dominated pre-independence politics (as a member of the African Democratic Rally), moved quickly to declare a single-party state and to pursue a socialist policy based on extensive nationalization. Ke\u00efta withdrew from the French Community and also had close ties to the Eastern bloc. A continuously deteriorating economy led to a decision to rejoin the Franc Zone in 1967 and modify some of the economic excesses.\nFrom 1962 to 1964, there was the Tuareg insurgency in northern Mali, launched from the Kidal Region. However, this was violently suppressed by government forces, in ways that include poisoning wells and executing livestock.\nUnder Moussa Traor\u00e9.\nOn November 19, 1968, a group of young officers staged a bloodless coup and set up a 14-member Military Committee for National Liberation (CMLN), with Lt. Moussa Traor\u00e9 as president. The military leaders attempted to pursue economic reforms, but for several years faced debilitating internal political struggles and the disastrous Sahelian drought.\nA new constitution, approved in 1974, created a one-party state and was designed to move Mali toward civilian rule. However, the military leaders remained in power. In September 1976, a new political party was established, the Democratic Union of the Malian People (UDPM), based on the concept of democratic centralism. Single-party presidential and legislative elections were held in June 1979, and Gen. Moussa Traor\u00e9 received 99% of the votes. His efforts at consolidating the single-party government were challenged in 1980 by student-led anti-government demonstrations that led to three coup attempts, which were brutally quashed.\nThe political situation stabilized during 1981 and 1982 and remained generally calm throughout the 1980s. In late December 1985, however, a border dispute between Mali and Burkina Faso over the mineral-rich Agacher strip erupted into a brief war. The UDPM spread its structure to cercles and arrondissements across the land.\nShifting its attention to Mali's economic difficulties, the government approved plans for some reforms of the state enterprise system and attempted to control public corruption. It implemented cereal marketing liberalization, created new incentives to private enterprise, and worked out a new structural adjustment agreement with the International Monetary Fund (IMF). But the populace became increasingly dissatisfied with the austerity measures imposed by the IMF plan as well as their perception that the ruling elite was not subject to the same strictures. In response to the growing demands for multiparty democracy then sweeping the continent, the Traor\u00e9 regime did allow some limited political liberalization. In National Assembly elections in June 1988, multiple UDPM candidates were permitted to contest each seat, and the regime organized nationwide conferences to consider how to implement democracy within the one-party framework. Nevertheless, the regime refused to usher in a full-fledged democratic system.\nBy 1990, cohesive opposition movements began to emerge, including the National Democratic Initiative Committee and the Alliance for Democracy in Mali (Alliance pour la D\u00e9mocratie au Mali, ADEMA). The increasingly turbulent political situation was complicated by the rise of ethnic violence in the north in mid-1990. The return to Mali of large numbers of Tuareg who had migrated to Algeria and Libya during the prolonged drought increased tensions in the region between the nomadic Tuareg and the sedentary population. Ostensibly fearing a Tuareg secessionist movement in the north, the Traor\u00e9 regime imposed a state of emergency and harshly repressed Tuareg unrest. Despite the signing of a peace accord in January 1991, unrest and periodic armed clashes continued.\n2000s.\nKonar\u00e9 stepped down after his constitutionally mandated limit of two terms and did not run in the 2002 elections. Tour\u00e9 then reemerged, this time as a civilian. Running as an independent on a platform of national unity, Tour\u00e9 won the presidency in a runoff against the candidate of Adema, which had been divided by infighting and suffered from the creation of a spin-off party, the Rally for Mali. Tour\u00e9 had retained great popularity because of his role in the transitional government in 1991\u201392. The 2002 election was a milestone, marking Mali's first successful transition from one democratically elected president to another, despite the persistence of electoral irregularities and low voter turnout. In the 2002 legislative elections, no party gained a majority; Tour\u00e9 then appointed a politically inclusive government and pledged to tackle Mali's pressing social and economic development problems.\n2010s.\nIn January 2012, the National Movement for the Liberation of Azawad (MNLA) began an insurgency. Rebel troops from the military appeared on state TV on March 22, 2012, announcing they had seized control of the country, citing unrest over the president's handling of the conflict with the rebels. The former president was forced into hiding.\nHowever, due to the 2012 insurgency in northern Mali, the military government controlled only the southern third of the country, leaving the north of the country (known as Azawad) to MNLA rebels. The rebels controlled Timbuktu, 700\u00a0km from the capital. In response, the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) froze assets and imposed an embargo, leaving some with only days of fuel. Mali was dependent on fuel imports trucked overland from Senegal and Ivory Coast.\nOn July 17, 2012, the Tuareg rebels were pushed out by their allies, the Islamists, Ansar Dine, and Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (A.Q.I.M.). An extremist mini-state in northern Mali was the unexpected result from the collapse of the earlier coup d'\u00e9tat by the angry army officers.\nRefugees in the 92,000-person refugee camp at Mbera, Mauritania, described the Islamists as \"intent on imposing an Islam of lash and gun on Malian Muslims.\" The Islamists in Timbuktu destroyed about a half-dozen venerable above-ground tombs of revered holy men, proclaiming the tombs contrary to Shariah. One refugee in the camp spoke of encountering Afghans, Pakistanis and Nigerians.\nRamtane Lamamra, the African Union's peace and security commissioner, said the African Union discussed sending a military force to reunify Mali and that negotiations with terrorists had been ruled out but negotiations with other armed factions were still open.\nOn December 10, 2012, Prime Minister Cheick Modibo Diarra was arrested by soldiers and taken to a military base in Kati. Hours later, the Prime Minister announced his resignation and the resignation of his government on national television.\nOn January 10, 2013, Islamist forces captured the strategic town of Konna, located 600\u00a0km from the capital, from the Malian army. The following day, the French military launched Op\u00e9ration Serval, intervening in the conflict.\nBy February 8, the Islamist-held territory had been re-taken by the Malian military, with help from the international coalition. Tuareg separatists have continued to fight the Islamists as well, although the MNLA has also been accused of carrying out attacks against the Malian military.\nA peace deal between the government and Tuareg rebels was signed on June 18, 2013.\nPresidential elections were held in Mali on July 28, 2013, with a second round run-off held on August 11. Ibrahim Boubacar Ke\u00efta defeated Souma\u00efla Ciss\u00e9 in the run-off to become the new President of Mali.\nThe peace deal between the Tuareg rebels and the Malian government was broken in late November 2013 because of clashes in the northern city of Kidal. A new ceasefire was agreed upon on February 20, 2015, between the Malian government and the northern rebels.\nIn August 2018, President Ibrahim Boubacar Ke\u00efta was re-elected for a new five-year term after winning the second round of the election against Souma\u00efla Ciss\u00e9.\n2020s.\nOn June 5, 2020, street protests calling for the resignation of President Ibrahim Boubacar Ke\u00efta began in Bamako. On August 18, 2020, mutinying soldiers arrested President Ibrahim Boubacar Ke\u00efta and Prime Minister Boubou Ciss\u00e9. President Ke\u00efta resigned and left the country. The National Committee for the Salvation of the People led by Colonel Assimi Go\u00efta took power. This was the fourth coup since independence from France in 1960. On September 12, 2020, the National Committee for the Salvation of the People agreed to an 18-month political transition to civilian rule. Shortly after, Bah N'Daw was named interim president.\nOn May 25, 2021, Colonel Assimi Go\u00efta dismissed the transitional president Bah N'Daw and the transitional prime minister Moctar Ouane from their positions. On June 7, 2021, Mali's military commander Assimi Go\u00efta was sworn into office as the new interim president. According to Human Rights Watch (HRW) Malian troops and suspected Russian mercenaries from the Wagner Group executed around 300 civilian men in central Mali in March 2022. France had withdrawn French troops from Mali in February 2022.\nIn 2023, Burkina Faso proposed a federation with Mali to bolster their political and economic clout by uniting their resources, territories, and populations, aligning with a broader movement among African nations to form regional alliances to tackle common challenges and promote collective interests. This initiative evolved into the Alliance of Sahel States (AES), formalized in September 2023 with Niger's inclusion, following military coups in all three countries (Mali in 2020 and 2021, Burkina Faso in 2022, and Niger in 2023).\nThe AES aimed to enhance security, economic integration, and sovereignty, with plans for a confederation by July 2024, including a joint biometric passport, a common currency, and shared infrastructure to foster trade, energy, and agricultural self-reliance. However, the proposal sparked concerns over cultural, historical, and economic disparities between Burkina Faso and Mali, alongside fears of unequal power distribution and eroded national sovereignty. Critics also highlighted the challenges of political instability, ongoing jihadist insurgencies, and the juntas' alignment with Russia over traditional Western partners, which strained relations with ECOWAS, leading to their withdrawal in January 2024. The AES's ambitious goals face hurdles due to limited funding, vast territorial challenges, and escalating violence, with over 8,000 deaths in Burkina Faso alone in 2023, raising doubts about its ability to deliver stability and integration.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19130", "revid": "49784051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19130", "title": "Demographics of Mali", "text": " \nDemographic features of the population of Mali include population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.\nPopulation.\nIn , Mali's population was an estimated million, with an annual growth rate of 2.7%. This figure can be compared to 4,638,000 in 1950. The population is predominantly rural (68% in 2002), and 5\u201310% of Malians are nomadic. More than 90% of the population lives in the southern part of the country, especially in Bamako, which has over 1 million residents.\nIn 2007, about 48% of Malians were less than 15 years old, 49% were 15\u201364 years old, and 3% were 65 and older. The median age was 15.9 years. The birth rate in 2007 was 49.6 births per 1,000, and the total fertility rate was 7.4 children per woman.\nThe death rate in 2007 was 16.5 deaths per 1,000. Life expectancy at birth was 49.5 years total (47.6 for males and 51.5 for females). Mali has one of the world's highest rates of infant mortality, with 106 deaths per 1,000 live births.\nThe proportion of the population aged below 15 in 2010 was 47.2%. 50.6% of the population were aged between 15 and 65 years of age. 2.2% of the population were aged 65 years or older.\nStructure of the population.\nStructure of the population (census January 2009):\nPopulation Estimates by Sex and Age Group (January 2018):\nVital statistics.\nRegistration of vital events in Mali is not complete. The website Our World in Data prepared the following estimates based on statistics from the Population Department of the United Nations. (\"UN World Population Prospects 2024\").\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nDemographic and Health Surveys.\nTotal Fertility Rate (TFR) (Wanted Fertility Rate) and Crude Birth Rate (CBR):\nFertility data as of 2012-2013 (DHS Program):\nImmigration and emigration.\nMali had an estimated net migration rate of \u20136.6 migrants per 1,000 people in 2006. About 3 million Malians are believed to reside in C\u00f4te d'Ivoire and France. Conversely, according to a 2003 estimate, Mali hosts about 11,000 Mauritanians; most are Fulani herders who routinely engage in cross-border migration. In addition, there are several thousand refugees from C\u00f4te d'Ivoire, Sierra Leone, and Liberia in Bamako and other urban areas of Mali.\nEthnic groups.\nEthnic groups include:\nMali's population consists of Sub-Saharan ethnic groups, sharing similar historic, cultural, and religious traditions. Exceptions are two nomadic northern groups, the Tuaregs, a Berber people, and Maurs (or Moors), of Arabo-Berber origins. In Mali and Niger, the Moors are also known as Azawagh Arabs, named after the Azawagh region of the Sahara. Azawagh Arabs speak mainly Hassaniya Arabic which is one of the regional varieties of Arabic.\nThe Tuaregs traditionally have opposed the central government. Starting in June 1990 in the north, Tuaregs seeking greater autonomy led to clashes with the military. In April 1992, the government and most opposing factions signed a pact to end the fighting and restore stability in the north. Its major aims are to allow greater autonomy to the north and increase government resource allocation to what has been a traditionally impoverished region. The peace agreement was celebrated in 1996 in Timbuktu during an official and highly publicized ceremony called \"Flamme de la Paix\" (peace flame).\nHistorically, interethnic relations throughout the rest of the country were facilitated by easy mobility on the Niger River and across the country's vast savannahs. Each ethnic group was traditionally tied to a specific occupation, all working within proximity to each other, although the distinctions were often blurred.\nThe Bambara, Malink\u00e9, Sarakole, Dogon and Songhay are farmers; the Fula or Fulani, Maur, and Tuareg are herders, while the Bozo and Somono are fishers. In recent years this linkage has shifted considerably, as ethnic groups seek nontraditional sources of income.\nEuropeans in Mali.\nPeople of European origin form a small minority in the country. They include those of mixed European and African descendant, as well as those of full European background. The latter includes the French, as well as the Spanish, Irish, Italian and Portuguese origins. Some of them descend from the Arma people (1% of the nation's population). They mainly live in Bamako, Sikasso, Kalabancoro, Koutiala, S\u00e9gou, Kayes, Kati, Mopti, Niono, Gao, San, Koro, Bla, Bougouni, Mand\u00e9, Baguineda-Camp, Kolondi\u00e9ba, Kolokani, and others.\nLanguages.\nAlthough each ethnic group speaks a separate language, nearly 80% of Malians communicate over ethnic borders in Bambara, which is the common language of the marketplace. French was formerly the country's official language and is spoken somewhat by 30% of Malians.\nReligion.\nAn estimated 95% of Malians are Sunni Muslim, 4% adhere to indigenous or traditional animist beliefs, and 1% are Christian (about two-thirds Roman Catholic and one-third Protestant). Atheism and agnosticism are believed to be rare among Malians, most of whom practice their religion on a daily basis. Islam as practiced in Mali can be moderate, tolerant, and adapted to local conditions; relations between Muslims and practitioners of minority religious faiths are generally amicable. The constitution establishes a secular state and provides for freedom of religion.\nHealth.\nMali's health and development indicators rank among the worst in the world. In 2000 only 62\u201365 percent of the population was estimated to have access to safe drinking water and only 69 percent to sanitation services of some kind; only 8 percent was estimated to have access to modern sanitation facilities. Only 20 percent of the nation\u2019s villages and livestock watering holes had modern water facilities.\nThere were an estimated 140,000 cases of human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune deficiency syndrome (HIV/AIDS) reported in 2003, and an estimated 1.9 percent of the adult population was afflicted with HIV/AIDS that year, among the lowest rates in Sub-Saharan Africa (see also HIV/AIDS in Africa). In the same year, there were 12,000 AIDS deaths. The infant mortality rate is 69.5 deaths/1,000 live births (75.3/1,000 among males and 63.5/1,000 among females) (2017 est.). Life expectancy at birth is 60.3 years (58.2 years among males and 62.5 years among females) (2017 est.)."}
{"id": "19131", "revid": "27112497", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19131", "title": "Politics of Mali", "text": " \nUntil the military coup of March 22, 2012 and a second military coup in December 2012 the politics of Mali took place in a framework of a semi-presidential representative democratic republic, whereby the President of Mali is head of state with a Presidentially appointed Prime Minister as the head of government, and of a multi-party system.\nExecutive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the National Assembly. \nThe Judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature.\nIn August 2018, President Ibrahim Boubacar Keita was re-elected for a new five-year term after winning the second round of the election against Souma\u00efla Ciss\u00e9.\nThe Economist Intelligence Unit rated Mali an \"authoritarian regime\" in .\nOn 18 August 2020 a coup d'\u00e9tat ousted the president and prime minister. On 25 September 2020, retired colonel and former defence minister Bah Ndaw was sworn in as Mali's interim president.\nOn 15 April 2021, the transitional administration announced that legislative and presidential elections will be held on 27 February 2022. On 7 June 2021, Mali's military commander Assimi Goita was sworn into office as the new interim president. On 30 December 2021, the transitional administration announced plans to delay the election by six months to five years in part because of security issues, leading to political opposition and sanctions.\nOn 14 May 2025, the National Committee for the Salvation of the People, the ruling military junta over Mali, ordered the dissolution of all political parties and organizations.\nExecutive branch.\nThe executive branch consists of the President of Mali and the Government of Mali, led by the Prime Minister of Mali.\nUnder Mali's 1992 constitution, the president is chief of state and commander in chief of the armed forces. The president is elected to 5-year terms by direct popular vote. He is limited to two terms.\nThe Prime Minister of Mali is the head of government. They are appointed by the president and are responsible for the appointment of the other ministers of government.\nThe president chairs the Council of Ministers (the prime minister and currently 27 other ministers), which adopts a proposals for laws submitted to the National Assembly for approval of them.\nLegislative branch.\nThe National Assembly is the sole legislative arm of the Malian government. It has 160 members, who are elected directly for a five-year term by party list. 147 members are elected in single-seat constituencies and 13 members elected by Malians abroad. Representation is apportioned according to the population of administrative districts.\nThe Assembly meets for two regular sessions each year. It debates and votes on legislation proposed either by one of its members or by the government; it also has the right to question government ministers about government actions and policies. Eight political parties, aggregated into four parliamentary groups, are represented in the Assembly. ADEMA currently holds the majority; minority parties are represented in all committees and in the Assembly directorate.\nPolitical parties and elections.\nMali's constitution provides for a multi-party democracy, with the only restriction being a prohibition against parties based on ethnic, religious, regional, or gender lines. In addition to those political parties represented in the National Assembly, others are active in municipal councils.\nJudicial branch.\nMali's legal system is based on codes inherited at independence from France. New laws have been enacted to make the system conform to Malian life, but French colonial laws not abrogated still have the force of law. The constitution provides for the independence of the judiciary.\nThe Ministry of Justice appoints judges and supervises both law enforcement and judicial functions. The Supreme Court has both judicial and administrative powers. Under the constitution, there is a separate constitutional court and a high court of justice with the power to try senior government officials in cases of treason.\nAdministrative divisions.\nAdministratively, Mali is divided into ten regions (Gao, M\u00e9naka, Kayes, Kidal, Koulikoro, Mopti, S\u00e9gou, Sikasso, Tombouctou, Taoud\u00e9nit) and the capital district of Bamako, each under the authority of an elected governor. Each region consists of five to nine districts (or Cercles), administered by Prefects. Cercles are divided into communes, which, in turn, are divided into villages or quarters.\nA decentralisation and democratisation process began in the 1990s with the establishment of 702 elected municipal councils, headed by elected mayors, and previously appointed officials have been replaced with elected officials, which culminates in a National council of local officials. Other changes included greater local control over finances, and the reduction of administrative control by the central government.\nForeign relations.\nMali is member of \nACCT, \nACP, \nAfDB, \nCCC, \nECA, \nECOWAS, \nFAO, \nFZ, \nG-77, \nIAEA, \nIBRD, \nICAO, \nICCt, \nICFTU, \nICRM, \nIDA, \nIDB, \nIFAD, \nIFC, \nIFRCS, \nILO, \nIMF, \nIntelsat, \nInterpol, \nIOC, \nIOM, \nITU, \nMIPONUH, \nMONUC, \nNAM, \nOAU, \nOIC, \nOPCW, \nUN, \nUNCTAD, \nUNESCO, \nUNIDO, \nUPU, \nWADB\u00a0(regional), \nWAEMU, \nWCL, \nWFTU, \nWHO, \nWIPO, \nWMO, \nWToO, \nWTrO\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19132", "revid": "46560660", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19132", "title": "Economy of Mali", "text": "The economy of Mali is based to a large extent upon agriculture, with a mostly rural population engaged in subsistence agriculture.\nMali is among the ten poorest nations of the world and is one of the 39 Heavily Indebted Poor Countries. Mali is a major recipient of foreign aid from many sources, including multilateral organizations (most significantly the World Bank, the African Development Bank, and Arab Funds), and bilateral programs funded by the European Union, France, the United States, Canada, the Netherlands, and Germany. Before 1991, the former Soviet Union, China and the Warsaw Pact countries had been a major source of economic and military aid.\nThe per capita gross domestic product (GDP) of Mali was $820 in 1999. Mali's great potential wealth lies in mining and the production of agricultural commodities, livestock, and fish. The most productive agricultural area lies along the banks of the Niger River, the Inner Niger Delta and the southwestern region around Sikasso. Mali advocates for a traditional economic system.\nMacro-economic trend.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132021. Inflation below 5% is in green.\nAgriculture.\nIn 2018, Mali produced:\nIn addition to smaller productions of other agricultural products.\nAgricultural activities occupy 70% of Mali's labor force and provide 42% of the GDP. Cotton and livestock make up 75%\u201380% of Mali's annual exports. Small-scale traditional farming dominates the agricultural sector, with subsistence farming (of cereals, primarily sorghum, pearl millet, and maize) on about 90% of the under cultivation.\nThe most productive agricultural area lies along the banks of the Niger River between Bamako and Mopti and extends south to the borders of Guinea, Ivory Coast, and Burkina Faso. Average rainfall varies in this region from per year around Mopti to in the south near Sikasso. This area is most important for the production of cotton, rice, pearl millet, maize, vegetables, tobacco and tree crops.\nAnnual rainfall, critical for Mali's agriculture, has been at or above average since 1993. Cereal production, including rice, has grown annually, and the 1997\u201398 cotton harvest reached a record 500,000 tons.\nUntil the mid-1960s, Mali was self-sufficient in grains \u2014 pearl millet, sorghum, rice and maize. Diminished harvests during bad years, a growing population, changing dietary habits, and, most importantly, policy constraints on agricultural production resulted in grain deficits almost every year from 1965 to 1986.\nProduction has rebounded since 1987 due to agricultural policy reforms undertaken by the government and supported by the Western donor nations. Liberalization of producer prices and an open cereals market have created incentives to production. These reforms, combined with adequate rainfall, successful integrated rural agriculture programs in the south, and improved management of the Office du Niger, have led to surplus cereal production over the past five years.\nRice.\nRice is grown extensively along the banks of the Niger between S\u00e9gou and Mopti, with the most important rice-producing area at the Office du Niger, located north of S\u00e9gou toward the Mauritanian border. Using water diverted from the Niger, the Office du Niger irrigates about of land for rice and sugarcane production. About one-third of Mali's paddy rice is produced at the Office du Niger.\nSorghum.\nSorghum is planted extensively in the drier parts of the country and along the banks of the Niger in eastern Mali, as well as in the lake beds in the Niger delta region. During the wet season, farmers near the town of Dire have cultivated wheat on irrigated fields for hundreds of years. Peanuts are grown throughout the country but are concentrated in the area around Kita, west of Bamako.\nLivestock.\nIn 2019, Mali produced 276 million liters of cow's milk, 270 million liters of camel milk, 243 million liters of goat milk, 176 million liters of sheep's milk, 187 thousand tons of beef, 64 thousand tons of lamb meat, 54 thousand tons of chicken meat, among others.\nMali's resource in livestock consists of millions of cattle, sheep, and goats. Approximately 40% of Mali's herds were lost during the great drought in 1972\u201374. The level was gradually restored, but the herds were again decimated in the 1983\u201385 drought. The overall size of Mali's herds is not expected to reach pre-drought levels in the north of the country, where encroachment of the desert has forced many nomadic herders to abandon pastoral activities and turn instead to farming.\nThe largest concentrations of cattle are in the areas north of Bamako and S\u00e9gou extending into the Niger delta, but herding activity is gradually shifting southward, due to the effects of previous droughts. Sheep, goats, and camels are raised to the exclusion of cattle in the dry areas north and east of Timbuktu.\nFishing.\nThe Niger River is also an important source of fish, providing food for riverside communities; the surplus\u2014smoked, salted, and dried\u2014is exported. Due to drought and diversion of river water for agriculture, fish production has steadily declined since the early 1980s.\nMining and resources.\nMining has long been an important aspect of the Malian economy. Gold, the largest source of Malian exports, is still mined in the southern region and at the end of the 20th century Mali had the third highest gold production in Africa (after South Africa and Ghana). These goldfields, the largest of which lie in the Bambouk Mountains in western Mali (Kenieba Cercle), were a major source of wealth and trade as far back as the Ghana Empire.\nSalt mining in the far north, especially in the Saharan oases of Taoudenni and Taghaza have been a crucial part of the Malian economy for at least seven hundred years. Both resources were vital components of the Trans-Saharan trade, stretching back to the time of the Roman Empire.\nFrom the 1960s to the 1990s state owned mining\u2014especially for gold\u2014expanded, followed by a period of expansion by international contract mining.\nIn 1991, following the lead of the International Development Association, Mali relaxed the enforcement of mining codes which led to greater foreign investment in the mining industry. From 1994 to 2007, national and foreign companies were granted around 150 operating licences along with more than 25 certificates for exploitation and more than 200 research permits. Gold mining in Mali has increased dramatically, with more than 50 tonnes in 2007 from less than half a tonne produced annually at the end of the 1980s. Mining revenue totaled some 300 billion CFA francs in 2007 more than a thirty times increase from the 1995 total national mining revenue of less than 10 billion CFA. Government revenues from mining contracts, less than 1% of the state income in 1989 were almost 18% in 2007.\nGold.\nIn 2019, the country was the 16th largest world producer of gold. \nGold accounted for some 80% of mining activity in the mid-2000s, while there remained considerable proven reserves of other minerals not currently exploited. Gold has become Mali's largest export, after cotton\u2014historically the basis of Mali's export industry\u2014and livestock. The emergence of gold as Mali's leading export product since 1999 has helped mitigate some of the negative impacts caused by fluctuations in world cotton markets and loss of trade from the Ivorian Civil War to the south. Large private investments in gold mining include AngloGold Ashanti ($250 million) in Sadiola and Yatela, and Randgold Resources ($140 million) in Morila \u2013 both multinational South African companies located respectively in the north-western and southern parts of the country.\nSocial and environmental impacts.\nWhile great incomes are produced, most staff employed in the mining industries are from outside Mali, and residents in the areas of intensive mining complain of little benefit from the industry. Populations complain of displacement for the construction of mines: at Sadiola Gold Mine, 43 villages have lost some land to the mine there, while in Fourou, near the large Syama goldmines, 121 villages saw some displacement.\nIn addition, the continued exploitation of unregulated small scale mining, often by child laborers, supplies a large international gold market in Bamako which feeds into international production. Recent criticism has surfaced around the working conditions, pay, and the widespread use of child labor in these small gold mines (as reported recently in the U.S. Department of Labor's \"List of Goods Produced by Child Labor or Forced Labor\"), and the method with which middlemen, in regional centers like Sikasso and Kayes, purchase and transport gold. Gold collected in the towns is sold on\u2014with almost no regulation or oversight\u2014to larger merchant houses in Bamako or Conakry, and eventually to smelters in Europe. Ecological factors, especially pollution of water by mine tailings, is a major source of concern.\nOther minerals.\nOther mining operations include kaolin, salt, phosphate, and limestone. The government is trying to generate interest in the potential of extracting petroleum from the Taoudeni basin.\nManufacturing.\nDuring the colonial period, private capital investment was virtually nonexistent, and public investment was devoted largely to the Office du Niger irrigation scheme and to administrative expenses. Following independence, Mali built some light industries with the help of various donors. Manufacturing, consisting principally of processed agricultural products, accounted for about 8% of the GDP in 1990.\nEconomic reform.\nBetween 1992 and 1995, Mali implemented an economic adjustment program that resulted in economic growth and a reduction in financial imbalances. This was reflected in the increased GDP growth rates (9.6% in 2002) and decreased inflation. GDP in 2002 amounted to US$3.2 billion, made up of agriculture 37.8%, industry 26.4% and services 35.9%.\nEffective implementation of macroeconomic stabilization and economic liberalization policies and the stable political situation resulted in good economic performance and enabled Mali to strengthen the foundations for a market-oriented economy and encourage private sector development, backed up by significant progress in implementing the country's privatization program. Agricultural reform measures were aimed at diversifying and expanding production as well as at reducing costs.\nMali's economic performance is fragile, characterized by a vulnerability to climatic conditions, fluctuating terms of trade, dependence on ports in neighboring countries.\nMali produces cotton, cereals and rice. Although locally produced rice now provides competition to imported Asian rice, Mali's primary export is cotton. Livestock exports and industry (producing vegetable and cottonseed oils, and textiles) have experienced growth. Although most of Mali is desert or semi-desert, the Niger River is a potential irrigation source. Exports are in three primary sector products (56% gold, 27% cotton, 5% livestock). Ivory Coast is where most of the country's trade goes through and the crisis previously experienced here had a negative effect on Mali's economy.\nThe mining industry in Mali has recently attracted renewed interest and investment from foreign companies. Gold and phosphate are the only minerals mined in Mali although deposits of copper and diamonds do also exist. The emergence of gold as Mali's leading export product since 1999 has helped mitigate some of the negative impact of the cotton and Ivory Coast crises.\nThe development of the oil industry is important due to the country's dependence on the importation of all petroleum products from neighbouring states. Electricity is provided by the parastatal utility, Electricit\u00e9 du Mali.\nForeign aid.\nMali residents are mostly French speaking. Mali is a major recipient of foreign aid from many sources, including multilateral organizations (most significantly the World Bank, African Development Bank, and Arab Funds), and bilateral programs funded by the European Union, France, United States, Canada, Netherlands, and Germany. Cooperation from Brazil has been growing quickly, especially in cotton production, by means of developing cotton seeds adapted to the Malian soil. Since 2009, Brazilian cooperation in Mali has raised the quality of the cotton fields and their productivity. Brazilian aide has also started since 2019 in cattle raising and the recovery of eroded soils for agriculture. Before 1991, the former Soviet Union had been a major source of economic and military aid, including construction of a cement plant and the Kalana gold mine.\nCurrently, aid from Russia is restricted mainly to training and provision of spare parts. Chinese aid remains high, and Chinese-Malian joint venture companies have become more numerous in the last 3 years, leading to the opening of a Chinese investment center. The Chinese are major participants in the textile industry and in large scale construction projects, including a bridge across the Niger, a conference center, an expressway in Bamako, and a stadium in Bamako completed in 2001 for the Africa Cup competition in 2002, named Stade du 26 Mars.\nIn 1998, U.S. assistance reached over $40 million. This included $39 million in sector support through United States Agency for International Development (USAID) programs, largely channeled to local communities through private voluntary agencies; Peace Corps program budget of $2.2 million for more than 160 Volunteers serving in Mali; Self Help and the Democracy Funds of $170,500; and $650,000 designated for electoral support. Military assistance includes $275,000 for the International Military Education Training (IMET) program, $1.6 million for the African Crisis Response Initiative (ACRI), $60,000 for Joint Combined Exercise Training (JCET), and $100,000 for Humanitarian Assistance.\nStatistics.\nGDP:\npurchasing power parity \u2013 $41.22 billion (2017 est.)\nGDP \u2013 real growth rate: 5.4% (2017 est.)\nGDP \u2013 per capita: purchasing power parity \u2013 $2,200 (2017 est.)\nGDP \u2013 composition by sector:&lt;br&gt;\"agriculture:\" 41.8% (2017 est.)&lt;br&gt;\"industry:\" 18.1% (2017 est.)&lt;br&gt;\"services:\" 40.5% (2017 est.)\nPopulation below poverty line:\n36.1% (2005 est.)\nHousehold income or consumption by percentage share:&lt;br&gt;\"lowest 10%:\"\n2.4% (2001 est.)&lt;br&gt;\"highest 10%:\"\n30.2% (2001 est.)\nInflation rate (consumer prices):\n1.8% (2017 est.)\nLabor force: 6.447 million (2017 est.)\nLabor force \u2013 by occupation: agriculture and fishing: 80% (2005 est.) industry and services: 20% (2005 est.)\nUnemployment rate: 12%\nBudget:&lt;br&gt;\"revenues:\" 3.075 billion (2017 est.)&lt;br&gt;\"expenditures:\" 3.513 billion (2017 est.)\nIndustries: food processing; construction; phosphate and gold mining\nIndustrial production growth rate: 6.3% (2017 est.)\nElectricity \u2013 production: 2.489 billion kWh (2016 est.)\nElectricity \u2013 production by source:&lt;br&gt;\"fossil fuel:\" 68%&lt;br&gt;\"hydro:\" 31%&lt;br&gt;\"nuclear:\" 0%&lt;br&gt;\"other:\" 1% (2017 est.)\nElectricity \u2013 consumption: 2.982 billion kWh (2016 est.)\nElectricity \u2013 exports: 0 kWh (2016 est.)\nElectricity \u2013 imports: 800 million kWh (2016 est.)\nAgriculture \u2013 products: cotton, pearl millet, rice, corn, maize, vegetables, peanuts; cattle, sheep, goats\nExports: $3.06 billion (2017 est.)\nExports \u2013 commodities: cotton 50%, gold, livestock\nExports \u2013 partners:\nSwitzerland 31.8%, UAE 15.4%, Burkina Faso 7.8%, C\u00f4te d'Ivoire 7.3%, South Africa 5%, Bangladesh 4.6% (2017)\nImports: $3.644 billion (2017 est.)\nImports \u2013 commodities: petroleum, machinery and equipment, construction materials, foodstuffs, textiles\nImports \u2013 partners: Senegal 24.4%, China 13.2%, C\u00f4te d'Ivoire 9%, France 7.3% (2017)\nDebt \u2013 external: $4.192 billion (31 December 2017 est.)\nEconomic aid \u2013 recipient:\n$691.5 million (2005)\nCurrency: 1 Communaute Financiere Africaine franc (CFAF) = 100 centimes\nExchange rates: Communaute Financiere Africaine francs (CFAF) per US$1 \u2013 647.25 (January 2000), 615.70 (1999), 589.95 (1998), 583.67 (1997), 511.55 (1996), 499.15 (1995)&lt;br&gt;\"note:\" since 1 January 1999, the CFAF is pegged to the euro at a rate of 655.957 CFA francs per euro\nFiscal year:\ncalendar year"}
{"id": "19133", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19133", "title": "Telecommunications in Mali", "text": " \nMali, a large, landlocked, multicultural country in West Africa, consistently ranks low in the Human Development Index. The infrastructure of communications in Mali, while underdeveloped, is crucial to the nation.\nHistory.\nPrior to the 19th century, the area which became Mali was crisscrossed by trade and communication links, the most important being the Niger River, and important southern terminals of the Trans-Saharan trade routes. Only the most basic infrastructure (notably the Dakar-Niger Railway) was constructed during the period of French colonialism. During the first two decades of independence, Mali received major technical and financial support from the former Soviet Union, China, and their allies, especially in the area of radio and television broadcasting.\nSince the 1980s, the government has instituted major infrastructural drives, primarily funded by European government partners, to improve and expand communications. Cellular phone usage, due to the vast and sparsely populated distances in the north and west, has grown tremendously since the 1990s.\nInternet connectivity, very low by developed world standards, has been the focus of decentralised commune based development projects since the year 2000, while the government participates in the UN's Global Alliance for ICT and Development and the Connect Africa projects to further provide computer and internet availability in the country.\nTelephone service.\nThere are some 112,000 (2012) fixed line telephone lines in Mali, far outstripped by 14.613 million (2012) mobile cellular phone lines.\nThere are two major mobile telephone operators, Ikatel (a subsidiary of Sonatel, of Senegal) and Malitel (a subsidiary of SOTELMA, the state owned telecommunications company).\nIn June 2003, legislation passed a bill allowing other private telecommunications operators to enter the market.\nTelephone system:\nthe domestic system is unreliable but improving and provides only minimal service\n&lt;br&gt;\"domestic:\"\nnetwork consists of microwave radio relay, open wire, and radiotelephone communications stations; expansion of microwave radio relay in progress\n&lt;br&gt;\"international:\"\nsatellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (1 Atlantic Ocean and 1 Indian Ocean)\nRadio and television.\nRadio broadcast stations:\nGovernment funded: AM 1, shortwave 1.\nMali has since 1994 allowed for private (as in non-state) radios to begin operating. Foreign funding, and some commercial funding (mostly in the capital) have helped to establish 160 FM stations in Mali, though many of those are small community \"suitcase radio stations\". Private radio are required to be members of URTEL, the radio union.\nThe state-operated radio is ORTM (office de Radiodiffusion au Television de Mali), which operates 2 FM stations and 1 television station, with repeaters throughout the country.\n&lt;br&gt;\"note:\"\nThe shortwave station in Bamako has seven frequencies and five transmitters and relays broadcasts for China Radio International (2001)\nRadios:\n570,000 (1997)\nTelevision broadcast stations:\n1 (plus repeaters) (2001)\nTelevisions:\n45,000 (1997)\nInternet.\nTop-level domain: .ml\nInternet users:\n414,985 users or 2.9% of the population (2011). Internet usage is low by international standards, ranked 123 of 125 by the UN in 2002.\nInternet Service Providers (ISPs):\n13 (2001).\nThere are an estimated 25 private internet service providers. Recently an association has been formed called AFIM (Association de Fournisseurs de l'Internet au Mali), which is intended to represent these providers.\nSOTELMA the state telecom, provides X.25 and dial-up telephone services. Many operators offer dial-up internet service, and wireless internet services. Most ISPs are small Bamako based providers with a VSAT connection, a cyber cafe and use wireless systems (Alviron, 802.11a, b, g, Motorola) to share their service with their clients. Bamako has at least 21 wireless providers, ranging from small VSAT operators, to sophisticated, multi-access point, full services providers."}
{"id": "19134", "revid": "40916056", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19134", "title": "Transport in Mali", "text": "Mali's transportation infrastructure is regarded as poor, even by regional standards, and deficiencies have limited economic growth and development. Nevertheless, improvements have been noted in the early 2000s. Most of the transportation in Mali consists of cars, planes, and boats.\nRailways.\nMali has one railroad (the Dakar-Niger Railway), with 729 kilometers in Mali, which runs from the port of Koulikoro via Bamako to the border with Senegal and continues on to Dakar. The Bamako-Dakar line, which has been described as dilapidated, was owned by a joint company established by Mali and Senegal in 1995, with the eventual goal of privatization. In 2003 the two countries sold a 25-year concession to run the rail line to a Canadian company, which has pledged to upgrade equipment and infrastructure.\nThe Malian portion of the railroad carried an estimated 536,000 tons of freight and 778,000 passengers in 1999. The track is in poor condition, and the line is closed frequently during the rainy season. The line is potentially significant because it links landlocked Mali to the port of Dakar. It is increasingly of interest for Malian exports in the face of the disruption of access to Abidjan, C\u00f4te d'Ivoire, as a result of civil conflict in that country beginning in late 2002. In the early 2000s, there also were plans to construct a new rail line between Bamako and Kouroussa and Kankan in Guinea.\nAs of 2013, passenger services in Mali were being offered three days between Bamako and Kayes via Kati and Diamou.\nHighways.\nMali had a road network totaling about 18,563 kilometers in 2000, including about 4,450 kilometers of paved roads. Mali's main economic link to the coast is a paved road between Bamako and Abidjan in C\u00f4te d\u2019Ivoire. The European Development Fund is financing\nconstruction of a road linking Bamako and Dakar, Senegal. The African Development Bank is funding the construction of a road linking Bamako and Kankan in Guinea. There are also plans for a trans-Saharan road linking Mali with Algeria.\nIn general, road conditions outside of urban areas are hazardous, especially at night. Because of isolation, poor road conditions, and the prevalence of banditry, overland travel to the north of Mali is regarded as especially dangerous. Flying or traveling by boat is reported to be preferable where possible. Many of Mali's major thoroughfares in the north are little more than desert tracks with long isolated stretches.\nUrban transport.\nBecause rate of automobile ownership is low, and formal government run public transit is sparse, informal buses and taxis abound in Malian urban centers. Bamako in particular is known for its green and yellow taxi fleet. Other vehicles, including trucks, buses, motorcycles and mini-vans, function as taxis. In recent years small motorcycles, imported from China and most lacking licenses, have come to dominate much of Bamako's traffic. Inexpensive motorbikes are often the only affordable transport in Mali, with Chinese made bikes selling for US$700.\nWhile the government formally requires licensing for both motorcycles and their operators, these rules are largely ignored. Some 500,000 motorcycles were estimated to be operating in Mali in 2009, with two-thirds of them inexpensive Chinese made cycles, known locally as \"Jakarta\"s, which boast better fuel economy but fewer safety features than more expensive Japanese or Western brands.\nIn the 1990s, Bamako banned horse carts, which caused an increase in hand carts on the streets. Recent road construction has included separated lanes for two wheeled (carts, bicycles, motorcycles), four wheeled, and pedestrian traffic.\nRoad fatalities.\nMotor vehicle accidents are relatively common on Mali's roads. The Malian Equipment and Transport Ministry reported that the first half of 2008 saw 254 deaths and 1,924 injuries on Mali's roads, following on 579 deaths in 2007 and 642 in 2006. The government has pledged 15 billion CFAF in 2009 to fund road safety, and has pledged to create a national road security agency to control highway traffic.\nPolice corruption.\nWhile police control barriers are a common sight on African highways, and while illicit demands for bribes at such stops are common in many countries, the main Malian highway heading south from Bamako to the Burkina Faso border was singled out in late 2008 as the worst in West Africa. A survey by the Observatory of Abnormal Practices (OPA) of the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) found the Malian section of this road to have the highest number of police roadblocks with the highest average amount paid in bribes per trip in West Africa. An average of twenty-nine roadblocks, almost 4 for every 100\u00a0km, were reported from June to September 2008. The amount paid in bribes in the Mali section (per trip) was CFA F 31,509. Also at Bamako airport is common to ask for CFA 40.000 to be allowed to leave the country. While in other nations the customs officials were responsible for most stops, in Mali, gendarmerie (National paramilitary police) and the Police force were found creating the majority of bribe extorting roadblocks\nPorts and waterways.\nMali has no seaports because it is landlocked, but Koulikoro on the Niger River near Bamako, serves as a principal river port. Traditionally, Abidjan in C\u00f4te d\u2019Ivoire has been Mali's main seaport, handling as much as 70 percent of Mali's trade (except for gold exports). Mali's export trade suffered when turbulence in C\u00f4te d\u2019Ivoire in the early 2000s interrupted that trade route.\nMali has 1,815 kilometers of inland waterways, principally the Niger River, some portions of which are navigable for medium and large shipping during the rainy season (June/July\u2013November/December) in years of normal rainfall. Parts of the Senegal River also are navigable, providing year-round access to the Atlantic from Kayes to St. Louis in Senegal.\nAviation.\nIn 2007 Mali reportedly had 29 airports, 8 of which had paved runways. The main airport is Senou International Airport in Bamako, which offers flights to neighboring countries and to Europe. As part of infrastructure improvements in 2002, the runway at Bamako was extended, and new airstrips were built in previously isolated areas of the west\u2014Kayes, Mopti, and Sikasso. Intercontinental services from Bamako are provided by Air France to Paris and Turkish Airlines to Istanbul as of 2025.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19135", "revid": "44092845", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19135", "title": "Malian Armed Forces", "text": "Combined military forces of Mali\nThe Malian Armed Forces (, FAMa) consists of the Army (), Republic of Mali Air Force (), and National Guard. They number some 7,000 and are under the control of the Minister of Armed Forces and Veterans. The Library of Congress as of January 2005 stated that \"[t]he military is underpaid, poorly equipped, and in need of rationalization. Its organisation has suffered from the incorporation of Tuareg irregular forces into the regular military following a 1992 agreement between the government and Tuareg rebel forces.\"\nIn 2009, the IISS Military Balance listed 7,350 soldiers in the Army, 400 in the Air Force, and 50 in the Navy. The Gendarmerie and local police forces (under the Ministry of Interior and Security) maintain internal security. The IISS listed paramilitary total force as 4,800 personnel: 1,800 in the Gendarmerie (8 companies), 2,000 in the Republican Guard, and 1,000 police officers. A few Malians receive military training in the United States, France, and Germany.\nMilitary expenditures total about 13% of the national budget. Mali is an active contributor to peacekeeping forces in West and Central Africa; the Library of Congress said that in 2004 Mali was participating in United Nations operations in the Democratic Republic of Congo (MONUC, 28 personnel including 27 observers), Liberia (UNMIL, 252 personnel, including 4 observers), and Sierra Leone (3 observers).\nHistory.\nThe Malian armed forces were initially formed by Malian conscript and volunteer veterans of the French Armed Forces. In the months preceding the formation of the Malian armed forces, the French Armed Forces withdrew from their bases in Mali.\nAmong the last bases to be closed were those at Kati, on 8 June 1961, Tessalit (\"base a\u00e9rienne secondaire\"), on 8 July 1961, Gao (\"base a\u00e9rienne 163 de Gao\"), on 2 August 1961, and Air Base 162 at Bamako (\"base a\u00e9rienne 162 de Bamako\"), on 5 September 1961.\nOn 1 October 1960, the Malian army was formally installed through a speech by Chief of Staff Captain Sekou Traore. On 12 October the same year, the army held its first parade in Bamako under the command of Captain Tiemoko Konate. The army initially consisted of a battalion in S\u00e9gou and included units scattered across the territory. A memo from the Chief of Staff ordered a realignment of the battalion. A command and services detachment in Bamako was created, and the engineer company in S\u00e9gou, the first Saharan motorized company of Gao, the Saharan Motor Company of Kidal, the Arouane nomad group, nomadic group of Timetrine (in the commune of Timtagh\u00e8ne), the 1st Reconnaissance Company and Nioro 2nd Reconnaissance Company Tessalit. By 16 January 1961, Mali's army totaled 1,232 men.\nIn the sixties and seventies, Mali's army and air force relied primarily on the Soviet Union for materiel and training.\nOn 19 November 1968, a group of young Malian officers staged a bloodless coup and set up a 14-member military junta, with Lieutenant Moussa Traor\u00e9 as president. The military leaders attempted to pursue economic reforms, but for several years faced debilitating internal political struggles and the disastrous Sahelian drought. A new constitution, approved in 1974, created a one-party state and was designed to move Mali toward civilian rule. The military leaders remained in power.\nMoussa Traor\u00e9 improved relations with France and other Western countries after the coup, but Mali remained dependent on the Soviet Union for the arming and training of the Malian Armed Forces. Approximately 50 Soviet military advisors provided armour, artillery and parachute training to Mali's military, and trained all of Mali's pilots. The Soviets also improved the Malian Air Force base in Mopti, and occasionally used Malian airfields to stage supply flights for groups it supported in Angola.\nSingle-party presidential and legislative elections were held in June 1979, and General Moussa Traor\u00e9 received 99% of the votes. His efforts at consolidating the single-party government were challenged in 1980 by student-led anti-government demonstrations, which were brutally put down, and by three coup attempts. The Traore government ruled throughout the 1970s and 1980s. On 26 March 1991, after four days of intense anti-government rioting, a group of 17 military officers, led by subsequent President Amadou Toumani Tour\u00e9, arrested President Traor\u00e9 and suspended the constitution. They formed a civilian-heavy provisional ruling body, and initiated a process that led to democratic elections.\nThe Tuareg rebellion began in 1990 when Tuareg separatists attacked government buildings around Gao. The armed forces' reprisals led to a full-blown rebellion in which the absence of opportunities for Tuareg in the army was a major complaint. The conflict died down after Alpha Konar\u00e9 formed a new government and made reparations in 1992. Also, Mali created a new self-governing region, the Kidal Region, and provided for greater Tuareg integration into Malian society. In 1994, Tuareg, reputed to have been trained and armed by Libya, attacked Gao, which again led to major Malian Army reprisals and to the creation of the Ghanda Koi Songhai militia to combat the Tuareg. Mali effectively fell into civil war.\nAs of June 2008, service commanders were Colonel Boubacar Togola (Arm\u00e9e de Terre), Colonel Waly Sissoko (Arm\u00e9e de l'Air), Lieutenant-Colonel Daouda Sogoba (Garde Nationale) et du Colonel Adama Demb\u00e9l\u00e9 (Gendarmerie Nationale).\nThe Malian army largely collapsed during the war against Tuareg separatists and Islamist rebels in early 2012. In a span of less than fourth months at the start of 2012, the Malian army was defeated by the rebels who seized more than 60% of the former Malian territory, taking all camps and position of the army, capturing and killing hundreds of Malian soldiers, while hundred others deserted or defected.\nFollowing the rebel advance, a group of soldiers from the Kati camp near Bamako staged a coup on 22 March 2012 which overthrew Malian president Amadou Toumani Tour\u00e9. After the junta seized power, they successfully repelled a counter coup on 30 April by loyalists from the red berets elite units.\nThe Malian military was rebuilt by French forces, and is now capable of conducting counter terrorism operations. In February 2020, the army stated that up to 200 Malian troops arrived in Kidal, a Northern city. This was the first time the army was deployed in this area because of the Tuareg Separatists rebels that chased out the army since 2014.\nOn 1 November 2019, the IS-GS militants killed at least 50 soldiers in the 2019 Indelimane attack in the M\u00e9naka Region of Mali.\nSince the 2020 coup, the military received equipment from Turkish forces.\nOn 7 September 2023, at least 154 civilians and fifteen Malian soldiers were killed when al-Qaeda linked JNIM militants simultaneously attacked a Malian military camp at Bamba and the civilian boat \"Tombouctou\" on the Niger River near the village of Banikane, Gourma-Rharous.\nIn July 2024, CSP-DPA rebels and JNIM militants killed dozens of Russian mercenaries and Malian government forces during the Battle of Tinzaouaten. On 17 September 2024, JNIM militants attacked several locations across Bamako, the capital of Mali, including police and military installations, killing at least 77 people and injuring 255 others.\nArmy.\nManpower is provided by two-year selective conscription. Mali apparently has six military regions, according to Jane's World Armies. The 1st Military Region and 13th Combined Arms Regiment may be in Gao. The 3rd Military Region appears to be at Kati. The 4th Military Region is at Kayes and the 5th Military Region is at Timbuktu.\nThe 512 Regiment was reported within the 5th Military Region in 2004.\nIn 2010 Agence France-Presse reported that French training would be given to the 62nd Motorized Infantry Regiment of the 6th Military Region, based at S\u00e9var\u00e9. The same story said that the regiment consisted of three Rapid Intervention Companies (CIR) and AFP said it was \"considered the elite...of the Malian army.\"\nMali is one of four Saharan states which created a Joint Military Staff Committee in 2010, to be based at Tamanrasset in southern Algeria. Algeria, Mauritania, Niger, and Mali were to take part.\nThe \"134e Escadron de Reconnaissance\" (reconnaissance squadron) was to be trained to operate the French ACMAT Bastion APC by the EUTM Mali.\nThe Army controls the small navy (approx. 130 sailors and 3 river patrol boats).\nSources: http:// 17 February 2012: http:// and https:// du 12 avril 2012: http://\nEquipment.\nThe goal of this list is to comprehensively catalogue Mali's current and past inventory of (armoured fighting) vehicles and heavy weaponry. Historically a major recipient of Soviet military aid, frequent arms deliveries in the 1970s and 1980s turned Mali into one of the strongest militaries in western Africa, operating advanced equipment such as dedicated tank destroyers, S-125 SAM systems and MiG-21bis jet fighters.\nTraining establishments.\nThe Malian armed forces have at least two significant training establishments:\nThe Alioune Bloundin Beye school is the tactical-level component of a trio of three ECOWAS peacekeeping training schools: the Alioune Bloundin Beye school (EMPABB), the Kofi Annan International Peacekeeping Training Centre in Accra, Ghana (operational level), and the Nigerian National Defence College (strategic level). The school has trained over 6900 students since its opening and is currently supported financially and technically by seven countries and as well as the ECOWAS.\nAir Force.\nThe Mali Air Force (\"Arm\u00e9e de l'air du Mali\") was founded in 1961 with French supplied military aid. This included MH.1521 Broussard utility monoplane followed by two C-47 transports until Soviet aid starting in 1962 with four Antonov AN-2 Colt biplane transports and four Mi-4 light helicopters. It used to operate MiG jets but is currently equipped with cargo aircraft, light attack aircraft and helicopters.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19136", "revid": "7447121", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19136", "title": "Foreign relations of Mali", "text": "Following independence in 1960, Mali initially followed a socialist path and was aligned ideologically with the communist bloc. Mali's foreign policy orientation became increasingly pragmatic and pro-Western over time. Since the institution of a democratic form of government in 1992, Mali's relations with the West in general and the United States in particular have improved significantly. U.S.-Malian relations are described by the U.S. Department of State as \"excellent and expanding,\" especially given Mali's recent record of democratic stability in the volatile area of West Africa and its avowed support of the war on terrorism. Mali is reported to be one of the largest recipients of U.S. aid in Africa.\nMali is active in regional organizations such as the African Union (AU). Working to control and resolve regional conflicts, such as in Ivory Coast, Liberia, and Sierra Leone, is one of Mali's major foreign policy goals. Mali feels threatened by the potential for the spillover of conflicts in neighboring states, and relations with those neighbors are often uneasy. General insecurity along borders in the north, including cross-border banditry and terrorism, remain troubling issues in regional regions.\nAlthough Azawad, a region spanning the expansive north of Mali, was proclaimed independent in April 2012 by Tuareg rebels, Mali has not recognised the \"de facto\" state. Britain has closed its embassy; ECOWAS has declared an embargo against Mali, aiming to squeeze out Malian oil supplies; closed Mali's assets in the ECOWAS regional bank and has prepared a potential intervention force of 3,000 troops. France has declared it will assist in a potential intervention.\nMultilateral membership.\nMali is a member of the United Nations (and many of its specialized agencies), the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the World Bank, the World Trade Organization (WTO), the International Labour Organization (ILO), the International Telecommunication Union (ITU), the Universal Postal Union (UPU) and the International Criminal Court (ICC). It also belongs to the Organisation of African Unity (OAU); Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC); Non-Aligned Movement (NAM); an associate member of the European Community (EC); and African Development Bank (ADB).\nMali is active in regional organizations. It participates in the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the West African Economic Monetary Union (UEMOA) for regional economic integration; Liptako\u2013Gourma Authority, which seeks to develop the contiguous areas of Mali, Niger, and Burkina Faso; the Niger River Commission; the Permanent Interstate Committee for drought control in the Sahel (CILSS); and the Senegal River Valley Development Organization (OMVS).\nHistorically, Mali has used these organizations to leverage the promotion of regional peacekeeping efforts. One of the largest issues facing the country is security threats from extremist groups and consequential political unrest.\nOne of the most prominent examples of this is Mali's former membership the G5 Sahel with the fellow member states Burkina Faso (formerly), Chad, Mauritania, and Niger (formerly). The Sahel was originally formed on 16 February 2014, with the main objective of encouraging security and development. This partnership is historically significant due to the group's shared colonizer, France. In its first year of existence, the organization formed a legal framework for strategic intervention and a secretariat located in Nouakchott, Mauritania. The framework was titled the Development and Security Strategy (SDS). In 2017, the G5 Sahel Joint Force was created and funded through the Priority Investment Program (PIP), aiming to reduce violence and create more stability in the region. In a December 2018 coordination conference, $2.6 billion was pledged from foreign nations including the United States, European Union, Saudi Arabia, and China. American and French financial support is suspected to be, in part, a result of their consequentially lowered troop commitment in the region. This military collective targets organized crime and religious extremists specifically with cross-border operations. In addition to military-centered approaches, Mali and Niger have implemented Disarmament, Demobilization, and Reintegration, or DDR, programs while Mauritania and Burkina Faso have not. DDR is an approach that removes weapons, breaks up crime organizations, and reintegrates combatants into civilian life or state-sanctioned armed forces. Although more costly and time-intensive, DDR has proven to be more sustainable than other stabilization approaches over time. The G5 Sahel has been weakening in the most recent years, with many forces from the European Union pulling their troops to concentrate their efforts on the Russian invasion of Ukraine. However, to compensate, the Sahel member states have reported on plans to expand the size of their force from six to fourteen battalions. Biannual reports from the Sahel have revealed that the efforts have become increasingly dire with high humanitarian needs and large terrorist activity with large resource and land occupation. This eventually lead to its withdrawal on 15 May 2022.\nAs seen with the G5-Sahel, Mali has not been a particularly active or compliant member of these organizations as a result of their ongoing political unrest. Despite some early successful peacekeeping initiatives by ECOWAS and the AU, their most recent joint policies are facing challenges of limited institutional capacity, low enforcement, and inexplicit language surrounding its implementation. ECOWAS was originally founded to promote economic development across its 15 West African member states, but also works to promote political institutions and stability. Recently, it promised to end the unconstitutional takeover of political power in member states, but Mali has since developed new policies to distance themselves from the organization and limit its reach.\nThe UN has also attempted many peacekeeping missions focusing on political unrest, economic objectives, and women's rights throughout Mali's history. The most notable effort began with the UN Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) in 2013. In 2022, Mali restricted United Nations peacekeeping operations through their security council and, in June 2023, asked for them to be removed. Although this program is being dissolved, some UN presence will remain in Mali. This effort kept about 15,000 soldiers and police personnel in Mali throughout the project's decade, but has recently been threatened by nearby territorial conflicts. It is also rumored that this removal may be the result of some strategic differences. Since the AU's creation in 2002, there have been some difficulties aligning it with the UN. Generally, the AU prioritizes short-term solutions over long-term, which is opposite to the UN. This disagreement has contributed to arguments about jurisdiction and the correct approach to security efforts.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Mali maintains diplomatic relations with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19137", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19137", "title": "Malta", "text": "Island country in Southern Europe\nMalta, officially the Republic of Malta, is an island country in Southern Europe located in the Mediterranean Sea, between Sicily and North Africa. It consists of an archipelago south of Italy, east of Tunisia, and north of Libya. The two official languages are Maltese and English. The country's capital is Valletta, which is the smallest capital city in the European Union (EU) by both area and population.\nWith a population of about 542,000 spread over an area of , Malta is the world's tenth-smallest country by area and the ninth-most densely populated. Various sources consider the country to consist of a single urban region, for which reason it is often described as a city-state.\nMalta has been inhabited since at least 6500 BC, during the Mesolithic. Its location in the centre of the Mediterranean has historically given it great geostrategic importance, with a succession of powers having ruled the islands and shaped its culture and society. These include the Phoenicians, Carthaginians, Greeks, and Romans in antiquity; the Arabs, Normans, and Aragonese during the Middle Ages; and the Knights Hospitaller, French, and British in the modern era. Malta came under British rule in the early 19th century and served as the headquarters for the British Mediterranean Fleet. It was besieged by the Axis powers during World War II and was an important Allied base for North Africa and the Mediterranean. Malta achieved independence in 1964, and established its current parliamentary republic in 1974. It has been a member state of the Commonwealth of Nations and the United Nations since independence; it joined the European Union in 2004 and the eurozone monetary union in 2008.\nMalta's long history of foreign rule and its proximity to both Europe and North Africa have influenced its art, music, cuisine, and architecture. Malta has close historical and cultural ties to Italy and especially Sicily; and while Maltese and English are its official languages, between 62 and 66 percent of Maltese people speak or have significant knowledge of the Italian language, which had official status from 1530 to 1934. Malta was an early centre of Christianity, and Catholicism is the state religion, although the country's constitution guarantees freedom of conscience and religious worship.\nMalta is a developed country with an advanced, high-income economy. It is heavily reliant on tourism, attracting both travellers and a growing expatriate community with its warm climate, numerous recreational areas, and architectural and historical monuments, including three UNESCO World Heritage Sites: \u0126al Saflieni Hypogeum, Valletta, and seven megalithic temples, which are some of the oldest free-standing structures in the world.\nName.\nThe English name \"Malta\" derives from Italian and Maltese , from medieval Arabic (), from classical Latin , from Latinised or Doric forms of the ancient Greek () of uncertain origin. The name \u2014shared by the Croatian island Mljet in antiquity\u2014literally means \"place of honey\" or \"sweetness\", derived from the combining form of (, \"honey\" or any similarly sweet thing) and the suffix (). The ancient Greeks may have given the island this name after Malta's endemic subspecies of bees. Alternatively, other scholars argue for derivation of the Greek name from an original Phoenician or Punic (, ml\u1e6d), meaning \"haven\" or \"port\" in reference to the Grand Harbour and its primary settlement at Cospicua following the sea level rise that separated the Maltese islands and flooded its original coastal settlements in the 10th centuryBC. The name was then applied to all of Malta by the Greeks and to its ancient capital at Mdina by the Romans. Given that Malta was colonized by the Phoenicians, not by the Greeks, and that control of the island then passed to the Carthaginians (who were also Phoenician in origin), it is far more likely that the origin of the island's name was Phoenician rather than Greek, whatever the later folk-etymological associations with the Greek, and later Latin, words for \"honey.\"\n\"Malta\" and its demonym \"Maltese\" are attested in English from the late 16th century. English Bible translations including the 1611 King James Version long used the Vulgate Latin form , although the 1525 Tyndale Bible used the transliteration instead. \"Malta\" is widely used in more recent versions.\nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nMalta has been inhabited from at least c.\u20096500 BC, with the arrival of Mesolithic hunter-gatherers likely originating from Sicily. Discoveries at Latnija Cave led by the Maltese archaeologist Eleanor Scerri included the remains of hearths, stone tools and an abundant and diverse range of animal bones. These included indigenous red deer that are now extinct, fish and marine mammals, as well as abundant edible marine gastropods. To arrive on Malta, these hunter-gatherers had to cross around 100\u00a0km of open water, documenting the longest yet-known sea crossing by hunter-gatherers in the Mediterranean. The extinction of the dwarf hippos, giant swans and dwarf elephants has historically been linked to the earliest arrival of humans on Malta. However this seems unlikely since recent work suggests these animals went extinct many thousands of years before the arrival of the first people, and no such animals were found in association with the earliest known Mesolithic hunter-gatherers. The claim for an earlier occupation of the island by Neanderthals is widely rejected. Supplementary Information Neolithic Farmers, also originating from Sicily, are thought to have arrived on the islands by around 5400 BC. Prehistoric farming settlements dating to the Early Neolithic include the G\u0127ar Dalam cave site in the uppermost layers associated with domesticated animals. The Neolithic population on Malta grew cereals, raised livestock and, in common with other ancient Mediterranean cultures, worshipped a fertility figure.\nA culture of megalithic temple builders then either supplanted or arose from this early period. Around 3500 BC, these people built some of the oldest existing free-standing structures in the world in the form of the megalithic \u0120gantija temples on Gozo; other early temples include those at \u0126a\u0121ar Qim and Mnajdra. The temples have distinctive architecture, typically a complex trefoil design, and were used from 4000 to 2500 BC. Tentative information suggests that animal sacrifices were made to the goddess of fertility, whose statue is now in the National Museum of Archaeology in Valletta. Another archaeological feature of the Maltese Islands often attributed to these ancient builders is equidistant uniform grooves dubbed \"cart tracks\" or \"cart ruts\", which can be found in several locations throughout the islands, with the most prominent being those found in Misra\u0127 G\u0127ar il-Kbir (\"Clapham Junction\"). These may have been caused by wooden-wheeled carts eroding soft limestone. The culture apparently disappeared from the islands around 2500 BC, possibly due to famine or disease.\nAfter 2500 BC, the Maltese Islands were depopulated for several decades until an influx of Bronze Age immigrants, a culture that cremated its dead and introduced smaller megalithic structures called dolmens. They are claimed to belong to a population certainly different from that which built the previous megalithic temples. It is presumed the population arrived from Sicily because of the similarity of Maltese dolmens to some small constructions found there.\nPhoenicians, Carthaginians, and Romans.\nPhoenician traders colonised the islands under the name Ann (, \u02beNN) sometime after 1000 BC as a stop on their trade routes from the eastern Mediterranean to Cornwall. Their seat of government was apparently at Mdina, which shared the island's name; the primary port was at Cospicua on the Grand Harbour, which they called Maleth. After the fall of Phoenicia in 332 BC, the area came under the control of Carthage. During this time, the people on Malta mainly cultivated olives and carob and produced textiles.\nDuring the First Punic War, the island was conquered after harsh fighting by Marcus Atilius Regulus. After the failure of his expedition, the island fell back in the hands of Carthage, only to be conquered again during the Second Punic War in 218 BC by the Roman consul Tiberius Sempronius Longus. Malta became a , a designation that meant it was exempt from paying tribute or the rule of Roman law, and fell within the jurisdiction of the province of Sicily. Its capital at Mdina was renamed after the Greek and Roman name for the island. Punic influence, however, remained vibrant on the islands with Cippi of Melqart, pivotal in deciphering the Punic language, dedicated in the second century BC. Local Roman coinage, which ceased in the first century BC, indicates the slow pace of the island's Romanisation: the last locally minted coins still bear inscriptions in Ancient Greek and Punic motifs, showing the resistance of the Greek and Punic cultures.\nIn the second century, Emperor Hadrian upgraded the status of Malta to a municipium or free town: the island's local affairs were administered by four duumvirs and a municipal senate, while a Roman procurator living in Mdina represented the proconsul of Sicily. In AD 58, Paul the Apostle and Luke the Evangelist were shipwrecked on the islands. Paul remained for three months, preaching the Christian faith. The island is mentioned at the Acts of the Apostles as Melitene ().\nIn 395, when the Roman Empire was divided for the last time at the death of Theodosius I, Malta, following Sicily, fell under the control of the Western Roman Empire. During the Migration Period as the Western Roman Empire declined, Malta was conquered or occupied a number of times. From 454 to 464 the islands were subdued by the Vandals, and after 464 by the Ostrogoths. In 533, Belisarius, on his way to conquer the Vandal Kingdom in North Africa, reunited the islands under Imperial (Eastern) rule. Little is known about the Byzantine rule in Malta: the island depended on the theme of Sicily and had Greek governors and a small Greek garrison. While the bulk of population continued to be constituted by the old, Latinized dwellers, during this period its religious allegiance oscillated between the Pope and the Patriarch of Constantinople. The Byzantine rule introduced Greek families to the Maltese collective. Malta remained under the Byzantine Empire until 870, when it was conquered by the Arabs.\nArab period and the Middle Ages.\nMalta became involved in the Arab\u2013Byzantine wars, and the conquest of Malta is closely linked with that of Sicily that began in 827 after Admiral Euphemius' betrayal of his fellow Byzantines, requesting that the Aghlabids invade the island. The Muslim chronicler and geographer al-Himyari recounts that in 870, following a violent struggle against the defending Byzantines, the Arab invaders, first led by Halaf al-Hadim, and later by Sawada ibn Muhammad, pillaged the island, destroying the most important buildings, and leaving it practically uninhabited until it was recolonised by the Arabs from Sicily in 1048\u20131049. It is uncertain whether this new settlement resulted from demographic expansion in Sicily, a higher standard of living in Sicily (in which case the recolonisation may have taken place a few decades earlier), or a civil war that broke out among the Arab rulers of Sicily in 1038. The Arab Agricultural Revolution introduced new irrigation, cotton, and some fruits. The Siculo-Arabic language was adopted on the island from Sicily; it eventually evolved into the Maltese language.\nNorman conquest.\nThe Normans attacked Malta in 1091, as part of their conquest of Sicily. The Norman leader, Roger I of Sicily, was welcomed by Christian captives, though contrary to myth he did not tear off a portion of his checkered red-and-white banner and present it to the Maltese in gratitude for having fought on his behalf, forming the basis of the modern flag of Malta.\nMalta became part of the newly formed Kingdom of Sicily, which also covered the island of Sicily and the southern Italian Peninsula. The Catholic Church was reinstated as the state religion, with Malta under the See of Palermo, and some Norman architecture sprang up around Malta, especially in its ancient capital Mdina. King Tancred made Malta a fief of the kingdom and installed a Count of Malta in 1192. As the islands were much desired due to their strategic importance, it was during this time that the men of Malta were militarised to fend off attempted conquest; early Counts were skilled Genoese privateers.\nThe kingdom passed on to the Hohenstaufen dynasty from 1194 until 1266. As Emperor Frederick II began to reorganise his Sicilian kingdom, Western culture and religion started to exert their influence more intensely. Malta was declared a county and a marquisate, but its trade was totally ruined. For a long time it remained solely a fortified garrison.\nA mass expulsion of Arabs occurred in 1224, and the entire Christian male population of Celano in Abruzzo was deported to Malta in the same year. In 1249 Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor, decreed that all remaining Muslims be expelled from Malta or compelled to convert.\nFor a brief period, the kingdom passed to the Capetian House of Anjou, but high taxes made the dynasty unpopular in Malta, due in part to Charles of Anjou's war against the Republic of Genoa, and the island of Gozo was sacked in 1275.\nCrown of Aragon and the Knights of Malta.\nMalta was ruled by the House of Barcelona, the ruling dynasty of the Crown of Aragon, from 1282 to 1409, with the Aragonese aiding the Maltese insurgents in the Sicilian Vespers in the naval battle in Grand Harbour in 1283.\nRelatives of the kings of Aragon ruled the island until 1409 when it formally passed to the Crown of Aragon. Early on in the Aragonese ascendancy, the sons of the monarchs received the title Count of Malta. During this time much of the local nobility was created. By 1397, however, the bearing of the comital title reverted to a feudal basis, with two families fighting over the distinction. This led King Martin I of Sicily to abolish the title. The dispute over the title returned when the title was reinstated a few years later and the Maltese, led by the local nobility, rose up against Count Gonsalvo Monroy. Although they opposed the Count, the Maltese voiced their loyalty to the Sicilian Crown, which so impressed King Alfonso V that he did not punish the people for their rebellion. Instead, he promised never to grant the title to a third party and incorporated it back into the crown. The city of Mdina was given the title of \"Citt\u00e0 Notabile\".\nIn September\u00a01429, Hafsid Saracens attempted to capture Malta but were repelled by the Maltese. The invaders pillaged the countryside and took about 3,000\u00a0inhabitants as slaves.\nOn 23 March 1530, Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor, gave the islands to the Knights Hospitaller under the leadership of Frenchman Philippe Villiers de L'Isle-Adam, in perpetual lease for which they had to pay an annual tribute of a single Maltese Falcon. These knights, a military religious order also known as the Order of St John and later as the Knights of Malta, had been driven out of Rhodes by the Ottoman Empire in 1522.\nThe Knights Hospitaller ruled Malta and Gozo between 1530 and 1798. During this period, the strategic and military importance of the island grew greatly as the small yet efficient fleet of the Order of Saint John launched their attacks from this new base targeting the shipping lanes of the Ottoman territories around the Mediterranean Sea.\nIn 1551, the population of the island of Gozo (around 5,000 people) were enslaved by Barbary pirates and taken to the Barbary Coast in North Africa.\nThe knights, led by Frenchman Jean Parisot de Valette, withstood the Great Siege of Malta by the Ottomans in 1565. The knights, with the help of Portuguese, Spanish and Maltese forces, repelled the attack. After the siege they decided to increase Malta's fortifications, particularly in the inner-harbour area, where the new city of Valletta, named in honour of Valette, was built. They also established watchtowers along the coasts\u00a0\u2013 the Wignacourt, Lascaris and De Redin towers\u00a0\u2013 named after the Grand Masters who ordered the work. The Knights saw the completion of many architectural and cultural projects, including the embellishment of Citt\u00e0 Vittoriosa (modern Birgu) and the construction of new cities including Citt\u00e0 Rohan (modern \u0126a\u017c-\u017bebbu\u0121). However, by the late 1700s the power of the Knights had declined.\nFrench period and British conquest.\nThe Knights' reign ended when Napoleon captured Malta on his way to Egypt during the in 1798. During 12\u201318 June 1798, Napoleon resided at the Palazzo Parisio in Valletta. He reformed national administration with the creation of a Government Commission, twelve municipalities, a public finance administration, the abolition of all feudal rights and privileges, the abolition of slavery and the granting of freedom to all Turkish and Jewish slaves. On the judicial level, a family code was framed and twelve judges were nominated. Public education was organised along principles laid down by Bonaparte himself, providing for primary and secondary education. He then sailed for Egypt, leaving a substantial garrison in Malta.\nThe French forces left behind became unpopular with the Maltese, due particularly to the French forces' hostility towards Catholicism and pillaging of local churches to fund war efforts. French financial and religious policies so angered the Maltese that they rebelled, forcing the French to depart. Great Britain, along with the Kingdom of Naples and the Kingdom of Sicily, sent ammunition and aid to the Maltese, and Britain also sent its navy, which blockaded the islands.\nOn 28 October 1798, Captain Sir Alexander Ball successfully completed negotiations with the French garrison on Gozo for a surrender and transfer of the island to the British. The British transferred the island to the locals that day, and it was administered by Archpriest Saverio Cassar on behalf of Ferdinand III of Sicily. Gozo remained independent until Cassar was removed by the British in 1801.\nGeneral Claude-Henri Belgrand de Vaubois surrendered his French forces in 1800. Maltese leaders presented the main island to Sir Alexander Ball, asking that the island become a British Dominion. The Maltese people created a Declaration of Rights in which they agreed to come \"under the protection and sovereignty of the King of the free people, His Majesty the King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland\". The Declaration also stated that \"his Majesty has no right to cede these Islands to any power...if he chooses to withdraw his protection, and abandon his sovereignty, the right of electing another sovereign, or of the governing of these Islands, belongs to us, the inhabitants and aborigines alone, and without control.\"\nBritish Empire and the Second World War.\nIn 1814, as part of the Treaty of Paris, Malta officially became a part of the British Empire and was used as a shipping way-station and fleet headquarters. After the Suez Canal opened in 1869, Malta's position halfway between the Strait of Gibraltar and Egypt proved to be its main asset, and it was considered an important stop on the way to India, a central trade route for the British. A Turkish Military Cemetery was commissioned by Sultan Abdul Aziz and built between 1873 and 1874 for the fallen Ottoman soldiers of the Great Siege of Malta.\nBetween 1915 and 1918, during the First World War, Malta became known as \"the Nurse of the Mediterranean\" due to the large number of wounded soldiers who were accommodated there. On 7 June 1919, the Maltese public rioted in response to a cost-of-living crisis; British troops eventually managed to suppress the riots, killing four in the process. The event, known as Sette Giugno (\"7 June\"), is commemorated every year and is one of five National Days. Until the Second World War, Maltese politics was dominated by the Language Question fought out by Italophone and Anglophone parties.\nBefore the Second World War, Valletta was the location of the Royal Navy's Mediterranean fleet headquarters; however, despite Winston Churchill's objections, the command was moved to Alexandria, Egypt, in 1937 out of fear that it was too susceptible to air attacks from Europe. During the war Malta played an important role for the Allies; being a British colony, situated close to Sicily and the Axis shipping lanes, Malta was bombarded by the Italian and German air forces. Malta was used by the British to launch attacks on the Italian Navy and had a submarine base. It was also used as a listening post, intercepting German radio messages including Enigma traffic. The bravery of the Maltese people during the second siege of Malta moved King George VI to award the George Cross to Malta on a collective basis on 15 April 1942. Some historians argue that the award caused Britain to incur disproportionate losses in defending Malta, as British credibility would have suffered if Malta had surrendered, as British forces in Singapore had done. A depiction of the George Cross now appears on the Flag of Malta and the country's arms.\nIndependence and Republic.\nMalta achieved its independence as the State of Malta on 21 September 1964 (Independence Day). Under its 1964 constitution, Malta initially retained Elizabeth II as Queen of Malta and thus head of state, with a governor-general exercising executive authority on her behalf. In 1971, the Malta Labour Party led by Dom Mintoff won the general elections, resulting in Malta declaring itself a republic on 13 December 1974 (Republic Day) within the Commonwealth. A defence agreement was signed soon after independence, and after being re-negotiated in 1972, expired on 31 March 1979 (Freedom Day). Upon its expiry, the British base closed and lands formerly controlled by the British were given to the Maltese government.\nIn the aftermath of the departure of the remaining British troops in 1979, the country intensified its participation in the Non-Aligned Movement. Malta adopted a policy of neutrality in 1980. In that same year, three of Malta's sites, including the capital Valletta, were inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage List. In 1989, Malta was the venue of a summit between US President George H. W. Bush and Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev, their first face-to-face encounter, which signalled the end of the Cold War. Malta International Airport was inaugurated and became fully operational on 25 March 1992, boosting the local aircraft and tourism industry. A referendum on joining the European Union was held on 8 March 2003, with 53.65% in favour. Malta joined the European Union on 1 May 2004 and the eurozone on 1 January 2008.\nPolitics.\nMalta is a republic whose parliamentary system and public administration are closely modelled on the Westminster system. The unicameral parliament is made up of the president of Malta and the House of Representatives ().\nThe House of Representatives has 65 members, elected for a five-year term in 13 five-seat electoral divisions, called , with constitutional amendments that allow for mechanisms to establish strict proportionality amongst seats and votes of political parliamentary groups. Members of the House of Representatives are elected by direct universal suffrage through single transferable vote every five years, unless the House is dissolved earlier by the president either on the advice of the prime minister or through a motion of no confidence. Malta had the second-highest voter turnout in the world (and the highest for nations without mandatory voting), based on election turnout in national lower house elections from 1960 to 1995.\nThe President of Malta, a largely ceremonial position, is appointed for a five-year term by a resolution of the House of Representatives carried by a simple majority. The president is the head of state. Myriam Spiteri Debono was elected on 27 March 2024 President of the republic by members of parliament in an indirect election. The 80th article of the Constitution of Malta provides that the president appoint as prime minister \"the member of the House of Representatives who, in his judgment, is best able to command the support of a majority of the members of that House\".\nMaltese politics is a two-party system dominated by the Labour Party (), a centre-left social democratic party, and the Nationalist Party (), a centre-right Christian democratic party. The Labour Party has been the governing party since 2013 and is currently led by Prime Minister Robert Abela, who has been in office since 13 January 2020. There are also a number of small political parties in Malta which have no parliamentary representation.\nCorruption, money laundering, and government maladministration in Malta have significantly increased since the Labour Party returned to power. In fact, Malta's record of clean governance has decreased since 2013, and the country is now considered among one of the worst EU member states in tackling corruption according to Transparency International. The same association reported that Malta dropped to its lowest ever ranking of 65th place in a report published in February 2025.\nAccording to International IDEA\u2019s Global State of Democracy (GSoD) Indices and Democracy Tracker, Malta performs in the mid to high range on overall democratic measures, with particular weaknesses in absence of corruption and civic engagement.\nAdministrative divisions.\nMalta has had a system of local government since 1993, based on the European Charter of Local Self-Government. The country is divided into six regions (one of them being Gozo), with each region having its own Regional Council, serving as the intermediate level between local government and national government. The regions are divided into local councils, of which there are currently 68 (54 in Malta and 14 in Gozo). The six districts (five on Malta and the sixth being Gozo) serve primarily statistical purposes.\nEach council is made up of a number of councillors (from 5 to 13, depending on and relative to the population they represent). A mayor and a deputy mayor are elected by and from the councillors. The executive secretary, who is appointed by the council, is the executive, administrative and financial head of the council. Councillors are elected every four years through the single transferable vote. Due to system reforms, no elections were held before 2012. Since then, elections have been held every two years for an alternating half of the councils.\nLocal councils are responsible for the general upkeep and embellishment of the locality (including repairs to non-arterial roads), allocation of local wardens, and refuse collection; they also carry out general administrative duties for the central government such as the collection of government rents and funds and answer government-related public inquiries. Additionally, a number of individual towns and villages in the Republic of Malta have sister cities.\nMilitary.\nThe objectives of the Armed Forces of Malta (AFM) are to maintain a military organisation with the primary aim of defending the islands' integrity according to the defence roles as set by the government in an efficient and cost-effective manner. This is achieved by emphasising the maintenance of Malta's territorial waters and airspace integrity.\nThe AFM also engages in combating terrorism, fighting against illicit drug trafficking, conducting anti-illegal immigrant operations and patrols, and anti-illegal fishing operations, operating search and rescue (SAR) services, and physical or electronic security and surveillance of sensitive locations. Malta's search-and-rescue area extends from east of Tunisia to west of Crete, an area of around .\nAs a military organisation, the AFM provides backup support to the Malta Police Force (MPF) and other government departments/agencies in situations as required in an organised, disciplined manner in the event of national emergencies (such as natural disasters) or internal security and bomb disposal.\nIn 2020, Malta signed and ratified the UN treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons.\nHuman rights.\nMalta is regarded as one of the most LGBT-supportive countries in the world, and was the first nation in the European Union to prohibit conversion therapy. Malta also constitutionally bans discrimination based on disability.\nMaltese legislation recognises both civil and canonical (ecclesiastical) marriages. Annulments by the ecclesiastical and civil courts are unrelated and are not necessarily mutually endorsed. Malta voted in favour of divorce legislation in a referendum held on 28 May 2011.\nAbortion in Malta is illegal. It and Poland are the only European Union members with near-total bans on the procedure. There are no exceptions for rape or incest. On 21 November 2022, the government led by the Labour Party proposed a bill that \"introduces a new clause into the country's criminal code allowing for the termination of a pregnancy if the mother's life is at risk or if her health is in serious jeopardy\"; the bill passed in June 2023 with amendments restricting the exception to situations where the woman's life is at risk.\nGeography.\nMalta is an archipelago in the central Mediterranean (in its eastern basin), some from southern Italy across the Malta Channel. Only the three largest islands\u2014Malta (), Gozo (), and Comino ()\u2014are inhabited. The islands of the archipelago lie on the Malta plateau, a shallow shelf formed from the high points of a land bridge between Sicily and North Africa that became isolated as sea levels rose after the last ice age. The archipelago is located on the African tectonic plate. Malta was considered an island of North Africa for centuries.\nNumerous bays along the indented coastline of the islands provide good harbours. The landscape consists of low hills with terraced fields. The highest point in Malta is Ta' Dmejrek, at , near Dingli. Although there are some small rivers at times of high rainfall, there are no permanent rivers or lakes on Malta. However, some watercourses have fresh water running all year round at Ba\u0127rija near Ras ir-Ra\u0127eb, at l-Imta\u0127leb and , and at Lunzjata Valley in Gozo.\nPhytogeographically, Malta belongs to the Liguro-Tyrrhenian province of the Mediterranean region within the Boreal Kingdom. According to the WWF, the territory of Malta belongs to the terrestrial ecoregion of Tyrrhenian\u2013Adriatic sclerophyllous and mixed forests.\nThe following uninhabited minor islands are part of the archipelago:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nClimate.\nMalta has a Mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Csa\"), with mild winters and hot summers, hotter in the inland areas. Rain occurs mainly in autumn and winter, with summer being generally dry.\nThe average yearly temperature is around during the day and at night. In the coldest month\u00a0\u2013 January\u00a0\u2013 the typical maximum temperature ranges from during the day and minimum at night. In the warmest month\u00a0\u2013 August\u00a0\u2013 the typical maximum temperature ranges from during the day and minimum at night. Amongst all capitals in the continent of Europe, Valletta\u00a0\u2013 the capital of Malta has the warmest winters, with average temperatures of around during the day and at night in the period January\u2013February. In March and December average temperatures are around during the day and at night. Large fluctuations in temperature are rare. Snow is very rare, although snowfalls have been recorded in the last century, the last one in 2014.\nThe average annual sea temperature is , from in February to in August. In the six months\u00a0from June to November,\u00a0the average sea temperature exceeds .\nThe annual average relative humidity is high, averaging 75%, ranging from 65% in July (morning: 78% evening: 53%) to 80% in December (morning: 83% evening: 73%).\nSunshine duration hours total around 3,000 per year, from an average 5.2 hours of sunshine duration per day in December to an average above 12 hours in July. This is about double that of cities in the northern half of Europe, for comparison: London\u00a0\u2013 1,461; however, in winter it has up to four times more sunshine; for comparison: in December, London has 37 hours of sunshine whereas Malta has above 160.\nUrbanisation.\nAccording to Eurostat, Malta is composed of two larger urban zones nominally referred to as \"Valletta\" (the main island of Malta) and \"Gozo\". The main urban area covers the entire main island, with a population of around 400,000. The core of the urban area, the \"greater city\" of Valletta, has a population of 205,768. According to the data from 2020 by Eurostat, the Functional Urban Area and metropolitan region covered the whole island and has a population of 480,134. According to the United Nations, about 95 percent of the area of Malta is urban and the number grows every year. According to ESPON and EU Commission studies, \"the whole territory of Malta constitutes a single urban region\".\nMalta, with area of and population of over 0.5\u00a0million, is one of the most densely populated countries worldwide. It is in some sources referred to as a city-state. Sometimes Malta is listed in rankings concerning cities or metropolitan areas.\nFlora.\nMalta contains only 4.6 square kilometres of naturally regenerating forest, characterised by mature trees with a height of 2 to 5 meters. The overall area occupied by trees is estimated to be 320 square kilometres, which constitutes approximately 1.44% of the total land area of the archipelago. The most common indigenous tree species are the willow (Salix alba), poplar (Populus alba), olive (\"Olea europaea\"), carob (\"Ceratonia siliqua\"), oak (\"Quericus ilex &amp;\" Quercus rotundifolia), Aleppo pine (\"Pinus halepensis\"), laurel (Laurus nobilis) and fig (\"Ficus carica\"), while the most common non-native trees are eucalyptus, acacia, date palm and opuntia. The Maltese islands are also home to a wide diversity of indigenous, sub-endemic and endemic plants. They feature many traits typical of a Mediterranean climate, such as drought resistance. Endemic plants include the national flower (\"Cheirolophus crassifolius\"), (\"Helichrysum panormitanum\" subsp. \"melitense\"), (\"Hyoseris frutescens\") and (\"Matthiola incana\" subsp. \"melitensis\") while sub-endemics include (\"Jacobaea maritima\" subsp. \"sicula\") and (\"Micromeria microphylla\"). The biodiversity of Malta is severely endangered by habitat loss, invasive species, and human intervention.\nEconomy.\nMalta is classified as an advanced economy according to the International Monetary Fund (IMF). Malta's major resources are limestone, a favourable geographic location and a productive labour force. Malta produces only about 20 percent of its food needs, has limited fresh water supplies because of the drought in the summer, and has no domestic energy sources, aside from the potential for solar energy from its plentiful sunlight. The economy is dependent on foreign trade (serving as a freight trans-shipment point), manufacturing (especially electronics and textiles), and tourism. Film production has contributed to the Maltese economy.\nAccess to biocapacity in Malta is below the world average. In 2024, Malta had 0.42 global hectares of biocapacity per person within its territory, contrasted with a global average of 1.6 hectares per person. Additionally, residents of Malta exhibited an ecological footprint of consumption of 5.12 global hectares of biocapacity per person, resulting in a sizable biocapacity deficit.\nIn preparation for Malta's membership in the European Union, which it joined on 1 May 2004, it privatised some state-controlled firms and liberalised markets. Malta has a financial regulator, the Malta Financial Services Authority (MFSA), with a strong business development mindset, and the country has been successful in attracting gaming businesses, aircraft and ship registration, credit-card issuing banking licences and also fund administration. Malta has made strong headway in implementing EU Financial Services Directives including UCITs IV and Alternative Investment Fund Managers (AIFMs). As a base for alternative asset managers who must comply with new directives, Malta has attracted a number of key players including IDS, Iconic Funds, Apex Fund Services and TMF/Customs House.\nMalta does not have an annual property tax, however, it does still tax property in transactions. Maltese real estate sales totaled over \u20ac320 million in May 2025, the second highest monthly total since 2023.\nAccording to Eurostat data, Maltese nominal GDP per capita stood at \u20ac39,350 in 2024, 9% higher than the EU average.\nThe National Development and Social Fund from the Individual Investor Programme, a citizenship by investment programme also known as the \"citizenship scheme\", became a significant income source for the government of Malta, adding 432,000,000 euro to the budget in 2018.\nBanking and finance.\nThe two largest commercial banks are Bank of Valletta and HSBC Bank Malta. Digital banks such as Revolut have also increased in popularity. The Central Bank of Malta (Bank \u010aentrali ta' Malta) has two key areas of responsibility: the formulation and implementation of monetary policy and the promotion of a sound and efficient financial system. The Maltese government entered ERM II on 4 May 2005, and adopted the euro as the country's currency on 1 January 2008.\nCurrency.\nMaltese euro coins feature the Maltese cross on \u20ac2 and \u20ac1 coins, the coat of arms of Malta on the \u20ac0.50, \u20ac0.20 and \u20ac0.10 coins, and the Mnajdra Temples on the \u20ac0.05, \u20ac0.02 and \u20ac0.01 coins.\nMalta has produced collectors' coins with face value ranging from 10 to 50 euros. These coins continue an existing national practice of minting of silver and gold commemorative coins. Unlike normal issues, these coins are not accepted in all the eurozone.\nFrom its introduction in 1972 until the introduction of the Euro in 2008, the currency was the Maltese lira, which had replaced the Maltese pound. The pound replaced the Maltese scudo in 1825.\nTourism.\nMalta is a popular tourist destination, with 1.6\u00a0million tourists per year, three times more tourists visit than there are residents. Tourism infrastructure has increased dramatically over the years and a number of hotels are present on the island, although overdevelopment and the destruction of traditional housing is of growing concern. In 2019, Malta had a record year in tourism, recording over 2.1 million tourists in one single year.\nIn recent years, Malta has advertised itself as a medical tourism destination, and a number of health tourism providers are developing the industry. However, no Maltese hospital has undergone independent international healthcare accreditation. Malta is popular with British medical tourists, pointing Maltese hospitals towards seeking UK-sourced accreditation, such as with the Trent Accreditation Scheme.\nTourism in Malta contributes around 11.6 percent of the country's gross domestic product.\nThe country's variety of landscapes and destinations has also become a significant draw for filmmakers, earning it the reputation as \"the Hollywood of the Mediterranean\". Films shot on the island include Ridley Scott's \"Napoleon\" and both \"Gladiator\" films, \"Gladiator\" and \"Gladiator II,\" \"Jurassic World: Rebirth\", \"Troy\", and , along with fantasy TV series \"Game of Thrones\".\nScience and technology.\nMalta signed a co-operation agreement with the European Space Agency (ESA) for more-intensive co-operation in ESA projects. The Malta Council for Science and Technology (MCST) is the civil body responsible for the development of science and technology on an educational and social level. Most science students in Malta graduate from the University of Malta and are represented by S-Cubed (Science Student's Society), UESA (University Engineering Students Association) and ICTSA (University of Malta ICT Students' Association). Malta was ranked 32tnd in the Global Innovation Index in 2025.\nDemographics.\nAs of the 2021 census, Maltese-born natives make up the majority of the island with 386,280 people out of a total population of 519,562. However, there are minorities, the largest of which by birthplace were: 15,082 from the United Kingdom, Italy (13,361), India (7,946), Philippines (7,784) and Serbia (5,935). Among racial origins for the non-Maltese, 58.1% of all identified as Caucasian, 22.2% Asian, 6.3% Arab, 6.0% African, 4.5% Hispanic or Latino and 2.9% more than one race.\nAs of 2005[ [update]], 17 percent were aged 14 and under, 68 percent were within the 15\u201364 age bracket whilst the remaining 13 percent were 65 years and over. Malta's population density of 1,282 per square km (3,322/sq\u00a0mi) is by far the highest in the EU and one of the highest in the world. \nThe Maltese-resident population for 2004 was estimated to make up 97.0 per cent of the total resident population. All censuses since 1842 have shown a slight excess of females over males. Population growth has slowed down, from +9.5 per cent between the 1985 and 1995 censuses, to +6.9 per cent between the 1995 and 2005 censuses (a yearly average of +0.7 per cent). The birth rate stood at 3860 (a decrease of 21.8 per cent from the 1995 census) and the death rate stood at 3025. Thus, there was a natural population increase of 835 (compared to +888 for 2004, of which over a hundred were foreign residents).\nThe population's age composition is similar to the age structure prevalent in the EU. Malta's old-age-dependency-ratio rose from 17.2 percent in 1995 to 19.8 percent in 2005, reasonably lower than the EU's 24.9 percent average; 31.5 percent of the Maltese population is aged under 25 (compared to the EU's 29.1 percent); but the 50\u201364 age group constitutes 20.3 percent of the population, significantly higher than the EU's 17.9 percent. Malta's old-age-dependency-ratio is expected to continue rising steadily in the coming years.\nIn 2021, the population of the Maltese Islands stood at 519,562.\nThe total fertility rate (TFR) as of 2016[ [update]] was estimated at 1.45 children born/woman, which is below the replacement rate of 2.1. In 2012, 25.8 per cent of births were to unmarried women. The life expectancy in 2018 was estimated at 83.\nLanguages.\nThe Maltese language () is one of the two constitutional languages of Malta and is considered the national language. The second official language is English and hence laws are enacted both in Maltese and English. However, article 74 of the Constitution states that \"if there is any conflict between the Maltese and the English texts of any law, the Maltese text shall prevail.\" Many speakers of English use a local dialect, Maltese English.\nMaltese is a Semitic language descended from the now extinct Sicilian-Arabic (Siculo-Arabic) dialect (from southern Italy) that developed during the Emirate of Sicily. The Maltese alphabet consists of 30 letters based on the Latin alphabet.\nIn 2022, Malta National Statistics Office states that 90 percent of the Maltese population has at least a basic knowledge of Maltese, 96 percent of English, 62 percent of Italian, and 20 percent of French. This widespread knowledge of second languages makes Malta one of the most multilingual countries in the European Union. A study collecting public opinion on what language was \"preferred\" discovered that 86 percent of the population preferred Maltese, 12 percent English, and 2 percent Italian. Italian television channels from Italy-based broadcasters, such as Mediaset and RAI, reach Malta and remain popular.\nMaltese Sign Language is used by signers in Malta.\nAccording to the 2021 census, among the population aged 5 and over, the main languages spoken from early childhood were the following.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe predominant religion in Malta is Catholicism. The second article of the Constitution of Malta establishes Catholicism as the state religion and it is also reflected in various elements of Maltese culture, although there are entrenched provisions for the freedom of religion. There are more than 360 churches in Malta, Gozo, and Comino, or one church for every 1,000 residents. The parish church ( or ) is the architectural and geographic focal point of every Maltese town and village.\nMalta is an Apostolic See; the Acts of the Apostles (Acts 28) tells of how St. Paul was shipwrecked on the island of \"Melite\", which many Biblical scholars identify with Malta, an episode dated around AD 60. Saint Publius is said to have been made Malta's first bishop. Further evidence of Christian practices and beliefs during the period of Roman persecution appears in catacombs that lie beneath various sites around Malta, including St. Paul's Catacombs. There are also a number of cave churches, including the grotto at Mellie\u0127a, which is a Shrine of the Nativity of Our Lady where, according to legend, St. Luke painted a picture of the Virgin Mary. It has been a place of pilgrimage since the medieval period.\nFor centuries, the Church in Malta was subordinate to the Diocese of Palermo, except when it was under Charles of Anjou, who appointed bishops for Malta, as did\u00a0\u2013 on rare occasions\u00a0\u2013 the Spanish and later, the Knights. Since 1808 all bishops of Malta have been Maltese. The patron saints of Malta are Saint Paul, Saint Publius, and Saint Agatha. Although not a patron saint, St George Preca (San \u0120or\u0121 Preca) is greatly revered as the first canonised Maltese saint. Various Catholic religious orders are present in Malta, including the Jesuits, Franciscans, Dominicans, Carmelites and Little Sisters of the Poor.\nThere exists a considerable minority of Eastern Orthodox Christians in Malta, of which there are 16,457, according to the 2021 census; although the number may also include Oriental Orthodox Christians, who are not in communion with the former. There are a small number of parishes belonging to each autocephalous Church, typically one for each. There are Greek, Russian, Serbian, Romanian, and Bulgarian Orthodox parishes located around Malta, mainly in Valletta.\nMost congregants of the local Protestant churches are not Maltese; their congregations mainly draw on vacationers and British retirees living in the country. There are also a Seventh-day Adventist church in Birkirkara, and a New Apostolic Church congregation founded in 1983 in Gwardamangia. There are approximately 600 Jehovah's Witnesses. Mormonism is also represented with 241 members in 1 congregation in Mosta.\nThe Jewish population of Malta reached its peak in the Middle Ages under Norman rule. In 1479, Malta and Sicily came under Aragonese rule and the Alhambra Decree of 1492 forced all Jews to leave the country. Today, there are two Jewish congregations. In 2019 the Jewish community in Malta gathered around 150 persons, slightly more than the 120 (of which 80 were active) estimated in 2003, and mostly elderly. Many among the newer generations decided to settle abroad, including in England and Israel. Most contemporary Maltese Jews are Sephardi, however, an Ashkenazi prayer book is used. In 2013 the Chabad Jewish Centre in Malta was founded.\nThere is one purpose-built Muslim mosque, the Mariam Al-Batool Mosque, although there are also a few improvised mosques located in Muslim homes spread around the island. The 2021 census recorded 17,454 Muslims, of which 1,746 were Maltese citizens. \nZen Buddhism and the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith claim some 40 members.\nIn a survey held by \"Malta Today\", the overwhelming majority of the Maltese population adheres to Christianity (95.2%) with Catholicism as the main denomination (93.9%); 4.5% of the population declared themselves either atheist or agnostic, one of the lowest figures in Europe. According to a 2019 Eurobarometer survey, 83% of the population identified as Catholic. The number of atheists has doubled from 2014 to 2018. The 2015 edition of the annual Freedom of Thought Report from the International Humanist and Ethical Union, asserted Malta was in the category of \"severe discrimination\", alongside seven other EU countries. In 2016, following the abolishment of blasphemy law, Malta was shifted to the category of \"systematic discrimination\" (same as most EU countries).\nMigration.\nHistorically a land of emigration, since the early 21st century Malta has seen a significant increase in net migration; the foreign-born population has grown nearly eightfold between 2005 and 2020. Most of the foreign community in Malta consists of active or retired British nationals and their dependents, centred on Sliema and surrounding suburbs. Other smaller foreign groups include Italians, Libyans, and Serbians, many of whom have assimilated into the Maltese nation over the decades.\nMalta is also home to a large number of foreign workers who migrated to the island for economic opportunity. This migration was driven predominantly in the early 21st century, when the Maltese economy was steadily booming yet the cost and quality of living on the island remained relatively stable. In recent years however the local Maltese housing index has doubled pushing property and rental prices to very high and almost unaffordable levels. Consequently, some expats in Malta have seen their relative financial fortunes decline, with others relocating to other European countries altogether.\nSince the late 20th century, Malta has become a transit country for migration routes from Africa towards Europe. As a member of the European Union and the Schengen Agreement, Malta is bound by the Dublin Regulation to process all claims for asylum by those asylum seekers that enter EU territory for the first time in Malta. However, irregular migrants who land in Malta are subject to a compulsory detention policy, being held in several camps organised by the Armed Forces of Malta (AFM), including those near \u0126al Far and \u0126al Safi. The compulsory detention policy has been denounced by several NGOs, and in July 2010, the European Court of Human Rights found that Malta's detention of migrants was arbitrary, lacking in adequate procedures to challenge detention, and in breach of its obligations under the European Convention on Human Rights. On 8 September 2020, Amnesty International criticised Malta for \"illegal tactics\" in the Mediterranean, against immigrants who were attempting to cross from North Africa. The reports claimed that the government's approach might have led to avoidable deaths.\nIn January 2014, Malta started granting citizenship for a \u20ac650,000 contribution plus investments, contingent on residence and criminal background checks. This \"golden passport\" citizenship scheme has been criticized as a fraudulent act by the Maltese Government. Concerns as to whether the Maltese citizenship scheme is allowing an influx of such individuals into the greater European Union have been raised by both the public as well as the European Council on multiple occasions. On 29 April 2025, the European Court of Justice ruled that Malta may no longer sell citizenship through its \u2018golden passports\u2019 scheme.\nIn the 19th century, most emigration from Malta was to North Africa and the Middle East, although rates of return migration to Malta were high. In the 20th century, most emigrants went to destinations in the New World, particularly to Australia, Canada, and the United States. Post Second World War, Malta's Emigration Department would assist emigrants with the cost of their travel. Between 1948 and 1967, 30 percent of the population emigrated. Between 1946 and the late-1970s, over 140,000 people left Malta on the assisted passage scheme, with 57.6% migrating to Australia, 22% to the UK, 13% to Canada and 7% to the United States. Emigration dropped dramatically after the mid-1970s and has since ceased to be a social phenomenon of significance. However, since Malta joined the EU in 2004 expatriate communities emerged in a number of European countries, particularly in Belgium and Luxembourg.\nEducation.\nPrimary schooling has been compulsory since 1946; secondary education up to the age of sixteen was made compulsory in 1971. The state and the Catholic Church provide education free of charge, both running a number of schools in Malta and Gozo. As of 2006[ [update]], state schools are organised into networks known as Colleges and incorporate kindergarten schools, primary and secondary schools. A number of private schools are run in Malta. St. Catherine's High School, Pembroke offers an International Foundation Course for students wishing to learn English before entering mainstream education. As of 2008[ [update]], there are two international schools, Verdala International School and QSI Malta. The state pays a portion of the teachers' salary in Church schools.\nEducation in Malta is based on the British model. Primary school lasts six years. Pupils sit for SEC O-level examinations at the age of 16, with passes obligatory in mathematics, a minimum of one science subject, English and Maltese. Pupils may opt to continue studying at a sixth form college for two years, at the end of which students sit for the matriculation examination. Subject to their performance, students may then apply for an undergraduate degree or diploma.\nThe adult literacy rate is 99.5 per cent.\nMaltese and English are both used to teach pupils at the primary and secondary school level, and both languages are also compulsory subjects. Public schools tend to use both Maltese and English in a balanced manner. Private schools prefer to use English for teaching, as is also the case with most departments of the University of Malta; this has a limiting effect on the capacity and development of the Maltese language. Most university courses are in English.\nOf the total number of pupils studying a first foreign language at secondary level, 51 per cent take Italian whilst 38 per cent take French. Other choices include German, Russian, Spanish, Latin, Chinese and Arabic.\nMalta is also a popular destination to study the English language, attracting over 83,000 students in 2019.\nInfrastructure.\nTransport.\nOwing to the British colonial rule, traffic in Malta drives on the left. Car ownership in Malta is exceedingly high, considering the very small size of the islands; it is the fourth-highest in the European Union. There were 182,254 registered cars in 1990, giving an automobile density of . Malta has of road, (87.5 per cent) of which are paved (as of December 2003).\nBuses (\"xarabank\" or \"karozza tal-linja\") are the primary method of public transport, established in 1905. Malta's vintage buses operated in the Maltese islands up to 2011 and became popular tourist attractions. To this day they are depicted on many Maltese advertisements and merchandise for tourists.\nThe bus service underwent extensive reform in July 2011. The management structure changed from having self-employed drivers driving their own vehicles to a service being offered by a single company through a public tender. The public tender was won by Arriva Malta, which introduced a fleet of brand new buses, built by King Long especially for service by Arriva Malta and including a smaller fleet of articulated buses brought in from Arriva London. It also operated two smaller buses for an intra-Valletta route only and 61 nine-metre buses, which were used to ease congestion on high-density routes. Overall Arriva Malta operated 264 buses. On 1 January 2014 Arriva ceased operations in Malta due to financial difficulties, having been nationalised as \"Malta Public Transport\". The government chose Autobuses Urbanos de Le\u00f3n (Alsa subsidiary) as its preferred bus operator for the country in October 2014. From October 2022, the bus system is free of charge for residents of Malta.\nAs of 2021, an underground Malta Metro is being planned, with a projected total cost of \u20ac6.2 billion.\nMalta has three large natural harbours on its main island:\nThere are also two human-made harbours that serve a passenger and car ferry service that connects \u010airkewwa Harbour on Malta and M\u0121arr Harbour on Gozo.\nMalta International Airport (Ajruport Internazzjonali ta' Malta) is the only airport serving the Maltese islands. It is built on the land formerly occupied by the RAF Luqa air base. A heliport is also located there. The heliport in Gozo is at Xewkija. The former RAF Ta Kali airfield at Ta' Qali houses a national park, stadium, the Crafts Village visitor attraction and the Malta Aviation Museum.\nFrom 1 April 1974 to 30 March 2024, the national airline was Air Malta, which was based at Malta International Airport and operated services to 22 destinations in Europe and North Africa. The owners of Air Malta were the Government of Malta (98 percent) and private investors (2 percent).\nOn 31 March 2024, KM Malta Airlines took over as the national airline of Malta. All former Air Malta Airplanes and other assets were transferred to the new airline, together with the staff. KM Malta Airlines is based at Malta International Airport and operates services to 18 destinations in Europe.\nIn June 2019, Ryanair has invested into a fully-fledged airline subsidiary, called Malta Air, operating a low-cost model. The Government of Malta holds one share in the airline.\nCommunications.\nThe mobile penetration rate in Malta exceeded 100% by the end of 2009. Malta uses the GSM900, UMTS(3G) and LTE(4G) mobile phone systems, which are compatible with the rest of the European countries, Australia and New Zealand.\nIn early 2012, the government called for a national Fibre to the Home (FttH) network to be built, with a minimum broadband service being upgraded from 4\u00a0Mbit/s to 100\u00a0Mbit/s.\nEnergy.\nMalta relied on coal until 1996 for electricity generation. In 1992, a new power station was built on the Delimara peninsula in Marsaxlokk. Originally the Delimara Power Station in 2015 used oil for electricity generation, before being converted to LNG in 2017. The power station also includes two gasoil-fired plants, which are used as standby power generation capacity during emergencies or lack of other power sources. Since 2015, the Malta\u2013Sicily interconnector allows Malta to be connected to the European power grid and import a significant share of its electricity.\nRooftop solar power, for electricity and water heating, is the main renewable source of energy in Malta that is on the rise. It accounts for 10% of the generated electricity. There are efforts to boost this renewable generation share to 25% by leveraging offshore platforms and battery storage by 2030. A waste-to-energy plant that runs off of biogas generated by organic waste is planned to contribute a further 4.5% to the electricity grid as a source of net carbon-neutral energy.\nHealthcare.\nMalta has a long history of providing publicly funded health care. The first hospital recorded in the country was already functioning by 1372. Today, Malta has both a public healthcare system, where healthcare is free at the point of delivery, and a private healthcare system. Malta has a strong general practitioner-delivered primary care base and the public hospitals provide secondary and tertiary care. The Maltese Ministry of Health advises foreign residents to take out private medical insurance.\nMalta also boasts voluntary organisations such as Alpha Medical (Advanced Care), the Emergency Fire &amp; Rescue Unit (E.F.R.U.), St John Ambulance and Red Cross Malta who provide first aid/nursing services during events involving crowds. The Mater Dei hospital, Malta's primary hospital, opened in 2007. It has one of the largest medical buildings in Europe.\nThe University of Malta has a medical school and a Faculty of Health Sciences. The Medical Association of Malta represents practitioners of the medical profession. The Foundation Programme followed in the UK has been introduced in Malta to stem the 'brain drain' of newly graduated physicians to the British Isles.\nCulture.\nThe culture of Malta reflects the various cultures that have come into contact with the Maltese Islands throughout the centuries.\nMusic.\nWhile Maltese music today is largely Western, traditional Maltese music includes what is known as \"g\u0127ana\". This consists of background folk guitar music, while a few people, generally men, take it in turns to argue a point in a sing-song voice. Music plays an important part in Maltese culture as each locality parades its own band club, on various occasions these being multiple per locality, and function to establish the thematic musical background to the various village feasts. The Malta Philharmonic Orchestra is recognised as Malta's foremost musical institution and is notable for being called to participate in important state events.\nContemporary music in Malta spans a variety of styles and sports international classical talents such as Miriam Gauci and Joseph Calleja, as well as non-classical music bands such as Winter Moods, and Red Electric, and singers like Ira Losco, Fabrizio Faniello, Glen Vella, Kevin Borg, Kurt Calleja, Chiara Siracusa, and Thea Garrett.\nLiterature.\nDocumented Maltese literature is over 200 years old. However, a recently unearthed love ballad testifies to literary activity in the local tongue from the Medieval period. Malta followed a Romantic literary tradition, culminating in the works of Dun Karm Psaila, Malta's national poet. Subsequent writers like Ruzar Briffa and Karmenu Vassallo tried to estrange themselves from the rigidity of formal themes and versification.\nThe next generation of writers, including Karl Schembri and Immanuel Mifsud, widened the tracks further, especially in prose and poetry.\nArchitecture.\nMaltese architecture has been influenced by many different Mediterranean cultures and British architecture over its history. The first settlers on the island constructed \u0120gantija, one of the oldest manmade freestanding structures in the world. The Neolithic temple builders (3800\u20132500 BC) endowed the numerous temples of Malta and Gozo with intricate bas-relief designs.\nThe Roman period introduced highly decorative mosaic floors, marble colonnades, and classical statuary, remnants of which are beautifully preserved and presented in the Roman Domus, a country villa just outside the walls of Mdina. The early Christian frescoes that decorate the catacombs beneath Malta reveal a propensity for eastern, Byzantine tastes. These tastes continued to inform the endeavours of medieval Maltese artists, but they were increasingly influenced by the Romanesque and Southern French Gothic movements.\nArt.\nTowards the end of the 15th century, Maltese artists, like their counterparts in Sicily, came under the influence of the School of Antonello da Messina, which introduced Renaissance ideals and concepts to the decorative arts in Malta.\nThe artistic heritage of Malta blossomed under the Knights of St. John, who brought Italian and Flemish Mannerist painters to decorate their palaces and the churches of these islands, most notably, Matteo Perez d'Aleccio, whose works appear in the Magisterial Palace and in the Conventual Church of St. John in Valletta, and Filippo Paladini, who was active in Malta from 1590 to 1595. For many years, Mannerism continued to inform the tastes and ideals of local Maltese artists.\nThe arrival in Malta of Caravaggio, who painted at least seven works during his 15-month stay on these islands, further revolutionised local art. Two of Caravaggio's most notable works, \"The Beheading of Saint John the Baptist\" and \"Saint Jerome Writing\", are on display in the Conventual Church of St. John. His legacy is evident in the works of local artists Giulio Cassarino and Stefano Erardi. However, the Baroque movement that followed was destined to have the most enduring impact on Maltese art and architecture. The vault paintings of the Calabrese artist Mattia Preti transformed the Conventual Church St. John into a Baroque masterpiece. Melchior Gaf\u00e0 emerged as one of the top Baroque sculptors of the Roman School.\nDuring the 17th and 18th centuries, Neapolitan and Rococo influences emerged in the works of the Italian painters Luca Giordano and Francesco Solimena, and these developments can be seen in the work of their Maltese contemporaries such as Gio Nicola Buhagiar and Francesco Zahra. The Rococo movement was greatly enhanced by the relocation to Malta of Antoine de Favray, who assumed the position of court painter to Grand Master Pinto in 1744.\nNeo-classicism made some inroads among local Maltese artists in the late-18th century, but this trend was reversed in the early 19th century, as the local Church authorities\u00a0\u2013 perhaps in an effort to strengthen Catholic resolve against the perceived threat of Protestantism during the early days of British rule in Malta\u00a0\u2013 favoured and avidly promoted the religious themes embraced by the Nazarene movement. Romanticism, tempered by the naturalism introduced to Malta by Giuseppe Cal\u00ec, informed the \"salon\" artists of the early 20th century, including Edward and Robert Caruana Dingli.\nParliament established the National School of Art in the 1920s. During the reconstruction period that followed the Second World War, the emergence of the \"Modern Art Group\", whose members included Josef Kalleya, George Preca, Anton Inglott, Emvin Cremona, Frank Portelli, Antoine Camilleri, Gabriel Caruana and Esprit Barthet greatly enhanced the local art scene. This group came together forming an influential pressure group known as the Modern Art Group, which played a leading role in the renewal of Maltese art. Most of Malta's modern artists have in fact studied in art institutions in England, or on the continent, leading to a diversity of artistic expression that has remained characteristic of contemporary Maltese art. In Valletta, the National Museum of Fine Arts featured work from artists such as H. Craig Hanna. In 2018 the national collection of fine arts was put on display in the new National Museum of Art, MU\u017bA, at Auberge d'Italie in Valletta.\nCuisine.\nMaltese cuisine shows strong Sicilian and Italian influences as well as influences of English, Spanish, Maghrebin and Proven\u00e7al cuisines. A number of regional variations can be noted as well as seasonal variations associated with the seasonal availability of produce and Christian feasts (such as Lent, Easter and Christmas). Food has been important historically in the development of a national identity in particular the traditional \"fenkata\" (i.e., the eating of stewed or fried rabbit). Potatoes are a staple of the Maltese diet as well.\nA number of grapes are endemic to Malta, including Girgentina and \u0120ellew\u017ca. There is a strong wine industry, with significant production of wines using these native grapes, as well as locally grown grapes of other more common varietals. A number of wines have achieved Protected Designation of Origin, with wines produced from grapes cultivated in Malta and Gozo designated as \"DOK\" wines, that is .\nCustoms.\nA 2010 Charities Aid Foundation study found that the Maltese were the most generous people in the world, with 83% contributing to charity.\nMaltese folktales include various stories about mysterious creatures and supernatural events. These were most comprehensively compiled by the scholar (and pioneer in Maltese archaeology) Manwel Magri in his core criticism \"\" (\"Fables from our Forefathers\"). This collection of material inspired subsequent researchers and academics to gather traditional tales, fables and legends from all over the Archipelago. While giants, witches, and dragons feature in many of the stories, some contain entirely Maltese creatures like the Kaw kaw, Il-Bellieg\u0127a and L-Im\u0127alla among others.\nTraditions.\nTraditional Maltese proverbs reveal cultural importance of childbearing and fertility: \"i\u017c-\u017cwie\u0121 ming\u0127ajr tarbija ma fihx tgawdija\" (a childless marriage cannot be a happy one). This is a belief that Malta shares with many other Mediterranean cultures. In Maltese folktales the local variant of the classic closing formula, \"and they all lived happily ever after\" is \"u g\u0127ammru u tg\u0127ammru, u spi\u010b\u010bat\" (and they lived together, and they had children together, and the tale is finished).\nRural Malta shares in common with the Mediterranean society a number of superstitions regarding fertility, menstruation, and pregnancy, including the avoidance of cemeteries leading up to childbirth, and avoiding the preparation of certain foods during menses. Pregnant women are encouraged to satisfy their food cravings, out of fear that their unborn child will bear a representational birth mark (Maltese: \"xewqa\", literally \"desire\" or \"craving\"). Maltese and Sicilian women also share certain traditions that are believed to predict the sex of an unborn child.\nTraditionally, Maltese newborns were baptised as promptly as possible. Traditional Maltese delicacies served at a baptismal feast include (almond macaroons), (a spicy, heart-shaped tart of chocolate-flavoured almond paste), and a liqueur known as \"ro\u017colin\", made with rose petals, violets, and almonds.\nOn a child's first birthday, in a tradition that still survives today, Maltese parents would organise a game known as \"il-qu\u010b\u010bija\", where a variety of symbolic objects would be randomly placed around the child. Whichever object the child shows the most interest in is said to reveal the child's path and fortunes in adulthood.\nTraditional Maltese weddings featured the bridal party walking in procession beneath an ornate canopy, from the home of the bride's family to the parish church, with singers trailing behind (\"il-\u0121ilwa\"). New wives would wear the g\u0127onnella, a traditional item of Maltese clothing. Today's couples are married in churches or chapels in the village or town of their choice, usually followed by a lavish wedding reception. Occasionally, couples will try to incorporate elements of the traditional Maltese wedding in their celebration. A resurgent interest in the traditional wedding was evident in May 2007, when thousands of Maltese and tourists attended a traditional Maltese wedding in the style of the 16th century, in \u017burrieq.\nFestivals and events.\nLocal festivals, similar to those in Southern Italy, are commonplace in Malta and Gozo, celebrating weddings, christenings and, most prominently, saints' days. On saints' days, in the morning, the \"festa\" reaches its apex with a High Mass featuring a sermon on the life and achievements of the patron saint. In the evening, a statue of the religious patron is taken around the local streets in solemn procession, with the faithful following in prayer. The atmosphere of religious devotion is preceded by several days of celebration and revelry: band marches, fireworks, and late-night parties. The largest festa is possibly that of the Assumption of Mary, which is celebrated in 8 parishes on 15 August and in 2 other parishes the following Sunday. Carnival (Maltese: \"il-karnival ta' Malta\") has had an important place on the cultural calendar after Grand Master It is held during the week leading up to Ash Wednesday, and typically includes masked balls, fancy dress and grotesque mask competitions, lavish late-night parties, a colourful, ticker-tape parade of allegorical floats presided over by King Carnival (Maltese: \"ir-Re tal-Karnival\"), marching bands and costumed revellers.\nHoly Week (Maltese: \"il-\u0120img\u0127a Mqaddsa\") starts on Palm Sunday (\"\u0126add il-Palm\") and ends on Easter Sunday (\"\u0126add il-G\u0127id\").\nMnarja, or l-Imnarja (pronounced \"lim-nar-ya\") is one of the most important dates on the Maltese cultural calendar. Officially, it is a national festival dedicated to the feast of Saints Peter and Paul. Its roots can be traced back to the pagan Roman feast of \"Luminaria\" (literally, \"the illumination\"), when torches and bonfires lit up the early summer night of 29 June. The festivities still commence today with the reading of the \"bandu\", an official governmental announcement, which has been read on this day in Malta since the 16th century. It is said that under the Knights, this was the one day in the year when the Maltese were allowed to hunt and eat wild rabbit, which was otherwise reserved for the hunting pleasures of the Knights. The close connection between Mnarja and rabbit stew (Maltese: \"fenkata\") remains strong today.\nIsle of MTV is a one-day music festival produced and broadcast on an annual basis by MTV. The festival has been arranged annually in Malta since 2007, with major pop artists performing each year. 2012 saw the performances of worldwide acclaimed artists Flo Rida, Nelly Furtado and Will.i.am. Over 50,000 people attended, which marked the biggest attendance so far.\nThe Malta International Fireworks Festival has been arranged annually in the Grand Harbour of Valletta since 2003.\nMedia.\nThe most widely read and financially the strongest newspapers are published by Allied Newspapers Ltd., mainly \"The Times of Malta\" (27 percent) and its Sunday edition \"The Sunday Times of Malta\" (51.6 percent). Due to bilingualism half of the newspapers are published in English and the other half in Maltese. The Sunday newspaper \"It-Tor\u010ba\" (\"The Torch\") published by a subsidiary of the General Workers' Union, is the widest Maltese language paper. Its sister paper, \"L-Orizzont\" (\"The Horizon\"), is the Maltese daily with the biggest circulation. There is a high number of daily or weekly newspapers\u2014one for every 28,000\u00a0people. Advertising, sales, and subsidies are the three main methods of financing.\nThere are nine terrestrial television channels in Malta: TVM, TVMNews+, Parliament TV, One, NET Television, Smash Television, F Living, TVMSport+ and Xejk. The state and political parties subsidise most of the funding of these channels. TVM, TVMNews+, and Parliament TV are operated by Public Broadcasting Services, the national broadcaster, and members of the EBU. Media.link Communications Ltd., the owner of NET Television, and One Productions Ltd., the owner of One, are affiliated with the Nationalist and Labour parties, respectively. The rest are privately owned. The Malta Broadcasting Authority has authority to supervise all local broadcasting stations and ensures their compliance with legal and licence obligations as well as the preservation of due impartiality.\nThe Malta Communications Authority reported that there were 147,896 pay TV subscriptions active at the end of 2012. For reference the 2011 census counts 139,583 households in Malta. Other European television networks can be received via satellite.\nSport.\nFootball (soccer) is one of the most popular sports in Malta. Other popular sports include bo\u010b\u010bi, horse racing, gostra, regatta, water polo, clay pigeon shooting, and motorsports.\nIn 2018 Malta hosted its first Esports tournament, 'Supernova CS:GO Malta', a tournament. Also since 2018, Malta has become the primary location for hosting the ESL Pro League.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19140", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19140", "title": "Demographics of Malta", "text": "Demographic features of the population of Malta include population density, ethnicity, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCharacteristics.\nMalta is the most densely populated country in the EU and one of the most densely populated countries in the world, with about . This compares with about 32 per square kilometre (85 per square mile) for the United States.\nInhabited since prehistoric times, Malta was first colonized by Sicilians. Subsequently, Phoenicians, Romans, Byzantines, Arabs in 870 AD who may have completely depopulated the islands but in 1224 were themselves expelled from Malta, Normans, Sicilians, Spanish, French and the British have influenced Maltese life and culture to varying degrees.\nRoman Catholicism is established by law as the religion of Malta with 98%; however, full liberty of conscience and freedom of worship is guaranteed, and a number of faiths have places of worship on the island (rather small groups, a combined total of 2% of the people are Protestants, Eastern Orthodox, Muslims and Jews).\nMalta has two official languages--Maltese (a Semitic language derived from Siculo-Arabic and heavily influenced by Sicilian and Italian), and English, which includes a local dialect, Maltese English. Both languages are compulsory subjects in Maltese primary and secondary schools. A large portion of the population is also fluent in Italian, which was, until 1936, the national language of Malta. The literacy rate has reached 93%, compared to 63% in 1946. Schooling is compulsory until age 16.\nAge distribution.\nSince 2000, the shift in the age composition towards an older population continued to materialise. In fact, the average age of the Maltese population increased from 38.5 in 2005 to 40.5 in 2011. This resulted from the increase in the number of persons aged 55 and over, together with a decrease in the number of persons under 25 years of age. The average in Gozo and Comino (41.6 years) was higher than that observed for Malta.\nPersons aged 65 and over more represent 16.3% of the total population in 2011, compared to 13.7% in 2005. In contrast, persons aged 14 and under make up 14.8% of the population in 2011, compared to 17.2% in 2005.\nMigrant background and foreign nationality.\nForeign nationals in Malta\nAs of 2016 and 2017, the numbers of selected groups of resident foreign nationals (non-naturalized residents) in Malta were as follows:\nThis list does not include foreign nationals who acquired Maltese nationality and foreign nationals without resident status.\nEmigration.\nMalta has long been a country of emigration, with big Maltese communities in English-speaking countries abroad.\nMass emigration picked up in the 19th century, reaching its peak in the decades after World War II.\nIn the nineteenth century, most migration from Malta was to North Africa and the Middle East (particularly Algeria, Tunisia and Egypt), although rates of return migration to Malta were high. Nonetheless, Maltese communities formed in these regions. By 1900, for example, British consular estimates suggest that there were 15,326 Maltese in Tunisia.\nThere is little trace left of the Maltese communities in North Africa, most of them having been displaced, after the rise of independence movements, to places like Marseille, the United Kingdom or Australia.\nAfter World War II, Malta's Emigration Department would assist emigrants with the cost of their travel. Between 1948 and 1967, 30 per cent of the population emigrated. Between 1946 and the late 1970s, over 140,000 people left Malta on the assisted passage scheme, with 57.6 per cent migrating to Australia, 22 per cent to the UK, 13 per cent to Canada and 7 per cent to the United States. (See also Maltese Australians; Maltese people in the United Kingdom)\n46,998 Maltese-born residents were recorded by the 2001 Australian Census, 30,178 by the 2001 UK Census, 9,525 by the 2001 Canadian Census and 9,080 by the 2000 United States census.\nEmigration dropped dramatically after the mid-1970s and has since ceased to be a social phenomenon of significance. However, since Malta joined the EU in 2004 expatriate communities emerged in a number of European countries particularly in Belgium and Luxembourg. At the same time, Malta is becoming more and more attractive for communities of immigrants, both from Western and Northern Europe (Italians, British) and from Eastern Europe (Serbians).\nImmigration.\nMost of the foreign community in Malta, predominantly active or retired British nationals and their dependents, is centred on Sliema and surrounding modern suburbs. Other smaller foreign groups include Italians, French, and Lebanese, many of whom have assimilated into the Maltese nation over the decades.\nSince the late 20th century, Malta has become a transit country for migration routes from Africa towards Europe.\nAs a member of the European Union and of the Schengen agreement, Malta is bound by the Dublin Regulation to process all claims for asylum by those asylum seekers that enter EU territory for the first time in Malta.\nIrregular migrants (formal Maltese: \"immigranti irregolari\", informal: \"klandestini\") who land in Malta are subject to a compulsory detention policy, being held in several camps organised by the Armed Forces of Malta (AFM), including those near \u0126al Far and \u0126al Safi. The compulsory detention policy has been denounced by several NGOs, and in July 2010, the European Court of Human Rights found that Malta's detention of migrants was arbitrary, lacking in adequate procedures to challenge detention, and in breach of its obligations under the European Convention on Human Rights.\nVery few migrants arrived in Malta in 2015, despite the fact that the rest Europe was experiencing a migrant crisis. Most migrants who were rescued between Libya and Malta were taken to Italy, and some refused to be brought to Malta.\nCIA World Factbook demographic statistics.\nThe following demographic statistics are from the CIA World Factbook, unless otherwise indicated.\nLargest cities:\nLife expectancy at birth:\n&lt;br&gt;\"total population:\"\n79.01 years\n&lt;br&gt;\"male:\"\n76.83 years\n&lt;br&gt;\"female:\"\n81.31 years (2006 est.)\nTotal fertility rate:\n1.42 children born/woman (2015 est.)\nState religion:\nRoman Catholic Church in Malta 88.6% (2016 est.)\nLanguages:\nMaltese (official de facto), English (official de jure), Italian (widely understood)\nVital statistics.\n\"Statistics from United Nations\" \"and National Statistics Office Malta\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population by Sex and Age Group (Census 20.XI.2011):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.I.2021) (Including civilian nationals temporarily outside the country.):\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nNote: Crude migration change (per 1000) is a trend analysis, an extrapolation based average population change (current year minus previous) minus natural change of the current year (see table vital statistics). As average population is an estimate of the population in the middle of the year and not end of the year.\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nCensus per locality, 1901-2021.\nNotes:\nSource: Census of population and housing 2011, Final Report, p.\u00a03; https://"}
{"id": "19141", "revid": "38443445", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19141", "title": "Politics of Malta", "text": " \nThe politics of Malta takes place within a framework of a parliamentary representative democratic republic, whereby the president of Malta is the constitutional head of state. Executive authority is vested in the president of Malta, with the general direction and control of the Government of Malta remaining with the prime minister of Malta, who is the head of government and the cabinet. Legislative power is vested in the Parliament of Malta, which consists of the president of Malta and the unicameral House of Representatives of Malta with the speaker as the presiding officer of the legislative body. Judicial power remains with the chief justice and the judiciary of Malta. Since independence, the party electoral system has been dominated by the Christian democratic Nationalist Party (\"Partit Nazzjonalista\") and the social democratic Labour Party (\"Partit Laburista\").\nThe Economist Intelligence Unit rated Malta a \"flawed democracy\" in .\nPolitical developments since independence.\nSince independence on 1964, two parties have dominated Malta's polarized and evenly divided politics during this period: the centre-right Nationalist Party and the centre-left Labour Party. From the pre-independence 1962 general election until 2017, third parties failed to score any electoral success. In the 2013 election, the Democratic Alternative (a green party established in 1989) managed to secure only 1.8% of the first preference votes nationwide.\nThe 1996 elections resulted in the election of the Labour Party, by 8,000 votes, to replace the Nationalists, who had won in 1987 and 1992. Voter turnout was characteristically high at 96%, with the Labour Party receiving 50.72%, the Nationalist Party 47.8%, the Democratic Alternative 1.46%, and independent candidates 0.02%. \nIn 1998, the Labour Party's loss in a parliamentary vote led the prime minister to call an early election. The Nationalist Party was returned to office in September 1998 by a majority of 13,000 votes, holding a five-seat majority in Parliament. Voter turnout was 95%, with the Nationalist Party receiving 51.81%, the Labour Party 46.97%, the Democratic Alternative 1.21%, and independent candidates 0.01%.\nBy the end of 2002 the Nationalist government wrapped up negotiations for European Union membership. A referendum on the issue was called in March 2003, for which the Nationalists and the Democratic Alternative campaigned for a \"yes\" vote while Labour campaigned heavily for \"no\" vote, invalidate their vote or abstain. Turnout was 91%, with more than 53% voting \"yes\".\nThe Labour Party argued that the \"yes\" votes amounted to less than 50% of the overall votes, hence, and citing the 1956 Maltese United Kingdom integration referendum as an example, they claimed that the \"yes\" had not in fact won the referendum. The then MLP Leader Alfred Sant said that the general election which was to be held within a month would settle the affair. In the general elections the Nationalists were returned to office with 51.79% of the vote to Labour's 47.51%. The Democratic Alternative polled 0.68%. The Nationalists were thus able to form a government and sign and ratify the EU Accession Treaty on 16 April 2003.\nOn 1 May 2004 Malta joined the EU and on 1 January 2008, the Eurozone with the euro as the national currency. The first elections after membership were held in March 2008 resulting in a narrow victory for the Nationalist Party with 49.34% of first preference votes. In May 2011, a nationwide referendum was held on the introduction of divorce. This was the first time in the history of parliament that Parliament approved a motion originating outside from the Cabinet.\nIn March 2013, the Labour Party returned to government after fifteen years in opposition with a record-breaking lead of 36,000 votes leading to the resignation of the Nationalist leader Lawrence Gonzi, and Joseph Muscat became prime minister. In June 2017, the Labour Party called in a snap election on its May Day celebrations and increased its vote disparity to around 40,000 votes. The then leader of the opposition, Simon Busuttil, announced his resignation shortly thereafter. This election saw the first third party elected to Malta's Parliament since independence, with the election of Marlene Farrugia in the 10th District representing the Democratic Party. Joseph Muscat continued to be prime minister In January 2020, he stepped down after the 2019 Malta political crisis surrounding the car bombing of investigative journalist Daphne Caruana Galizia. Robert Abela - the son of Malta's former president George Abela - elected a new leader of Labour Party and new prime minister of Malta in January 2020.\nDemocratic Alternative and the Democratic Party merged into a new party, AD+PD, on 17 October 2020.\nIn March 2022, the ruling Labour party, led by Prime Minister Robert Abela, won its third successive election. It gained even bigger victory than in 2013 and in 2017.\nExecutive branch.\nUnder its 1964 constitution, Malta became a parliamentary democracy within the Commonwealth. Queen Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom was sovereign of Malta, and a governor-general exercised executive authority on her behalf, while the actual direction and control of the government and the nation's affairs were in the hands of the cabinet under the leadership of a Maltese prime minister.\nOn December 13, 1974, the constitution was revised, and Malta became a republic within the Commonwealth, with executive authority vested in the president of Malta, which can be exercised directly or through officers subordinate to him. The president is elected by the House of Representatives for a five-year term. They appoint as prime minister the leader of the party with a majority of seats in the unicameral House of Representatives, known in Maltese as \"Kamra tar-Rappre\u017centanti\".\nThe president also nominally appoints, upon recommendation of the prime minister, the individual ministers. Ministers are selected from among the members of the House of Representatives, which usually consists of 65 members unless bonus seats are given to a party which gains an absolute majority of votes but not a parliamentary majority. Elections must be held at least every five years and the electoral system used is single transferable vote.\nAdministrative divisions.\nMalta is divided into 68 elected local councils, with each council responsible for the administration of cities or regions of varying sizes. Administrative responsibility is distributed between the local councils and the central government in Valletta. The Local Councils Act, 1993 (Act XV of 1993), was published on June 30, 1993, subdividing Malta into 54 local councils in Malta and 14 in Gozo. The inhabitants who are registered elect the Council every three years, as voters in the Local Councils' Electoral Register. Elections are held by means of the system of proportional representation using the single transferable vote. The mayor is the head of the Local Council and the representative of the Council for all effects under the Act. The executive secretary, who is appointed by the Council, is the executive, administrative, and financial head of the Council. All decisions are taken collectively with the other members of the Council. Local councils are responsible for the general upkeep and embellishment of the locality, local wardens, and refuse collection, and carry out general administrative duties for the central government such as collection of government rents and funds, and answering government-related public inquiries.\nThere are also Administrative Committees elected with responsibility for smaller regions.\nLegislative branch.\nElections to the House of Representatives (\"Kamra tad-Deputati\") are based on the single transferable vote system, a variant of the proportional representation electoral system. First, vacancies are filled through casual election and subsequent vacancies through co-option, meaning that no by-elections are held between one general election and the other. The parliamentary term cannot exceed five years.\nOrdinarily, 65 members are elected to the House from 13 multi-seat constituencies each returning 5 MPs. Additional MPs are elected in two circumstances:\nA third electoral amendment has been enacted which guarantees strict-proportionality with respect to votes and seats to parliamentary political groups.\nJudicial branch.\nThe judicial system in Malta comprises inferior courts, civil and criminal courts of appeal, and a Constitutional Court. Inferior courts are presided over by magistrates which have original jurisdiction in criminal and civil actions. In the criminal courts, the presiding judge sits with a jury of nine. The Court of Appeal and the Court of Criminal Appeal hear appeals from decisions of the civil and criminal actions respectively.\nThe highest court, the Constitutional Court, has both original and appellate jurisdiction. In its appellate jurisdiction it adjudicates cases involving violations of human rights and interpretation of the Constitution. It can also perform judicial review. In its original jurisdiction it has jurisdiction over disputed parliamentary elections and electoral corrupt practices.\nThere is a legal aid scheme offered to citizens lacking the means to afford legal defence.\nAccording to the Constitution, the president appoints the chief justice of Malta acting in accordance with a resolution of the House supported by the votes of not less than two-thirds of all the members of the House of Representatives. The judges of the Superior Court and the magistrates of the inferior courts are appointed through the Judicial Appointments Committee of Malta.\nGuarantees for the independence of the judiciary include the security of tenure for judges until their retiring age set at 65 (with a choice to extend retirement till 68), or until impeachment. The impeachment procedure for judges foresees a removal decision of the president upon request by the Commission for the Administration for Justice. \nThe independence of the judiciary is also guaranteed by the constitutional requirement that the judges\u2019 salaries are paid from the Consolidated Fund and thus the government may not diminish or amend them to their prejudice.\nThe Maltese system is considered in line with the principles of separation of powers and of independence of the judiciary. However, in its pre-accession evaluation reports, the European Commission has suggested in 2003 the need to reform the procedure for appointment of the members of the judiciary, currently \"controlled by political bodies\" (i.e. the Parliament and parties therein), in order to improve its objectivity. The Commission has also pointed to the need to check the compliance of the procedure for challenging judges and magistrates provided for by Article 738 of the Code of Organisation and Civil Procedure with the principle of an impartial tribunal enshrined in the European Convention on Human Rights.\nInternational organization participation.\nMalta is a member of the Commonwealth of Nations, CE, EBRD, ECE, EU (member from 1 May 2004), FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICCt, ICFTU, ICRM, IFAD, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, OPCW, OSCE, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WCO, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO\nMalta was a long-time member of the Non-Aligned Movement. It ceased to be part of the movement when it joined the European Union.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19142", "revid": "18872885", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19142", "title": "Economy of Malta", "text": "Highly industrialised service-based economy\nThe economy of Malta is a highly industrialised service-based economy. It is classified as an advanced economy by the International Monetary Fund and is considered a high-income country by the World Bank and an innovation-driven economy by the World Economic Forum. It is a member of the European Union and of the eurozone, having formally adopted the euro on 1 January 2008.\nThe strengths of Malta's economy are its advantageous location, being situated in the middle of the Mediterranean Sea at a crossroads between Europe, North Africa and the Middle East, its fully developed open market economy, multilingual population (88% of Maltese people speak English), productive labour force, low corporate tax and well developed finance and ICT clusters. The economy is dependent on foreign trade, manufacturing (especially electronics), tourism and other services in the tertiary sector of the economy. In 2014, over 1.7 million tourists visited the island.\nMalta's GDP per capita in 2024, adjusted by purchasing power parity, stood at $67,682 and ranked 15th in the list of EU countries in terms of purchasing power standard. In the 2013 calendar year, Malta recorded a budget deficit of 2.7%, which is within the limits for eurozone countries imposed by the Maastricht criteria, and Government gross debt of 69.8%. At 5.9%, Malta had the sixth-lowest unemployment rate in the EU in 2015.\nMalta is the 33rd-most democratic country in the world according to the Economist Intelligence Unit's Democracy Index with an upper-middle score on V-Dem's Democracy Indices.\nTransport.\nMalta has an airport, Luqa International Airport, and two majors ports, Malta Freeport and Valletta Cruise Port. Malta Freeport is used for all cargo ships and imports-exports while Valletta Cruise Port is only used by cruise ships. The Malta Freeport reported revenues of 170 million euros, while \u20ac90 million came from the Valletta Cruise Port, totaling \u20ac260 million. The Freeport connects Malta with 110 others ports in the world including 55 in the Mediterranean. Furthermore, 2,189 container ships carried 2.80 million TEU of container traffic in and out of Malta Freeport in 2022. The Valletta Cruise Port welcomed 900,000 passengers in 2023, contributing \u20ac53 million to the Maltese economy.\nLuqa International Airport serves 35 different airlines with 115 destinations. In 2023, 7.8 million people travelled through the airport, providing $2.7 billion in revenues to the Maltese economy, equivalent to 24% of Malta's Gross Domestic Product (GDP). Specifically, the former air flag carrier of Malta Air Malta, KM Malta Airlines since 2024, had a revenue of \u20ac679.4 million in 2022. Another new airline operating from Luqa Airport, Universal Air, started operations in April 2024 with a fleet of 6 aircraft. The airlines, airport, and surrounding businesses employ almost 7,000 people.\nHistory.\nIn the mid-thirteenth century, Abate Giliberto indicated that the population of the Maltese islands consisted of 1,119 families. At the time, Maltese agriculture transitioned from subsistence agriculture to a more commerce-based one through the cultivation for export of cotton and cumin, which were introduced during the Arab period. As a result, there was a need to import food from neighbouring Sicily. Eventually, in the late fourteenth century, cotton production became the principal agricultural product in the archipelago, since it was one of the few production hubs in the western Mediterranean. Processing cotton to weave it into the fabric was a labour-intensive activity, so the boost in cotton trade led to the population surging to 33,000. In an exploratory mission in 1524, the Knights of St. John noted how the islands were dependent on grain imports since agriculture was dedicated to the production of cotton, honey and cumin.\nDuring the Napoleonic Wars (1800\u20131815), Malta's economy prospered and became the focal point of a major trading system. In 1808, two-thirds of the cargo consigned from Malta went to Levant and Egypt. Later, one half of the cargo was usually destined for Trieste. Cargo consisted of largely British and colonial-manufactured goods. Malta's economy became prosperous from this trade and many artisans, such as weavers, found new jobs in the port industry.\nIn 1820, during the Battle of Navarino, which took place in Greece, the British fleet was based in Malta. In 1839, P&amp;O and East India Company used Malta as a calling port on their Egypt and Levant runs.\nIn 1869, the opening of the Suez Canal benefited Malta's economy greatly as there was a massive increase in the shipping which entered in the port. The economy had entered a special phase. The Mediterranean Sea became the \"world highway of trade\" and a number of ships called at Malta for coal and various supplies on their way to the Indian Ocean and the Far East. From 1871 to 1881, about 8,000 workers found jobs in the Malta docks and a number of banks opened in Malta. By 1882, Malta reached the height of its prosperity.\nHowever, the boom did not last long. By the end of the 19th century, the economy began declining and by the 1940s, Malta's economy was in serious crisis. This was primarily due to the invention of large ships which had become oil-fired and therefore had no need to stop in the Grand Harbor of Malta to refuel. The British Government had to extend the dockyard.\nAt the end of World War II, Malta's strategic importance had reached a low point. Modern air warfare technology and the invention of the atomic bomb had changed the importance of the military base. The British lost control of the Suez Canal and withdrew from the naval dockyard, transforming it for commercial shipbuilding and ship repair purposes.\nModern economy.\nThe Maltese economy is dependent on foreign trade, manufacturing (especially electronics and pharmaceuticals), and tourism. Malta adopted the Euro currency on 1 January 2008.\nTourist arrivals and foreign exchange earnings derived from tourism have steadily increased since 1987. Following the September 11 attacks, the tourist industry suffered a temporary setback. With the help of a favorable international economic climate, the availability of domestic resources, and industrial policies that support foreign export-oriented investment, the economy has been able to sustain a period of rapid growth. Growing public and private sector demand for credit has led \u2014 in the context of interest rate controls \u2014 to credit rationing to the private sector and the introduction of non-interest charges by banks. Despite these pressures, consumer price inflation has remained low (2.2% according to the Central Bank of Malta in 2007), reflecting the impact of a fixed exchange rate policy (100% hard peg to the euro, in preparation for currency changeover) and lingering price controls.\nThere is a strong manufacturing base for high value-added products like electronics and pharmaceuticals, and the manufacturing sector has more than 250 foreign-owned, export-oriented enterprises. Tourism generates around 15% of GDP. Film production in Malta is another growing industry (approx. 35 million euros between 1997 and 2011), despite stiff competition from other film locations in Eastern Europe and North Africa, with the Malta Film Commission providing support services to foreign film companies for the production of feature cinema, commercials and television series.\nFrom 2001 to 2005 the mean GDP real growth was 0.4% due to Malta losing pace in tourism and other industries. Unemployment was down to 4.4%, its lowest level in 3 years. Many formerly state-owned companies are being privatised\u2014and the market liberalised.\nFiscal policy has been directed toward bringing down the budget deficit after public debt grew from a negative figure in 1988 to 56% in 1999 and 69.1% in 2009. By 2007, the deficit-to-GDP ratio was comfortably below 3% as required for eurozone membership, but due to pre-election spending has gone up to 4.4% in 2008 and 3.8% in 2009.\nEnergy.\nDespite a great potential for solar and wind power, Malta produces almost all its electricity from oil, importing 100% of it. Energy and the cost of energy, which is oft-quoted as the highest in Europe, was a key issue in the 2013 election.\nAgriculture.\nAgriculture constitutes a relatively small proportion of the GDP of Malta, at around 0.7%. The country produces a diverse range of crops, including potatoes, olives, and tomatoes. Animal livestock within Malta include cattle, goat, pigs and poultry.\nStatistics.\nElectricity - production:\n1,620 GWh (1998)\nElectricity - production by source:\n&lt;br&gt;\"fossil fuel:\"\n98.6%\n&lt;br&gt;\"hydro:\"\n0%\n&lt;br&gt;\"nuclear:\"\n0%\n&lt;br&gt;\"Renewable sources:\"\n1.4%\n&lt;br&gt;\"other:\"\n0% (1998)\nElectricity - consumption:\n1,507 GWh (1998)\nElectricity - exports:\n0 kWh (1998)\nElectricity - imports:\n0 kWh (1998)\nAgriculture - products:\npotatoes, cauliflower, grapes, wheat, barley, tomatoes, citrus, cut flowers, green peppers; pork, milk, poultry, eggs\nCurrency:\n1 euro = 100 cents since 1 January 2008\npreviously 1 Maltese lira = 100 cents;\nExchange rates:\nMaltese liri (LM) per US$1 \u2013 0.4086 (January 2000), 0.3994 (1999), 0.3885 (1998), 0.3857 (1997), 0.3604 (1996), 0.3529 (1995)\nIrrevocably fixed conversion rate to the euro: Maltese liri (LM) per EUR1 - 0.4293 (2007)\nCompanies.\nAccording to HitHorizons, companies registered in Malta generate \u20ac88,255,174,701 in sales per annum. The company with the highest sales is ALKAGESTA LTD with \u20ac2.075B followed by HC TRADING MALTA LIMITED and ADVAITA TRADE PRIVATE LIMITED with \u20ac1.346B and \u20ac1.253B in sales respectively.\nPoverty.\nPoverty and social exclusion are significant problems in Malta. As of 2008, an estimate of 15% of Malta's citizens were living below the poverty line, which was slightly better than the EU average of 17% at the time. To address the issue of poverty, on 24 December 2014 Malta addressed poverty in the six branches of social services, health and environment, culture, income and social benefits, education and employment, by unveiling the National Strategic Policy for Poverty Reduction and Social Inclusion; this will stay in effect from 2014 to 2024. Under this policy, stakeholders will be involved in the discussion of how to reduce hardships experienced by families living in Malta.\nUnemployment system.\nBenefits for unemployment are given out based on contributory and non-contributory schemes. Contributory schemes distribute unemployment benefits within 50 weeks of contribution. Non-contributory schemes a Social Unemployment Benefit is granted after a means test to the head of a household. In order to qualify for unemployment benefits, a person must be able to do work and have registered as unemployed.\nThere are three categories to the Malta registrar of unemployment. People who have never worked fall into category one. Those who quit or were dismissed from their jobs fall into category two. Category three is for people who are currently employed but are looking for other job prospects. Benefits for unemployment are given for 156 days after which a person may qualify for the means tested unemployment assistance. People eligible for unemployment benefits are Maltese citizens who are aged sixteen years or older, people signed up for eligible work-study programs, and citizens outside of Malta who are employed by foreign entities.\nSome scholars have noted that Malta's unemployment system has created a dependency on the benefits provided by the system. From 1992 to 2005, there was an increase in the number of recipients of both short-term and long-term benefits. Additionally, in 2016, 969 Maltese citizens were cut off the employment register for abusing the system. For these reasons, there has been movements from politicians to reduce and reshape the unemployment system. After the election of the Labour Party in 2013, the number of people receiving unemployment benefits dropped by 75%. This same government introduced the \"in-work\" benefit which forces more people to work while helping the most poor and desperate.\nIn order to be eligible for in-work benefit, applicants must first have children under the age of 23, and from that point, benefits vary depending on marital status and the number of people employed per family. For a single parent in employment who earns between \u20ac6,600-\u20ac16,500, they are eligible for a maximum payable rate of up to \u20ac1,250 annually per child. For a married couple whose collective income is between \u20ac10,000 and is less than \u20ac24,000 (the income of one of the spouses must be over \u20ac3,000), they are eligible for a maximum payment rate of up to \u20ac1,200 annually per child. In 2016, the in-work benefit was extended to married couples where only one parent works, extending the benefit to an additional 3,700 families. For a married couple with only one parent gainfully employed whose income is greater than \u20ac6,600 and less than \u20ac16,500, they are eligible for a maximum payable rate of up to \u20ac350 yearly per child. The in-work benefit is paid quarterly in January, April, July, and October.\nAt 42.3% in 2017, female workforce participation rate in Malta is relatively low. For over half of Maltese women who stay out of the workforce altogether, they do not receive direct unemployment benefits. Rather, most unemployment benefits are given to men because to receive unemployment benefits, one must first be employed. However, because older women tend to stay out of the workforce, those women who do participate in the workforce tend to be younger and have higher levels of education. This has led to a lower long-term unemployment rate amongst women than men. In 2011, the long-term unemployment rate of women was 2.5% while the long-term unemployment rate of men was 3.3%.\nPensions system.\nMalta has public and private pension systems. There are two types of contributions for the public pension system: class one and class two. Employed people contribute to class one and those are self-employed contribute to class two. There was a gradual increase in pension age in Malta in the 1950s and 1960s; for example, someone who was born in 1953 needs to be 62 years old in order to collect pensions while another person born in 1960 would have to be 64 years old in order to collect pensions. Another requirement to qualify for a Malta pension program is that a person must have been contributing to the program for a certain time period or they will not be eligible. In Malta there is a state Malta Retirement Programme for foreign pensioners. According to the programme, a foreigner whose income is more than 75% from pension payments, can receive a residence permit in the country and a special tax status.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19143", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19143", "title": "Telecommunications in Malta", "text": " \nThis article is an overview of telecommunications in Malta.\nTelephone.\nTelephones - main lines in use:\n259,000 (2022)\nTelephones - mobile cellular:\n702,000 (2022)\nTelephone system:\nautomatic system satisfies normal requirements\n&lt;br&gt;\"domestic:\"\nsubmarine cables and microwave radio relay between islands\n&lt;br&gt;\"international:\"\n2 submarine cables; satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)\nRadio.\nRadio broadcast stations:\nAM 1, FM 18, shortwave 6 (1999)\nRadios:\n255,000 (1997)\nAmateur radio operators:\nApprox. 500\nAmateur radio repeaters:\n1 HF ALE EchoLink Gateway (9H1BBS-L) DTMF Access 145300 CTCSS 77\u00a0Hz (Owned by G0DEO/9H1IA)\n1 VHF/UHF 9H1IA-L Frequency Agile CrossBand Link CTCSS 151.4\u00a0Hz (Owned by G0DEO/9H1IA)\n1 VHF (9H1BBS 145.750\u00a0MHz CTCSS 77\u00a0Hz (Owned by G0DEO/9H1IA)\n1 UHF (9H1BBS 433.175\u00a0MHz CTCSS 77\u00a0Hz (Owned by G0DEO/9H1IA)\n2 Microwave Amateur Television ( ATV ) Repeaters ( 9H1ATV built by 9H1LO and run by MARL and 9H1LO/r built and run by 9H1LO )\nAmateur radio beacons:\n1 HF 6 Meater Beacon 9H1SIX 50.023\u00a0MHz JM75fv (Run by MARL Club)\n1 HF 10 Meter Band CW Beacon 9H1LO/B on 28.223\u00a0MHz\n1 HF 30 Meter Band QRSS Beacon 9H1LO/B on 10.140.90\u00a0MHz\n1 HF 17 Meter Band PSK31 Beacon 9H1LO/B on 18.110.15\u00a0MHz\n1 VHF 2 Meter Band Beacon 9H1LO/B on 144.500\u00a0MHz (currently summer months only)\nTelevision.\nTelevision broadcast stations:\n6 (2000)\nTelevisions:\n280,000 (1997)\nInternet.\nInternet Service Providers (ISPs):\n17 (2005)\nBroadband Wireless Internet Service Provider Licenses:\n3 (2005)\nInternet users:\n461,100 (2021)\nCountry code (Top level domain): .mt\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19144", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19144", "title": "Transport in Malta", "text": " \nThe transport system in Malta is small but extensive, and the islands' domestic system of public transport is reliant on buses and taxis, although there was both a railway and a tramway in the past. Public transport in Malta has been free of charge since October 2022 for all residents with a Tallinja Card (a personalised public transport card), for which any resident of Malta can register.\nMalta's primary international connections are the Malta International Airport in Luqa and by sea the Valletta Ferry Terminal. Malta's primary commercial connection is the Malta Freeport (the 3rd largest transshipment port in the Mediterranean Sea) in Bir\u017cebbu\u0121a.\nCreated in 2010 the authority in charge of all Transport services in the country is Transport Malta, consumed the services of the Malta Maritime Authority, the Malta Transport Authority and the Director and Directorate of Civil Aviation.\nThe Ministry of Culture of Malta sanctioned Touring Club Malta to set up a Transport Museum.\nLand transport.\nRoads.\nTraffic in Malta drives on the left, being one of only four countries in Europe to do so, along with the United Kingdom, Ireland and Cyprus. Car ownership in Malta is exceedingly high given the very small size of the islands. The country has a car ownership rate of 766 motor vehicles per 1,000 people. As of October 2021, the number of registered cars amounted to 411,056, giving an auto-mobile density of 1253.8 per km\u00b2.\nMalta has 3,096 kilometres of road, 2,704\u00a0km (87.3%) of which are paved and 392\u00a0km are unpaved as of 2008. 114\u00a0km of Malta's roads are on the Trans-European Transport Network but it has no motorways. Roads in Malta are maintained and operated by Infrastructure Malta.\nThe official road user guide for Malta is \"The Highway Code\".\nBuses.\nBuses are the primary method of public transport for the Maltese Islands and have been in operation there since 1905, offering a cheap and frequent service to many parts of Malta and Gozo. The vast majority of buses on Malta depart from a terminus in Valletta. Malta's buses carried over 40 million passengers in 2015.\nThe traditional classic Maltese buses, which were in operation until 2011 and still provide tourist-oriented services to this day, have become visitor attractions in their own right due to their uniqueness, and are depicted on many Maltese advertisements to promote tourism as well as on gifts and merchandise for tourists. Prior to their reform there were approximately 500 buses in public transit service, most of them privately owned by the bus drivers themselves, and operated to a unified timetable set by the transport authority. On any one day, half the bus fleet worked on the public transport network (called \"route buses\"), while the other half were used for private tours and school transport.\nIn July 2011 a new public transport network was installed by Transport Malta (the regulating authority) and on 3 July 2011 it started being operated by Arriva Malta, which was owned by Arriva (67%) and Tumas Group (33%), operating as the sole operator on a 10-year contract and running a new 264-strong fleet of buses in a turquoise and cream livery. Unlike the system it replaced, the buses were owned and operated by a single company with the drivers working as employees of Arriva Malta.\nWhen Arriva ceased operations on 1 January 2014 due to financial difficulties, the company was nationalised as Malta Public Transport by the Maltese government as an interim measure while a new bus operator could be found. As of October 2014 the government has chosen Autobuses Urbanos de Le\u00f3n (Alsa subsidiary) as its preferred bus operator for the country, and although the agreement has yet to be fully determined and signed, it is planned that they will be in operation in January 2015.\nDuring the closing days of December 2014, the Times of Malta and other newspapers were reporting that the company had now signed contracts and purchased the existing operation for 8 million euros. They duly took over the business on January 8, 2015 with their takeover being effected as a \"soft launch\". The existing name - Malta Public Transport - is to be retained instead of using Autobuses Urbanos de Le\u00f3n and nothing will have changed from a passenger perspective initially. The buses are to be repainted into a new livery of light green and white and during a press announcement to mark the formal takeover of operations on the day, several repainted buses were lined up for a photo call to show off the new livery, these being two of the leased in 2014 Optare Solos, one of the leased in 2014 Wright Volvos, one each of the new in 2011 King Long XMQ6900J and XMQ6127J buses. By February the sub contracted buses from UBS were replaced - temporarily - with 32 dual-door Mercedes-Benz Citaro buses operated by ALESA (as opposed to the situation until then of sub contracting of both bus and driver from UBS) until new Otokar Vectio C dual-door single deck buses currently on order have arrive later in 2015. These new buses will number 142 in total and used to augment the existing fleet as the revised route network is incrementally rolled out during the course of 2015 with the full service planned not expected to be fully realized until 2016, at which time the 23 million euro subsidy for 2015 will rise to 29 million thereafter.\nIn January 2019, the Government has said that young people who are between 16 and 20-years old in 2018 can now travel by bus for free. People between 17 and 19-years old will travel for free between 1 January 2019 and 31 December 2019. The government also said that those who will turn 16 this year will start travelling for free on their birthday and will keep benefiting from the scheme until their 17th birthday. 20-year-olds will benefit until they reach 21.\nSince October 2022 public transport (which includes buses) in Malta and Gozo has been free of charge for all residents with a Tallinja Card (a personalised public transport card), of which any Malta resident can register for.\nRailway.\nThe Malta Railway was the only railway line ever on the island of Malta, and it consisted of a single railway line from Valletta to Mdina. It was a single-track line in metre gauge, operating from 1883 to 1931 between the capital city of Valletta and the army barracks at Mtarfa / Mdina. The railway was known in Maltese as \"il-vapur tal-art\" (the land ship).\nTramways.\nElectric tramways operated in Malta from 23 February 1905 till 1929.\nThe tramway was connected with two lines, considered to be a direct line:\nThere was no immediate extension of the track to Mosta.\nThe tracks ran on the road parallel to the Valletta-Mdina railway line, which also allowed the traffic system to be used by cars and buses. The road operation was terminated after the bankruptcy of the company on December 15, 1929 and the infrastructure was rebuilt.\nIn 2008, the Halcrow report suggested the government to reintroduce two tram lines in Malta: Valletta to Sliema along the coast road, and Valletta to Ta' Qali. The report was largely overlooked, as the government focused on reforming the bus transport. In 2016 the government announced a new study on reintroducing the tram. The new study, which is expected by late 2020, should also look at metro and monorail options.\nMetro.\nIn 2021 the Maltese government unveiled a proposal for a \u20ac6.2 billion metro network, to consist of three lines and 25 stations, of which the majority would be underground. As of 2023, the project seems to have been shelved.\nMaritime transport.\nMalta has three large natural harbours on its main island. There are also two man-made harbours that connect the islands of Malta and Gozo.\nFerry services.\nA frequent daily passenger and car ferry service runs between the islands of Malta and Gozo between \u010airkewwa Harbour and M\u0121arr Harbour.\nThere are also regularly scheduled local commuter ferries, including:\nMore ferries are planned to be introduced starting in Summer 2025.\nThere is also a ferry terminal at the Grand Harbour that connects Malta to Pozzallo and Catania in Sicily.\nMerchant marine.\nMalta is one of the ten largest ship registers in the world (6th in 2016) and the largest in the EU, with 66.2 million gt registered. At the end of 2015, there were also 501 yachts on the register.\nAir transport.\nMalta International Airport is the only airport serving the Maltese Islands. It is built on the land formerly occupied by the RAF Luqa air base. A heliport is also located there, but the scheduled service to Gozo ceased in 2006. From June 2007 to August 2012, a three-times daily floatplane service, operated by HarbourAir Malta, linked the sea terminal in Grand Harbour to Mgarr harbour in Gozo.\nIn the past there were two further airfields which were in operation during World War II and into the 1960s, located at Ta'Qali and \u0126al Far. They have now since been closed, the land on the former has now been converted into a national park, stadium and the Crafts Village visitor attraction. The Malta Aviation Museum is also situated here, preserving several aircraft including Hurricane and Spitfire fighters which defended the island in World War II. \u0126al Far has been converted into an industrial estate, a race track and an immigration reception centre.\nThe national airline is KM Malta Airlines, which replaced Air Malta in March 2024.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19145", "revid": "276448", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19145", "title": "Military of Malta", "text": ""}
{"id": "19146", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19146", "title": "Foreign relations of Malta", "text": "After independence from the United Kingdom in 1964, Malta followed a policy of close co-operation with NATO countries. Since 1971, the country sought relations with the rest of the world, including communist countries in Eastern Europe and the non-aligned countries.\nAfter substantially increased financial contributions from several NATO countries (including the United States), the Royal Navy remained in the Malta Dockyard until 1979. Following their departure, Malta charted a new course of neutrality and became an active member of the Non-Aligned Movement. The country joined the Non-Aligned Movement in 1973 as the third European member state after Cyprus and SFR Yugoslavia. Malta is an active participant in the United Nations, the Commonwealth, the Council of Europe, OSCE, and various other international organisations. In these forums, Malta has frequently expressed its concern for the peace and economic development of the Mediterranean region.\nOn May 1, 2004, Malta withdrew from the Non-Aligned Movement and became a full member of the European Union, with which it had an association agreement since 1971. It was one of ten new members which joined on that date. The Ministry for Foreign Affairs, at Palazzo Parisio, oversees the direction of Maltese foreign policy. The country has close relations with most sovereign countries, with an emphasis on increased trade and foreign direct investment.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Malta maintains diplomatic relations with:\nMalta and the Commonwealth of Nations.\nMalta has been a member state of the Commonwealth of Nations since 1964, when it became an independent Dominion under the name 'State of Malta'.\nMalta became a republic in the Commonwealth of Nations on December 13, 1974, when the last Governor-General of Malta, Sir Anthony Mamo became the first President of Malta.\nFOSS Membership.\nMalta has been a member of The Forum of Small States (FOSS) since the group's founding in 1992.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19147", "revid": "49394694", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19147", "title": "Marshall Islands", "text": "Island country in the Pacific Ocean\nThe Marshall Islands, officially the Republic of the Marshall Islands, is an island country in Oceania. The sovereign state lies west of the International Date Line and north of the equator in the Micronesia region of the Northwestern Pacific Ocean.\nThe territory consists of 29 coral atolls and five main islands as well as 1,220 other very small ones, divided across two island chains: Ratak in the east and Ralik in the west. 98.13% of its territory is water, the largest proportion of water to land of any sovereign state. The country shares maritime boundaries with Wake Island to the north, Kiribati to the southeast, Nauru to the south, and the Federated States of Micronesia to the west. The capital and largest city is Majuro, home to approximately half of the country's population. The Marshall Islands are one of only four atoll based nations in the entire world.\nAustronesian settlers reached the Marshall Islands as early as the 2nd millennium BC and introduced Southeast Asian crops, including coconuts, giant swamp taro, and breadfruit, as well as domesticated chickens, which made the islands permanently habitable. Several Spanish expeditions visited the islands in the mid-16th century, but Spanish galleons usually sailed a Pacific route farther north and avoided the Marshalls. European maps and charts named the group for British captain John Marshall, who explored the region in 1788. American Protestant missionaries and Western business interests began arriving in the 1850s. German copra traders dominated the economy in the 1870s and 1880s, and the German Empire annexed the Marshalls as a protectorate in 1885.\nThe Empire of Japan occupied the islands in the autumn of 1914 at the beginning of World War I. After the war, the Marshalls and other former German Pacific colonies north of the equator became the Japanese South Seas Mandate. The United States occupied the islands during World War II and administered them as part of the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands after the war. Between 1946 and 1958, the United States conducted 67 nuclear tests at Bikini Atoll and Enewetak Atoll.\nThe U.S. government formed the Congress of Micronesia in 1965, a plan for increased self-governance of Pacific islands. In May 1979, the United States gave the Marshall Islands independence by recognizing its constitution and president, Amata Kabua. Full sovereignty or self-government was achieved in a Compact of Free Association with the United States. The Marshall Islands has been a member of the Pacific Community (PC) since 1983 and a United Nations member state since 1991.\nPolitically, the Marshall Islands is a presidential parliamentary republic in free association with the United States, with the U.S. providing defense, subsidies, and access to U.S.-based agencies such as the Federal Communications Commission and the United States Postal Service. With few natural resources, the islands' wealth is based on a service economy, as well as fishing and agriculture; aid from the United States represents a large percentage of the islands' gross domestic product, and although most financial aid from the Compact of Free Association was set to expire in 2023, it was extended for another 20 years that same year. The country uses the United States dollar as its currency. In 2018, it also announced plans for a new cryptocurrency to be used as legal tender.\nThe majority of the citizens of the Republic of Marshall Islands are of Marshallese descent, though there are small numbers of immigrants from the United States, China, Philippines, and other Pacific islands. The two official languages are Marshallese, which is one of the Oceanic languages, and English. Almost the entire population of the islands practices some religion: three-quarters of the country follows either the United Church of Christ \u2013 Congregational in the Marshall Islands (UCCCMI) or the Assemblies of God.\nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nLinguistic and anthropological studies have suggested that the first Austronesian settlers of the Marshall Islands arrived from the Solomon Islands. Radiocarbon dating suggests that Bikini Atoll may have been inhabited as early as 1200 BCE, though samples may not have been collected from secure stratigraphic contexts and older driftwood samples may have affected results. Archaeological digs on other atolls have found evidence of human habitation dating around the 1st century CE at the village of Laura on Majuro and on Kwajalein Atoll.\nThe Austronesian settlers introduced Southeast Asian crops, including coconuts, giant swamp taro, and breadfruit, as well as domesticated chickens throughout the Marshall Islands. They possibly seeded the islands by leaving coconuts at seasonal fishing camps before permanently settling years later. The southern islands receive heavier rainfall than the north, so communities in the wet south subsisted on prevalent taro and breadfruit, while northerners were more likely to subsist on pandanus and coconuts. Southern atolls probably supported larger, more dense populations.\nThe Marshallese sailed between islands on walaps made from breadfruit-tree wood and coconut-fiber rope. They navigated by using the stars for orientation and initial course setting, but also developed a piloting technique of interpreting disruptions in ocean swells to determine the location of low coral atolls below the horizon. They noticed that swells refracted around the undersea slope of atolls. When refracted swells from different directions met, they created noticeable disruption patterns, which Marshallese pilots could read to determine the direction of an island. When interviewed by anthropologists, some Marshallese sailors noted that they piloted their canoes by both sight and feeling changes in the motion of the boat. Sailors also invented stick charts to map the swell patterns, but unlike western navigational charts, the Marshallese stick charts were tools for teaching students and for consultation before embarking on a voyage; navigators did not take charts with them when they set sail.\nWhen Russian explorer Otto von Kotzebue visited the Marshalls in 1817, the islanders still showed few signs of western influence. He observed that the Marshallese lived in thatched-roof huts, but their villages did not include the large ornate meeting houses found in other parts of Micronesia. They did not have furniture, except for woven mats, which they used for both floor coverings and clothing. The Marshallese had pierced ears and tattoos. He learned that Marshallese families practiced infanticide after the birth of a third child as a form of population planning due to frequent famines. He also noted that Marshallese iroij held considerable authority and rights to all property, though he had a more favorable view of the condition of Marshallese commoners than of that of Polynesian commoners. The Marshalls' two island groups, the Ratak and Ralik chains, were each ruled by a paramount chief, or iroijlaplap, who held authority over the individual island iroij.\nEuropean exploration.\nOn August 21, 1526, Spanish explorer Alonso de Salazar was the first European to sight the Marshall Islands. While commanding the \"Santa Maria de la Victoria\", he sighted an atoll with a green lagoon, which may have been Taongi. The crew could not land, because of strong currents and water too deep for the ship's anchor, so the ship sailed for Guam two days later.\nOn January 2, 1528, the expedition of \u00c1lvaro de Saavedra Cer\u00f3n landed on an uninhabited island, possibly in Ailinginae Atoll, where they resupplied and stayed for six days. Natives from a neighboring island briefly met the Spanish. This expedition named the islands 'Los Pintados' or \"the Painted Ones\" for the natives who wore tattoos. Later Spanish explorers of the Marshalls included Ruy L\u00f3pez de Villalobos, Miguel L\u00f3pez de Legazpi, Alonso de Arellano, and \u00c1lvaro de Menda\u00f1a de Neira, though coordinates and geographic descriptions in 16th century Spanish logs are sometimes imprecise, leaving uncertainty about the specific islands they sighted and visited.\nOn July 6, 1565, the Spanish ship \"San Jeronimo\" nearly wrecked at Ujelang Atoll after the ship's pilot Lope Mart\u00edn led a mutiny. While the mutineers were resupplying at Ujelang, several crew members took back control of the ship and marooned Mart\u00edn and twenty-six other mutineers in the Marshalls. By the late 16th century, Spanish galleons sailing between the Americas and the Philippines kept to a sea lane at 13\u00b0N and provisioned at Guam, avoiding the Marshalls, which Spanish sailors saw as unprofitable islands amid hazardous waters.\nThe British sea captains John Marshall and Thomas Gilbert visited the islands in 1788. Their vessels had been part of the First Fleet taking convicts from England to Botany Bay in New South Wales, and were en route to Guangzhou when they passed through the Gilbert Islands and Marshall Islands. On June 25, 1788, the British ships had peaceful interactions and traded with islanders at Mili Atoll; their meeting may have been the first contact between Europeans and Marshallese since the Menda\u00f1a expedition of 1568. Subsequent navigational charts and maps named the islands for John Marshall.\nFrom the 1820s through the 1850s, the Marshall Islanders became increasingly hostile to western vessels, possibly because of violent punishments that sea captains exacted for theft as well as the abduction of Marshallese people for sale into slavery on Pacific plantations. One of the earliest violent encounters occurred in February 1824, when the inhabitants of Mili Atoll massacred marooned sailors from the American whaler \"Globe\". Similar encounters occurred as late as 1851 and 1852, when three separate Marshallese attacks on ships occurred at Ebon, Jaluit, and Namdrik Atolls.\nColonial period.\nIn 1857, American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions sent two families to establish a mission church and school at Ebon. By 1875, the missionaries had established churches on five atolls and had baptized more than 200 islanders, and one traveler noted that most women on Ebon wore western clothes and many men wore trousers by the mid-1870s.\nIn 1859, Adolph Capelle and another merchant arrived at Ebon and set up a trading post for the German company Hoffschlaeger &amp; Stapenhorst. When the firm went bankrupt in 1863, Capelle partnered with Portuguese ex-whaler Anton Jose DeBrum to establish a copra trading firm: Capelle &amp; Co. In 1873, the company moved its headquarters to Jaluit, the home of Kabua, a powerful iroij and disputed successor for the paramount chieftainship of the southern Ralik Chain. In the 1870s, various other companies from Germany, Hawaii, New Zealand, and the United States engaged in the copra trade in the Marshall Islands. By 1885, the German firms Hernsheim &amp; Co. and Deutsche Handels- und Plantagen-Gesellschaft Der S\u00fcdsee Inseln zu Hamburg controlled two-thirds of the trade.\nContact between the Marshallese and westerners led to sometimes lethal outbreaks of western diseases, including influenza, measles, syphilis, and typhoid fever. Increased access to alcohol led to social problems in some Marshallese communities, and on several atolls conflicts erupted between rival iroij with access to firearms.\nGerman protectorate.\nIn 1875, the British and German governments conducted a series of secret negotiations to divide the Western Pacific into spheres of influence. The German sphere included the Marshall Islands. On November 26, 1878, the German warship SMS \"Ariadne\" anchored at Jaluit to begin treaty negotiations with the chiefs to grant the German Empire \"most favored nation\" status in the Ralik Chain. During the second day of negotiations, Captain Bartholom\u00e4us von Werner ordered his men to give military demonstrations which he later said were intended to \"show the islanders, who have not seen anything like it before, the power of the Europeans.\" On November 29, Werner signed a treaty with Kabua and several other Ralik Chain iroij which secured a German fuelling station at Jaluit and free use of the atoll's harbor.\nOn August 29, 1885, German Chancellor Otto von Bismarck authorized the annexation of the Marshall Islands as a protectorate following repeated petitions by German business interests. The German gunboat docked at Jaluit on October 13 to take control. On October 15, iroij Kabua, Loeak, Nelu, Lagajime, and Launa signed a protection treaty in German and Marshallese at the German consulate. While the Marshallese text made no distinction of rank among the five chiefs, the German text recognized Kabua as the King of the Marshall Islands, despite an ongoing dispute between Kabua and Loeak over the paramount chieftainship. A company of German marines hoisted the flag of the German Empire over Jaluit, and performed similar ceremonies at seven other atolls in the Marshalls, though several pro-American iroij refused to recognize the German protectorate until threatened with German naval force in mid-1886. Nauru was incorporated into the German Protectorate of the Marshall Islands in 1888, following the Anglo-German Declarations of April 1886.\nThe German commercial interests formed the joint-stock Jaluit Company, which was responsible for financing the colony's administration. In addition to controlling two-thirds of the Marshallese copra trade, the company had the authority to collect commercial license fees and an annual poll tax. The company also had the right to be consulted on all new laws and ordinances and nominated all colonial administrative staff. The company's licensing fees and legal advantages pushed out American and British competition, creating a monopoly in the German Pacific colonies. The British government protested the regulations benefiting the Jaluit Company as a violation of the Anglo-German Declarations' free-trade provision. On March 31, 1906, the German government assumed direct control and reorganized the Marshall Islands and Nauru as part of the protectorate of German New Guinea.\nJapanese mandate.\nThe Imperial Japanese Navy invaded Enewetak on September 29, 1914, and Jaluit on September 30 at the beginning of World War I. An occupation force was stationed on Jaluit on October 3. At the Paris Peace Conference in 1919, Germany's Pacific colonies north of the equator became the Japanese South Seas Mandate under the system of League of Nations mandates. Germany ceded the Marshall Islands to Japan with the signing of the Treaty of Versailles on June 28, 1919.\nThe Japanese navy administered the islands from late 1914 through 1921. The civilian set up its headquarters in Palau in April 1922 and administered the Marshalls until World War II. Japanese surveys determined that the Marshalls' value was primarily strategic, because they could enable future southward expansion. The Marshalls also continued to be a major producer of copra during the Japanese period, with the taking over the Jaluit Company's operations and building upon the German colonial infrastructure. Other parts of the South Seas Mandate experienced heavy Japanese settlement, shifting the population to majority Japanese in the Northern Mariana Islands and Palau, but Japanese settlers remained a minority under 1,000 people in the Marshall Islands throughout the Japanese period, because the islands were distant from Japan and had the most limited economic potential in Micronesia.\nOn March 27, 1933, Japan declared its intentions to withdraw from the League of Nations, officially withdrawing in 1935 but continuing to control the territory of the South Seas Mandate. Japanese military planners initially discounted the Marshalls as too distant and indefensible for extensive fortification, but as Japan developed long-range bombers, the islands became useful as a forward base to attack Australia, British colonies, and the United States. In 1939 and 1940, the navy built military airfields on Kwajalein, Maloelap, and Wotje Atolls as well as seaplane facilities at Jaluit.\nAfter the outbreak of the Pacific War, the United States Pacific Fleet carried out the Marshalls\u2013Gilberts raids, which struck Jaluit, Kwajalein, Maloelap, and Wotje on February 1, 1942. They were the first American air raids on Japanese territory. The United States invaded the Marshall Islands on January 31, 1944, during the Gilbert and Marshall Islands campaign. The Americans simultaneously invaded Majuro and Kwajalein. By autumn 1944, the Americans controlled all of the Marshall Islands, except for Jaluit, Maloelap, Mili, and Wotje. As the American campaign advanced through Micronesia and into the Ryukyu Islands, the four Japanese-held atolls were cut off from supplies and subject to American bombardment. The garrisons began running out of provisions in late 1944, leading to high casualties from starvation and disease.\nU.S. Trust Territory.\nIn 1947, the United States entered into an agreement with the UN Security Council to administer much of Micronesia, including the Marshall Islands, as the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands.\nFrom 1946 to 1958, it served as the Pacific Proving Grounds for the United States and was the site of 67 nuclear tests on various atolls.\nOperation Crossroads atomic bomb testing began in 1946 on Bikini Atoll after some of the residents were forcibly evacuated.\nThe world's first hydrogen bomb, codenamed \"Mike\", was tested at the Enewetak atoll in the Marshall Islands on November 1 (local date) in 1952, which produced significant fallout in the region.\nOver the years just one of over 60 islands was cleaned by the U.S. government, and the inhabitants are still waiting for the 2 billion dollars in compensation assessed by the Nuclear Claims Tribunal. Many of the islanders and their descendants still live in exile, as the islands remain contaminated with high levels of radiation.\nA significant radar installation was constructed on Kwajalein atoll.\nIndependence.\nOn May 1, 1979, in recognition of the evolving political status of the Marshall Islands, the United States recognized the constitution of the Marshall Islands and the establishment of the Government of the Republic of the Marshall Islands. The constitution incorporates both American and British constitutional concepts.\nThere have been a number of local and national elections since the Republic of the Marshall Islands was founded. The United Democratic Party, running on a reform platform, won the 1999 general election, taking control of the presidency and cabinet.\nThe islands signed a Compact of Free Association with the United States in 1986. Trusteeship was ended under United Nations Security Council Resolution 683 of December 22, 1990. Until 1999 the islanders received US$180 million for continued American use of Kwajalein atoll, US$250 million in compensation for nuclear testing, and US$600 million in other payments under the compact.\nDespite the constitution, the government was largely controlled by Iroij. It was not until 1999, following political corruption allegations, that the aristocratic government was overthrown, with Imata Kabua replaced by the commoner Kessai Note.\nThe Runit Dome was built on Runit Island to deposit U.S.-produced radioactive soil and debris, including lethal amounts of plutonium. There are ongoing concerns about deterioration of the waste site and a potential radioactive spill.\nIn February 2018, the Marshall Islands became the first country in the world to recognize its cryptocurrency as its own legal tender for digital currency.\nIn January 2020, David Kabua, son of founding president Amata Kabua, was elected as the new President of the Marshall Islands. His predecessor Hilda Heine lost the position after a vote.\nSince the late 1980s, Marshallese have migrated to the US, with over 4,000 in Arkansas and over 7,000 in Hawaii in the 2010 US Census.\nFollowing independence, the Marshall Islands continued to play a prominent role in the testing and launches of missiles and rockets for both military and commercial space purposes. All five of the SpaceX Falcon 1 rocket flights were carried out on Omelek Island within the Kwajalein Atoll. The fourth launch of the Falcon 1 was successful, marking the first time in history a privately developed, fully liquid-fueled launch vehicle achieved orbit.\nIn early 2025, the Marshall Islands established its first marine protected area, covering 48,000 sq kms around the northern atolls of Bikar and Bokak, in its intention to protect two of the country's most pristine marine ecosystems, including the largest turtle nesting site and a significant shark population, by prohibiting extractive activities of fishing. The MPA combines traditional knowledge with modern science to preserve its vital ocean habitats for the future.\nGeography.\nThe Marshall Islands sit atop ancient submerged volcanoes rising from the ocean floor, about halfway between Hawaii and Australia, north of Nauru and Kiribati, east of the Federated States of Micronesia, and south of the disputed U.S. territory of Wake Island, to which it also lays claim. The atolls and islands form two groups: the Ratak (sunrise) and the Ralik (sunset). The two island chains lie approximately parallel to one another, running northwest to southeast, comprising about of ocean but only about of land mass. Each includes 15 to 18 islands and atolls.\nThe country consists of a total of 29 atolls and five individual islands situated in about of the Pacific. The largest atoll with a land area of is Kwajalein. It surrounds a lagoon.\nTwenty-four of the atolls and islands are inhabited. The remaining atolls are uninhabited due to poor living conditions, lack of rain, or nuclear contamination. The uninhabited atolls are:\nThe average altitude above sea level for the entire country is .\nShark sanctuary.\nIn October 2011, the government declared that an area covering nearly of ocean shall be reserved as a shark sanctuary. This is the world's largest shark sanctuary, extending the worldwide ocean area in which sharks are protected from . In protected waters, all shark fishing is banned and all by-catch must be released. However, some have questioned the ability of the Marshall Islands to enforce this zone.\nTerritorial claim on Wake Island.\nThe Marshall Islands also lays claim to Wake Island based on oral legends. While Wake Island has been administered by the United States since 1899, the Marshallese government refers to it by the name \"\u0100nen Kio\" (new orthography) or \"Enen-kio\" (old orthography). The United States does not recognize this claim.\nClimate.\nThe climate has a relatively dry season from December to April and a wet season from May to November. Many Pacific typhoons begin as tropical storms in the Marshall Islands region and grow stronger as they move west toward the Mariana Islands and the Philippines.\nPopulation has outstripped the supply of fresh water, usually from rainfall. The northern atolls get of rainfall annually; the southern atolls about twice that. The threat of drought is commonplace throughout the island chains.\nClimate change.\nClimate change is a threat to the Marshall Islands, with typhoons becoming stronger and sea levels rising. The sea around the Pacific islands has risen a year since 1993, which is more than twice the worldwide average rate. In Kwajalein, there is a high risk of permanent flooding; when sea level rises by , 37% of buildings will be permanently flooded. In Ebeye, the risk from sea level rise is even higher, with 50% of buildings being permanently flooded in the same scenario. With of sea level rise, parts of the Majuro atoll will be permanently flooded and other parts will have a high risk of flooding especially the eastern part of the atoll would be significantly at risk. With sea level rise all the buildings of Majuro will be permanently flooded or will be at a high risk of being flooded.\nThe per capita CO2 emissions were 2.56 t in 2020. The government pledged to be net zero in 2050, with a decrease of 32% in GHGs in 2025, 45% in 2030 and 58% in 2035, all compared to 2010 levels.\nFauna.\nBirds.\nMost birds found in the Marshall Islands, with the exception of those few introduced by humans, are either sea birds or migratory species. There are about 70 species of birds, including 31 seabirds. 15 of these species actually nest locally. Sea birds include the black noddy and the white tern. The only land bird is the house sparrow, introduced by humans.\nMarine.\nThere are about 300 species of fish, 250 of which are reef fish.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHistorical population figures for the Marshall Islands are unknown. In 1862, the population of the Islands was estimated at 10,000. In 1960, the population of the Islands was approximately 15,000. The 2021 census counted 42,418 residents, 23,156 of whom (approximately 54.6%) lived on Majuro. 77.7% of the population lived in an urban setting on Majuro or Ebeye, the country's secondary urban center. This figure excludes Marshall Islands natives who have relocated elsewhere; the Compact of Free Association allows them to freely relocate to the United States and obtain work there. Approximately 4,300 Marshall Islands natives relocated to Springdale, Arkansas, in the United States. This figure represents the largest population concentration of Marshall Islands natives outside their island home.\nMost residents of the Marshall Islands are Marshallese. Marshallese people are of Micronesian origin and are believed to have migrated from Asia to the Marshall Islands several thousand years ago. A minority of the Marshallese have Asian and European ancestry such as Japanese and German. A Majority have Polynesian and Melanesian ancestry. About one-half of the nation's population lives in Majuro and Ebeye Atolls.\nThe official languages of the Marshall Islands are English and Marshallese. Both languages are widely spoken.\nReligion.\nAt the September 2021 census, approximately 96.2% of the population identified with one of fourteen Christian denominations in the Marshall Islands. The denominations with more than 1,000 adherents included the United Church of Christ - Congregational in the Marshall Islands (47.9%), the Assemblies of God (14.1%), the Catholic Church (9.3%), the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (5.7%), the Full Gospel Church of the Marshall Islands (5%), and Bukot nan Jesus (3%).\nThe remainder of denominations primarily included Protestant churches as well as Jehovah's Witnesses. 1,128 people, or 2.7% of respondents identified as belonging to a religion other than one of the fourteen denominations listed on the census form. 444 people, or 1.1% of respondents claimed to be irreligious. Majuro also has a Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed community and a Muslim community. The country's sole mosque is aligned with the Ahmadiyya movement.\nFather A. Erdland, a Catholic priest of the Missionaries of the Sacred Heart of Hiltrup (German Empire, called in German \"Herz-Jesu-Missionare\" and in Latin \"Missionarii Sacratissimi Cordis\"), lived in Jaluit between 1904 and 1914. After doing considerable research on Marshallese culture and language, he published a 376-page monograph on the islands in 1914. Father H. Linckens, another Sacred Heart missionary, visited the Marshall Islands in 1904 and 1911 for several weeks. In 1912, he published a small work on Catholic missionary activities and the people of the Marshall Islands. The Catholics are under the responsibility of the Apostolic Prefecture of the Marshall Islands (\"Praefectura Apostolica Insularum Marshallensium\"), with headquarters at the Cathedral of the Assumption in Majuro, which was created by Pope John Paul II in 1993 through the papal bull \"Quo expeditius\".\nHealth.\nThe Castle Bravo test of the first deployable thermonuclear bomb had an unforeseen additional nuclear reactions involving lithium-7 that resulted in the explosion being over twice as large as predicted. Resulting in a much larger nuclear fallout than expected. The nuclear fallout spread eastward onto the inhabited Rongelap and Rongerik Atolls. These islands were not evacuated before the explosion. Many of the Marshall Islands natives have since suffered from radiation burns and radioactive dusting, suffering similar fates as the Japanese fishermen aboard the \"Daigo Fukury\u016b Maru\", but have received little, if any, compensation from the federal government.\nIn 2010, it was noted the Marshallese were having a problem finding land to bury their dead due to limited land. One solution they developed was to make a double grave by burying another on the same plot.\nGovernment.\nThe government of the Marshall Islands operates under a mixed parliamentary-presidential system as set forth in its 1979 Constitution. Elections are held every four years in universal suffrage (for all citizens above 18), with each of the twenty-four constituencies electing one or more representatives (senators) to the lower house of RMI's unicameral legislature, the Nitijela. (Majuro, the capital atoll, elects five senators.) The President, who is head of state as well as head of government, is elected by the 33 senators of the Nitijela. Four of the five Marshallese presidents who have been elected since the Constitution was adopted in 1979 have been traditional paramount chiefs.\nIn January 2016, senator Hilda Heine was elected by Parliament as the first female president of the Marshall Islands; previous president Casten Nemra lost office in a vote of no confidence after serving two weeks.\nLegislative power lies with the Nitijela. The Council of Iroij is an advisory body comprising twelve paramount chiefs. The executive branch consists of the President and the Presidential Cabinet, which consists of ten ministers appointed by the President with the approval of the Nitijela. The twenty-four electoral districts into which the country is divided correspond to the inhabited islands and atolls. There are currently four political parties in the Marshall Islands: Aelon\u0304 Kein Ad (AKA), United People's Party (UPP), Kien Eo Am (KEA), and United Democratic Party (UDP). The AKA and the UDP share rulership. The following senators are in the legislative body:\nForeign affairs and defense.\nThe Compact of Free Association with the United States gives the U.S. sole responsibility for international defense of the Marshall Islands. It gives the islanders (the Marshallese) the right to emigrate to the United States without any visa. However, as aliens, they can be placed in removal proceedings if convicted of certain criminal offenses.\nThe Marshall Islands was admitted to the United Nations based on the Security Council's recommendation on August 9, 1991, in Resolution 704 and the General Assembly's approval on September 17, 1991, in Resolution 46/3. In international politics within the United Nations, the Marshall Islands has often voted consistently with the United States with respect to General Assembly resolutions.\nOn April 28, 2015, the Iranian navy seized the Marshall Island-flagged MV \"Maersk Tigris\" near the Strait of Hormuz. The ship had been chartered by Germany's Rickmers Ship Management, which stated that the ship contained no special cargo and no military weapons. The ship was reported to be under the control of the Iranian Revolutionary Guard according to the Pentagon. Tensions escalated in the region due to the intensifying of Saudi-led coalition attacks in Yemen. The Pentagon reported that the destroyer USS \"Farragut\" and a maritime reconnaissance aircraft were dispatched upon receiving a distress call from the ship \"Tigris\" and it was also reported that all 34 crew members were detained. US defense officials have said that they would review U.S. defense obligations to the Government of the Marshall Islands in the wake of recent events and also condemned the shots fired at the bridge as \"inappropriate\". It was reported in May 2015 that Tehran would release the ship after it paid a penalty.\nIn March 2017, at the 34th regular session of the UN Human Rights Council, Vanuatu made a joint statement on behalf of the Marshall Islands and some other Pacific nations raising human rights violations in the Western New Guinea, which has been occupied by Indonesia since 1963, and requested that the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights produce a report. Indonesia rejected allegations.\nSince 1991 the Republic of Marshall Islands Sea Patrol, a division of Marshall Islands Police, has operated the 160-ton patrol vessel RMIS \"Lomor\". \"Lomor\" is one of 22 Pacific Forum patrol vessels Australia provided to smaller nations in the Pacific Forum. While some other nations' missions for their vessels include sovereignty and protection, the terms of the Compact of Free Association restrict \"Lomor\" to civilian missions, like fishery protection and search and rescue.\nIn 2021, the governments of Australia and Japan decided to fund two major law enforcement developments in the Marshall Islands.\nIn February 2021, the Marshall Islands announced it would be formally withdrawing from the Pacific Islands Forum in a joint statement with Kiribati, Nauru, and the Federated States of Micronesia after a dispute regarding Henry Puna's election as the forum's secretary-general.\nSports.\nMajor sports played in the Marshall Islands include volleyball, basketball (primarily by men), baseball, soccer and a number of water sports. The Marshall Islands has been represented at the Olympics at all games since the 2008 Beijing Olympics. In the 2020 Tokyo Olympics, the Marshall Islands were represented by two swimmers.\nSoccer.\nThe Marshall Islands have a small club soccer league, including Kobeer as the most successful club. One tournament was held by \"Play Soccer Make Peace\". The island of Majuro has a small football association. The Marshall Islands was the only country in the world that did not have its own national team. In 2020, the Marshall Islands Soccer Federation was founded by Shem Livai. On 14 August 2025, The Marshall Islands played their first international game against the US Virgin Islands losing 4-0 in Springdale, Arkansas during the 2025 Outrigger Challenge Cup .\nBaseball and softball.\nSoftball and baseball are held under one sports federation in the Marshall Islands. The President is Jeimata Nokko Kabua. Both sports are growing at a fast pace, with hundreds of Marshallese people behind the Marshall Islands Baseball / Softball Federation. The Marshall Islands achieved a silver medal in the Micronesian Games in 2012, as well as medals in the SPG Games.\nEconomy.\nThe islands have few natural resources, and their imports far exceed exports. According to the CIA, the value of exports in 2013 was approximately $53.7 million while estimated imports were $133.7 million. Agricultural products include coconuts, tomatoes, melons, taro, breadfruit, fruits, pigs and chickens. Industry is made of the production of copra and craft items, tuna processing and tourism. The GDP in 2016 was an estimated $180 million, with a real growth rate of 1.7%. The GDP per capita was $3,300.\nThe International Monetary Fund reported in mid-2016 that the economy of the Republic had expanded by about 0.5 percent in the Fiscal Year 2015 thanks to an improved fisheries sector. A surplus of 3% of GDP was recorded \"owing to record-high fishing license fees. Growth is expected to rise to about 1.5 percent and inflation to about 0.5 percent in FY2016, as the effects of the drought in earlier 2016 are offset by the resumption of infrastructure projects.\"\nIn 2018, the Republic of Marshall Islands passed the Sovereign Currency Act, which was later repealed in August 2025. . This was intended to launch a sovereign cryptocurrency and certify it as legal tender.\nMarshall Islands has signed a bilateral trade agreement with Taiwan in 2019, this agreement has been approved in 2023 and will take effect at a future date.\nIn November 2025, the Ministry of Finance announced ENRA, a universal basic income program, for disbursements of funds to citizens. Eligible citizens have the option of receiving their disbursement through direct deposits, mailed checks and, through a dedicated citizen digital wallet designed specifically for the Marshallese, called Lomalo (which translates to \u201cshared\nwaters\u201d in English). Through Lomalo, qualified recipients can verify their eligibility status, receive benefits in real time,\nand manage their accounts. The Lomalo digital wallet will help overcome long-standing distribution barriers in the Neighboring Islands, where limited banking infrastructure has historically delayed government transfers.\nA digital disbursement channel is made possible by integration with USDM1, the RMI\u2019s Digital Sovereign Bond - a U.S. dollar-denominated sovereign security fully collateralized by short-dated US Treasuries and redeemable at par in U.S. dollars. Because USDM1 is issued and recorded digitally, it enables secure, low-cost electronic distribution of benefits across the Marshall Islands, while all settlements remain in U.S. dollars through existing financial channels. USDM1 is a sovereign obligation of the Republic of the Marshall Islands, supported by the U.S. Treasuries held as collateral by a Qualified Custodian in the United States under New York law. The Treasuries are purchased with proceeds from the issuance of each unit and maintained in a\nbankruptcy-remote reserve account. This structure mirrors the design of Brady Bonds, through which more than $150 billion of sovereign debt has been issued globally over the past three decades. USDM1 is recorded in digital, book-entry form on the blockchain, enabling transparent, real-time settlement and verification while preserving the legal and prudential safeguards of\ntraditional sovereign securities.\nShipping.\nThe Marshall Islands plays a vital role in the international shipping industry as a flag of convenience for commercial vessels. The Marshallese registry began operations in 1990, and is managed through a joint venture with International Registries, Inc., a US-based corporation that has offices in major shipping centers worldwide. As of 2017, the Marshallese ship registry was the second largest in the world, after that of Panama.\nUnlike some flag countries, there is no requirement that a Marshallese flag vessel be owned by a Marshallese individual or corporation. Following the 2015 seizure of the \"MV Maersk Tigris\", the United States announced that its treaty obligation to defend the Marshall Islands did not extend to foreign-owned Marshallese flag vessels at sea.\nAs a result of ship-to-ship transfers by Marshallese flag tanker vessels, the Marshall Islands have statistically been one of the largest importers of crude oil from the United States, despite the fact that the islands have no oil refining capacity.\nLabour.\nIn 2007, the Marshall Islands joined the International Labour Organization, which means its labor laws will comply with international benchmarks. This may affect business conditions in the islands.\nTaxation.\nThe income tax has two brackets, with rates of 8% and 12%. The corporate tax is 3% of revenue.\nForeign assistance.\nUnited States government assistance is the mainstay of the economy. Under terms of the Amended Compact of Free Association, the U.S. is committed to providing US$57.7 million per year in assistance to the Marshall Islands (RMI) through 2013 and then US$62.7 million through 2023, at which time a trust fund, made up of U.S. and RMI contributions, will begin perpetual annual payouts.\nThe United States Army maintains the Ronald Reagan Ballistic Missile Defense Test Site on Kwajalein Atoll. Marshallese landowners receive rent for the base.\nAgriculture.\nAgricultural production is concentrated on small farms. The most important commercial crop is copra, followed by coconut, breadfruit, pandanus, banana, taro and arrowroot. The livestock consists primarily of pigs and chickens.\nIndustry.\nSmall-scale industry is limited to handicrafts, fish processing, and copra.\nFishing.\nMajuro is the world's busiest tuna transshipment port, with 704 transshipments totaling 444,393 tons in 2015. Majuro is also a tuna processing center; the Pan Pacific Foods plant exports processed tuna to a number of countries, primarily the United States under the Bumble Bee brand. Fishing license fees, primarily for tuna, provide noteworthy income for the government.\nIn 1999, a private company built a tuna loining plant with more than 400 employees, mostly women. But the plant closed in 2005 after a failed attempt to convert it to produce tuna steaks, a process that requires half as many employees. Operating costs exceeded revenue and the plant closed. It was taken over by the government, which had been the guarantor of a $2 million loan to the business.\nEnergy.\nCoconut trees abound in the Pacific's tropical islands. Copra, the meat of the coconut, yields 1 liter of coconut oil for every 6 to 10 coconuts. As of 2007 power authorities, private companies, and entrepreneurs on the islands had been experimenting with coconut oil as alternative to diesel fuel for vehicles, power generators, and ships. In 2009, a 57\u00a0kW solar power plant was installed, the largest in the Pacific at the time, including New Zealand. It is estimated that 330\u00a0kW of solar and 450\u00a0kW of wind power would be required to make the College of the Marshall Islands energy self-sufficient. Marshalls Energy Company (MEC), a government entity, provides the islands with electricity. In 2008, two 100-Wp solar home systems were installed on 420 homes on Ailinglaplap Atoll, sufficient for limited electricity use.\nEducation.\nThe Human Rights Measurement Initiative (HRMI) finds that the Marshall Islands are fulfilling only 66.1% of what it should be fulfilling for the right to education based on the country's level of income. HRMI breaks down the right to education by looking at the rights to both primary education and secondary education. While taking into consideration the Marshall Islands' income level, the nation is achieving 65.5% of what should be possible based on its resources (income) for primary education and 66.6% for secondary education.\nThe Ministry of Education is the education agency of the islands. Marshall Islands Public School System operates the state schools in the Marshall Islands.\nIn the 1994\u20131995 school year the country had 103 elementary schools and 13 secondary schools. There were 27 private elementary schools and one private high school. Christian groups operated most of the private schools.\nHistorically the Marshallese population was taught in English first with Marshallese instruction coming later, but this was reversed in the 1990s to keep the islands' cultural heritage and so children could write in Marshallese. Now English language instruction begins in grade 3. Christine McMurray and Roy Smith wrote in \"Diseases of Globalization: Socioeconomic Transition and Health\" that this could potentially weaken the children's English skills.\nThere are two tertiary institutions operating in the Marshall Islands, the College of the Marshall Islands and the University of the South Pacific.\nTransportation.\nThe Marshall Islands are served by the Marshall Islands International Airport in Majuro, the Bucholz Army Airfield in Kwajalein, and other small airports and airstrips. Airlines serving the country include United Airlines, Nauru Airlines, Air Marshall Islands, and Asia Pacific Airlines.\nMedia and communications.\nThe Marshall Islands have several AM and FM radio stations. AM stations are 1098 5\u00a0kW V7AB Majuro (Radio Marshalls, national coverage) and 1224 AFN Kwajalein (both public radio) as well as 1557 Micronesia Heatwave. The FM stations are 97.9 V7AD Majuro, V7AA 96.3 FM Uliga and 104.1 V7AA Majuro (Baptist religious). BBC World is broadcast on 98.5 FM Majuro. The most recent station is Power 103.5 which started broadcasting in 2016.\nAFRTS stations include 99.9 AFN Kwajalein (country), 101.1 AFN (adult rock) and 102.1 AFN (hot AC).\nThere is one broadcast television station, MBC-TV operated by the state. Cable TV is available. On cable TV, most programs are shown two weeks later than in North America but news in real time can be viewed on CNN, CNBC and BBC. American Forces Radio and Television also provides TV service to Kwajalein Atoll.\nThe Marshall Islands National Telecommunications Authority (NTA) provides telephone, cable TV (MHTV), FAX, cellular and Internet services. The Authority is a private corporation with significant ownership by the national government.\nNewspapers.\n\"Loan Ran Kein\", a Marshallese language paper, was published from 1953 to 1954. The current national newspaper is a bilingual (Marshallese and English) weekly, \"The Marshall Islands Journal\". It has been published since 1980.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nOther.\nLat. Long. (Majuro)"}
{"id": "19149", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19149", "title": "Geography of the Marshall Islands", "text": " \nThe Marshall Islands consist of two archipelagic island chains of 30 atolls and 1,152 islands, which form two parallel groups\u2014the \"Ratak\" (sunrise) chain and the \"Ralik\" (sunset) chain. The Marshalls are located in the North Pacific Ocean and share maritime boundaries with Micronesia and Kiribati. Two-thirds of the nation's population lives in the capital of Majuro and the settlement of Ebeye. The outer islands are sparsely populated due to lack of employment opportunities and economic development.\nStatistics.\nThe country is located about one-half of the way from Hawaii to Papua New Guinea. The archipelago includes the atolls of Bikini, Enewetak, Kwajalein, Majuro, Rongelap, and Utirik.\nThe total area of the islands is equal to the size of the City of Washington, DC. The largest atoll with a land area of is Kwajalein. The terrain consists of low coral limestone and sand islands. Natural resources include coconut products, marine products, and deep seabed minerals. Current environmental issues are inadequate supplies of potable water; pollution of Majuro lagoon from household waste and discharges from fishing vessels.\nMaritime claims:\n&lt;br&gt;\"territorial sea:\"\n12\u00a0nautical miles\n&lt;br&gt;\"contiguous zone:\"\n24\u00a0nm\n&lt;br&gt;\"exclusive economic zone:\"\n200\u00a0nm\nElevation extremes:\n&lt;br&gt;\"lowest point:\"\nPacific Ocean 0 meters\n&lt;br&gt;\"highest point:\"\nunnamed location on Likiep Atoll above sea level\nLand use:\n&lt;br&gt;\"arable land:\"\n11.11%\n&lt;br&gt;\"permanent crops:\"\n44.44%\n&lt;br&gt;\"other:\"\n44.44% (2011)\nEnvironment - international agreements:\n&lt;br&gt;\"party to:\"\nBiodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands, Whaling\nBikini and Enewetak are former US nuclear test sites; Kwajalein, the famous World War II battleground, is now used as a US missile test range; the island city of Ebeye is the second largest settlement in the Marshall Islands, after the capital of Majuro, and one of the most densely populated locations in the Pacific.\nClimate.\nTropical; hot and humid with a Koeppen-Geiger classification of \"Af\". The wet season lasts from May to November and the islands border the typhoon belt. Typhoons do pose an infrequent threat from July to mid November.\nDue to their low elevation, the Marshall Islands are threatened by the potential effects of sea level rise. According to the President of Nauru, the Marshall Islands are the most endangered nation on Earth due to flooding from climate change.\nA study by the University of Plymouth found that the tides move sediment to create higher elevation, which may keep the islands habitable.\nClimate change.\nClimate change is a serious threat to the Marshall Islands, with typhoons becoming stronger and sea levels rising. The sea around Pacific islands has risen 7mm a year since 1993, which is more than twice the rate of the worldwide average. In Kwajalein, there is a high risk of permanent flooding; when sea level rise to 1 meter, 37% of buildings will be permanently flooded in that scenario. In Ebeye, the risk of sea level rise is even higher, with 50% of buildings being permanently flooded in the same scenario. With 1 meter sea level rise parts of the Majuro atoll will be permanently flooded and other parts are having a high risk of flooding especially the eastern part of the atoll would be significantly at risk. With 2 meter sea level rise all the buildings of Majuro will be permanently flooded or would be at a high risk to be flooded.\nThe per capita CO2 emissions were 2.56t in 2020. The government of Marshall Islands pledged to be net zero in 2050, with a decrease of 32% decrease of GHGs in 2025, 45% decrease in 2030 and a 58% decrease in 2035 all compared to 2010 levels.\nExtreme points.\nThis is a list of the extreme points of the Marshall Islands, the points that are farther north, south, east or west than any other location.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19150", "revid": "5183450", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19150", "title": "Demographics of the Marshall Islands", "text": " \nThe demographics of the Marshall Islands include data such as population density, ethnicity, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.\nHistorical population figures for the Marshall Islands are unknown. In 1862, the population of the islands was estimated at 10,000. In 1960, the population of the Islands was approximately 15,000. The 2021 census counted 42,418 residents, 23,156 of whom (approximately 54.6%) lived on Majuro. 77.7% of the population lived in an urban setting on Majuro or Ebeye, the country's secondary urban center. The Marshallese census figures exclude Marshall Islanders who have relocated elsewhere; the Compact of Free Association allows them to freely relocate to the United States and obtain work there. Approximately 4,300 Marshall Islands natives relocated to Springdale, Arkansas in the United States; this figure represents the largest population concentration of Marshall Islands natives outside their island home.\nMost residents of the Marshall Islands are Marshallese. Marshallese people are of Micronesian origin and are believed to have migrated from Asia to the Marshall Islands several thousand years ago. A minority of the Marshallese have Asian and European ancestry such as Japanese and German. A majority have Polynesian and Melanesian ancestry. About one-half of the nation's population lives in Majuro and Ebeye Atolls.\nThe official languages of the Marshall Islands are English and Marshallese. Both languages are widely spoken.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSource:\nStructure of the population.\nPopulation by Sex and Age Group (Census 03.IV.2011):\nReligion.\nMajor religious groups in the Republic of the Marshall Islands include the United Church of Christ \u2013 Congregational in the Marshall Islands, with 51.5% of the population; the Assemblies of God, 24.2%; the Roman Catholic Church, 8.4%; and The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Mormons), 8.3%. Also represented are Bukot Nan Jesus (also known as Assembly of God Part Two), 2.2%; Baptist, 1.0%; Seventh-day Adventists, 0.9%; Full Gospel, 0.7%; and the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith, 0.6%. Persons without any religious affiliation account for a very small percentage of the population. Islam is also present through Ahmadiyya Muslim Community which is based in Majuro, with the first mosque opening in the capital in September 2012.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19151", "revid": "13054498", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19151", "title": "Politics of the Marshall Islands", "text": ""}
{"id": "19153", "revid": "1312014129", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19153", "title": "Communications in the Marshall Islands", "text": " \nThe Marshall Islands is an island country in Oceania.\nIn 2010, the Majuro and Kwajalein Atoll were connected to the HANTRU-1 undersea communications cable to provide high-speed bandwidth. Faster internet service was rolled out to Majuro and Ebeye on April 1, 2010.\nThe majority of communication is under the responsibility of \"Marshall Islands National Telecommunications Authority\".\nPublications.\nNewspapers: \nTelephone.\nTelephones:\nTelex services:\nRadio.\nRadio broadcast stations: AM 3, FM 4, shortwave 0 (1998)\nStations included are:\nTelevision.\nBroadcast stations:\nSeveral are available on cable (converted from ATSC to DVB-T): KHET (PBS), KHON-TV (Fox), KITV-TV (ABC), KHNL-TV (NBC) and KGMB-TV (CBS).\nTelevisions:\nNA\nInternet.\nInternet Service Providers: 1\nTop level domain: The TLD of the Marshall Islands is .mh. However, it's registrar has been essentially defunct, with their website not resolving.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19154", "revid": "1214541758", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19154", "title": "Transportation in the Marshall Islands", "text": "Railways:\n0\u00a0km\nHighways:\n&lt;br&gt;\"total:\"\nNA km\n&lt;br&gt;\"paved:\"\n64.5\u00a0km\n&lt;br&gt;\"unpaved:\"\nNA km\n&lt;br&gt;\"note:\"\npaved roads on major islands (Majuro, Kwajalein), otherwise stone-, coral-, or laterite-surfaced roads and tracks (2002)\nPorts and harbors:\nMajuro\nMerchant marine:\n&lt;br&gt;\"total:\"\n342 ships (1,000 GT or over) totaling 14,471,690 GT/\u00a0tonnes deadweight (DWT)\n&lt;br&gt;\"ships by type:\"\nbulk 86, cargo 18, chemical tanker 31, combination bulk 4, combination ore/oil 7, container 69, liquified gas 8, multi-functional large load carrier 1, passenger 6, petroleum tanker 106, roll on/roll off 1, short-sea passenger 1, vehicle carrier 1 (2002 est.)\n&lt;br&gt;\"note:\"\na flag of convenience registry; includes the ships of People's Republic of China 1, Cyprus 1, Denmark 9, Germany 70, Greece 54, Hong Kong 2, Japan 4, Monaco 8, Netherlands 8, United Kingdom 3, United States 87, and Uruguay 1 (2002 est.)\nAirports:\n35 (2009), see list of airports in the Marshall Islands\nAirports - with paved runways:\n&lt;br&gt;\"total:\"\n5\n&lt;br&gt;\"1,524 to 2,437 m:\"\n4 (Eniwetok, IATA airport code ENT; Kwajalein, KWA; and Marshall Islands International, MAJ; Rongelap, RNP).\n&lt;br&gt;\"914 to 1,523 m:\"\n1 (2009)\nAirports and airstrips - with unpaved runways:\n&lt;br&gt;\"total:\"\n30\n&lt;br&gt;\"914 to 1,523 m:\"\n29\n&lt;br&gt;\"under 914 m:\"\n1 (2009)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19155", "revid": "1938651", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19155", "title": "Military of the Marshall Islands", "text": ""}
{"id": "19156", "revid": "36907843", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19156", "title": "Foreign relations of the Marshall Islands", "text": "The Republic of the Marshall Islands has established bilateral diplomatic relations with 112 countries. Regional cooperation, through membership in various regional and international organizations, is a key element in its foreign policy.\nThe Marshall Islands became a member of the United Nations on September 17, 1991. The Marshall Islands maintains embassies in the United States, Fiji, South Korea, Japan, and the Republic of China (Taiwan). They also maintain a consulate in Honolulu, Hawaii and in Springdale, Arkansas, United States.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which the Marshall Islands maintains diplomatic relations with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19157", "revid": "1268596922", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19157", "title": "Mass deacidification", "text": "Measure against the degradation of books made of acidic paper\nMass deacidification is a term used in library and information science as one possible measure against the degradation of paper in old books, the so-called \"slow fires\". The goal of the process is to increase the pH of acidic paper. Although acid-free paper has become more common, a large body of acidic paper still exists in books made after the 1850s; this is because of its cheaper and simpler production methods. Acidic paper, especially when exposed to light, air pollution, or high relative humidity, yellows and becomes brittle over time. During mass deacidification an alkaline agent is deposited in the paper to neutralize existing acid and prevent further decay. Mass deacidification is intended for objects on acidic paper that will be lost if no action is performed.\nHistory of research and process development.\nMass deacidification\u2014along with microfilm and lamination\u2014was developed during the early and mid-20th century as a response to the chemical process of hydrolysis by which the fibers that constitute paper, providing its structure and strength, have their bonds broken, resulting in paper that becomes increasingly brittle over time. Environmental pollutants can react with paper to form acids that promote oxidation, creating more acid as a by-product, which results in a positive feedback loop of autocatalytic destruction. Supported in part by grants from the Council on Library Resources, William J. Barrow conducted research into paper decay and found that no more than three percent of books published between 1900 and 1949 would survive more than fifty years. In response to this, a Standing Committee on the Preservation of Research Library Materials was formed by the Association of Research Libraries (ARL) in 1960.\nBarrow also invented an aqueous process to neutralize acid in paper while depositing an alkaline buffer that would slow the rate of decay. In addition to Barrow's original method, both non-aqueous\u2014employing organic solvents\u2014and vaporous\u2014the Library of Congress' DEZ (diethyl zinc) treatment\u2014methods of achieving the same results have been researched in an attempt to reduce time, labor, and cost requirements.\nOne technique proposed is to place books in an evacuated chamber, then introduce diethylzinc (DEZ). In theory, the diethylzinc would react with acidic residues in the paper, leaving an alkaline residue that would protect the paper against further degradation. In practice, the heating required to remove trace water from the books before reaction (DEZ reacts violently with water) caused an accelerated degradation of the paper, a series of chemical reactions between DEZ and other components of the book (glues, bindings), caused further damage, and produced unpleasant aromas. In the 1980s, a pilot plant for mass deacidification, using this process, was constructed by NASA and was tested on books provided by the Library of Congress. In 1986 it was discovered that the DEZ had not been removed in one of the deacidification runs and pooled in the bottom of the chamber, possibly remaining within the plumbing. DEZ is violently flammable when it comes in contact with either oxygen or water vapor, so the vacuum chamber could not be opened to remove the books within. Eventually, explosives were used to rupture the suspect plumbing; suspicions of the presence of residual DEZ were confirmed by the subsequent fire that destroyed the plant. In his book \"Double Fold\", Nicholson Baker discusses the failure of the NASA program at great length.\nThe chemical company AkzoNobel made later attempts at refining the process. The risks of fire and explosions were reduced by a better process design, however, damage and odors remained a problem. In the end, AkzoNobel determined the process was not a viable commercial proposition and shut down their research at the end of 1994.\nGoals.\nThese are the results that the Library of Congress expected of an ideal mass deacidification treatment in 1994:\nFaculty members of the Slovak University of Technology added these further requirements:\nEffects.\nAll of the processes imparted an adequately high pH in studies conducted by the European Commission on Preservation and Access, the Library of Congress, and a team of scientists from the Centre de Recherches sur la Conservation des Documents Graphiques in the early and mid-nineties. BookKeeper produced a pH of 9\u201310. CSC Book Saver yielded a pH of 8.78\u201310.5. Wei T'o gives 7.5 to 10.4, and Papersave gives a pH of 7.5\u20139.\nThe same studies also found that the processes had adverse cosmetic side effects. BookKeeper left \"a palpable residue\", clamp marks on the covers, and caused some of the colored inks to rub off. CSC Book Saver left a \"white powdery deposit\" on books. Papersave caused \"discoloration, white deposit, Newton's rings, bleeding of inks and dyes, odor and different 'feel' of the paper.\" Wei T'o caused \"odor, white residues, rings, cockling, (yellow) discolorations and adhesive bleeding.\"\nConservators from the British Library acknowledge that the existing mass deacidification processes are still being developed and further research needs to be conducted on their chemical and mechanical effects.\nServices.\nSeveral commercial deacidification techniques are on the market as of 2008[ [update]]:\nBookKeeper, CSC Booksaver, Papersave, and Wei T'o are also available as hand-held sprays.\nAdoption and costs.\nWhile deacidification has been adopted by major research libraries such as the Library of Congress and the New York Public Library, it is not clear whether many archives, particularly those in the United States, have followed suit. Some European national archives have tested deacidification techniques. The United States' National Archives and Records Administration (NARA), which pioneered an aqueous technique that improved upon Barrow's, chose to invest its preservation dollars elsewhere. In 2000, the Chief of the NARA Document Conservation Laboratory defended the lack of a mass deacidification program by pointing to differences between library and archival collections. For example, noting that many of the papers coming to NARA were of a higher quality than those in library collections; that the Archives does not receive records from federal government agencies until they are at least 30 years old, by which time acidic paper will have already been irrevocably weakened, and that limited resources might best be applied elsewhere, such as climate control. Under the Archives' Twenty-Year Preservation Plan, emphasis was placed on achieving the \"maximum benefit for the greatest number of records.\"\nThough now dated, several sources estimate the costs and suitability of deacidification treatment. Studies conducted by the Harry Ransom Humanities Research Center and the General State Archive of the Netherlands found the DEZ method might be particularly applicable to archival materials. It was estimated that deacidification costs, excluding transportation and handling, during the early 1990s was $5\u201310 per volume. During 1995\u20131997, the Library of Congress received $2 million in appropriations to deacidify 72,000 books using the Bookkeeper commercial method and evaluate alternative methods. The actual cost per book was $11.70. Finally, a 2003 cost comparison with reformatting options per volume yielded $125 for microfilming, $50 for scanning and minimal indexing and, based on a New York Public Library project, $16.20 for deacidification. However, already in 2004 Google Books was able to scan for only $10-$20 per book.\nAs of 2022, there were five mass deacidification plants in the world.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19159", "revid": "13541347", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19159", "title": "Mile", "text": "Unit of length\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nThe mile, sometimes the international mile or statute mile to distinguish it from other miles, is a British imperial unit and United States customary unit of length; both are based on the older English unit of length equal to 5,280 English feet, or 1,760 yards. The statute mile was standardised as a unit of length between the Commonwealth of Nations and the United States by an international agreement in 1959, when the yard was formally redefined with respect to SI units as 0.9144metres, making the mile exactly 1609.344 metres (1.609344 kilometres). For everyday use, five miles equates roughly to eight kilometres.\nWith qualifiers, \"mile\" is also used to describe or translate a wide range of units derived from or roughly equivalent to the Roman mile (roughly 1.48 km), such as the nautical mile (now 1.852 km exactly), the Italian mile (roughly 1.852 km), and the Chinese mile (now 500 m exactly). The Romans divided their mile into 5,000 (lit.\u2009'feet'), but the greater importance of furlongs in the Elizabethan-era England meant that the statute mile was made equivalent to 8 furlongs or 5,280 feet in 1593. This form of the mile then spread across the British Empire, some successor states of which continue to employ the mile. The US Geological Survey now employs the metre for official purposes, but legacy data from its 1927 geodetic datum has meant that a separate US survey mile ( km) continues to see some use, although it was officially phased out in 2022. While most countries replaced the mile with the kilometre when switching to the International System of Units (SI), the international mile continues to be used in some countries, such as the United Kingdom, the United States, and a number of countries with fewer than one million inhabitants, most of which are UK or US territories or have close historical ties with the UK or US.\nName.\nThe modern English word \"mile\" derives from Middle English and Old English , which was cognate with all other Germanic terms for \"miles\". These derived from the nominal ellipsis form of 'mile' or \" 'miles', the Roman mile of one thousand paces.\nThe present international mile is usually what is understood by the unqualified term \"mile\". When this distance needs to be distinguished from the nautical mile, the international mile may also be described as a land mile or statute mile. In British English, \"statute mile\" may refer to the present international mile or to any other form of English mile since the 1593 Act of Parliament, which set it as a distance of 1,760 yards. Under American law, however, \"statute mile\" refers to the US survey mile. Foreign and historical units translated into English as \"miles\" usually employ a qualifier to describe the kind of mile being used but this may be omitted if it is obvious from the context, such as a discussion of the 2nd-century Antonine Itinerary describing its distances in terms of \"miles\" rather than \"Roman miles\".\nAbbreviation.\nThe mile has been variously abbreviated in English\u2014with and without a trailing period\u2014as \"mi\", \"M\", \"ml\", and \"m\". The American National Institute of Standards and Technology now uses and recommends \"mi\" to avoid confusion with the SI metre (m) and millilitre (ml). However, derived units such as miles per hour or miles per gallon continue to be abbreviated as an initialism as in \"mph\" and \"mpg\", rather than \"mi/h\" and \"mi/gal\". In the United Kingdom, road signs use \"m\" as the abbreviation for mile though height and width restrictions also use \"m\" as the symbol for the metre, which may be displayed alongside feet and inches. The BBC style holds that \"there is no acceptable abbreviation for 'miles'\" and so it should be spelled out when used in describing areas.\nHistorical.\nRoman.\nThe Roman mile (, \u00a0\"thousand paces\"; \u00a0m.p.; also and ) consisted of a thousand paces as measured by every other step\u2014as in the total distance of the left foot hitting the ground 1,000 times. The distance was indirectly standardised by Agrippa's establishment of a standard Roman foot (Agrippa's own) in 29\u00a0BC, and the definition of a pace as 5\u00a0(Roman) feet. An Imperial Roman mile thus denoted 5,000\u00a0Roman feet. Surveyors and specialised equipment such as the decempeda and dioptra then spread its use.\nIn modern times, Agrippa's Imperial Roman mile was empirically estimated to have been about in length, slightly less than the of the modern international mile.\nIn Hellenic areas of the Empire, the Roman mile (, ) was used beside the native Greek units as equivalent to 8 stadia of 600 Greek feet. The continued to be used as a Byzantine unit and was also used as the name of the zero mile marker for the Byzantine Empire, the Milion, located at the head of the Mese near Hagia Sophia.\nThe Roman mile spread throughout Europe, with its local variations giving rise to the different units. Also arising from the Roman mile is the milestone. All roads radiated out from the Roman Forum throughout the Empire \u2013 50,000 (Roman) miles of stone-paved roads. At every mile was placed a shaped stone. Originally, these were obelisks made from granite, marble, or whatever local stone was available. On these was carved a Roman numeral, indicating the number of miles from the centre of Rome \u2013 the Forum. Hence, one can know how far one is from Rome.\nPtolemaic mile.\nIn the 2nd-century, Greco-Roman polymath, Claudius Ptolemy, of Alexandria (Egypt), in his Almagest and Geography, defined a mile as a geographic arcminute of longitude, of the earth's circumference, equivalent to 1:60 of a degree of longitude, or 1:21,600 of the circumference. While his estimate of the circumference of the earth, and therefore the derived length of a \"stade\", and a mile, from third party observations, principally offered in non-normalised stadion (600 Greek feet), Egyptian \"schoinos\", and Persian \"parasang\" were erroneous. Ptolomy's assumptions of a customary \"stade\" to be of a \"Roman mile\", of a \"schoinos\" or \"parasang\", of an arc-minute, or ~185 metres, his Geographical mile, is the basis of the current nautical mile, and was adopted by medieval Arab and European cartographers.\nArabic.\nThe Arabic mile (, ), of 4,000 cubits, was not the common Arabic unit of length; instead, Arabs and Persians traditionally used the longer parasang or \"Arabic league\". Although the precise length of the Arabic mile remains disputed, due to the variability in cubit length, it was somewhere between 1.8 and 2.0\u00a0km; it is approximate to a 1.852\u00a0km nautical or geographical mile, and an approximation of 1 arcminute of latitude measured directly north-and-south along a meridian. The mile was used by medieval Arab geographers and scientists.\nBreslau.\nThe Breslau mile, used in Breslau, and from 1630 officially in all of Silesia, is equal to 11,250 ells, or about 6,700 meters. The mile equaled the distance from the Piaskowa Gate all the way to Psie Pole (Hundsfeld). By rolling a circle with a radius of 5 ells through Piaskowa Island, Ostr\u00f3w Tumski and suburban tracts, passing eight bridges on the way, the standard Breslau mile was determined.\nCroatian.\nThe Croatian mile (), first devised by the Jesuit Stjepan Glava\u010d on a 1673 map, is the length of an arc of the equator subtended by \u00b0 or 11.13\u00a0km exactly. The previous Croatian mile, now known as the \"ban mile\" (), had been the Austrian mile given above.\nDanish.\nFollowing its standardisation by Ole R\u00f8mer in the late 17th century, the Danish mile () was precisely equal to the Prussian mile and likewise divided into 24,000 feet. These were sometimes treated as equivalent to 7.5\u00a0km. Earlier values had varied: the , for instance, had been 11.13\u00a0km.\nDutch.\nThe Dutch mile () has had different definitions throughout history. One of the older definitions was 5,600 ells. But the length of an ell was not standardised, so that the length of a mile could range between 3,280\u00a0m and 4,280\u00a0m. In the sixteenth century, the Dutch had three different miles: small (), medium (), and large (). The Dutch mile had the historical definition of one hour's walking (), which was defined as 24 stadia, 3000 paces, or 15,000 Amsterdam or Rhineland feet (respectively 4,250\u00a0m or 4,710\u00a0m). The common Dutch mile was 32 stadia, 4,000 paces, or 20,000 feet (5,660 m or 6,280 m). The large mile was defined as 5000 paces. The common Dutch mile was preferred by mariners, equating with 15 to one degree of latitude or one degree of longitude on the equator. This was originally based upon Ptolemy's underestimate of the Earth's circumference. The ratio of 15 Dutch miles to a degree remained fixed while the length of the mile was changed as with improved calculations of the circumference of the Earth. In 1617, Willebrord Snellius calculated a degree of the circumference of the Earth at 28,500 (within 3.5% of the actual value), which resulted in a Dutch mile of 1900 rods. By the mid-seventeenth century, map scales assigned 2000 rods to the common Dutch mile, which equalled around 7,535\u00a0m (reducing the discrepancy with latitude measurement to less than 2%). The metric system was introduced in the Netherlands in 1816, and the metric mile became a synonym for the kilometre, being exactly 1,000\u00a0m. Since 1870, the term was replaced by the equivalent . Today, the word is no longer used, except as part of certain proverbs and compound terms like ('miles away').\nEnglish.\nThe \"old English mile\" of the medieval and early modern periods varied but seems to have measured about 1.3\u00a0international\u00a0miles (2.1\u00a0km). The old English mile varied over time and location within England. The old English mile has also been defined as 79,200 or 79,320 inches (1.25 or 1.2519 statute miles). The English long continued the Roman computations of the mile as 5,000 feet, 1,000 paces, or 8 longer divisions, which they equated with their \"furrow's length\" or furlong.\nThe origins of English units are \"extremely vague and uncertain\", but seem to have been a combination of the Roman system with native and Germanic systems both derived from multiples of the barleycorn. Probably by the reign of Edgar in the 10th century, the nominal prototype physical standard of English length was an arm-length iron bar (a yardstick) held by the king at Winchester; the foot was then one-third of its length. Henry\u00a0I was said to have made a new standard in 1101 based on his own arm. Following the issuance of Magna Carta in 1215, the barons of Parliament directed John and his son to keep the king's standard measure () and weight at the Exchequer, which thereafter verified local standards until its abolition in the 19th century. New brass standards are known to have been constructed under Henry\u00a0VII and Elizabeth\u00a0I.\nArnold's c.\u20091500 \"Customs of London\" recorded a mile shorter than previous ones, coming to 0.947\u00a0international\u00a0miles (5,000 feet) or 1.524\u00a0km.\nEnglish statute.\nThe English statute mile was established by a Weights and Measures Act of Parliament in 1593 during the reign of Queen Elizabeth\u00a0I. The act on the Composition of Yards and Perches had shortened the length of the foot and its associated measures, causing the two methods of determining the mile to diverge. Owing to the importance of the surveyor's rod in deeds and surveying undertaken under Henry\u00a0VIII, decreasing the length of the rod by &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204411 would have amounted to a significant tax increase. Parliament instead opted to maintain the mile of 8 furlongs (which were derived from the rod) and to increase the number of feet per mile from the old Roman value. The applicable passage of the statute reads: \"A Mile shall contain eight Furlongs, every Furlong forty Poles, and every Pole shall contain sixteen Foot and an half.\" The statute mile therefore contained 5,280\u00a0feet or 1,760\u00a0yards. The distance was not uniformly adopted. Robert Morden had multiple scales on his 17th-century maps which included continuing local values: his map of Hampshire, for example, bore two different \"miles\" with a ratio of 1\u2009:\u20091.23 and his map of Dorset had three scales with a ratio of 1\u2009:\u20091.23\u2009:\u20091.41. In both cases, the traditional local units remained longer than the statute mile. The English statute mile was superseded in 1959 by the international mile by international agreement.\nGerman.\nThe German mile () was 24,000 German feet. The standardised Austrian mile used in southern Germany and the Austrian Empire was 7.586\u00a0km; the Prussian mile used in northern Germany was 7.5325\u00a0km. The Germans also used a longer version of the geographical mile.\nHungarian.\nThe Hungarian mile ( or ) varied from 8.3790\u00a0km to 8.9374\u00a0km before being standardised as 8.3536\u00a0km.\nIrish.\nThe Irish mile ( or ) measured 2,240 yards: approximately 1.27 statute miles or 2.048 kilometres. It was used in Ireland from the 16th century plantations until the 19th century, with residual use into the 20th century. The units were based on \"English measure\" but used a linear perch measuring as opposed to the English rod of .\nItalian.\nThe Italian mile (, \u00a0) was traditionally considered a direct continuation of the Roman mile, equal to 1000 paces, although its actual value over time or between regions could vary greatly. It was often used in international contexts from the Middle Ages into the 17th century and is thus also known as the \"geographical mile\", although the geographical mile is now a separate standard unit.\nJapanese.\nThe CJK Compatibility Unicode block contains square-format versions of Japanese names for measurement units as written in katakana script.\nAmong them, there is , after .\nOttoman.\nThe Ottoman mile was 1,894.35 m, which was equal to 5,000 Ottoman foot. After 1933, the Ottoman mile was replaced with the modern Turkish mile (1,853.181\u00a0m).\nPortuguese.\nThe Portuguese\u00a0mile () used in Portugal and Brazil was 2.0873\u00a0km prior to metrication.\nRussian.\nThe Russian mile ( or , ) was 7.468\u00a0km, divided into 7 versts.\nSaxon.\nThe Saxon post mile ( or , introduced on occasion of a survey of the Saxon roads in the 1700s, corresponded to 2,000 Dresden rods, equivalent to 9.062 kilometres.\nOld Scandinavian.\nThe old Scandinavian miles (Norse: \"mil\", , ) were a number of measurements of length used in Scandinavia prior to the adoption of the modern \"Scandinavian metric mile\" (10 km) in the late 19th century.\nBefore the Renaissance, there were various regional miles in Scandinavia. In Sweden, the regional miles were eventually divided after province, so called (roughly \"county miles\"). Some noteworthy Swedish county miles are:\nWhile Denmark eventually adopted the Prussian mile (see ), the Swedish kept their indigenous miles. In 1649 the Swedish government made the Uppland mile the de facto Swedish mile, or \"unit mile\" (), for all of Sweden, also called the \"land mile\" or \"long mile\". In Finland, then part of Sweden, their measurement (which is translated as \"mile\") then became equivalent to the Swedish \"unit mile\", which later carried over when Finland seceded to the Russian Empire in 1809. When Norway became part of Sweden in 1814, forming the Union between Sweden and Norway, the Swedish standard for defining a \"unit mile\", 36,000 feet, was introduced to Norway, which, due to the Norwegian foot being slightly longer than the Swedish foot, then became slightly longer than in Sweden, making the \"unit mile\" in Norway.\nUpon metrification, Finland, Norway, and Sweden, decided to redefine their miles as , since they were all based on the old Swedish \"unit mile\", already close to the measurent. The modern Scandinavian (metric) mile is still a unit of length common in Norway and Sweden, to a lesser extent in Finland, but not Denmark.\nThe Scandinavians also had their own \"nautical mile\", called \"sea mile\" (, , ), or the equivalent \"sea-peninkulma\" in Finnish (), equivalent to the German geographical mile (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204415 degrees of latitude), around ; later, during metrification, standardized as .\nScots.\nThe Scots mile was longer than the English mile, as mentioned by Robert Burns in the first verse of his poem \"Tam o' Shanter\". It comprised 8\u00a0(Scots)\u00a0furlongs divided into 320\u00a0falls or faws (Scots rods). It varied from place to place but the most accepted equivalencies are 1,976\u00a0Imperial\u00a0yards (1.123 statute miles or 1.81\u00a0km).\nIt was legally abolished three times: first by a 1685 act of the Scottish Parliament, again by the 1707 Treaty of Union with England, and finally by the Weights and Measures Act 1824. It had continued in use as a customary unit through the 18th century but had become obsolete by its final abolition.\nWelsh.\nThe Welsh mile ( or ) was 3\u00a0statute miles and 1,470\u00a0yards long (6.17\u00a0km). It comprised 9,000\u00a0paces (), each of 3\u00a0Welsh feet () of 9\u00a0inches (). (The Welsh inch is usually reckoned as equivalent to the English inch.) Along with other Welsh units, it was said to have been codified under Dyfnwal the Bald and Silent and retained unchanged by Hywel the Good. Along with other Welsh units, it was discontinued following the conquest of Wales by Edward I of England in the 13th century.\nInternational.\nThe international mile is precisely equal to (or \u00a0km as a fraction). It was established as part of the 1959 international yard and pound agreement reached by the United States, the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and the Union of South Africa, which resolved small but measurable differences that had arisen from separate physical standards each country had maintained for the yard. As with the earlier statute mile, it continues to comprise 1,760 yards or 5,280 feet.\nThe difference from the previous standards was 2\u00a0ppm, or about 3.2\u00a0millimetres (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20448\u00a0inch) per mile. The US standard was slightly longer and the old Imperial standards had been slightly shorter than the international mile. When the international mile was introduced in English-speaking countries, the basic geodetic datum in America was the North American Datum of 1927 (NAD27). This had been constructed by triangulation based on the definition of the foot in the Mendenhall Order of 1893, with 1\u00a0foot\u00a0=\u00a0 (\u22480.304800609601) metres and the definition was retained for data derived from NAD27, but renamed the \"US survey foot\" to distinguish it from the international foot. Thus a survey mile =\u00a0 \u00d7 5280 (\u22481609.347218694) metres. An international mile = 1609.344 / ( \u00d7 5280) (=0.999998) survey miles.\nThe exact length of the land mile varied slightly among English-speaking countries until the international yard and pound agreement in 1959 established the yard as exactly 0.9144\u00a0metres, giving a mile of exactly 1,609.344\u00a0metres. The US adopted this international mile for most purposes, but retained the pre-1959 mile for some land-survey data, terming it the \"U. S. survey mile\". In the United States, \"statute mile\" normally refers to the survey mile, about 3.219\u00a0mm (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20448\u00a0inch) longer than the international mile (the international mile is exactly 0.0002% less than the US survey mile).\nWhile many countries abandoned the mile when switching to the metric system, the international mile continues to be used in some countries, such as Liberia, Myanmar, the United Kingdom and the United States. It is also used in a number of territories with less than a million inhabitants, most of which are UK or US territories, or have close historical ties with the UK or US: American Samoa, Bahamas, Belize, British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Dominica, Falkland Islands, Grenada, Guam, The N. Mariana Islands, Samoa, St. Lucia, St. Vincent &amp; The Grenadines, St. Helena, St. Kitts &amp; Nevis, the Turks &amp; Caicos Islands, and the US Virgin Islands.\nThe mile is even encountered in Canada, though this is predominantly in rail transport and horse racing, as the roadways have been metricated since 1977. Ireland gradually replaced miles with kilometres, including in speed measurements; the process was completed in 2005.\nUS survey.\nThe US survey mile is 5,280 US survey feet, or 1,609.347 metres and 0.30480061 metres respectively. Both are very slightly longer than the international mile and international foot. In the United States, the term \"statute mile\" formally refers to the survey mile, but for most purposes, the difference of less than between the survey mile and the international mile (1609.344\u00a0metres exactly) is insignificant\u2014one international mile is US survey miles\u2014so \"statute mile\" can be used for either. But in some cases, such as in the US State Plane Coordinate Systems (SPCSs), which can stretch over hundreds of miles, the accumulated difference can be significant, so it is important to note that the reference is to the US survey mile.\nThe United States redefined its yard in 1893, and this resulted in US and Imperial measures of distance having very slightly different lengths.\nThe North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83), which replaced the NAD27, is defined in metres. State Plane Coordinate Systems were then updated, but the National Geodetic Survey left individual states to decide which (if any) definition of the foot they would use. All State Plane Coordinate Systems are defined in metres, and 42 of the 50 states only use the metre-based State Plane Coordinate Systems. However, eight states also have State Plane Coordinate Systems defined in feet, seven of them in US survey feet and one in international feet.\nState legislation in the US is important for determining which conversion factor from the metric datum is to be used for land surveying and real estate transactions, even though the difference (2\u00a0ppm) is hardly significant, given the precision of normal surveying measurements over short distances (usually much less than a mile). Twenty-four states have legislated that surveying measures be based on the US survey foot, eight have legislated that they be based on the international foot, and eighteen have not specified which conversion factor to use.\nSPCS 83 legislation refers to state legislation that has been passed or updated using the newer 1983 NAD data. Most states have done so. Two states, Alaska and Missouri, and two jurisdictions, Guam and Puerto Rico, do not specify which foot to use. Two states, Alabama and Hawaii, and four jurisdictions, Washington, DC, US Virgin Islands, American Samoa and Northern Mariana Islands, do not have SPCS 83 legislation.\nIn October 2019, US National Geodetic Survey and National Institute of Standards and Technology announced their joint intent to retire the US survey foot and US survey mile, as permitted by their 1959 decision, with effect on January 1, 2023.\nNautical.\nInternational nautical.\nThe \"nautical mile\" (historically also (\"sea mile\") was originally defined as one minute of arc along a meridian of the Earth. Navigators use dividers to step off the distance between two points on the navigational chart, then place the open dividers against the minutes-of-latitude scale at the edge of the chart, and read off the distance in nautical miles. The Earth is not perfectly spherical but an oblate spheroid, so the length of a minute of latitude increases by 1% from the equator to the poles, as seen for example in the WGS84 ellipsoid, with at the equator, at the poles and average .\nSince 1929 the international nautical mile is defined by the First International Extraordinary Hydrographic Conference in Monaco as exactly 1,852 metres (which is or ). In the United States, the nautical mile was defined in the 19th century as , whereas in the United Kingdom, the \"Admiralty nautical mile\" was defined as and was about one minute of latitude in the latitudes of the south of the UK. Other nations had different definitions of the nautical mile.\nRelated units.\nThe nautical mile per hour is known as the knot. Nautical miles and knots are almost universally used for aeronautical and maritime navigation, because of their relationship with degrees and minutes of latitude and the convenience of using the latitude scale on a map for distance measuring.\nThe data mile is used in radar-related subjects and is equal to 6,000 feet (1.8288 kilometres). The radar mile is a unit of time (in the same way that the light year is a unit of distance), equal to the time required for a radar pulse to travel a distance of two miles (one mile each way). Thus, the radar statute mile is 10.8\u00a0\u03bcs and the radar nautical mile is 12.4\u00a0\u03bcs.\nScandinavian nautical.\nScandinavians used their own version of the \"nautical mile\" up to the beginning of the 20th century (with continued regional use), indigenously known as a sea mile (, , ), or the equivalent \"sea-peninkulma\" in Finnish (). It was equal to a \"geographical mile\", defined as &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204415 of an equatorial degree (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u2044360\u00b0 of longitude), equivalent to approximately four modern nautical miles or \"medium meridian minutes\" (4 \u00d7 1,852 m) \u2013 a nautical mile is approximately one sixtieth of a degree along a meridian (1/60 meridian degree).\nDuring metrification in 1875, this brought it down to about from its former equivalence of 3950 fathoms (, ) or about .\nGeographical.\nThe geographical mile is based upon the length of a meridian of latitude. The German geographical mile () was previously &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204415\u00b0 of latitude (7.4127\u00a0km), and was used as the basis for the Scandinavian nautical mile.\nMetric.\nThe informal term \"metric mile\" is used in some countries, in sports such as track and field athletics and speed skating, to denote a distance of . The 1500 meters is the premier middle distance running event in Olympic sports. In United States high-school competition, the term is sometimes used for a race of .\nMetric mile has also been used to denote other metric measurements under the name mile, such as the Scandinavian mile (), and previously also the kilometre, in Dutch.\nScandinavian metric.\nThe Scandinavian metric mile (Norwegian and , ) refers to the modern Scandinavian mile, used in Norway and Sweden, to a lesser extent in Finland (), but not in Denmark, which since metrication in the late 19th century is standardized as 10\u00a0km. It is used in informal situations and in measurements of fuel consumption, which are often given as litres per . In formal situations (such as official road signs) only kilometres are given.\nThe Scandinavian metric mile is based of the old Swedish \"unit mile\" (), which was standardised as 36,000 Swedish feet or in 1649; before that, the mile varied by province from about , also known as \"county miles\" (). In Finland, then part of Sweden, the traditional Finnish measurement , or \"Finnish mile\" (), became redefined as equivalent to the Swedish \"unit mile\" , which was then kept when Finland seceded to Russia in 1809. When Norway became part of Sweden in 1814, forming the Union between Sweden and Norway, the Swedish standard for defining a mile was introduced, which then became slightly longer in Norway than in Sweden, due to the Norwegian foot being slightly longer than the Swedish foot, making the \"unit mile\" in Norway. Upon metrification, each country decided to redefine their mile to 10 kilometres.\nComparison table.\nA comparison of the different lengths for a \"mile\", in different countries and at different times in history, is given in the table below. Leagues are also included in this list because, in terms of length, they fall in between the short West European miles and the long North, Central and Eastern European miles.\nSimilar units:\nIdioms.\nThe mile is still used in a variety of idioms, even in English-speaking countries that have moved from the Imperial to the metric system (for example, Australia, Canada, or New Zealand). These idioms include:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19160", "revid": "8356162", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19160", "title": "Spam (Monty Python sketch)", "text": "1970 British comedy short\n\"Spam\" is a Monty Python sketch, first televised in 1970 on \"Monty Python's Flying Circus\" (series 2, episode 12, \"Spam\") and written by Terry Jones and Michael Palin. In the sketch, two customers are lowered by wires into a greasy spoon caf\u00e9 and try to order a breakfast from a menu that includes Spam in almost every dish, much to the consternation of one of the customers. As the waitress recites the Spam-filled menu, a group of Viking patrons drown out all conversations with a song, repeating \"Spam, Spam, Spam, Spam\u2026 Lovely Spam! Wonderful Spam!\".\nThe excessive amount of Spam was probably a reference to the ubiquity of it and other imported canned meat products in the United Kingdom after World War II (a period of rationing in the UK) as the country struggled to rebuild its agricultural base. Thanks to its wartime ubiquity, the British public had grown tired of it.\nThe televised sketch and several subsequent performances feature Terry Jones as the waitress, Eric Idle as Mr. Bun and Graham Chapman as Mrs. Bun, who does not like Spam. The original sketch also featured John Cleese as The Hungarian and Palin as a historian, but this part was left out of the audio version of the sketch recorded for the team's second album \"Another Monty Python Record\" (1971). A year later this track was released as the Pythons' first 7\" single.\nThe use of the term \"spam\" for unsolicited electronic communications is derived from this sketch.\nPlot.\nThe three-and-a-half-minute sketch is set in the fictional Green Midget Cafe in Bromley. An argument develops between the waitress, who recites a menu in which nearly every dish contains Spam, and Mrs. Bun, who does not like Spam. She asks for a dish without Spam, much to the amazement of her Spam-loving husband. The waitress responds to this request with disgust. Mr. Bun offers to take her Spam instead, and asks for a dish containing a lot of Spam and baked beans. The waitress says the beans are not available; when Mr. Bun asks for a substitution of Spam, the waitress begins reading out the new dish's name.\nAt several points, a group of Vikings in the restaurant interrupt conversations by loudly singing about Spam. The irate waitress orders them to shut up, but they resume singing more loudly. A Hungarian tourist comes to the counter, trying to order by using a wholly inaccurate Hungarian/English phrasebook (a reference to a previous sketch). He is rapidly escorted away by a police constable.\nThe sketch abruptly cuts to a historian in a television studio talking about the origin of the Vikings in the caf\u00e9. As he goes on, he begins to increasingly insert the word \"Spam\" into every sentence, and the backdrop is raised to reveal the restaurant set behind. The historian joins the Vikings in their song, and Mr. and Mrs. Bun are lifted by wires out of the scene while the singing continues. In the original televised performance, the closing credits (which also have \"Spam\" inserted in various points among others) begin to scroll with the singing still audible in the background.\nProduction notes.\nThe sketch premiered on 15 December 1970 as the final sketch of the 25th show of \"Monty Python's Flying Circus\", and the end credits for the episode were changed so every member of the crew has either Spam or some other food item from the menu added to their names. (Spam Terry Jones, Michael Spam Palin, John Spam John Spam John Spam Cleese, Graham Spam Spam Spam Chapman, Eric Spam Egg and Chips Idle, Terry Spam Sausage Spam Egg Spam Gilliam, etc.) The \"Spam\" sketch became immensely popular, and was ranked the fifth favourite Python sketch in a poll. The word \"Spam\" is uttered at least 132 times. The Vikings' Spam song is a parody of \"The Viking Song\" by Samuel Coleridge-Taylor.\nThis sketch has also been featured in several Monty Python videos including \"Parrot Sketch Not Included \u2013 20 Years of Monty Python\". A lead sheet for the song appears in \"Monty Python's Big Red Book\". The DVD release of the episode contains a deliberate subtitling error. When the Hungarian tries to order food, his words are \"My lower intestine is full of Spam, Egg, Spam, Bacon, Spam, Tomatoes, Spam.\" Yet the subtitles read \"Your intestine is full of Sperm.\" This is a continuation of the \"Dirty Hungarian Phrasebook\" sketch from the same episode.\nThe audio version of the sketch excludes the Hungarian and historian, and instead has the Vikings reaching a dramatic crescendo. The waitress, resigned to these disruptions, mutters \"Bloody Vikings!\" In the 2014 version of the sketch performed in \"Monty Python Live (Mostly)\", one of the Vikings replies \"Racist bastard!\" before leading the group into an operatic chorus that includes a sampling of \"Finland\" from the team's \"Contractual Obligation Album\".\nSpam was a popular food during World War II in the UK. Although rationed, it was generally easily available and not subject to supply shortages, as were other meats. Thanks to its wartime ubiquity, the British public eventually tired of it.\n* Lobster Thermidor aux crevettes with a Mornay sauce, \"served in a Proven\u00e7ale manner with shallots and aubergines\", garnished with truffle p\u00e2t\u00e9, brandy, and a fried egg on top, and Spam. (vinyl record)\nImpact.\nThe phenomenon, some years later, of marketers drowning out discourse by flooding Usenet newsgroups and individuals' email with junk mail advertising messages was named spamming, due to some early internet users that flooded forums with the word \"spam\" recounting the repetitive and unwanted presence of spam in the sketch. This phenomenon has been reported in court decisions handed down in lawsuits against spammers \u2013 see, for example, \"CompuServe Inc. v. Cyber Promotions, Inc.\", 962 F.Supp. 1015, n. 1 (S.D.Ohio 1997). Furthermore, it has been referenced in an Electronic Frontier Foundation \"amicus curiae\" brief to the Supreme Court of the United States in 2014. The term also is used to refer to mass marketing using junk phone calls or text messages, and has since entered video game culture as a term to refer to producing a large quantity of something, such as rocket-spamming or grenade-spamming.\nThe Python programming language, named after Monty Python, prefers to use spam, ham, and eggs as metasyntactic variables, instead of the traditional foo, bar and baz.\nThe Japanese anime series \"Girls und Panzer\" featured the special episode \"Survival War!\", which referenced the \"Spam\" sketch, but the word \"spam\" was censored. This was reversed in the English dub.\nHormel's response.\nSpam makers Hormel, while never happy with the use of the word \"spam\" for junk email, have been supportive of Monty Python and their sketch. Hormel issued a special tin of Spam for the Broadway premiere of Eric Idle's musical \"Spamalot\" based on \"Monty Python and the Holy Grail\". The sketch is part of the company's Spam Museum in Austin, Minnesota, United States, and also mentioned in Spam's on-can advertisements for the product's 70th anniversary in 2007 \u2013 although the date of the Python sketch was incorrectly stated to be 1971 instead of 1970.\nIn 2007 the company decided that such publicity was part of their corporate image, and sponsored a game where their product is strongly associated with Monty Python, featuring a product with \"Stinky French Garlic\" as part of the promotion of \"Spamalot\". For the company's 75th anniversary in 2012, they introduced Sir Can-A-Lot, a knight character, appearing on the product's packaging with the phrase \"Glorious SPAM\u00ae!\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19161", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19161", "title": "Dead Parrot sketch", "text": "Monty Python sketch (1969)\nThe \"Dead Parrot sketch\", alternatively and originally known as the \"Pet Shop sketch\" or \"Parrot sketch\", is a sketch from \"Monty Python's Flying Circus\" about a non-existent species of parrot, called a \"Norwegian Blue\". A satire on poor customer service, it was written by John Cleese and Graham Chapman and initially performed in the show's first series, in the eighth episode (\"Full Frontal Nudity\", which first aired 7 December 1969).\nThe sketch portrays a conflict between disgruntled customer Mr Praline (played by Cleese) and a shopkeeper (Michael Palin), who argue whether or not a recently purchased parrot is dead.\nOver the years, Cleese and Palin have performed many versions of the \"Dead Parrot\" sketch for television shows, record albums, and live performances. \"Dead Parrot\" was voted the top alternative comedy sketch in a \"Radio Times\" poll.\nPlot.\nMr. Praline (Cleese) enters the pet shop to register a complaint about a recently purchased Norwegian Blue parrot (actually Spix's macaw; parrots are not native to Norway) just as the shopkeeper (Palin) is preparing to close the establishment for lunch. Despite being told that the bird is deceased and that it had been nailed to its perch, the proprietor insists that it is \"pining for the fjords\" or simply \"stunned\".\nAs the exasperated Praline attempts to wake up the parrot, the shopkeeper tries to make the bird move by hitting the cage, and Praline erupts into a rage after banging \"Polly Parrot\" on the counter. After listing several euphemisms for death (\"is no more\", \"has ceased to be\", \"bereft of life, it rests in peace\", and \"is an ex-parrot\") he is told to go to the pet shop run by the shopkeeper's brother in Bolton, Lancashire for a refund. He travels to Bolton only to find himself in the exact same store as before, with his cage on the floor, as the proprietor of that store (who is really the first shopkeeper, save for a false moustache) claims this is Ipswich, prompting Praline to return to the railway station, where the station attendant (Terry Jones) assures him that he is actually in Bolton after all.\nConfronting the shopkeeper's \"brother\" for lying, the shopkeeper claims he was playing a prank on Praline by sending him to Ipswich, which he claims was a palindrome for Bolton; Praline points out that the shopkeeper was wrong because a palindrome for Bolton would have been \"Notlob\" (i.e., it would not be spelled the same backwards). When the shopkeeper demands to know what he wants, Praline refuses to continue this conversation, saying that \"this is getting too silly\". The no-nonsense Colonel (Graham Chapman) then bursts in to concur and orders the sketch stopped.\nBackground.\nThe \"Dead Parrot\" sketch was inspired by a \"Car Salesman\" sketch that Palin and Chapman had done in \"How to Irritate People\". In it, Palin played a car salesman who repeatedly refused to admit that there was anything wrong with his customer's (Chapman's) car, even as it fell apart in front of him. That sketch was based on an actual incident between Palin and a car salesman. In \"Monty Python Live at Aspen\", Palin said that this salesman \"had an excuse for everything\". John Cleese said on the same show that he and Chapman \"believed that there was something very funny there, if we could find the right context for it\". In early drafts of what would become the Dead Parrot Sketch, the frustrated customer was trying to return a faulty toaster to a shop. Chapman realised that it needed to be \"madder\", and came up with the parrot idea.\nVariations of the sketch.\nIn the film \"And Now for Something Completely Different\" (1971), in which the parrot is a blue and gold macaw, the sketch ends with the shopkeeper explaining that he always wanted to be a lumberjack and, ignoring Mr Praline's protests of that being irrelevant, begins singing \"The Lumberjack Song\".\nThe \"Monty Python Live at Drury Lane\" album features a live version of the sketch, which is slightly different from the TV version. Praline's rant about the deceased parrot includes \"He fucking snuffed it!\" Also, the sketch ends with the shopkeeper saying that he has a slug that does talk. Cleese, after a brief pause, says, \"Right, I'll have that one, then!\" According to Michael Palin's published diary, Palin changed his response in order to throw Cleese off. During this performance something occurs on stage that does not translate into audio, but causes the audience to break into hysterics upon Cleese's follow-up line \"Now that's what I call a dead parrot\".\nA live performance from the 1976 Amnesty International benefit show, \"A Poke in the Eye (With a Sharp Stick)\", has Palin bursting into laughter while Cleese declares \"Pining for the fjords? What kind of talk is that?\" The audience cheers this bit of breaking character, but Palin quickly composes himself and Cleese declares \"Now, look! This is nothing to laugh at!\" before proceeding with the sketch. This version can be seen in the film \"Pleasure at Her Majesty's\", albeit with the ending removed.\nThe 1976 \"Monty Python Live at City Center\" performance ended with the following punchline:\n\"Shopkeeper\": (long, long pause) ... Do you want to come back to my place?\n\"Mr Praline\": I thought you'd never ask.\nIn his appearance on \"The Muppet Show\", Cleese appears as a pirate attempting to take over a spaceship during a \"Pigs in Space\" sketch. At the end of the sketch, he demands of the smart-mouthed talking parrot on his shoulder, \"Do you want to be an ex-parrot?\"\nIn 1980, the sketch was performed again during The Pythons' four-night stint at the Hollywood Bowl. However, it was one of the sketches to be cut from the 1982 film version. In the 1989 TV special which saw the final appearance of all six Pythons together, the sketch was mentioned in the title, \"Parrot Sketch Not Included \u2013 20 Years of Monty Python\". True to its title, the \"Dead Parrot sketch\" is not included.\nIn 1989's Amnesty benefit show, \"The Secret Policeman's Biggest Ball\", the sketch opens similarly, but ends very differently:\n\"Mr Praline\": It's dead, that's what's wrong with it.\n\"Shopkeeper\": \"(long pause as he examines the bird)\" So it is. 'Ere's your money back and a couple of holiday vouchers.\n\"(audience goes wild)\"\n\"Mr Praline\": \"(looks completely flabbergasted)\" Well, you can't say Thatcher hasn't changed some things.\nMargaret Thatcher famously used the sketch in a speech at the Conservative Party Conference in 1990, referring to the Liberal Democrats and their symbol being a dove, before ending the speech by commenting, \"And now for something completely different.\" In 1998, \"The Sun\" ran the front-page headline \"This party is no more...it has ceased to be...this is an EX-party\" for an article about a Conservative Party conference. According to her former political secretary John Whittingdale, Thatcher did not understand why the joke was funny and had to be persuaded that it would work. The Conservatives' use of this sketch was derivative of an earlier \"Spitting Image\" sketch, itself derivative of the Python Dead Parrot sketch, in which the part of Mr. Praline was played by a puppet representing David Owen and the part of the shopkeeper was played by a puppet representing Roy Jenkins. Mr Praline/Owen complains that the \"party\" he has recently acquired from the shopkeeper (representing the Social Democratic Party (UK)) has \"expired\", and the shopkeeper/Jenkins claims it is not dead but \"pining for Bill Rodgers\" (Rodgers, Jenkins and Owen being original members of the 'Gang of Four (SDP)'.\nIn a 1997 \"Saturday Night Live\" performance of the sketch, Cleese added a line to the rant: \"Its metabolic processes are a matter of interest only to historians!\" In an interview on NPR's \"Fresh Air\", Palin attributed an almost dead audience to his seeing guests reverently mouthing the words of the sketch, rather than laughing at it. To end the sketch, Palin reused the punchline from \"City Center\" and asked Cleese, \"Do you want to come back to my place?\" to which Cleese said, \"I thought you'd never ask!\"\nFor the 1999 \"Python Night \u2013 30 Years of Monty Python\" TV special, Trey Parker and Matt Stone made a \"South Park\" version of the sketch depicting Cartman angrily returning a dead Kenny to Kyle's shop. Using much of the dialogue from the original sketch, it ends with Terry Gilliam's animations playing around with Cartman before everything is crushed by the giant foot.\nIn a 2002 interview with Michael Parkinson, John Cleese said that when he and Palin were performing the sketch on Drury Lane, Palin made him laugh by saying, when asked if his slug could talk, \"It mutters a bit\" instead of \"Not really.\" When Cleese eventually stopped laughing, he couldn't remember where they were in the sketch. He turned to the audience and asked them what the next line was, and people shouted it at him, causing him to wonder, \"What is the point of this?\" He also says that when he and Palin were asked to do the sketch for \"Saturday Night Live\" they sat down together to try to remember the lines, and when they got stuck they considered just going out and stopping somebody on the street to ask how it went, since everybody seemed to have it memorised.\nIn his published 2006 diary, Michael Palin recalls that during the filming of \"Monty Python's Life of Brian\" in Tunisia, Spike Milligan (who happened to be there on holiday) regaled the Pythons with his own version of the Dead Parrot sketch, but changed \"Norwegian Blue\" to \"Arctic Grey\".\nCleese and Palin acted out the sketch during the Python's reunion in The O2 in July 2014, \"Monty Python Live (Mostly)\". The sketch ended with the shopkeeper saying he has a selection of cheeses, transitioning into the Cheese Shop Sketch. The entire sketch ended like the City Center performance, with the shopkeeper offering Mr Praline to come back to his place, and Mr Praline replying \"I thought you'd never ask.\" In their final performance on 20 July (which was broadcast live to many theatres across the world), whilst listing the metaphors for the parrot's death, Cleese added the line \"it had expired and gone to meet Dr Chapman\" after which both Cleese and Palin did a thumbs-up to the sky.\nIn the episode of \"The Late Show with Stephen Colbert\" from 13 November 2015, Cleese is a guest on the show. At the end of the big furry hat segment (where Stephen Colbert \u2013 and in this specific instance, Cleese \u2013 create nonsensical rules), Cleese asks, \"Do you want to come back to my place?\" and Colbert replies, \"I thought you'd never ask.\"\nFurther uses.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Graham Chapman, co-author of the 'Parrot Sketch,' is no more. \"He has ceased to be, bereft of life, he rests in peace, he has kicked the bucket, hopped the twig, bit the dust, snuffed it, breathed his last\", and gone to meet the Great Head of Light Entertainment in the sky.\"\nJohn Cleese alludes to the sketch at Graham Chapman's memorial service.\nAt Graham Chapman's memorial service, John Cleese began his eulogy by reprising euphemisms from the sketch.\nPart or all of the dead parrot sketch is quoted in several television programmes, among them the \"Life of Python\" sketch from \"Not the Nine O'Clock News\" (a parody of the \"Friday Night, Saturday Morning\" debate on \"Life of Brian\") and \"The Early Bird\", an episode from the third season of \"Death in Paradise\".\nWhen paleontologists published a paper announcing the discovery of a fossil parrot in Denmark, lead author Dr David Waterhouse alluded to the Dead Parrot Sketch, saying, \"Obviously, we are dealing with a bird that is bereft of life, but the tricky bit is establishing that it was a parrot.\" However, he declared that this bird could never have been pining for the fjords, explaining, \"This parrot shuffled off its mortal coil around 55 million years ago, but the fjords of Norway were formed during the last ice age and are less than a million years old.\"\nDuring the Monty Python Reunion at London's O2 Arena in 2014, UKTV channel Gold commissioned sculptor Iain Prendergast to create a giant fibreglass version of the mythical \"Norwegian Blue\". The 50-foot long (15m) bird was displayed, appropriately \"resting\" on its back, inside the O2 during the run of the shows there, as well as at Potters Fields Park in South London, in view of Tower Bridge.\nThe sketch was extensively referenced in a 2021 British Columbia court opinion allowing a class action lawsuit for dietary supplements which did not contain the advertised ingredients. The judge stated \"Health Canada cannot establish a protocol that requires that a parrot only still have its feathers in order to be sold as a live parrot, and thereby prevent anyone from suing after being sold a parrot who 'joined the bleedin' choir invisible.'\"\nPrecedents.\nThe \"Philogelos\", the oldest surviving joke book from antiquity written in the fourth century AD, contains a joke widely reported as an \"ancestor\" to the Dead Parrot sketch. In the joke, a man complains to a slave trader that a slave recently sold to him has died, to which the slave trader replies, \"When he was with me, he never did any such thing!\"\nIn Mark Twain's humorous short story \"A Nevada Funeral\", two characters use a series of euphemisms for death including 'kicked the bucket' and 'departed to that mysterious country from whose bourne no traveller returns'.\nIn 1963, Benny Hill performed a sketch entitled \"The Taxidermist\" (written by Dave Freeman) on \"The Benny Hill Show\" in which he attempted to pass off a stuffed duck as a parrot (blaming its different appearance on \"the steaming\" and \"the shrinkage\"). John Cleese later admitted that he watched Hill's show during this period, but did not recall that particular piece.\nIn the 1960s, the comedian Freddie \"Parrot Face\" Davies included an obviously stuffed parrot in his act, berating its seller for having cheated him.\nLegacy.\nIn 2008, the extinct bird genus \"Mopsitta\" was discovered in the Fur Formation and initially described as a parrot. The bird was nicknamed the \"Danish Blue Parrot\" and \"Norwegian Blue\" in reference to the Monty Python sketch due to being a dead parrot from Scandinavia.\nThere is a painted bronze sculpture, \"Monument for a Dead Parrot\", close to the National Maritime Museum in Greenwich, created in 2009 by artist John Reardon. It has a purpose-built plinth and is located on the corner of Romney Road and King William Walk.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19162", "revid": "49538980", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19162", "title": "Cheese Shop sketch", "text": "Monty Python sketch\nThe \"Cheese Shop\" is a sketch from \"Monty Python's Flying Circus\".\nIt originally appeared in episode 33, \"Salad Days\" on 30 November, 1972. The script for the sketch is included in the 1989 book \"The Complete Monty Python's Flying Circus: All the Words, Volume 2\".\nIt was later reworked for the album \"The Monty Python Matching Tie and Handkerchief\" and appeared for one last time during \"Monty Python Live (Mostly)\", as a surprising coda to the Dead Parrot sketch.\nOrigins.\nThe idea for the sketch came after a day of shooting in Folkestone Harbour, where John Cleese became seasick and threw up repeatedly while trying to deliver a line. During the drive back, Graham Chapman recommended that Cleese eat something and asked him what he wanted; Cleese replied that he fancied a piece of cheese. Upon seeing a chemist's shop, Cleese pondered whether the shop would sell cheese, to which Chapman responded that if they did it would be medicinal cheese and that Cleese would need a prescription to buy some. Giggling, they decided to write a sketch based on that idea. However, on starting to write it, they concluded that asking for cheese in a chemist's shop was too unrealistic without being set up. Wondering why someone would attempt to buy cheese somewhere other than a cheese shop, Cleese thought that they should write a sketch about someone attempting to buy cheese in a cheese shop that had no cheese whatsoever to set up a sketch revolving around someone attempting to buy cheese at a chemist's which never wound up happening.\nChapman then wrote the sketch with Cleese, who did not initially find it humorous. When Chapman insisted that it was funny, they presented it at a reading for the other Python members. Though most of the other Pythons were also unimpressed, Michael Palin loved it and laughed hysterically, eventually falling to the floor. This amused the others and they agreed to use the sketch.\nSummary.\nCleese plays an erudite customer (Mr. Mousebender in the script) attempting to purchase some cheese from \"\"Ye Old Cheese Emporium\", purveyor of fine cheese to the gentry (and the poverty-stricken too)\". The proprietor (Palin), Mr. Arthur Wensleydale (Henry Wensleydale in the TV version), appears to have nothing in stock, not even cheddar, \"the single most popular cheese in the world\". A slow crescendo of bouzouki music plays in the background performed by Joe Moretti, as Terry Jones and Graham Chapman dance while dressed in bowler hats and business suits. Cleese initially expresses appreciation of the music, being \"one who delights in all manifestations of the Terpsichorean Muse\", but as the sketch progresses it mirrors Cleese's growing frustration until he loudly demands the music cease. As Cleese lists increasingly obscure, unsavoury, and, in one instance fictional, cheeses to no avail, the proprietor offers weak excuses such as \"Ohh! The cat's eaten it.\" Cleese remarks that it is not much of a cheese shop, but Palin insists it is the best in the district due to its cleanliness, to which Cleese replies \"Well, it's certainly uncontaminated by cheese.\" Eventually, Cleese asks if Palin has any cheese at all, to which Palin replies \"no\". Cleese then tells him that he will ask the question again, and if Palin says \"no\", he will shoot him \"through\" the head. Palin answers \"no\" the second time, and Cleese immediately shoots him, then muses, \"What a senseless waste of human life!\" He then puts on a Stetson, and the sketch segues into Hugh Walpole's \"Rogue Cheddar\" and a link to the Sam Peckinpah's \"Salad Days\" sketch.\nCheeses.\nForty-three cheeses are mentioned in the original sketch. In the audio version on \"The Monty Python Matching Tie and Handkerchief\" album and other live and recorded versions, Cleese also mentions Greek feta. In the 2014 reunion show \"Monty Python Live (Mostly)\", Stinking Bishop, Armenian string cheese and Zimbabwean rhinoceros milk cheese were also added to the list. \"Venezuelan Beaver Cheese\", mentioned in the original as well as future versions, is a fictitious type of cheese.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19163", "revid": "18872885", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19163", "title": "Bruces' Philosophers Song", "text": "Song performed by Monty Python\n\"Bruces' Philosophers Song\", also known as \"The Bruces' Song\", is a Monty Python song written and composed by Eric Idle that was a feature of the group's stage appearances and its recordings.\nOrigins.\nThe Bruces' Philosophers Song is sung by The Bruces, stereotypical \"ocker\" Australians of the period. The Bruces are kitted out in khakis, slouch hats and a cork hat, and are faculty members of the Philosophy Department at the fictional University of Woolamaloo (Woolloomooloo is an inner suburb of Sydney, although there is no university there).\nThe Bruces themselves first appeared in the Bruces sketch which featured in episode 22, \"How to Recognise Different Parts of the Body\", of the TV show \"Monty Python's Flying Circus\", first broadcast on 24 November 1970. The sketch shows an English academic (played by Terry Jones) coming to a hot and perhaps remote part of Australia and being inducted by the Bruces (John Cleese, Graham Chapman, Eric Idle and Michael Palin) into their Philosophy Department, seemingly located in a simple wooden shack. The Bruces are lounging around a wooden table and soon start drinking cans of Foster's Lager.\nThe song was not part of the TV sketch; it first appeared on the Monty Python's 1973 album \"Matching Tie and Handkerchief\" as a coda for the album version of the sketch. The song was subsequently included in most of the Monty Python team's live shows, sometimes as a singalong with musical accompaniment provided by a Jew's harp.\nLyrics.\nThe song's lyrics make a series of scandalous allegations about a number of highly respected philosophers, usually with regard to their capacity or incapacity for imbibing alcoholic drinks.\nThe sixth line differs from version to version. While the studio recording on \"Matching Tie and Handkerchief\" refers solely to \"Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel\", live recordings (included in the \"Monty Python Live at the Hollywood Bowl\" film and on the albums \"Live at Drury Lane\" and \"Live at City Center\") mention \"Schopenhauer and Hegel.\"\nThe philosophers.\nAll the philosophers whom the song mentions were dead by the time it appeared, apart from Martin Heidegger.\nPhilosophers mentioned in the song (in order):\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19164", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19164", "title": "The Funniest Joke in the World", "text": "Monty Python sketch\n\"The Funniest Joke in the World\" (also \"Joke Warfare\" and \"Killer Joke\") is a Monty Python comedy sketch revolving around a joke that is so funny that anyone who reads or hears it promptly dies from laughter. Ernest Scribbler (Michael Palin), a British \"manufacturer of jokes\", writes the joke on a piece of paper only to die laughing. His mother (Eric Idle) also immediately dies laughing after reading it, as do the first constables on the scene. Eventually the joke is contained, weaponized, and deployed against Germany during World War II.\nThe sketch appeared in the first episode of the television show \"Monty Python's Flying Circus\" (\"Whither Canada\"), first shown on 5 October 1969. It appeared in altered forms in several later Python works. The German translation of the joke in the sketch is made of various meaningless, German-sounding nonsense words, and so it does not have an English translation.\nSynopsis.\nThe sketch is framed in a documentary style and opens with Ernest Scribbler (Michael Palin), a British \"manufacturer of jokes\", creating and writing the funniest joke in the world on a piece of paper, only to die laughing. His mother (Eric Idle) finds the joke, thinks it is a suicide note, reads it and also immediately dies laughing. Aware of the deadly nature of the joke, a brave Scotland Yard inspector (Graham Chapman) attempts to retrieve the joke, aided by the playing of very somber music on gramophone records and the chanting of laments by fellow policemen to create a depressing atmosphere. The inspector leaves the house with the joke in hand, but also dies from laughter.\nThe British Army are soon eager to determine \"the military potential of the Killer Joke\".11 They test the joke on a short-sighted rifleman (Terry Jones), who suppresses a laugh and falls dead on the range. After confirming its \"devastating effectiveness at a range of up to 50 yards\", they then translate it into German, with each translator working on only one word of the joke for their own safety (one translator saw two words of the joke and had to be hospitalised for several weeks). The German \"translation\" (in reality mostly just nonsense words) is used for the first time on 8 July 1944 in the Ardennes, causing German soldiers to fall down dead from laughter:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe German version is described as being \"over 60,000 times as powerful as Britain's great pre-war joke\"12 (at this point a newsreel of Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain waving his \"piece of paper\" appears on screen). The joke is then used in open warfare, with Tommies running through an open field amid artillery fire while shouting the joke at the Germans, who die laughing in response. Afterward, a German field hospital is shown with bandaged German soldiers on stretchers, convulsing with laughter, presumably having heard some parts of the joke. In a subsequent scene, a British officer from the Joke Brigade (Palin) has been taken prisoner and is being interrogated by Gestapo officers. The British officer uses the joke to escape as his German captors die laughing, with one German officer (Cleese) insisting that the joke isn't funny. He then cracks up and utters a Woody Woodpecker-style laugh, before expiring.\nThe Germans attempt counter-jokes, but each attempt is found unsuccessful, with unamused Gestapo officers executing the hapless scientists as a consequence. For example, a film is shown of Adolf Hitler supposedly telling the joke while giving a speech. It is translated to \"My dog has no nose\", then a German soldier asking \"How does he smell?\", with Hitler replying, \"Awful!\". Eventually their best \"V-joke\" (in reference to the V-weapons) is attempted on a radio broadcast to British households: \"Der ver zwei peanuts, valking down der Stra\u00dfe, und von vas assaulted...peanut. Ohohohoho!\"14 Although the joke is followed triumphantly by the German anthem \"Deutschland \u00fcber alles\", the attack is ineffective, and merely confuses any Britons listening.\nThe British joke is said to have been laid to rest when \"peace broke out\" at the end of the war, and countries agree to a joke warfare ban at the Geneva Convention.14 In 1950, the last copy of the joke is sealed under a monument in the Berkshire countryside, bearing the inscription \"To the Unknown Joke\". Thus, the English version of the joke is never revealed to the audience.\nHitler footage from the sketch in reality.\nThe footage of Adolf Hitler is taken from Leni Riefenstahl's film \"Triumph of the Will\". The section (about 34 minutes into the film) where Konstantin Hierl presents the Reichsarbeitsdienst to Hitler is the source of the speech used for the joke. The first clip shows Hitler saying ' (\"In particular, no one will live in Germany anymore [without working for their country]\"), subtitled \"My dog has no nose\". The crowd (led by Hitler Youth leader Baldur von Schirach) saying: \"How does he smell?\" is from a scene just before Hitler's speech; the original German is ', \"We are the Reich's young men!\" The punchline of the joke \"Awful\" is the next shot that shows Hitler's face. The original words are \"\", from \"[The whole nation will go through] your school\".\nInfluence, and other works.\nJim Carrey is a fan of Monty Python. He described how Ernest Scribbler, played by Michael Palin, laughing himself to death in the sketch, had a huge effect on his early years.\nThe sketch was later remade in a shorter version for the film \"And Now for Something Completely Different\". It is also available on the CD-ROM video game version of the film \"Monty Python's The Meaning of Life\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19165", "revid": "12418561", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19165", "title": "The Spanish Inquisition (Monty Python)", "text": "Series of Monty Python sketches\n\"The Spanish Inquisition\" is an episode and recurring segment in the British sketch comedy TV series \"Monty Python's Flying Circus\", specifically series 2 episode 2 (first broadcast 22 September 1970), that satirises the Spanish Inquisition. The sketches are notable for the catchphrase, \"Nobody expects the Spanish Inquisition!\", which has been frequently quoted and become an Internet meme. The final instance of the catchphrase in the episode uses the musical composition \"Devil's Galop\" by Charles Williams. Rewritten audio versions of the sketches were included on \"Another Monty Python Record\" in 1971.\nPlot synopsis.\nThis recurring sketch is predicated on a seemingly unrelated narrative bit in which someone exclaims that they \"didn't expect a Spanish Inquisition!\", often in irritation at being vigorously questioned by another. The first appearance of Monty Python's \"Spanish Inquisition\" characters occurs in a drawing room set in \"Jarrow, 1912\", with a title card featuring a modern British urban area with a nuclear power plant. A mill worker (Graham Chapman) enters the room and tells a woman sitting on a couch knitting (Carol Cleveland) in a thick accent that \"one of the cross beams has gone out askew on the treadle\". When Cleveland says that she cannot understand what he's talking about, Chapman repeats the line without the thick accent. The woman says, \"Well, what on earth does that mean?\" Chapman becomes defensive and says, \"I didn't expect a kind of Spanish Inquisition!\" Suddenly, the Inquisition\u2014consisting of Cardinal Xim\u00e9nez (Michael Palin) and his assistants, Cardinal Biggles (Terry Jones) (who resembles his namesake Biggles wearing a leather aviator's helmet and goggles) and Cardinal Fang (Terry Gilliam)\u2014bursts into the room to the sound of a jarring musical sting. Xim\u00e9nez shouts, with a particular and high-pitched emphasis on the first word: \"\"No\"-body expects the Spanish Inquisition!\".\nAfter entering, Xim\u00e9nez begins enumerating their weapons, but interrupts himself as he keeps forgetting to mention additional weapons and has to begin numbering his list over again. After several attempts, Xim\u00e9nez states that he will come in again and herds the Inquisition back off the set. The straight man mill worker repeats the cue line, the Inquisition bursts back in (complete with jarring chord), and the introduction is tried anew. But Xim\u00e9nez fails again and tries to get Cardinal Biggles to do the introduction, but Biggles is also unsuccessful.\nXim\u00e9nez decides to forget the introduction and has Cardinal Fang read out charges of heresy against Cleveland, who pleads \"innocent\", and the cardinals respond with \"diabolical laughter\" and threats. Xim\u00e9nez intends to torture the woman with \"the rack\", but Cardinal Biggles instead produces a dish-drying rack. This rack is tied to Cleveland and Biggles pretends to turn a lever, but it has no effect whatsoever. As they work, Chapman answers the door to find a BBC employee (John Cleese) requesting him to open a door for a gag on \"the neighboring sketch\", leading into the \"Jokes and Novelties Salesman\" segment.\nThe Inquisition returns in a later sketch as an older woman (Marjorie Wilde) shares photographs from a scrapbook with another woman (Cleveland), who rips them up as they are handed to her. When the older woman presents a photo of the Spanish Inquisition hiding behind the coal shed, Cleveland says, \"I didn't expect the Spanish Inquisition!\" The three cardinals then reappear and take the older woman away to a dungeon.\nBiggles tries to torture the woman by poking her repeatedly with soft cushions. When this fails, Xim\u00e9nez orders Fang to get \"the comfy chair\", which is brought out and the woman placed in it. Xim\u00e9nez states that she must stay in the chair \"until lunch time with only a cup of coffee at 11\", and begins to shout at her to confess\u2014only to have Biggles break down and confess. This frustrates Xim\u00e9nez, but he cannot complain about it since he is distracted by a cartoon character from the next scene.\nAt the end of the show, in the \"Court Charades\" sketch, a judge (Jones) who is also a defendant in an obscenity trial at the Old Bailey is casually sentenced by another judge (Chapman) to be burned at the stake. The convicted judge responds, \"Blimey, I didn't expect the Spanish Inquisition!\" The whole court rises and looks expectantly at the witness entrance door. As the closing credits of the episode begin, the Inquisitors race out of a house and hop on a double-decker bus to the Old Bailey, all to the tune of \"Devil's Galop\". As the Inquisitors ride in the bus, they comment worriedly that they are running out of credits and are panicked that the episode will soon end. The bus reaches the courthouse and the cardinals charge up the steps of the Old Bailey. They finally burst into the courtroom and Xim\u00e9nez begins to shout, \"NO-body expects the Span...,\" but a black title card with the words, \"THE END\", interrupts him. In resignation, he says, \"Oh, bugger\", and the episode concludes.\nIn the \"Monty Python Live (Mostly)\" stage show, the sketch ends when Xim\u00e9nez orders Biggles to \"torture\" the victim (who is sitting in the comfy chair) by giving her a glass of cold milk from the fridge. When Biggles opens the door, the Man in the Fridge (Eric Idle) emerges and begins singing the \"Galaxy Song\" to the victim, while the Inquisition exit through the fridge.\nRelated sketches.\nCardinal Xim\u00e9nez briefly appears two episodes later (\"The Buzz Aldrin Show\") in a vox pop, again displaying difficulty counting (in this instance, the kinds of aftershave he uses). Later in that episode during the \"Police Constable Pan Am Sketch\", the policeman tells a chemist \"one more peep out of you and I'll do you for heresy\", with the chemist (played by Palin) responding that he \"didn't expect the Spanish Inquisition\"; PC Pan Am (played by Graham Chapman) tells the chemist to shut up.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19166", "revid": "43240415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19166", "title": "Maya Lin", "text": "American designer and artist (born 1959)\nMaya Ying Lin (Chinese: \u6797\u74d4; born October 5, 1959) is an American architect, designer, and sculptor. Born in Athens, Ohio, to Chinese immigrants, she attended Yale University to study architecture. She has an older brother, the poet Tan Lin.\nIn 1981, while still an undergraduate at Yale, Lin achieved national recognition when she won a national design competition for the planned Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington, D.C. The memorial was designed in the minimalist architectural style, and it attracted controversy upon its release but went on to become influential.\nLin has since designed numerous memorials, public and private buildings, landscapes, and sculptures. In 1989, she designed the Civil Rights Memorial in Montgomery, Alabama.\nAlthough best-known for historical memorials, Lin is also known for environmentally themed works that often address environmental decline. According to Lin, she draws inspiration from the architecture of nature but believes that nothing she creates can match its beauty. She also draws inspirations from \"culturally diverse sources, including Japanese gardens, Hopewell Indian earthen mounds and works by American earthworks artists of the 1960s and the 1970s\".\nEarly life and education.\nMaya Lin was born in Athens, Ohio. Her parents emigrated from China to the United States, her father in 1948 and her mother in 1949, and settled in Ohio before Lin was born. Her father, Henry Huan Lin, born in Fuzhou, Fujian, was a ceramist and dean of the Ohio University College of Fine Arts. Her mother, Julia Chang Lin, born in Shanghai, was a poet and professor of literature at Ohio University. She is the \"half\" niece of Lin Huiyin, who was an American-educated artist and poet, and said to have been the first female architect in modern China. Lin Juemin and Lin Yin Ming, both of whom were among the 72 martyrs of the Second Guangzhou uprising, were cousins of her grandfather. Lin Chang-min, a Hanlin of Qing dynasty and the emperor's teacher, fathered Lin Huiyin with his wife, while Maya Lin's father Henry Huan Lin was Lin Chang-Min\u2019s son by his concubine.\nAccording to Lin, she \"didn't even realize\" she was ethnically Chinese until later in life, and that only in her 30s did she acquire an interest in her cultural background.\nLin has said that she did not have many friends when growing up, stayed home a lot, loved to study, and loved school. While still in high school she took courses at Ohio University where she learned to cast bronze in the school's foundry. She graduated in 1977 from Athens High School in The Plains, Ohio, after which she attended Yale University where she earned a Bachelor of Arts in 1981 and a Master of Architecture in 1986.\nEnvironmental concerns.\nAccording to Lin, she has been concerned with environmental issues since she was very young, and dedicated much of her time at Yale University to environmental activism. She attributes her interest in the environment to her upbringing in rural Ohio: the nearby Hopewell and Adena Native America burial mounds inspired her from an early age. Noting that much of her later work has focused on the relationship people have with their environment, as expressed in her earthworks, sculptures, and installations, Lin said: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"I'm very much a product of the growing awareness about ecology and the environmental movement...I am very drawn to landscape, and my work is about finding a balance in the landscape, respecting nature not trying to dominate it. Even the Vietnam Veterans Memorial is an earthwork. All of my work is about slipping things in, inserting an order or a structuring, yet making an interface so that in the end, rather than a hierarchy, there is a balance and tension between the man-made and the natural.\"\nAccording to the scholar Susette Min, Lin's work uncovers \"hidden histories\" to bring attention to landscapes and environments that would otherwise be inaccessible to viewers and \"deploys the concept to discuss the inextricable relationship between nature and the built environment\". Lin's focus on this relationship highlights the impact humanity has on the environment, and draws attention to issues such as global warming, endangered bodies of water, and animal extinction/endangerment. She has explored these issues in her recent memorial, called \"What Is Missing?\"\nAccording to one commentator, Lin constructs her works to have a minimal effect on the environment by utilizing recycled and sustainable materials, by minimizing carbon emissions, and by attempting to avoid damaging the landscapes/ecosystems where she works.\nIn addition to her other activities as an environmentalist, Lin has served on\u00a0the Natural Resources Defense Council board of trustees.\nVietnam Veterans Memorial.\nIn 1981, at 21 and still an undergraduate student, Lin won a public design competition to design the Vietnam Veterans Memorial to be built on the National Mall in Washington D.C. Her design, one of 1,422 submissions, specified a black granite wall with the names of 57,939 fallen soldiers carved into its face (hundreds more have been added since the dedication), to be v-shaped, with one side pointing toward the Lincoln Memorial and the other toward the Washington Monument. The memorial was designed in the minimalist architectural style, which was in contrast to previous war memorials. The memorial was completed in late October 1982 and dedicated in November 1982.\nAccording to Lin, her intention was to create an opening or a wound in the earth to symbolize the pain caused by the war and its many casualties. \"I imagined taking a knife and cutting into the earth, opening it up and with the passage of time, that initial violence and pain would heal,\" she recalled.\nLin's winning design was initially controversial for several reasons: its minimalist design, her lack of professional experience, and her Asian ethnicity. Some objected to the exclusion of the surviving veterans' names, while others complained about the dark complexion of the granite, claiming it expressed a negative attitude towards the Vietnam War. Lin defended her design before the US Congress, and a compromise was reached: \"Three Soldiers\", a bronze depiction of a group of soldiers and an American flag were placed to the side of Lin's design.\nNotwithstanding the initial controversy, the memorial has become an important pilgrimage site for relatives and friends of the dead soldiers, many of whom leave personal tokens and mementos in memory of their loved ones. In 2007, an American Institute of Architects poll ranked the memorial No. 10 on a list of America's Favorite Architecture and is now one of the most visited sites on the National Mall. Furthermore, it now serves as a memorial for the veterans of the Afghanistan and Iraq wars. There is a collection with items left since 2001 from the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund, which includes handwritten letters and notes of those who lost loved ones during these wars. There is also a pair of combat boots and a note with it dedicated to the veterans of the Vietnam War, that reads \"If your generation of Marines had not come home to jeers, insults and protests, my generation would not come home to thanks, handshakes and hugs.\"\nLin once said that if the competition had not been held \"blind\" (with designs submitted by name instead of number), she \"never would have won\" on account of her ethnicity. Her assertion is supported by the fact that she was harassed after her ethnicity was revealed as when prominent businessman and later third-party presidential candidate Ross Perot called her an \"egg roll.\"\nLater work.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLin, who now owns and operates Maya Lin Studio in New York City, has designed numerous projects following the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, including the Civil Rights Memorial in Montgomery, Alabama (1989) and the \"Wave Field\" outdoor installation at the University of Michigan (1995). Lin is represented by the Pace Gallery in New York City.\nThe White House.\nOn February 25, 2010, the Obama administration awarded Lin the 2009 National Medal of Arts.\nBoth \"What is Missing\" and the Vietnam Veterans Memorial were referenced by the Obama administration in its press release that announced Lin as one of the 2016 recipients of the Presidential Medal of Freedom. Nature and the environment have been central concerns for Lin in both her art and architecture.\nWhen informed of her win, Lin noted: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"As an artist I often work in series, and so for me, I wanted my last memorial to be on a subject that I have personally been concerned with and connected to since I was a child. The last memorial is 'What Is Missing?' and encompasses multiple platforms, with temporary and permanent physical installations as well as an interactive online component.\"\nAt the same time, Lin also expressed her concerns for the goals of the upcoming Trump administration: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDesign methodology.\nMaya Lin calls herself a \"designer\", rather than an \"architect\". Her vision and her focus are always on how space needs to be in the future, the balance and relationship with the nature and what it means to people. She has tried to focus less on how politics influences design and more on what emotions the space would create and what it would symbolize to the user. Her belief in a space being connected and the transition from inside to outside being fluid, coupled with what a space means, has led her to create some very memorable designs. She has also worked on sculptures and landscape installations, such as \u201cInput\u201d artwork at Ohio University. In doing so, Lin focuses on memorializing concepts of time periods instead of direct representations of figures, creating an abstract sculptures and installations.\nLin believes that art should be an act of any individual who is willing to say something that is new and not quite familiar. In her own words, Lin's work \"originates from a simple desire to make people aware of their surroundings, not just the physical world but also the psychological world we live in.\" Lin describes her creative process as having a very important writing and verbal component. She first imagines an artwork verbally to understand its concepts and meanings. She believes that gathering ideas and information is especially vital in architecture, which focuses on humanity and life and requires a well-rounded mind. When a project comes her way, she tries to \"understand the definition (of the site) in a verbal before finding the form to understand what a piece is conceptually and what its nature should be even before visiting the site\". After she completely understands the definition of the site, Lin finalizes her designs by creating numerous renditions of her project in model form. In her historical memorials, such as the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, the \"Women's Table\", and the Civil Rights Memorial, Lin tries to focus on the chronological aspect of what she is memorializing. That theme is shown in her art memorializing the changing environment and in charting the depletion of bodies of water. Lin also explores themes of juxtaposing materials and a fusion of opposites: \"I feel I exist on the boundaries. Somewhere between science and art, art and architecture, public and private, east and west... I am always trying to find a balance between these opposing forces, finding the place where opposites meet... existing not on either side but on the line that divides.\"\nPersonal life.\nLin was married to Daniel Wolf (1955\u20132021), a photography dealer and collector, until his death. Her sister-in-law was the philanthropist Diane R. Wolf (1954\u20132008). She has homes in New York and rural Colorado, and is the mother of two daughters, India and Rachel.\nLin has an older brother, the poet Tan Lin.\nRecognition.\nLin has been awarded honorary doctorate degrees from Yale University, Harvard University, the University of Pennsylvania, Williams College, and Smith College. In 1987, she was among the youngest to be awarded an honorary Doctorate of Fine Arts by Yale University.\nIn 1994, she was the subject of the Academy Award-winning documentary \"\". Its title comes from an address she gave at Juniata College in which she spoke of the monument design process in the origin of her work; \"My work originates from a simple desire to make people aware of their surroundings and this can include not just the physical but the psychological world that we live in.\"\nIn 2002, Lin was elected Alumni Fellow of the Yale Corporation, the governing body of Yale University (upon whose campus sits another of Lin's designs, the Women's Table, designed to commemorate the role of women at Yale University), in an unusually public contest. Her opponent was W. David Lee, a local New Haven minister and graduate of the Yale Divinity School, who was running on a platform to build ties to the community with the support of Yale's unionized employees. Lin was supported by Yale President Richard Levin and other members of the Yale Corporation, and she was the officially endorsed candidate of the Association of Yale Alumni.\nIn 2003, Lin was chosen to serve on the selection jury of the World Trade Center Site Memorial Competition. A trend toward minimalism and abstraction was noted among the entrants and the finalists as well as in the chosen design for the World Trade Center Memorial.\nIn 2005, Lin was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Letters, as well as the National Women's Hall of Fame in Seneca Falls, New York.\nPresident Barack Obama awarded Lin the National Medal of Arts in 2009 and the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 2016.\nIn 2022, the Smithsonian's National Portrait Gallery in Washington, D.C. announced the first biographical exhibition, \"One Life: Maya Lin\", dedicated to Lin, noting her contributions as architect, sculptor, environmentalist, and designer of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19167", "revid": "21583272", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19167", "title": "Manuscript", "text": "Document written by hand\nA manuscript (abbreviated MS for singular and MSS for plural) was, traditionally, any document written by hand or typewritten, as opposed to mechanically printed or reproduced in some indirect or automated way. More recently, the term has come to be understood to further include \"any\" written, typed, or word-processed copy of an author's work, as distinguished from the rendition as a printed version of the same.\nBefore the arrival of prints, all documents and books were manuscripts. Manuscripts are not defined by their contents, which may combine writing with mathematical calculations, maps, music notation, explanatory figures, or illustrations.\nTerminology.\nThe word \"manuscript\" derives from the (from , hand and from , to write), and is first recorded in English in 1597. An earlier term in English that shares the meaning of a handwritten document is \"hand-writ\" (or \"handwrit\"), which is first attested around 1175 and is now rarely used. The study of the writing (the \"hand\") in surviving manuscripts is termed palaeography (or paleography). The traditional abbreviations are MS for manuscript and MSS for manuscripts, while the forms MS., ms or ms. for singular, and MSS., mss or mss. for plural (with or without the full stop, all uppercase or all lowercase) are also accepted. The second \"s\" is not simply the plural; by an old convention, a doubling of the last letter of the abbreviation expresses the plural, just as \"pp.\" means \"pages\".\nA manuscript may be a codex (i.e. bound as a book), a scroll, or bound differently or consist of loose pages. Illuminated manuscripts are enriched with pictures, border decorations, elaborately embossed initial letters or full-page illustrations.\nReproduction.\nThe mechanical reproduction of a manuscript is called facsimile. Digital reproductions can be called (high-resolution) scans or digital images.\nHistory.\nBefore the inventions of printing, in China by woodblock and in Europe by movable type in a printing press, all written documents had to be both produced and reproduced by hand. In the west, manuscripts were produced in form of scrolls (\"volumen\" in Latin) or books (\"codex\", plural \"codices\"). Manuscripts were produced on vellum and other parchment, on papyrus, and on paper.\nIn Indian subcontinent and Southeast Asia, palm leaf manuscripts, with a distinctive long rectangular shape, were used dating back to the 5th century BCE or earlier, and in some cases continued to be used until the 19th century. In China, bamboo and wooden slips were used prior to the introduction of paper. In Russia, birch bark documents as old as from the 11th century have survived.\nPaper spread from China via the Islamic world to Europe by the 14th century, and by the late 15th century had largely replaced parchment for many purposes there. When Greek or Latin works were published, numerous professional copies were sometimes made simultaneously by scribes in a scriptorium, each making a single copy from an original that was declaimed aloud.\nThe oldest written manuscripts have been preserved by the perfect dryness of their Middle Eastern resting places, whether placed within sarcophagi in Egyptian tombs, or reused as mummy-wrappings, discarded in the middens of Oxyrhynchus or secreted for safe-keeping in jars and buried (Nag Hammadi library) or stored in dry caves (Dead Sea Scrolls). Volcanic ash preserved some of the Roman library of the Villa of the Papyri in Herculaneum. Manuscripts in Tocharian languages, written on palm leaves, survived in desert burials in the Tarim Basin of Central Asia.\nIronically, the manuscripts that were being most carefully preserved in the libraries of antiquity are virtually all lost. Papyrus has a life of at most a century or two in relatively humid Italian or Greek conditions; only those works copied onto parchment, usually after the general conversion to Christianity, have survived, and by no means all of those.\nOriginally, all books were in manuscript form. In China, and later other parts of East Asia, woodblock printing was used for books from about the 7th century. The earliest dated example is the Diamond Sutra of 868. In the Islamic world and the West, all books were in manuscript until the introduction of movable type printing in about 1450. Manuscript copying of books continued for a least a century, as printing remained expensive. Private or government documents remained hand-written until the invention of the typewriter in the late 19th century. Because of the likelihood of errors being introduced each time a manuscript was copied, the filiation of different versions of the same text is a fundamental part of the study and criticism of all texts that have been transmitted in manuscript.\nIn Southeast Asia, in the first millennium, documents of sufficiently great importance were inscribed on soft metallic sheets such as copperplate, softened by refiner's fire and inscribed with a metal stylus. In the Philippines, for example, as early as 900 AD, specimen documents were not inscribed by stylus, but were punched much like the style of today's dot-matrix printers. This type of document was rare compared to the usual leaves and bamboo staves that were inscribed. However, neither the leaves nor paper were as durable as the metal document in the hot, humid climate. In Burma, the kammavaca, Buddhist manuscripts, were inscribed on brass, copper or ivory sheets, and even on discarded monk robes folded and lacquered. In Italy some important Etruscan texts were similarly inscribed on thin gold plates: similar sheets have been discovered in Bulgaria. Technically, these are all inscriptions rather than manuscripts.\nIn the Western world, from the classical period through the early centuries of the Christian era, manuscripts were written without spaces between the words (scriptio continua), which makes them especially hard for the untrained to read. Extant copies of these early manuscripts written in Greek or Latin and usually dating from the 4th century to the 8th century, are classified according to their use of either all upper case or all lower case letters. Hebrew manuscripts, such as the Dead Sea scrolls make no such differentiation. Manuscripts using all upper case letters are called majuscule, those using all lower case are called minuscule. Usually, the majuscule scripts such as uncial are written with much more care. The scribe lifted his pen between each stroke, producing an unmistakable effect of regularity and formality. On the other hand, while minuscule scripts can be written with pen-lift, they may also be cursive, that is, use little or no pen-lift.\nIslamic world.\nIslamic manuscripts were produced in different ways depending on their use and time period. Parchment (vellum) was a common way to produce manuscripts. Manuscripts eventually transitioned to using paper in later centuries with the diffusion of paper making in the Islamic empire. When Muslims encountered paper in Central Asia, its use and production spread to Iran, Iraq, Syria, Egypt, and North Africa during the 8th century.\nAfrica.\n4,203 of Timbuktu's manuscripts were burned or stolen during the armed conflict in Mali between 2012 and 2013. 90% of these manuscripts were saved by the population organized around the NGO \"Sauvegarde et valorisation des manuscrits pour la d\u00e9fense de la culture islamique\" (SAVAMA-DCI). Some 350,000 manuscripts were transported to safety, and 300,000 of them were still in Bamako in 2022. An international consultation on the safeguarding, accessibility and promotion of ancient manuscripts in the Sahel was held at the UNESCO office in Bamako in 2020.\nWestern world.\nMost surviving pre-modern manuscripts use the codex format (as in a modern book), which had replaced the scroll by Late Antiquity. Parchment or vellum, as the best type of parchment is known, had also replaced papyrus, which was not nearly so long lived and has survived to the present almost exclusively in the very dry climate of Egypt, although it was widely used across the Roman world. Parchment is made of animal skin, normally calf, sheep, or goat, but also other animals. With all skins, the quality of the finished product is based on how much preparation and skill was put into turning the skin into parchment. Parchment made from calf or sheep was the most common in Northern Europe, while civilizations in Southern Europe preferred goatskin. Often, if the parchment is white or cream in color and veins from the animal can still be seen, it is calfskin. If it is yellow, greasy or in some cases shiny, then it was made from sheepskin.\nVellum comes from the Latin word vitulinum which means \"of calf\"/ \"made from calf\". For modern parchment makers and calligraphers, and apparently often in the past, the terms parchment and vellum are used based on the different degrees of quality, preparation and thickness, and not according to which animal the skin came from, and because of this, the more neutral term \"membrane\" is often used by modern academics, especially where the animal has not been established by testing.\nScripts.\nMerovingian script, or \"Luxeuil minuscule\", is named after an abbey in Western France, the Luxeuil Abbey, founded by the Irish missionary St Columba c.\u2009590. Caroline minuscule is a calligraphic script developed as a writing standard in Europe so that the Latin alphabet could be easily recognized by the literate class from different regions. It was used in the Holy Roman Empire between approximately 800 and 1200. Codices, classical and Christian texts, and educational material were written in Carolingian minuscule throughout the Carolingian Renaissance. The script developed into blackletter and became obsolete, though its revival in the Italian renaissance forms the basis of more recent scripts. In \"Introduction to Manuscript Studies\", Clemens and Graham associate the beginning of this text coming from the Abby of Saint-Martin at Tours.\nCaroline Minuscule arrived in England in the second half of the 10th century. Its adoption there, replacing Insular script, was encouraged by the importation of continental European manuscripts by Saints Dunstan, Aethelwold, and Oswald. This script spread quite rapidly, being employed in many English centres for copying Latin texts. English scribes adapted the Carolingian script, giving it proportion and legibility. This new revision of the Caroline minuscule was called English Protogothic Bookhand.\nAnother script that is derived from the Caroline Minuscule was the German Protogothic Bookhand. It originated in southern Germany during the second half of the 12th century.\nAll the individual letters are Caroline; but just as with English Protogothic Bookhand it evolved. This can be seen most notably in the arm of the letter h. It has a hairline that tapers out by curving to the left. When first read the German Protogothic h looks like the German Protogothic b. Many more scripts sprang out of the German Protogothic Bookhand. After those came Bastard Anglicana, which is best described as:\nThe coexistence in the Gothic period of formal hands employed for the copying of books and cursive scripts used for documentary purposes eventually resulted in cross-fertilization between these two fundamentally different writing styles. Notably, scribes began to upgrade some of the cursive scripts. A script that has been thus formalized is known as a \"bastard\" script (whereas a bookhand that has had cursive elements fused onto it is known as a hybrid script). The advantage of such a script was that it could be written more quickly than a pure bookhand; it thus recommended itself to scribes in a period when demand for books was increasing and authors were tending to write longer texts. In England during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, many books were written in the script known as Bastard Anglicana.\nGenres.\nFrom ancient texts to medieval maps, anything written down for study would have been done with manuscripts. Some of the most common genres were bibles, religious commentaries, philosophy, law and government texts.\nBiblical.\n\"The Bible was the most studied book of the Middle Ages\". The Bible was the center of medieval religious life. Along with the Bible came scores of commentaries. Commentaries were written in volumes, with some focusing on just single pages of scripture. Across Europe, there were universities that prided themselves on their biblical knowledge. Along with universities, certain cities also had their own celebrities of biblical knowledge during the medieval period.\nBook of hours.\nA book of hours is a type of devotional text which was widely popular during the Middle Ages. They are the most common type of surviving medieval illuminated manuscripts. Each book of hours contain a similar collection of texts, prayers, and psalms but decoration can vary between each and each example. Many have minimal illumination, often restricted to ornamented initials, but books of hours made for wealthier patrons can be extremely extravagant with full-page miniatures. These books were used for owners to recite prayers privately eight different times, or hours, of the day.\nLiturgical books and calendars.\nAlong with Bibles, large numbers of manuscripts made in the Middle Ages were received in Church. Due to the complex church system of rituals and worship these books were the most elegantly written and finely decorated of all medieval manuscripts. Liturgical books usually came in two varieties. Those used during mass and those for divine office.\nMost liturgical books came with a calendar in the front. This served as a quick reference point for important dates in Jesus' life and to tell church officials which saints were to be honored and on what day.\nModern variations.\nIn the context of library science, a manuscript is defined as any hand-written item in the collections of a library or an archive. For example, a library's collection of hand-written letters or diaries is considered a manuscript collection. Such manuscript collections are described in finding aids, similar to an index or table of contents to the collection, in accordance with national and international content standards such as and ISAD(G).\nIn other contexts, however, the use of the term \"manuscript\" no longer necessarily means something that is hand-written. By analogy a typescript has been produced on a typewriter.\nPublishing.\nIn book, magazine, and music publishing, a manuscript is an autograph or copy of a work, written by an author, composer or copyist. Such manuscripts generally follow standardized typographic and formatting rules, in which case they can be called fair copy (whether original or copy). The staff paper commonly used for handwritten music is, for this reason, often called \"manuscript paper\".\nFilm and theatre.\nIn film and theatre, a manuscript, or \"script\" for short, is an author's or dramatist's text, used by a theatre company or film crew during the production of the work's performance or filming. More specifically, a motion picture manuscript is called a screenplay; a television manuscript, a teleplay; a manuscript for the theatre, a stage play; and a manuscript for audio-only performance is often called a radio play, even when the recorded performance is disseminated via non-radio means.\nInsurance.\nIn insurance, a manuscript policy is one that is negotiated between the insurer and the policyholder, as opposed to an off-the-shelf form supplied by the insurer.\nPreservation.\nAbout 300,000 Latin, 55,000 Greek, 30,000 Armenian and 12,000 Georgian medieval manuscripts have survived. National Geographic estimates that 700,000 African manuscripts have survived at the University of Timbuktu in Mali.\nRepositories.\nMajor U.S. repositories of medieval manuscripts include:\nMany European libraries have far larger collections.\nBecause they are books, pre-modern manuscripts are best described using bibliographic rather than archival standards. The standard endorsed by the American Library Association is known as AMREMM. A growing digital catalog of pre-modern manuscripts is Digital Scriptorium, hosted by the University of California at Berkeley.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19168", "revid": "211905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19168", "title": "Misogyny", "text": "Prejudice against, or hatred of, women\nMisogyny () is hatred of, contempt for, or prejudice against women or girls. It is a form of sexism that can keep women at a lower social status than men, thus maintaining the social roles of patriarchy. Misogyny has been widely practised for thousands of years. It is reflected in art, literature, human societal structure, historical events, mythology, philosophy, and religion worldwide.\nAn example of misogyny is violence against women, which includes domestic violence and, in its most extreme forms, misogynist terrorism and femicide. Misogyny also often operates through sexual harassment, coercion, and psychological techniques aimed at controlling women, and by legally or socially excluding women from full citizenship. In some cases, misogyny rewards women for accepting an inferior status.\nMisogyny can be understood both as an attitude held by individuals, primarily by men, and as a widespread cultural custom or system. Sometimes misogyny manifests in obvious and bold ways; other times it is more subtle or disguised in ways that provide plausible deniability.\nIn feminist thought, misogyny is related to femmephobia, the rejection of feminine qualities. It holds in contempt institutions, work, hobbies, or habits associated with women. It rejects any aspects of men that are seen as feminine or unmanly. Racism and other prejudices may reinforce and overlap with misogyny.\nThe English word \"misogyny\" was coined in the middle of the 17th century from the Greek 'hatred' + 'woman'. The word was rarely used until it was popularised by second-wave feminism in the 1970s.\nDefinitions.\nEnglish and American dictionaries define misogyny as \"hatred of women\" and as \"hatred, dislike, or mistrust of women\".\nIn 2012, primarily in response to a speech in the Australian Parliament, the \"Macquarie Dictionary\" (which documents Australian English and New Zealand English) expanded its definition to include not only hatred of women but also \"entrenched prejudices against women\".\nDistinctions from other terms.\nThe American \"Merriam-Webster Dictionary\" distinguishes misogyny, \"a hatred of women\", from sexism, which denotes sex-based discrimination, and \"behavior, conditions, or attitudes that foster stereotypes of social roles based on sex\".\nPhilosopher Kate Manne distinguishes these terms:\nManne defines misogyny as the attempt to control and punish women who challenge male dominance. She finds the traditional \"hatred of women\" definition of misogyny too simplistic, noting it does not account for how perpetrators of misogynistic violence may love certain women; for example, their mothers. Instead, misogyny rewards women who uphold the status quo and punishes those who reject women's subordinate status. Manne distinguishes sexism, which she says seeks to rationalise and justify patriarchy, from misogyny, which she calls the \"law enforcement\" branch of patriarchy:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[S]exist ideology will tend to discriminate \"between\" men and women, typically by alleging sex differences beyond what is known or could be known, and sometimes counter to our best current scientific evidence. Misogyny will typically differentiate between good women and \"bad\" ones, and punishes the latter. [\u2026] Sexism wears a lab coat; misogyny goes on witch hunts. \nFemininity researcher Rhea Ashley Hoskin dinstinguishes between oppression based on female gender, and oppression based on feminine gender expression. The academic term for the latter is femmephobia.\nIn sociology and psychology.\nSocial psychology research describes overt misogyny as \"blatant hostile sexism\" that raises resistance in women, as opposed to \"manifestations of benevolent sexism\" or chivalry that lead women to behave in a manner perpetuating patriarchal arrangements.\nAccording to sociologist Allan G. Johnson, \"misogyny is a cultural attitude of hatred for females because they are female\". Johnson argues that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Misogyny ... is a central part of sexist prejudice and ideology and, as such, is an important basis for the oppression of females in male-dominated societies. Misogyny is manifested in many different ways, from jokes to pornography to violence to the self-contempt women may be taught to feel toward their own bodies.\nSociologist Michael Flood at the University of Wollongong defines misogyny as the hatred of women, and notes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Though most common in men, misogyny also exists in and is practiced by women against other women or even themselves. Misogyny functions as an ideology or belief system that has accompanied patriarchal, or male-dominated societies for thousands of years and continues to place women in subordinate positions with limited access to power and decision making. [\u2026] Aristotle contended that women exist as natural deformities or imperfect males [\u2026] Ever since, women in Western cultures have internalised their role as societal scapegoats, influenced in the twenty-first century by multimedia objectification of women with its culturally sanctioned self-loathing and fixations on plastic surgery, anorexia and bulimia.\nOther forms of the word.\n\"Misogynous\" and \"misogynistic\" can both be used as an adjectival form of the word. The noun \"misogynist\" can be used for a woman-hating person. The counterpart of misogyny is misandry, the hatred or dislike of men. Marc A. Ouellette argues in \"International Encyclopedia of Men and Masculinities\" that \"misandry lacks the systemic, transhistoric, institutionalized, and legislated antipathy of misogyny\". Anthropologist David Gilmore argues that misogyny is a \"near-universal phenomenon\" and that there is no male equivalent. The antonym of misogyny, philogyny\u2014love or fondness towards women\u2014 is not widely used. Words derived from the word \"misogyny\" and denoting connected concepts include misogynoir, the intersection of anti-black racism and misogyny faced by Black women; transmisogyny, the intersection of misogyny and transphobia faced by trans women and transfeminine people; and transmisogynoir, the confluence of these faced by black trans women and transfeminine people.\nOrigins.\nMisogyny likely arose at the same time as patriarchy: three to five thousand years ago at the start of the Bronze Age. The three main monotheistic religions of Judaism, Christianity and Islam promoted patriarchal societal structures, and used misogyny to keep women at a lower status. Misogyny gained strength in the Middle Ages, especially in Christian societies. In parallel to these, misogyny was also practised in societies such as the Romans, Greeks, and the tribes of the Amazon Basin and Melanesia, who did not follow a monotheistic religion. Nearly every human culture contains evidence of misogyny.\nAnthropologist David D. Gilmore argues that misogyny is rooted in men's conflicting feelings: men's existential dependence on women for procreation, and men's fear of women's power over them in their times of male weakness, contrasted against the deep-seated needs of men for the love, care and comfort of women\u2014a need that makes the men feel vulnerable.\nAngela Saini notes that a large proportion of women in ancient societies were kidnapped brides from other cultures. Such a woman was often forced to marry a man who had killed her family. Misogynistic suspicion in ancient Greece and elsewhere is to some degree explained by male anxiety that women would some day revolt against their captors. Saini argues that patriarchy and gender stereotyping emerged at the same time as the state.\nHistorical usage.\nClassical Greece.\nIn his book \"City of Sokrates: An Introduction to Classical Athens\", J.W. Roberts argues that older than tragedy and comedy was a misogynistic tradition in Greek literature, reaching back at least as far as Hesiod. He claims that the term \"misogyny\" itself comes directly into English from the Ancient Greek word \"misogunia\" (), which survives in several passages.\nThe earlier, longer, and more complete passage comes from a moral tract known as \"On Marriage\" (\"c\". 150 BC) by the stoic philosopher Antipater of Tarsus. pp. 221\u2013226.\n\"Misogunia\" appears in the accusative case on page 224 of Deming, as the fifth word in line 33 of his Greek text.\nIt is split over lines 25\u201326 in von Arnim. Antipater argues that marriage is the foundation of the state, and considers it to be based on divine (polytheistic) decree. He uses \"misogunia\" to describe the sort of writing the tragedian Euripides eschews, stating that he \"reject[s] the hatred of women in his writing\" (\u1f00\u03c0\u03bf\u03b8\u03ad\u03bc\u03b5\u03bd\u03bf\u03c2 \u03c4\u1f74\u03bd \u1f10\u03bd \u03c4\u1ff7 \u03b3\u03c1\u03ac\u03c6\u03b5\u03b9\u03bd \u03bc\u03b9\u03c3\u03bf\u03b3\u03c5\u03bd\u03af\u03b1\u03bd). He then offers an example of this, quoting from a lost play of Euripides in which the merits of a dutiful wife are praised.\nAccording to Tieleman other surviving use of the Ancient Greek word is by Chrysippus, in a fragment from \"On affections\", quoted by Galen in \"Hippocrates on Affections\". Here, \"misogyny\" is the first in a short list of three \"disaffections\"\u2014women (\"misogunia\"), wine (\"misoinia\", \u03bc\u03b9\u03c3\u03bf\u03b9\u03bd\u03af\u03b1) and humanity (\"misanthr\u014dpia\", \u03bc\u03b9\u03c3\u03b1\u03bd\u03b8\u03c1\u03c9\u03c0\u03af\u03b1). Chrysippus' point is more abstract than Antipater's, and Galen quotes the passage as an example of an opinion contrary to his own. What is clear, however, is that he groups hatred of women with hatred of humanity generally, and even hatred of wine. \"It was the prevailing medical opinion of his day that wine strengthens body and soul alike.\" So Chrysippus, like his fellow stoic Antipater, views misogyny negatively, as a disease; a dislike of something that is good. It is this issue of conflicted or alternating emotions that was philosophically contentious to the ancient writers. Ricardo Salles suggests that the general stoic view was that \"[a] man may not only alternate between philogyny and misogyny, philanthropy and misanthropy, but be prompted to each by the other\".\nIn the \"Routledge philosophy guidebook to Plato and the Republic\", Nickolas Pappas describes the \"problem of misogyny\" and states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the \"Apology\", Socrates calls those who plead for their lives in court \"no better than women\" (35b)... The \"Timaeus\" warns men that if they live immorally they will be reincarnated as women (42b-c; cf. 75d-e). The \"Republic\" contains a number of comments in the same spirit (387e, 395d-e, 398e, 431b-c, 469d), evidence of nothing so much as of contempt toward women. Even Socrates' words for his bold new proposal about marriage... suggest that the women are to be \"held in common\" by men. He never says that the men might be held in common by the women... We also have to acknowledge Socrates' insistence that men surpass women at any task that both sexes attempt (455c, 456a), and his remark in Book 8 that one sign of democracy's moral failure is the sexual equality it promotes (563b).\n\"Misogynist\" is also found in the Greek\u2014\"misogun\u0113s\" ()\u2014in \"Deipnosophistae\" and in Plutarch's \"Parallel Lives\", where it is used as the title of Heracles in the history of Phocion. It was the title of a play by Menander, which we know of from book seven (concerning Alexandria) of Strabo's 17 volume \"Geography\", and quotations of Menander by Clement of Alexandria and Stobaeus that relate to marriage. A Greek play with a similar name, \"Misogunos\" (\u039c\u03b9\u03c3\u03cc\u03b3\u03c5\u03bd\u03bf\u03c2) or \"Woman-hater\", is reported by Marcus Tullius Cicero (in Latin) and attributed to the poet Marcus Atilius.\nCicero reports that Greek philosophers considered misogyny to be caused by gynophobia, a fear of women.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is the same with other diseases; as the desire of glory, a passion for women, to which the Greeks give the name of \"philogyneia\": and thus all other diseases and sicknesses are generated. But those feelings which are the contrary of these are supposed to have fear for their foundation, as a hatred of women, such as is displayed in the \"Woman-hater\" of Atilius; or the hatred of the whole human species, as Timon is reported to have done, whom they call the Misanthrope. Of the same kind is inhospitality. And all these diseases proceed from a certain dread of such things as they hate and avoid.\u2014\u200a\nIn summary, despite considering women as generally inferior to men, Greek literature considered misogyny to be a disease\u2014an anti-social condition\u2014in that it ran contrary to their perceptions of the value of women as wives and of the family as the foundation of society. These points are widely noted in the secondary literature.\nEnglish language.\nAccording to the \"Oxford English Dictionary\", the word entered English because of an anonymous proto-feminist play, \"Swetnam the Woman-Hater\", published in 1620 in England. The play is a criticism of anti-woman writer Joseph Swetnam, who it represents with the pseudonym Misogynos. The character of Misogynos is the origin of the term misogynist in English.\nThe term was fairly rare until the mid-1970s. The publication of feminist Andrea Dworkin's 1974 critique \"Woman Hating\" popularised the idea. The term misogyny entered the lexicon of second-wave feminism. Dworkin and her contemporaries used the term to include not only a hatred or contempt of women, but the practice of controlling women with violence and punishing women who reject subordination.\nMisogyny was discussed worldwide in 2012 because of a viral video of a speech by Australian Prime Minister Julia Gillard. Her parliamentary address is known as the Misogyny Speech. In the speech, Gillard powerfully criticised her opponents for holding her policies to a different standard than those of male politicians, and for speaking about her in crudely sexual terms. She was criticised for systemic misogyny, because earlier in the day her Labour Party had passed legislation cutting $728 million in welfare benefits to single mothers.\nGillard's usage of the word \"misogyny\" promoted re-evaluations of the word's published definitions. The \"Macquarie Dictionary\" revised its definition in 2012 to better match the way the word has been used over the prior 30 years. The book \"Down Girl\", which reconsidered the definition using the tools of analytic philosophy, was inspired in part by Gillard.\nReligion.\nAncient Greek.\nIn \"Misogyny: The World's Oldest Prejudice\", Jack Holland argues that there is evidence of misogyny in the mythology of the ancient world. In Greek mythology according to Hesiod, the human race had already experienced a peaceful, autonomous existence as a companion to the gods before the creation of women. When Prometheus decides to steal the secret of fire from the gods, Zeus becomes infuriated and decides to punish humankind with an \"evil thing for their delight\". This \"evil thing\" is Pandora, the first woman, who carried a jar (usually described\u2014incorrectly\u2014as a box) which she was told to never open. Pandora cannot resist peeking into the jar, and by opening it she unleashes into the world all evil; labour, sickness, old age, and death.\nBuddhism.\nIn his book \"The Power of Denial: Buddhism, Purity, and Gender\", professor Bernard Faure of Columbia University argued that \"Buddhism is paradoxically neither as sexist nor as egalitarian as is usually thought\". He remarked, \"Many feminist scholars have emphasised the misogynistic (or at least androcentric) nature of Buddhism\" and stated that Buddhism morally exalts its male monks while the mothers and wives of the monks also have important roles. Additionally, he wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nChristianity.\nDifferences in tradition and interpretations of scripture have caused sects of Christianity to differ in their beliefs with regard to their treatment of women.\nIn \"The Troublesome Helpmate\", Katharine M. Rogers argues that Christianity is misogynistic, and she lists what she says are specific examples of misogyny in the Pauline epistles. She states: \"The foundations of early Christian misogyny\u2014its guilt about sex, its insistence on female subjection, its dread of female seduction\u2014are all in St. Paul's epistles.\" In K. K. Ruthven's \"Feminist Literary Studies: An Introduction\", Ruthven makes reference to Rogers' book and argues that the \"legacy of Christian misogyny was consolidated by the so-called 'Fathers' of the Church, like Tertullian, who thought a woman was not only 'the gateway of the devil' but also 'a temple built over a sewer'.\"\nSeveral Christian institutions exclude women. For example, women are excluded from the Mount Athos region of Greece and from the governing hierarchy of the Catholic Church. Some Christian theologians, such as John Knox in his book \"The First Blast of the Trumpet Against the Monstruous Regiment of Women\", have written that women should be excluded from secular government institutions for religious reasons.\nHowever, some other scholars have argued that Christianity does not include misogynistic principles, or at least that a proper interpretation of Christianity would not include misogynistic principles. David M. Scholer, a biblical scholar at Fuller Theological Seminary, stated that the verse (\"There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither slave nor free, there is neither male nor female; for you are all one in Christ Jesus\") is \"the fundamental Pauline theological basis for the inclusion of women and men as equal and mutual partners in all of the ministries of the church\". \nIn \"Christian Men Who Hate Women\", clinical psychologist Margaret J. Rinck has written that Christian social culture often allows a misogynist \"misuse of the biblical ideal of submission\". However, she argues that this a distortion of the \"healthy relationship of mutual submission\" which is actually specified in Christian doctrine, where \"[l]ove is based on a deep, mutual respect as the guiding principle behind all decisions, actions, and plans\". Similarly, Catholic scholar Christopher West argues that \"male domination violates God's plan and is the specific result of sin\".\nIslam.\nThe fourth chapter (or \"sura\") of the Quran is called \"Women\" (\"an-nisa\"). The 34th verse is a key verse in feminist criticism of Islam. The verse notes men's God-given advantages over women. They are consequently their protectors and maintainers. Where women are disobedient \"admonish them, and leave them alone in the sleeping-places and beat them; then if they obey you, do not seek a way against them...\" In his book \"\", University of Southern California, Professor Reza Aslan wrote that \"misogynistic interpretation\" has been persistently attached to An-Nisa, 34 because commentary on the Quran \"has been the exclusive domain of Muslim men\".\nIn his book \"Popular Islam and Misogyny: A Case Study of Bangladesh\", Taj Hashmi discusses misogyny in relation to Muslim culture, writing:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[T]hanks to the subjective interpretations of the Quran (almost exclusively by men), the preponderance of the misogynic mullahs and the regressive Shariah law in most \"Muslim\" countries, Islam is synonymously known as a promoter of misogyny in its worst form... we may draw a line between the Quranic texts and the corpus of avowedly misogynic writing and spoken words by the mullah having very little or no relevance to the Quran.\nThe economic and social position of men and women was reflected in blood money to the family of a victim. The financial loss for a woman was pegged at half that of a man.\nSikhism.\nScholars William M. Reynolds and Julie A. Webber have written that Guru Nanak, the founder of the Sikh faith tradition, was a \"fighter for women's rights\" that was \"in no way misogynistic\" in contrast to some of his contemporaries. However, unconscious misogynistic attitudes in Sikh men have steadily reduced the power of women in Sikhism, such that the Sikh community has been observed to contain toxic masculinity.\nMisogynistic ideas among prominent Western thinkers.\nNumerous influential Western philosophers have expressed ideas that have been characterised as misogynistic, including Aristotle, Ren\u00e9 Descartes, Thomas Hobbes, John Locke, David Hume, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, G. W. F. Hegel, Arthur Schopenhauer, Friedrich Nietzsche, Sigmund Freud, Otto Weininger, Oswald Spengler, and John Lucas. Because of the influence of these thinkers, feminist scholars trace misogyny in Western culture to these philosophers and their ideas.\nAristotle.\nAristotle believed women were inferior and described them as \"deformed males\". In his work \"Politics\", he states\nas regards the sexes, the male is by nature superior and the female inferior, the male ruler and the female subject 4 (1254b13-14).\nAnother example is \"Cynthia's catalogue\" in which Cynthia states \"Aristotle says that the courage of a man lies in commanding, a woman's lies in obeying; that 'matter yearns for form, as the female for the male and the ugly for the beautiful'; that women have fewer teeth than men; that a female is an incomplete male or 'as it were, a deformity'. Aristotle believed that men and women naturally differed both physically and mentally. He claimed that women are \"more mischievous, less simple, more impulsive ... more compassionate[,] ... more easily moved to tears[,] ... more jealous, more querulous, more apt to scold and to strike[,] ... more prone to despondency and less hopeful[,] ... more void of shame or self-respect, more false of speech, more deceptive, of more retentive memory [and] ... also more wakeful; more shrinking [and] more difficult to rouse to action\" than men.\nJean-Jacques Rousseau.\nJean-Jacques Rousseau is well known for his views against equal rights for women. For example, in his treatise \"Emile\", he writes: \"Always justify the burdens you impose upon girls but impose them anyway\u00a0... . They must be thwarted from an early age\u00a0... . They must be exercised to constraint, so that it costs them nothing to stifle all their fantasies to submit them to the will of others.\" He also writes that women should be \"closed up in their houses\" and \"must receive the decisions of fathers and husbands like that of the church.\"\nArthur Schopenhauer.\nBased on his essay \"On Women\" (\u00dcber die Weiber), Arthur Schopenhauer has been noted as a misogynist by many such as the philosopher, critic, and author Tom Grimwood. In a 2008 article published in the philosophical journal of \"Kritique,\" Grimwood argues that Schopenhauer's misogynistic works have largely escaped attention despite being more noticeable than those of other philosophers such as Nietzsche. \nSchopenhauer condemned what he called \"Teutonico-Christian stupidity\" on female affairs. He argued that women are \"by nature meant to obey\" as they are \"childish, frivolous, and short sighted\". He also argued that women did not possess any real beauty:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is only a man whose intellect is clouded by his sexual impulse that could give the name of the \"fair sex\" to that under-sized, narrow-shouldered, broad-hipped, and short-legged race; for the whole beauty of the sex is bound up with this impulse. Instead of calling them beautiful there would be more warrant for describing women as the unaesthetic sex.\nNietzsche.\nIn \"Beyond Good and Evil\", Friedrich Nietzsche stated that stricter controls on women was a condition of \"every elevation of culture\". In his \"Thus Spoke Zarathustra\", he has a female character say \"You are going to women? Do not forget the whip!\" In \"Twilight of the Idols\", Nietzsche writes \"Women are considered profound. Why? Because we never fathom their depths. But women aren't even shallow.\" There is controversy over the questions of whether or not this amounts to misogyny, whether his polemic against women is meant to be taken literally, and the exact nature of his opinions of women.\nHegel.\nHegel's view of women has been characterised as misogynistic. Passages from Hegel's \"Elements of the Philosophy of Right\" illustrate the criticism:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Women are capable of education, but they are not made for activities which demand a universal faculty such as the more advanced sciences, philosophy and certain forms of artistic production... Women regulate their actions not by the demands of universality, but by arbitrary inclinations and opinions.\nViolence.\nTerrorism and hate crimes.\nFemicide is the name of a hate crime, the intentional killing of women or girls on account of their sex. It is ideological misogynist killing, and in some cases may also be an example of domestic violence.\nMisogynist terrorism is terrorism intended to punish woman. Since 2018 counter-terrorism professionals such as ICCT and START have tracked misogyny or male supremacy as ideologies that have motivated terrorism. They describe this form of terror as a \"rising threat\". Among the attacks designated as misogynist terrorism are the 2014 Isla Vista killings and the 2018 Toronto van attack. Some of the attackers have identified with the incel movement, and were motivated to kill by a perception of being entitled to sexual access to women. However, misogyny is common among mass killers, even when it is not the primary motivation.\nOnline misogyny.\nMisogynistic rhetoric is pervasive online and has grown more aggressive over time. Online misogyny includes both individual attempts to intimidate and denigrate women, denial of gender inequity (neosexism), and also coordinated, collective attempts such as vote brigading and the Gamergate antifeminist harassment campaign. In a paper written for the \"Journal of International Affairs\", Kim Barker and Olga Jurasz discuss how online misogyny can lead to women facing obstacles when trying to engage in the public and political spheres of the Internet due to the abusive nature of these spaces. They also suggest regulations and shut downs of online misogyny through both governmental and non-governmental means.\nCoordinated attacks.\nThe most likely targets for misogynistic attacks by coordinated groups are women who are visible in the public sphere, women who speak out about the threats they receive, and women who are perceived to be associated with feminism or feminist gains. Authors of misogynistic messages are usually anonymous or otherwise difficult to identify. Their rhetoric involves misogynistic epithets and graphic or sexualised imagery. It centres on the women's physical appearance, and prescribes sexual violence as a corrective for the targeted women. Examples of people who spoke out about misogynistic attacks are Anita Sarkeesian, Laurie Penny, Caroline Criado Perez, Stella Creasy, and Lindy West.\nThese attacks do not always remain online only. Swatting was used to bring Gamergate attacks into the physical world.\nLanguage used.\nThe insults and threats directed at different women tend to be very similar. Jude Doyle, who has been the target of online threats, noted the \"overwhelmingly impersonal, repetitive, stereotyped quality\" of the abuse, the fact that \"all of us are being called the same things, in the same tone\".\nA 2016 study conducted by the think tank Demos found that the majority of Twitter messages containing the words \"whore\" or \"slut\" were advertisements for pornography. Of those that were not, a majority used the terms in a non-aggressive way, such a discussion of slut-shaming. Of those that used the terms \"whore\" or \"slut\" in an aggressive, insulting way, about half were women and half were men. Twitter users most frequently targeted by women with aggressive insults were celebrities, such as Beyonc\u00e9 Knowles.\nA 2020 study published in the journal \"New Media &amp; Society\" also discusses how language on the internet can contribute to online misogyny. The authors specifically criticise \"Urban Dictionary\", claiming the language used in the definitions are misogynistic and anti-feminist, rather than simply being a collaborative dictionary.\nA 2021 study published at the meeting of the \"Association for Computational Linguistics\" notes that online misogyny presents differently in different contexts. For example: Spanish online discussions show a stronger presence of dominance; Italian misogyny has a plurality of stereotyping and objectification; English online misogyny most frequently involves discrediting women; and Danish discussions primarily express neo-sexism.\nIncels.\nIncels, or involuntary celibates, is an online community of men who believe they cannot get into heterosexual relationships. They share a common belief that women pick partners based solely on looks, so due to their unattractiveness, they will be alone forever. Due to this perception of themselves, incels in turn hate women, and believe that men are systematically discriminated against. Incels have a large network of male-orientated websites dedicated to the cyber hate of women, discrimination, and networking of misogyny.\u00a0In the incel form of misogyny, all women are discriminated against, however, women of colour are doubly denigrated by sexism and racism.\u00a0Incels endorse and participate in sexism, racism, and mass violence. They are not only a threat in online communities, but they also carry their misogyny over to killing sprees, like the 2014 Isla Vista massacre that inspired other incel acts of violence.\u00a0Incel existence and rhetoric is a good example of misogyny online.\nWith white supremacy.\nAndrew Anglin uses the white supremacist website \"The Daily Stormer\" as a platform to promote misogynistic conspiracy theories, claiming that politically active \"[w]hite women across the Western world\" are pushing for liberal immigration policies \"to ensure an endless supply of Black and Arab men to satisfy their depraved sexual desires\". In July 2018, Anglin summarised his misogynistic views, writing: \"Look, I hate women. I think they deserve to be beaten, raped and locked in cages.\" The term misogynoir describes misogyny directed towards Black women where prejudice based upon race and gender play reinforcing roles.\nPsychological impact.\nWomen who experience internalised misogyny may express it through minimising the value of women, mistrusting women, and believing gender bias in favour of men. A common manifestation of internalised misogyny is lateral violence.\nMisogyny has taken shape as sexual harassment.\nMisogynist attitudes lead to the physical, sexual, and emotional abuse of gender nonconforming boys in childhood.\nFeminist theory.\n\"Good\" versus \"bad\" women.\nMany feminists have written that the notions of \"good\" women and \"bad\" women are imposed upon women in order to control them. Women who are easy to control, or who advocate for their own oppression, may be told they are good. The categories of bad and good also cause fighting among women; Helen Lewis identifies this \"long tradition of regulating female behaviour by defining women in opposition to one another\" as the architecture of misogyny.\nThe \"Madonna\u2013whore dichotomy\" or \"virgin/whore dichotomy\" is the perception of women as either good and chaste or as bad and promiscuous. Belief in this dichotomy leads to misogyny, according to the feminist perspective, because the dichotomy appears to justify policing women's behaviour. Misogynists seek to punish \"bad\" women for their sexuality. Author Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie observes that when women describe being harassed or assaulted (as in the #MeToo movement) they are viewed as deserving sympathy only if they are \"good\" women: non-sexual, and perhaps helpless.\nIn her 1974 book \"Woman Hating\", Andrea Dworkin uses traditional fairy tales to illustrate misogyny. Fairy tales designate certain women as \"good\", for example Sleeping Beauty and Snow White, who are inert, passive characters. Dworkin observed that these characters \"never think, act, initiate, confront, resist, challenge, feel, care, or question. Sometimes they are forced to do housework.\" In contrast, the \"evil\" women who populate fairy tales are queens, witches, and other women with power. Further, men in fairy tales are said to be good kings and good husbands irrespective of their actions. For Dworkin, this illustrates that under misogyny only powerless women are allowed to be seen as good. No similar judgement is applied to men.\nIn her book \"Right-Wing Women\", Dworkin adds that powerful women are tolerated by misogynists provided women use their power to reinforce the power of men and to oppose feminism. Dworkin gives Phyllis Schlafly and Anita Bryant as examples of powerful women tolerated by anti-feminists only because they advocated for their own oppression. Women may even be worshipped or called superior to men if they are sufficiently \"good\", meaning obedient or inert.\nPhilosopher Kate Manne argues that the word \"misogyny\" as used by modern feminists denotes not a generalised hatred of women, but instead the system of distinguishing good from bad women. Misogyny is like a police force, Manne writes, that rewards or punishes women based on these judgements.\nPatriarchal bargain.\nIn the late 20th century, second-wave feminist theorists argued that misogyny is both a cause and a result of patriarchal social structures.\nEconomist Deniz Kandiyoti has written that colonisers of the Middle East, Africa, and Asia kept conquered armies of men under control by offering them complete power over women. She calls this the \"patriarchal bargain\". Men who were interested in accepting the bargain were promoted to leadership by colonial powers, causing the colonised societies to become more misogynistic.\nContempt for the feminine.\nJulia Serano defines misogyny as not only hatred of women per se, but the \"tendency to dismiss and deride femaleness and femininity\". In this view, misogyny also causes homophobia against gay men because gay men are stereotyped as feminine and weak; misogyny likewise causes anxiety among straight men that they will be seen as unmanly. Serano's book \"Whipping Girl\" argues that most anti-trans sentiment directed at trans women should be understood as misogyny. By embracing femininity, the book argues, trans women cast doubt on the superiority of masculinity.\nCulture rewards traits that are considered masculine and devalues traits that seem feminine, according to Tracy M. Hallstead at Quinnipiac University. From childhood, boys and men are told to \"man up\" to appear tough by distancing themselves from feminine things. Boys learn that it is shameful to be seen as emotional, dependent, or vulnerable. Men raised in this way may disown femininity and may even learn to despise it. In this view, misogyny is directed not only at women, but at any feminine qualities that men see within themselves.\nThis contempt for the feminine causes men who feel that they must assert their dominance over women by controlling them, Hallstead writes. She illustrates this with the ancient story of Pygmalion, a sculptor who hated \"the faults beyond measure which nature has given to women\". Pygmalion creates a sculpture of a woman that magically comes alive. Pygmalion is very gratified by the complete control he has over the woman, Galatea, because this control re-enforces his masculinity. He considers Galatea the perfect woman, in spite of his contempt for women, because of his absolute power over her.\nEnglish and Welsh law.\nIn recent years, there has been increasing discussion in England and Wales of misogyny being added to the list of aggravating factors that are commonly referred to by the media as \"hate crimes\". Aggravating factors in criminal sentencing currently include hostility to a victim due to characteristics such as sexuality, race or disability.\nIn 2016, Nottinghamshire Police began a pilot project to record misogynistic behaviour as either hate crime or hate incidents, depending on whether the action was a criminal offence. Over two years (April 2016-March 2018) there were 174 reports made, of which 73 were classified as crimes and 101 as incidents.\nIn September 2018, it was announced that the Law Commission would conduct a review into whether misogynistic conduct, as well as hostility due to ageism, misandry or towards groups such as goths, should be treated as a hate crime.\nIn October 2018, two senior police officers, Sara Thornton, chair of the National Police Chiefs' Council, and Cressida Dick, Commissioner of the Metropolitan Police, stated that police forces should focus on more serious crimes such as burglary and violent offences, and not on recording incidents which are not crimes. Thornton said that \"treating misogyny as a hate crime is a concern for some well-organised campaigning organisations\", but that police forces \"do not have the resources to do everything\".\nIn September 2020 the Law Commission proposed that sex or gender be added to the list of protected characteristics. At the time of the Law Commission's proposals seven police forces in England and Wales classed misogyny as a hate crime, but that definition had not been adopted across the board. A Home Office spokesperson in October 2021 stated that police forces had been requested to record any crime the victim understood was driven by hostility to their sex.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19169", "revid": "44141905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19169", "title": "Martinique", "text": "Overseas department and region of France\nMartinique ( ; or ; Kalinago: or ) is an island in the Lesser Antilles of the West Indies, in the eastern Caribbean Sea. It was previously known as Iguanacaera which translates to 'Iguana Island' in Kari'nja. A part of the French West Indies (Antilles), Martinique is an overseas department and region and a single territorial collectivity of France.\nIt is a part of the European Union as an outermost region within the special territories of members of the European Economic Area, and an associate member of the CARICOM, the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS), the Association of Caribbean States (ACS), and the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) but is not part of the Schengen Area or the European Union Customs Union. The currency in use is the euro. It has been a UNESCO Biosphere Reserve since 2021 for its entire land and sea territory. In September 2023, the volcanoes and forests of Mount Pel\u00e9e and the peaks of northern Martinique, in particular the Pitons du Carbet, were listed as UNESCO World Heritage Sites.\nMartinique has a land area of and a population of 349,925 inhabitants as of January 2024. One of the Windward Islands, it lies directly north of Saint Lucia, northwest of Barbados and south of Dominica. Virtually the entire population speaks both French (the sole official language) and Martinican Creole. \nEtymology.\nIt is thought that Martinique is a corruption of the Ta\u00edno name for the island (/, meaning 'island of flowers', or , 'island of women'), as relayed to Christopher Columbus when he visited the island in 1502. According to historian Sydney Daney, the island was called or \"Iouanacaera\" by the Caribs, which means 'the island of iguanas'.\nHistory.\nPre-European contact and early colonial periods.\nThe island was occupied first by Arawaks, then by Caribs. The Arawaks came from Central America in the 1st century AD and the Caribs came from the Venezuelan coast around the 11th century.\nChristopher Columbus charted Martinique (without landing) in 1493, during his second voyage, but Spain had little interest in the territory. Columbus landed during a later voyage, on 15 June 1502, after a 21-day trade wind passage, his fastest ocean voyage. He spent three days there refilling his water casks, bathing and washing laundry.\nThe indigenous people encountered by Columbus called Martinique \"Matinino\". He was told by indigenous people of\nSan Salvador that \"the island of Matinino was entirely populated by women on whom the Caribs descended at certain seasons of the year; and if these women bore sons they were entrusted to the father to bring up.\" \nIn 1635, Spain formally ceded Martinique to France after 133 years of Spanish rule. On 15 September 1635, Pierre Belain d'Esnambuc, French governor of the island of St. Kitts, landed in the harbour of St. Pierre with 80 to 150 French settlers after being driven off St. Kitts by the English. D'Esnambuc claimed Martinique for the French king Louis XIII and the French \"Compagnie des \u00celes de l'Am\u00e9rique\" (Company of the American Islands), and established the first European settlement at Fort Saint-Pierre (now St. Pierre). D'Esnambuc died in 1636, leaving the company and Martinique in the hands of his nephew, Jacques Dyel du Parquet, who in 1637 became governor of the island.\nIn 1636, in the first of many skirmishes, the indigenous Kalinago rose against the settlers to drive them off the island. The French repelled the natives and forced them to retreat to the eastern part of the island, on the Caravelle Peninsula in the region then known as the Capesterre. When the Caribs revolted against French rule in 1658, the governor Charles Hou\u00ebl du Petit Pr\u00e9 retaliated with war against them. Many were killed, and those who survived were taken captive and expelled from the island. Some Caribs fled to Dominica or St. Vincent, where the French agreed to leave them at peace.\nAfter the death of du Parquet in 1658, his widow Marie Bonnard du Parquet tried to govern Martinique, but dislike of her rule led King Louis XIV to take over the sovereignty of the island. In 1654, Dutch Jews expelled from Portuguese Brazil introduced sugar plantations worked by large numbers of enslaved Africans.\nIn 1667, the Second Anglo-Dutch War spilled out into the Caribbean, with Britain attacking the pro-Dutch French fleet in Martinique, virtually destroying it and further cementing British preeminence in the region. In 1674, the Dutch attempted to conquer the island, but were repulsed.\nBecause there were few Catholic priests in the French Antilles, many of the earliest French settlers were Huguenots who sought religious freedom. Others were transported there as a punishment for refusing to convert to Catholicism, many of them dying en route. Those who survived were quite industrious and over time prospered, though the less fortunate were reduced to the status of indentured servants. Although edicts from King Louis XIV's court regularly came to the islands to suppress the Protestant \"heretics\", these were mostly ignored by island authorities until Louis XIV's Edict of Revocation in 1685.\nAs many of the planters on Martinique were Huguenots suffering under the harsh strictures of the Revocation, they began plotting to emigrate from Martinique with many of their recently arrived brethren. Many of them were encouraged by the Catholics, who looked forward to their departure and the opportunities for seizing their property. By 1688, nearly all of Martinique's French Protestant population had escaped to the British American colonies or Protestant countries in Europe. The policy decimated the population of Martinique and the rest of the French Antilles and set back their colonisation by decades, causing the French king to relax his policies in the region, which left the islands susceptible to British occupation over the next century.\nPost-1688 period.\nUnder governor of the Antilles Charles de Courbon, comte de Bl\u00e9nac, Martinique served as a home port for French pirates, including Captain Crapeau, \u00c9tienne de Montauban, and Mathurin Desmarestz. In later years, pirate Bartholomew Roberts styled his jolly roger as a black flag depicting a pirate standing on two skulls labeled \"ABH\" and \"AMH\" for \"A Barbadian's Head\" and \"A Martinican's Head\" after governors of those two islands sent warships to capture Roberts.\nOn 28 November 1717 the pirate Blackbeard and his pirates captured a French frigate named \"La Concorde\" near the island of Martinique in the West Indies. After selling her cargo of slaves on the island, Blackbeard made the vessel his flagship, added more heavy cannons and renamed her \"Queen Anne's Revenge\".\nMartinique was attacked or occupied several times by the British, in 1693, 1759, 1762 and 1779. Excepting a period from 1802 to 1809 following signing of the Treaty of Amiens, Britain controlled the island for most of the time from 1794 to 1815, when it was traded back to France at the conclusion of the Napoleonic Wars. Martinique has remained a French possession since then.\nDespite the introduction of successful coffee plantations to Martinique in the 1720s, making it the first coffee-growing area in the Western hemisphere, the planter class lost political influence as sugar prices declined in the early 1800s. Slave rebellions in 1789, 1815 and 1822, plus the campaigns of abolitionists such as Cyrille Bissette and Victor Sch\u0153lcher, persuaded the French government to end slavery in the French West Indies in 1848. Martinique was the first French overseas territory in which the abolition decree came into force, on 23 May 1848.\nAs a result, some plantation owners imported workers from India and China. Despite the abolition of slavery, life scarcely improved for most Martinicans; class and racial tensions exploded into rioting in southern Martinique in 1870 following the arrest of L\u00e9opold Lubin, a trader of African ancestry who retaliated after he was beaten by a Frenchman. After several deaths, the revolt was crushed by French militia.\n20th\u201321st centuries.\nOn 8 May 1902, Mont Pel\u00e9e erupted and completely destroyed St. Pierre, killing 30,000 people. Refugees from Martinique travelled by boat to the southern villages of Dominica, and some of them remained permanently on the island. The only survivor in the town of Saint-Pierre, Ludger Sylbaris, was saved by the thick walls of his prison cell. Shortly thereafter, the capital shifted to Fort-de-France, where it remains.\nDuring World War II, the pro-Nazi Vichy government controlled Martinique under Admiral Georges Robert. German U-boats used Martinique for refuelling and re-supply during the Battle of the Caribbean. In 1942, 182 ships were sunk in the Caribbean, dropping to 45 in 1943, and five in 1944. Free French forces took over on the island on Bastille Day, 14 July 1943.\nIn 1946, the French National Assembly voted unanimously to transform the colony into an Overseas Department of France. Meanwhile, the post-war period saw a growing campaign for full independence; a notable proponent of this was the author Aim\u00e9 C\u00e9saire, who founded the Progressive Party of Martinique in the 1950s. Tensions boiled over in December 1959 when riots broke out following a racially-charged altercation between two motorists, resulting in three deaths. In 1962, as a result of this and the global turn against colonialism, the strongly pro-independence OJAM () was formed. Its leaders were later arrested by the French authorities. However, they were later acquitted. Tensions rose again in 1974, when gendarmes shot dead two striking banana workers. However the independence movement lost steam as Martinique's economy faltered in the 1970s, resulting in large-scale emigration. Hurricanes in 1979\u201380 severely affected agricultural output, further straining the economy. Greater autonomy was granted by France to the island in the 1970s\u201380s.\nIn 2009, Martinique was convulsed by the French Caribbean general strikes. Initially focusing on cost-of-living issues, the movement soon took on a racial dimension as strikers challenged the continued economic dominance of the \"B\u00e9k\u00e9\", descendants of French European settlers. President Nicolas Sarkozy later visited the island, promising reform. While ruling out full independence, which he said was desired neither by France nor by Martinique, Sarkozy offered Martiniquans a referendum on the island's future status and degree of autonomy.\nOn 2 February 2023, Martinique adopted its independent activist flag, symbolising its three colours of Pan-Africanism.\nGovernance.\nLike French Guiana, Martinique is a special collectivity (\"Collectivit\u00e9 territoriale unique \" in French) of the French Republic. It is also an outermost region of the European Union. The inhabitants of Martinique are French citizens with full political and legal rights. Martinique sends to the French National Assembly and two senators to the French Senate.\nOn 24 January 2010, during a referendum, the inhabitants of Martinique approved by 68.4% the change to be a \"special (unique) collectivity\" within the framework of article 73 of the French Republic's Constitution. The new council replaces and exercises the powers of both the General Council and the regional council.\nAdministrative divisions.\nMartinique is divided into 4 \"arrondissements\" and 34 \"communes\". It had also been divided into 45 \"cantons\", but these were abolished in 2015. The four arrondissements of the island, with their respective locations, are as follows:\nRepresentation of the State.\nThe prefecture of Martinique is Fort-de-France. The three sub-prefectures are Le Marin, Saint-Pierre and La Trinit\u00e9. The French State is represented in Martinique by a prefect (Stanislas Cazelles since 5 February 2020), and by two sub-prefects in Le Marin (Corinne Blanchot-Prosper) and La Trinit\u00e9 / Saint-Pierre (Nicolas Onimus, appointed on 20 May 2020).\nThe prefecture was criticized for racism following the publication on its Twitter account of a poster calling for physical distancing against the coronavirus and showing a black man and a white man separated by pineapples.\nInstitutions.\nThe President of the Executive Council of Martinique is Serge Letchimy as of 2 July 2021.\nThe Executive Council of Martinique is composed of nine members (a president and eight executive councilors).\nThe deliberative assembly of the territorial collectivity is the Assembly of Martinique, composed of 51 elected members and chaired by Lucien Saliber as of 2 July 2021.\nThe advisory council of the territorial collectivity of Martinique is the Economic, Social, Environmental, Cultural and Educational Council of Martinique (Conseil \u00e9conomique, social, environnemental, de la culture et de l'\u00e9ducation de Martinique), composed of 68 members. Its president is Justin Daniel since 20 May 2021.\nNational representation.\nMartinique has been represented since 17 June 2017, in the National Assembly by four deputies (Serge Letchimy, Jean-Philippe Nilor, Josette Manin and Manu\u00e9la K\u00e9clard-Mond\u00e9sir) and in the Senate by two senators (Maurice Antiste and Catherine Conconne) since 24 September 2017.\nMartinique is also represented in the Economic, Social and Environmental Council by Pierre Marie-Joseph since 26 April 2021.\nInstitutional and statutory evolution of the island.\nDuring the 2000s, the political debate in Martinique focused on the question of the evolution of the island's status. Two political ideologies, assimilationism and autonomism, clashed. On the one hand, there are those who want a change of status based on Article 73 of the French Constitution, i.e., that all French laws apply in Martinique as of right, which in law is called legislative identity, and on the other hand, the autonomists who want a change of status based on Article 74 of the French Constitution, i.e., an autonomous status subject to the regime of legislative specialty following the example of St. Martin and St. Barthelemy.\nSince the constitutional revision of 28 March 2003, Martinique has four options:\nUnlike the overseas departments, the overseas collectivities are subject to legislative specialization. The laws and decrees of the Republic apply to them under certain conditions established by the organic law defining their status. The overseas departments have a greater degree of autonomy than the DOMs. They have an executive council, a territorial council and an economic and social council. The prefect is the representative of the French State in the overseas collectivity.\nHowever, the French Constitution specifies in Article 72-4 that \"no change may be made, for all or part of one of the communities mentioned in the second paragraph of Article 72-3, from one of the regimes provided for in Articles 73 and 74, without the prior consent of the electors of the community or part of the community concerned having been obtained, under the conditions provided for in the following paragraph.\nIn 2003, a new organization is envisaged, in which the regional and departmental institutions would be merged into a single institution. This proposal was rejected in Martinique (but also in Guadeloupe) by 50.48% in a referendum held on 7 December 2003.\nOn 10 January 2010, a consultation of the population was held. Voters were asked to vote in a referendum on a possible change in the status of their territory. The ballot proposed voters to \"approve or reject the transition to the regime provided for in Article 74 of the Constitution\". The majority of voters, 79.3%, said \"no\".\nThe following 24 January, in a second referendum, 68.4% of the population of Martinique approved the transition to a \"single collectivity\" under Article 73 of the Constitution, i.e., a single assembly that would exercise the powers of the General Council and the Regional Council.\nNew collectivity of Martinique.\nThe project of the elected representatives of Martinique to the government proposes a single territorial community governed by Article 73 of the Constitution, whose name is \"Territorial Community of Martinique\". The single assembly that replaces the General Council and the Regional Council is called the \"Assembly of Martinique\". The Assembly of Martinique is composed of 51 councilors, elected for a six-year term of office by the proportional representation system (the electoral district is divided into four sections). A majority bonus of 20% is granted to the first place list.\nThe executive body of this community is called the \"executive council\", which is composed of nine executive councilors, including a president. The president of the community of Martinique is the president of the executive council. The executive council is responsible to the Assembly of Martinique, which may overrule it by a motion of constructive censure. Unlike the previous functioning of the General Council and the Regional Council, the Assembly of Martinique is separate from the Executive Council and is headed by a bureau and a president.\nThe new collectivity of Martinique combines the powers of the general and regional councils, but may obtain new powers through empowerments under Article 73. The executive council is assisted by an advisory council, the Economic, Social, Environmental, Cultural and Educational Council of Martinique.\nThe bill was approved on 26 January 2011, by the French Government. The ordinary law was submitted to Parliament during the first half of 2011 and resulted in the adoption of Law No. 2011-884 27 July 2011, on the territorial communities of French Guiana and Martinique.\nPolitical forces.\nPolitical life in Martinique is essentially based on Martinican political parties and local federations of national parties (PS and LR). The following classification takes into account their position with regard to the statutory evolution of the island: there are the assimilationists (in favor of an institutional or statutory evolution within the framework of Article 73 of the French Constitution), the autonomists and the independentists (in favor of a statutory evolution based on Article 74 of the French Constitution).\nIndeed, on 18 December 2008, during the congress of Martinique's departmental and regional elected representatives, the thirty-three pro-independence elected representatives (MIM/CNCP/MODEMAS/PALIMA) of the two assemblies voted unanimously in favor of a change in the island's status based on Article 74 of the French Constitution, which allows access to autonomy; this change in status was massively rejected (79.3%) by the population during the referendum of 10 January 2010.\nDefence.\nThe defence of the department is the responsibility of the French Armed Forces. Some 1,400 military personnel are deployed in Martinique and Guadeloupe \u2013 centred on the 33e r\u00e9giment d'infanterie de Marine in Martinique and incorporating a reserve company of the regiment located in Guadeloupe.\nFive French Navy vessels are based in Martinique, including: the surveillance frigates and , the patrol and support ship \"Dumont d'Urville\", the \"Combattante\" and the coastal harbor tug (RPC) \"Ma\u00eftos\". The naval aviation element includes two Eurocopter AS565 Panther helicopters able to embark on the two \"Flor\u00e9al\"-class surveillance frigates as required. One \"Engins de D\u00e9barquement Amphibie \u2013 Standards\" (EDA-S) landing craft (\"Coutelas\") is to be delivered to naval forces based in Martinique by 2025. The landing craft is to better support operations in the territory and region.\nAbout 700 National Gendarmerie are also stationed in Martinique.\nGeography.\nPart of the archipelago of the Antilles, Martinique is located in the Caribbean Sea about northeast of the coast of South America and about southeast of the Dominican Republic. It is north of St. Lucia, northwest of Barbados and south of Dominica.\nThe total area of Martinique is , of which is water and the rest land. Martinique is the 3rd largest island in The Lesser Antilles after Trinidad and Guadeloupe. It stretches in length and in width. The highest point is the volcano of Mount Pel\u00e9e at above sea level. There are numerous small islands, particularly off the east coast.The Atlantic, or \"windward\" coast of Martinique is difficult to navigate by ship. A combination of coastal cliffs, shallow coral reefs and cays, and strong winds make the area notoriously hazardous for sea traffic. The Caravelle peninsula clearly separates the north Atlantic and south Atlantic coast.\nThe Caribbean, or \"leeward\" coast of Martinique is much more favourable to sea traffic. Besides being shielded from the harsh Atlantic trade winds by the island, the sea bed itself descends steeply from the shore. This ensures that most potential hazards are deep underwater, and prevents the growth of corals.\nThe north of the island is especially mountainous. It features four ensembles of \"pitons\" (volcanoes) and \"mornes\" (mountains): the Piton Conil on the extreme North, which dominates the Dominica Channel; Mont Pel\u00e9e, an active volcano; the Morne Jacob; and the Pitons du Carbet, an ensemble of five extinct volcanoes covered with rainforest and dominating the Bay of Fort de France at . Mont Pel\u00e9e's volcanic ash has created grey and black sand beaches in the north (in particular between Anse Ceron and Anse des Gallets), contrasting markedly from the white sands of Les Salines in the south.\nThe south is more easily traversed, though it still features impressive geographic features. Because it is easier to travel to, and due to the many beaches and food facilities throughout this region, the south receives most of the tourism. The beaches from Pointe de Bout, through Diamant (which features right off the coast of Roche de Diamant), St. Luce, the department of St. Anne and down to Les Salines are popular.\nRelief.\nThe terrain is mountainous on this island of volcanic origin. The oldest areas correspond to the volcanic zones at the southern end of the island and towards the peninsula of La Caravelle to the east. The island developed over the last 20 million years according to a sequence of movements and volcanic eruptions to the north.\nThe volcanic activity is due to the subduction fault located here, where the South American Plate slides beneath the Caribbean Plate. Martinique has eight centres of volcanic activity. The oldest rocks are andesitic lavas dated to about 24 million years ago, mixed with tholeiitic magma containing iron and magnesium. Mount Pel\u00e9e, the island's most dramatic feature, formed about 400,000 years ago. Pel\u00e9e erupted in 1792, 1851, and twice in 1902. The eruption of 8 May 1902, destroyed Saint-Pierre and killed 28,000 people in 2 minutes; that of 30 August 1902, killed nearly 1,100, mostly in Le Morne-Rouge and Ajoupa-Bouillon.\nThe east coast, coast of the wind or of the islands, has been called in the Caribbean \"cabesterre\". This term in Martinique designates more specifically the area of La Caravelle. This windward coast, bordered by the Atlantic Ocean, is directly exposed to the trade winds and the sea bottom. The northern part of the Grand River in Sainte-Marie is basically surrounded by cliffs, with very few mooring points; access to maritime navigation is limited to inshore fishing with small traditional Martinique boats.\nFlora and fauna.\nThe northern end of the island catches most of the rainfall and is heavily forested, featuring species such as bamboo, mahogany, rosewood and West Indian locust. The south is drier and dominated by savanna-like brush, including cacti, Copaiba balsam, logwood and acacia.\nAnole lizards and fer-de-lance snakes are native to the island. Mongooses (\"Urva auropunctata\"), introduced in the 1800s to control the snake population, have become a particularly cumbersome introduced species as they prey upon bird eggs and have exterminated or endangered a number of native birds, including the Martinique trembler, white-breasted trembler and White-breasted Thrasher. Bat species include the Jamaican fruit bat, the Antillean fruit-eating bat, the Little yellow-shouldered bat, Davy's naked-backed bat, the Greater bulldog bat, Schwartz's myotis, and the Mexican free-tailed bat.\nBeaches.\nMartinique has many beaches: those in the south of the island have white sand, unlike those in the north which are of volcanic origin and therefore have black or gray sand.\nMost of the beaches are wild, without services and without surveillance, but some are organized and enable water-sports and marine activities.\nHydrography.\nDue to the island's geographic and morphological characteristics, it has short and torrential rivers. The L\u00e9zarde, long, is the longest on the island.\nMajor urban areas.\nThe most populous urban unit is Le Robert, which covers 11 communes in the southeastern part of the department. The three largest urban units are:\nEconomy.\nIn 2014, Martinique had a total GDP of 8.4\u00a0billion euros. Its economy is heavily dependent on tourism, limited agricultural production, and grant aid from mainland France.\nHistorically, Martinique's economy relied on agriculture, notably sugar and bananas, but by the beginning of the 21st century this sector had dwindled considerably. Sugar production has declined, with most of the sugarcane now used for the production of rum. Banana exports are increasing, going mostly to mainland France. Chlordecone, a pesticide used in the cultivation of bananas before a ban in 1993, has been found to have contaminated farming ground, rivers and fish, and affected the health of islanders. Fishing and agriculture has had to stop in affected areas, having a significant effect on the economy. The bulk of meat, vegetable and grain requirements must be imported. This contributes to a chronic trade deficit that requires large annual transfers of aid from mainland France.\nAll goods entering Martinique are charged a variable \"sea toll\" which may reach 30% of the value of the cargo and provides 40% of the island's total revenue. Additionally the government charges an \"annual due\" of 1\u20132.5% and a value added tax of 2.2\u20138.5%.\nExports and imports.\nExports of goods and services in 2015 amounted to \u20ac1,102\u00a0million (\u20ac504\u00a0million of goods), of which more than 20% were refined petroleum products (SARA refinery located in the town of Le Lamentin), \u20ac95.9\u00a0million of agricultural, forestry, fish and aquaculture products, \u20ac62.4\u00a0million of agri-food industry products and \u20ac54.8\u00a0million of other goods.\nImports of goods and services in 2015 were \u20ac3,038\u00a0million (of which \u20ac2,709\u00a0million were goods), of which approximately 40% were crude and refined petroleum products, \u20ac462.6\u00a0million were agricultural and agri-food products, and \u20ac442.8\u00a0million were mechanical, electrical, electronic and computer equipment.\nTourism.\nTourism has become more important than agricultural exports as a source of foreign exchange. Most visitors come from mainland France, Canada and the United States. Roughly 16% of the total businesses on the island (some 6,000 companies) provide tourist-related services.\nAgriculture.\nBanana.\nBanana cultivation is the main agricultural activity, with more than 7,200 hectares cultivated, nearly 220,000 tons produced and almost 12,000 jobs (direct + indirect) in 2006 figures. Its weight in the island's economy is low (1.6%); however, it generates more than 40% of the agricultural value added.\nRum.\nRum, and particularly agricultural rum, accounted for 23% of agri-food value added in 2005 and employed 380 people on the island (including traditional rum). The island's production is about 90,000 hl of pure alcohol in 2009, of which 79,116 hl of pure alcohol is agricultural rum (2009).\nSugarcane.\nIn 2009, sugarcane cultivation occupied , or 13.7% of agricultural land. The area under cultivation has increased by more than 20% in the last 20 years, a rapid increase explained by the high added value of the rum produced and the rise in world sugar prices. This production is increasingly concentrated, with farms of more than 50 hectares accounting for 6.2% of the farms and 73.4% of the area under production. Annual production was about 220,000 tons in 2009, of which almost 90,000 tons went to sugar production, and the rest was delivered to agricultural rum distilleries.\nPineapples.\nPineapples used to be an important part of agricultural production. However, according to IEDOM, in 2005, they accounted for only 1% of agricultural production in value (\u20ac2.5\u00a0million compared to \u20ac7.9\u00a0million in 2000).\nInfrastructure.\nTransport.\nMartinique's main and only airport with commercial flights is Martinique Aim\u00e9 C\u00e9saire International Airport. It serves flights to and from Europe, the Caribbean, Venezuela, the United States, and Canada. See List of airports in Martinique.\nFort-de-France is the major harbour. The island has regular ferry service to Guadeloupe, Dominica and St. Lucia. There are also several local ferry companies that connect Fort-de-France with Pointe du Bout.\nThe road network is extensive and well-maintained, with freeways in the area around Fort-de-France. Buses run frequently between the capital and St. Pierre.\nRoads.\nIn 2019, Martinique's road network consisted of 2,123\u00a0km:\nIn proportion to its population, Martinique is the French department with the highest number of vehicle registrations.\nIn 2019, 19,137 new vehicles were registered in Martinique, i.e. 42 new vehicles were purchased per 1,000 inhabitants (+14 in five years), to the great benefit of dealers.\nPublic transport.\nThe public entity \"Martinique Transport\" was created in December 2014. This establishment is in charge of urban, intercity passenger (cabs), maritime, school and disabled student transport throughout the island, as well as the bus network.\nThe first exclusive right-of-way public transport line in Martinique (TCSP), served by high-service-level buses between Fort-de-France and Le Lamentin airport, was put into service on 13 August 2018. Extensions to Sch\u0153lcher, Robert and Ducos are planned.\nPorts.\nGiven the insular nature of Martinique, its supply by sea is important. The port of Fort-de-France is the seventh largest French port in terms of container traffic. After 2012, it became the Grand Port Maritime Port (GPM) of Martinique, following the State's decision to modernize port infrastructures of national interest.\nAir services.\nThe island's airport is Martinique Aim\u00e9 C\u00e9saire International Airport. It is located in the municipality of Le Lamentin. Its civilian traffic (1,696,071 passengers in 2015) ranks it thirteenth among French airports, behind those of two other overseas departments (Guadeloupe \u2013 P\u00f4le Cara\u00efbes de Pointe-\u00e0-Pitre Airport, Guadeloupe, and La R\u00e9union-Roland-Garros Airport). Its traffic is very strongly polarized by metropolitan France, with very limited (192,244 passengers in 2017) and declining international traffic.\nRailroads.\nAt the beginning of the 20th century, Martinique had more than of railways serving the sugar factories (cane transport). Only one tourist train remains in Sainte-Marie between the Saint-James house and the banana museum.\nCommunications.\nThe country code top-level domain for Martinique is .mq, but .fr is often used instead. The country code for international dialling is 596. The entire island uses a single area code (also 596) for landline phones and 696 for cell phones. (596 is dialled twice when calling a Martinique landline from another country.)\nMobile telephony.\nThere are three mobile telephone networks in Martinique: Orange, SFR Cara\u00efbe and Digicel. The arrival of Free, in partnership with Digicel, was planned for 2020.45\nAccording to Arcep, by mid-2018, Martinique is 99% covered by 4G.\nTelevision.\nThe DTT package includes 10 free channels: 4 national channels of the France T\u00e9l\u00e9visions group, the news channel France 24, Arte and 4 local channels Martinique 1re, Vi\u00e0ATV, KMT T\u00e9l\u00e9vision. Zouk TV stopped broadcasting in April 2021 and will be subsequently replaced by Zitata TV, whose broadcasting is delayed following the COVID-19 pandemic.\nViewers in Martinique do not have free access to other free national channels in the DTT package in mainland France (TF1 group, M6 group, etc.).\nViewers in the French overseas territories also do not have free access to the public service cultural channel Culturebox, which is not broadcast locally on DTT.\nThe French-language satellite package Canal+ Cara\u00efbes is available in the territory.\nTelephone and Internet.\nIn early 2019, Orange put into service \"Kanawa\", a new submarine cable linking Martinique to French Guiana.\nMartinique is also connected by other submarine cables: ECFS (en), Americas-2 (en) and Southern Caribbean Fiber.\nDemographics.\nPopulation.\nMartinique had a population of 349,925 as of January 2024. The population has been decreasing by 0.9% per year since 2013. There are an estimated 260,000 people of Martinican origin living in mainland France, most of them in the Paris region. &lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEthnic groups.\nThe population of Martinique is mainly of African descent generally mixed with European, Amerindian (Carib), Indian (descendants of 19th-century Tamil and Telugu immigrants from South India), Lebanese, Syrian or Chinese. Martinique also has a small Syro-Lebanese community, a small Indian community, a small but increasing Chinese community, and the \"B\u00e9k\u00e9\" community, descendants of the first European settlers.\nThe B\u00e9k\u00e9 population represents around 1% of Martinique's population, mostly of noble ancestry or members of the old bourgeoisie. In addition to the island population, the island hosts a mainland French community, most of which live on the island on a temporary basis (generally from 3 to 5 years).\nReligion.\nAbout 90% of Martiniquans are Christian, predominantly Roman Catholic as well as smaller numbers of various Protestant denominations. There are much smaller communities of other faiths such as Islam, Hinduism and the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith.\nThe island has 49 parishes and several historic places of worship, such as the Saint-Louis Cathedral of Fort de France, the Sacred Heart Church of Balata, and the Co-Cathedral of Our Lady of Assumption, Saint-Pierre.\nCatholic Church.\nCatholic parishes are present in each municipality and village of the territory. The island has the following places of worship classified as historic monuments:\nThe Archdiocese of Saint-Pierre and Fort-de-France (Latin: archidioecesis Sancti Petri et Arcis Gallicae seu Martinicensis) is an ecclesiastical circumscription of the Catholic Church in the Caribbean, based in Saint-Pierre and Fort-de-France, on the island of Martinique. The archdiocese of Saint-Pierre and Fort-de-France is metropolitan and its suffragan dioceses are Basse-Terre and Pointe-\u00e0-Pitre and Cayenne.\nLanguages.\nThe official language of Martinique is French, which is spoken by most of the population. The department was integrated into France in 1946, and consequently became French. Most residents also speak Martinican Creole (\"Martinique Creole\", \"Kr\u00e9yol Mat'nik, Krey\u00f2l\"), a form of Antillean Creole closely related to the varieties spoken in neighboring English-dominated islands of Saint Lucia and Dominica. Martinican Creole is based on French, Carib and African languages with elements of English, Spanish, and Portuguese. Also, unlike other varieties of French creole, such as Mauritian Creole, Martinican Creole is not readily understood by speakers of Standard French due to significant differences in grammar, syntax, vocabulary and pronunciation. It continues to be used in oral storytelling traditions and other forms of speech and to a lesser extent in writing.\nFrench and Creole are in a diglossic situation in Martinique, where French is used in official dialogue and Martinican Creole is used in casual or familial contexts. Creole was a spoken language with a developed \"oraliture\"; it was not until the mid-20th century that it began to be written. Since then, decreolization of the language has taken place via the adoption of Standard French features, mostly unconsciously, but some speakers have noticed that they do not speak Creole like their parents once did.\nBeing an overseas department of France, the island has European, French, Spanish, Caribbean, Martinican, Black (African), Indian (Tamil) and Creole markers of identity, all being influenced by foreign factors, social factors, cultural factors and, as a reportedly important marker, linguistic practices. Martinican and Creole identities are specifically asserted through encouragement of Creole language and its use in literature, in a movement known as \"Cr\u00e9olit\u00e9,\" that was started by Patrick Chamoiseau, Jean Bernab\u00e9 and Rapha\u00ebl Confiant. Martinican Creole used to be a shameful language, and it was not until the 1970s that it has been revalorized through literature and increasing code switching. People now speak Martinican Creole more often and in more contexts.\nSpeaking Creole in public schools was forbidden until 1982, which is thought to have discouraged parents from using Creole in the home. In collaboration with GEREC (\"Groupe d'Etudes et de Recherches en Espace Cr\u00e9olophone\") Rapha\u00ebl Confiant created KAPES KREYOL (CAPES for Creole, \"Certificat d'aptitude au professorat de l'enseignement du second degr\u00e9)\", which is an aptitude exam that allowed Creole teachers in secondary school. This debuted 9 February 2001. Recently, the education authority, \"Acad\u00e9mie de la Martinique\", launched \"Parcours Creole +\" in 2019, a project trialling bilingual education of children in French and Martinican. Rather than being a topic to be learned itself, Creole became a language that classes were taught in, such as arts, math, physical activity, etc. Parents can also choose the \"Parcours Anglais +\", learning in classes conducted in French and English from kindergarten until their final year, as in the Creole + course. A \"Parcours Espagnol +\", where children learn in and with French and Spanish, is in the planning stages.\nThough Creole is normally not used in professional situations, members of the media and politicians have begun to use it more frequently as a way to redeem national identity and prevent cultural assimilation by mainland France.\nLinguistic features of Martinican Creole.\nMartinican Creole has general locative marking (GLM, also called general locative adposition, goal/source (in)difference and motion-to=motion-from). This means that source locations, final locations and static entity locations are expressed morphologically identically. Some West African languages that are possibly contributors to Martinican Creole also present GLM. Martinican Creole locative marking exists in 3 morphological types, including:\nCulture.\nAs an overseas \"d\u00e9partement\" of France, Martinique's culture has blended the French, African, Indian and Caribbean influences. The city of Saint-Pierre (destroyed by a volcanic eruption of Mount Pel\u00e9e), was often referred to as the \"Paris of the Lesser Antilles\". Following traditional French custom, many businesses close at midday to allow a lengthy lunch, then reopen later in the afternoon.\nToday, Martinique has a higher standard of living than most other Caribbean countries. French products are easily available, from Chanel fashions to Limoges porcelain. Studying in the \"m\u00e9tropole\" (mainland France, especially Paris) is common for young adults. Martinique has been a vacation hotspot for many years, attracting both upper-class French and more budget-conscious travelers.\nCuisine.\nMartinique has a hybrid cuisine, mixing elements of African, French, Carib Amerindian and Indian subcontinental traditions. One of its most famous dishes is the Colombo (compare kuzhambu () for gravy or broth), a unique curry of chicken (curry chicken), meat or fish with vegetables, spiced with a distinctive \"masala\" of Tamil origins, sparked with tamarind, and often containing wine, coconut milk, cassava and rum. A strong tradition of Martiniquan desserts includes cakes made with pineapple, rum, and a wide range of local ingredients.\nLiterature.\nSisters Jeanne Nardal and Paulette Nardal were involved in the creation of the N\u00e9gritude movement. Yva L\u00e9ro was a writer and painter who co-founded the Women's Union of Martinique. Anna Marie-Magdeleine wrote with her partner under the pseudonym Carbet.\nAim\u00e9 C\u00e9saire is perhaps Martinique's most famous writer; he was one of the main figures in the N\u00e9gritude literary movement. Ren\u00e9 M\u00e9nil was a surrealist writer who founded the journal \"Tropiques\" with Aim\u00e9 and Suzanne C\u00e9saire and later formulated the concept of Antillanit\u00e9. Other surrealist writers of that era included \u00c9tienne L\u00e9ro and Jules Monnerot, who co-founded the journal \"L\u00e9gitime D\u00e9fense\" with Simone Yoyotte and M\u00e9nil. \u00c9douard Glissant was later influenced by C\u00e9saire and M\u00e9nil, and in turn had an influence on Patrick Chamoiseau, who founded the Cr\u00e9olit\u00e9 movement with Rapha\u00ebl Confiant and Jean Bernab\u00e9. Rapha\u00ebl Confiant was a poetry, prose and non-fiction writer who supports Creole and tries to bring both French and Martinican Creole together in his work. He is specifically known for his contribution to the Cr\u00e9olit\u00e9 movement.\nFrantz Fanon, a prominent critic of colonialism and racism, was also from Martinique.\nMusic.\nMartinique has a large popular music industry, which gained in international renown after the success of zouk music in the later 20th century. Zouk's popularity was particularly intense in France, where the genre became an important symbol of identity for Martinique and Guadeloupe. Zouk's origins are in the folk music of Martinique and Guadeloupe, especially Martinican chouval bwa, and Guadeloupan gwo ka. There's also notable influence of the pan-Caribbean calypso tradition and Haitian kompa.\nFilm.\nMartinique has been the site for filming many films, including movies, TV shows, and documentaries. The Martinique Film Commission offers aid opportunities, including residence grants, writing assistance, development assistance and production assistance.\nSymbols and flags.\nMartinique adopted a new flag on February 2, 2023, featuring a red triangle at the hoist and two horizontal bands of green and black. The flag of France is also flown alongside it as the country's parent country. A previous competition to create a flag in 2018 was annulled by the local administrative tribunal, but the island began a new public vote in 2022, with the hummingbird design being selected as the winner. However, the designer withdrew her design due to accusations of plagiarism, and the runner-up design, the rouge-vert-noir (\"red-green-black\"), was adopted. This flag is also the preferred symbol of Martinique's independence movement.\nSport.\nAssociation football.\nThe Martinique national football team is affiliated with CONCACAF, but not FIFA, so it does not play in World Cup Qualifiers, but can play friendly matches and CONCACAF tournaments such as the CONCACAF Nations League and Gold Cup. Since Martiniquais people are French citizens, they may choose to represent France in international competitions. Several French players also have had roots in Martinique although they were born or raised in France. Among the most famous include Thierry Henry, Eric Abidal, Rapha\u00ebl Varane, Sylvain Wiltord and Lo\u00efc R\u00e9my, all of whom represented France on multiple occasions and in Henry's case won the European Golden Boot twice. Henry and Varane also have won a FIFA World Cup each.\nMartinique has its own soccer league known as the Ligue de Football de Martinique. The Martinique men's soccer championship, known as the Regional 1 (R1) \u2013 Troph\u00e9e G\u00e9rard Janvion, is a premier local soccer competition in the territory. It is held annually in the form of a championship between fourteen amateur clubs between the months of September and May. The competition is organized by the Martinique Football League and, although the clubs in the league are affiliated with the French Football Federation, there is no promotion to the French national championships.\nAt the end of the twenty-six-day (two-stage) championship, the top four teams qualify for the Ligue Antilles, while the bottom three are relegated to the lower division, the R\u00e9gionale 2.\nSurf.\nThe Martinique Surf Pro is an international surfing competition held every year in April in Basse-Pointe (Martinique). It was created in 2015 by two Martinicans, Nicolas Ursulet and Nicolas Cl\u00e9ment\u00e9 and is organized by the Caribbean Surf Project (CSP).51 It is the only Caribbean competition in the World Surf League, the world surfing championship. It is part of the World Qualifying Series calendar, the entry league to the WSL's elite circuit, the Championship Tour.\nRegattas.\nLe Tour de Yoles Rondes de Martinique is an annual sailing regatta, the island's largest sporting event, which takes place in late July and early August and is very popular with spectators.\nThe event is organized by the \"F\u00e9d\u00e9ration des yoles rondes\". Crews circumnavigate Martinique on a 180-kilometer course over eight stages. The race begins with a prologue time trial from the starting town.\nThe time trial determines the starting order of the first ten boats, and the time between starts is determined by the advantage of each boat over the next during the prologue; all Boats below the top ten start simultaneously. The next seven legs circumnavigate the island. The leg around the southern part of the island, starting in the commune of Le Diamant, passing through Sainte-Anne and finishing in Le Fran\u00e7ois, is known as the D\u00e9fi de l'Espace Sud (Southern Challenge Zone).\nHandball.\nThe Martinique Handball Championship, organized by the Martinique Handball League, concludes with the Poule des As (play-off) which determines the Martinique champion in the women's and men's categories. The Poule des As is a very popular event in Martinique, the pavilions are filled for the finals held at the Palais des Sports de Lamentin.\nThe highest division is the Pr\u00e9-Nationale, equivalent to the Pr\u00e9-Nationale (or even the Nationale 3) in metropolitan France. The champions of the Poule des As come every year to Metropolitan France to play in the finals of the French Handball Championships of N1, N2 and N3 Women, N2 and N3 Men Metropolitan/Ultra Marines.\nThe winners (female and male) of the Martinique Handball Cup, receive a reward of 10 000 Euros. The main players of the Martinique Handball Championship in recent years have been: Katty Piejos, C\u00e9dric Sorhaindo, Jo\u00ebl Abati.\nNotable people.\nBelow is a list of notable people born in Martinique, with at least one parent or grandparent born in Martinique, or who are living or have lived in Martinique.\nSports personalities.\nFootball.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMartinican writers and intellectuals.\nA non-exhaustive list of the main novelists, poets, playwrights, essayists, sociologists, economists and historians from Martinique:\nEnergy.\nMartinique is part of the zones not interconnected to the continental metropolitan network (ZNI), which must therefore produce the electricity they consume themselves. For this reason, the ZNI have specific legislation on electricity production and distribution.\nMartinique's energy mix is marked by a very strong importance of thermal energy production. At the same time, the island's electricity consumption has decreased slightly. These results can be attributed to the information and awareness-raising efforts of the regions, the Agency for the Environment and Energy Management (ADEME) and energy companies in favor of energy savings, but also to the context of demographic decline of the territory.\nDespite these results, the control of the Territory's electricity consumption remains a central issue, given the Territory's low energy potential compared to other overseas territories, such as Guadeloupe and Reunion.\nMartinique and its inhabitants are therefore faced with a twofold need: to further strengthen the control of electricity consumption and at the same time develop renewable energies to reduce environmental pollution due to thermal electricity production.\nRenewable energies.\nThe exploitation of renewable energies in Martinique started late, as the characteristics of the island were previously considered unfavorable for their development. However, the efforts of the population and energy suppliers are moving towards a higher proportion of renewable energies in Martinique's future energy mix.\nArticle 56 of the Grenelle I Law No. 2009-967 3 August 2009, on the implementation of the Grenelle Environment Forum, sets out the provisions for overseas: in the case of Martinique, the energy objective is to reach 50% renewable energy in final consumption by 2020. Energy autonomy is planned for 2030.\nAs Martinique's electricity distribution grid is not interconnected with neighboring islands, let alone with the mainland's metropolitan grid, the decree of 23 April 2008, applies to the management of so-called intermittent energies: wind, photovoltaic and marine: any solar and wind power production facility with a capacity exceeding 3 kWp and not equipped with a storage system is liable to be disconnected from the grid by the grid manager once the threshold of 30% of random active power injected into the grid has been reached.\nThus, the achievement of the objectives of the Grenelle I law is subject to the development of Structures with a maximum power of 3 kWp or less, or to the incorporation of storage devices in production facilities.\nWater.\n90% of the water distributed by Martinique's drinking water network comes from Rainwater intakes in five catchment areas. Thus, although there is no shortage of water, the situation becomes very critical in the Lenten period, with abstractions leading to the drying up of several rivers.\nWater resources are abundant but unevenly distributed: Four municipalities (Saint-Joseph, Gros-Morne, le Lorrain and Fort-de-France) provide 85% of Martinique's drinking water.\nThere is no water catchment in the south of the island. The water consumed in the South comes exclusively from abstractions from the North and the center (mainly from the Blanche River which flows into the L\u00e9zarde, the Capot, and the Dumauz\u00e9). Thus, 60% of the total is extracted from a single river (the L\u00e9zarde and its tributary, the Blanche river). This concentration of abstractions can constitute a risk in a crisis situation, such as a drought for example.\nHealth.\nRegional health agency.\nA regional health agency for Martinique (Agence r\u00e9gionale de sant\u00e9 Martinique) was set up in 2010. It is responsible for applying French health policy in the territory, managing public health and health care regulations.\nHealthcare professionals.\nAs of 1 January 2018, Martinique had a workforce of 1,091 doctors. For each 100,000 people of its population, there was a density of 141 general practitioners, 150 specialists, 53 dentists, 1,156 state certified nurses and 90 pharmacists. Self-employed doctors are represented by URML Martinique, created under the Hospital, patients, health, territories bill. URML Martinique works in partnership with ARS Martinique, l'Assurance Maladie, the Ministry of Health and Local Authorities to manage regional health policy.\nHealth facilities.\nThe University Hospital of Martinique (Le Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Martinique) is a teaching hospital based in Fort-de-France, in an agreement with the University of the French Antilles. It is the largest French- and English-speaking university hospital in the Caribbean, having more than 1,600 beds. These include 680 medical, 273 surgical and 100 obstetrics beds, with another 30 in its intensive care unit. The hospital operates a 24-hour emergency service.\nChlordecone controversy.\nActions of the French government.\nAfter the discovery of the toxicity of chlordecone, a dangerous insecticide, and the health risks it posed, the French state put in place certain measures to protect the Martinican and Guadeloupean populations, allocating nearly 100 million euros towards the implementation of these measures. The soils are regularly tested and subjected to strict regulations related to the standards of potability. Martinique is also subject to regular mapping processes to delineate highly contaminated areas. River fishing is also prohibited in order to limit health risks, as rivers represent high-risk contamination areas.\nSince 2008, the French state has developed three action plans establishing strategies to protect local populations, raise awareness regarding the effects of chlordecone, as well as to support the agriculture and fisheries sectors.\nA French parliamentary commission revealed in 2019 that more than 90% of Martinicans have been exposed to chlordecone, which was authorized for use between 1972 and 1993 in the banana plantations of the Antilles. The committee judged the three \"Chlordecone Plans\" launched by the State since 2008 to be inadequate; recommendations were provided via its rapporteur, Justine Benin MP, to address prevention and research into cleanup methods for a fourth plan, scheduled for 2020.\nThe parliamentary commission of inquiry called the French state into question for having authorized the sale of chlordecone as an insecticide, as its toxicity was known, but \"responsibilities are shared with economic actors. Firstly, industrialists, but also groups of planters and certain elected officials.\"\nHealth consequences.\nChlordecone is known to have harmful effects on human health, with scientific research identifying it as an endocrine disruptor or hormonally-active chemical agent, as well as a probable carcinogen, particularly in relation to increasing chances of prostate cancer occurrence and recurrence. As an endocrine disruptor, chlordecone can also lead to delayed cognitive development in infants, an increased likelihood of pregnancy complications, and may disrupt the reproductive process.\nThe chlordecone molecule has physical and chemical characteristics that allow it to remain for several centuries in soil, river-water and groundwater, thus spreading beyond the location of the banana plantations where this insecticide was initially administered. Although chlordecone has not been used since the 1990s, the health risks remain. Chlordecone contamination occurs through contaminated food and drink.\nLocal community response.\nIn the streets of Fort-de-France, approximately 5,000 to 15,000 residents of Martinique demonstrated in protest on 27 March 2021, denouncing the possible statute of limitations on a complaint filed by civil parties for the use of chlordecone in causing life endangerment (\"mise en danger de la vie d'autrui).\" The complaint was issued on 23 February 2006.\nThe French government's actions in response to the historical authorization of chlordecone are often criticized by residents of Martinique and local associations involved in the \"Chlordecone Scandal.\" The lack of information transmitted to the population concerning the danger of chlordecone between 1993 and 2004 is one of the main concerns expressed.\nThe civil complaint in 2006 was issued by several associations from the islands of Martinique and Guadeloupe, and was in response to the long-term impacts of government-authorized chlordecone use in polluting the islands' natural environments and affecting the health of inhabitants.\nCOVID-19 pandemic.\nMartinique's first cases of coronavirus (COVID-19) were confirmed in March 2020. The pandemic has since put provision of health services under significant stress; as of 2 September 2021, Martinique had recorded an excess mortality at all ages, and of all causes since the week beginning 26 July 2021.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19170", "revid": "37740198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19170", "title": "Martinique/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "19172", "revid": "28991092", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19172", "title": "Demographics of Martinique", "text": "This is a list of the demographics of Martinique, a Caribbean island and an overseas department/region and single territorial collectivity of France.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPopulation.\nAccording to INSEE Martinique has an estimated population of 390,371 on 1 January 2012. Life expectancy at birth is 78.9 years for males and 84.8 for females (figures for 2011).\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.I.2010)(Provisional):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population by Sex and Age Group (Census 01.I.2015): \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.I.2021): \nEthnic groups.\nAfrican Martinicans and African-White-Indian mixture 80%; Indo-Martinicans 10%; White Martinicans 5%; Lebanese, Jewish, Syrian, and Chinese Martinicans comprise less than 5% of the population. Note that French government forbids ethnic censuses. Those numbers are not official and may be inaccurate.\nLanguages.\nFrench is the official language and is understood by the majority of the population. Martinican Creole, a form of Antillean Creole, is also spoken by most of the population.\nReligion.\nMartinique's population is predominantly Christian, with 96.5% of Martinicans identifying as such. A much smaller number of Martinicans identify as unaffiliated with any religion, accounting for 2.3% of the population. Hinduism, Judaism, and Islam all have a presence on the island, each accounting for less than 1% of the population. Muslims account for 0.5% or 1751 person, out of population of 350,373.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19173", "revid": "1245757928", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19173", "title": "Government of Martinique", "text": " \nMartinique is an overseas Territorial collectivity of France, with the same political status as regions and departments in mainland France. The administrative centre of Martinique is located in Fort-de-France.\nDuring the referendum of 24 January 2010, the residents of Martinique approved by 68.4% the creation of a new and unique territorial collectivity which is governed by the section 73 of the French Constitution. The territorial collectivity of Martinique replaces and exercises all the related power and duties of the department's General Council and the Regional Council.\n\"Gran Sanbl\u00e9 pou ba peyi an chans\", a coalition of the Martinican Independence Movement and right-wing parties, led by Alfred Marie-Jeanne defeated \"Ensemble pour une Martinique Nouvelle\", a coalition of left-wing parties, led by Serge Letchimy, winning 33 seats out of 51 seats of the new Territorial Collectivity's assembly during the election held on December 13, 2015 in Martinique.\nOn December 18, 2015 Alfred Marie-Jeanne was elected the first president of the Executive Council of the Territorial Collectivity of Martinique.\nAssembly of Martinique.\nThe Assembly of the Territorial Collectivity of Martinique is composed of 51 members elected by proportional representation in two rounds with each list having an equal number of male and female candidates. The term of the Assembly is 6 years. The current president of the assembly is Serge Letchimy.\nGeneral Council of Martinique.\nThe General Council of Martinique was composed of 45 seats whose members were elected by popular vote to serve six-year terms. The last President of the General Council was Josette Manin.\nRegional Council of Martinique.\nThe Regional Council was composed of 41 seats whose members were elected by popular vote to serve six-year terms. The last President of the Regional Council was Serge Letchimy.\n\"Notable representatives may be found in \"\nParliamentary representation.\nFrench Senate, 2 seats.\nMartinique elects 2 seats to the French Senate; indirect elections were last held in September 2004. The Martinican Progressive Party won 1 senator and one other left-wing candidate was elected.\nFrench National Assembly, 4 seats.\nMartinique also elects 4 seats to the French National Assembly, the last elections were held in June 2007. The Union for a Popular Movement elected 1 deputy (Alfred Almont), the Socialist Party elected 1 (Louis-Joseph Manscour), the nationalist Martinican Independence Movement elected 1 (Alfred Marie-Jeanne), and the Martinican Progressive Party also elected 1 (Serge Letchimy, mayor of Fort de France).\nJudicial system.\nIn Martinique, the French system of justice is in force with there being two lower courts (\"tribunaux d\u2019instance\"), one higher court (\"tribunal de grande instance\"), one administrative court, a commercial court, and a court of appeal at Fort-de-France.\nWith regard to the legal profession, it is known that women have been practicing law since 1945 when Andr\u00e9e Pierre-Rose Bocaly became an attorney. She would be followed by Marcelle Yang-ting, Marie-Th\u00e9r\u00e8se Yoyo-Likao, and Marie-Alice Andr\u00e9-Jaccoulet (1969) in sequence.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19174", "revid": "1263554253", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19174", "title": "Economy of Martinique", "text": "The economy of Martinique is mostly based in the services sector. Agriculture accounts for about 6% of Martinique's GDP and the small industrial sector for 11%. Sugar production has declined, with most of the sugarcane now used for the production of rum. Banana exports are increasing, going mostly to France. The bulk of meat, vegetable, and grain requirements must be imported, contributing to a chronic trade deficit that requires large annual transfers of aid from France. Tourism has become more important than agricultural exports as a source of foreign exchange. The majority of the work force is employed in the service sector and in administration.\nGross domestic product.\nGDP:\nreal exchange rate - US$9.61\u00a0billion (in 2006)\nGDP - real growth rate:\n2.8% (in 2006)\nGDP - per capita:\nreal exchange rate - US$24,118 (in 2006)\nGDP - composition by sector:\n\"agriculture:\"\n6%\n\"industry:\"\n11%\n\"services:\"\n83% (1997 est.)\nDemographics.\nPopulation below poverty line:\nNA%\nHousehold income or consumption by percentage share:\n\"lowest 10%:\"\nNA%\n\"highest 10%:\"\nNA%\nLabor force:\n165 900 (1998)\nLabor force - by occupation:\nagriculture 7%, industry 20%, services 73% (1997)\nUnemployment rate:\n12,9% (2021)\nBudget:\n\"revenues:\"\n$900\u00a0million\n\"expenditures:\"\n$2.5\u00a0billion, including capital expenditures of $140\u00a0million (1996)\nIndustries.\nIndustries:\nconstruction, rum, cement, petroleum refining, sugar, tourism\nIndustrial production growth rate:\nNA%\nInfrastructure.\nElectricity - production:\n1,205 GWh (2003)\nElectricity - production by source:\n\"fossil fuel:\"\n100%\n\"hydro:\"\n0%\n\"nuclear:\"\n0%\n\"other:\"\n0% (1998)\nElectricity - consumption:\n1535430MHW (2016)\nElectricity - exports:\n0 kWh (1998)\nElectricity - imports:\n0 kWh (1998)\nAgriculture.\nAgricultural products:\npineapples, avocados, bananas, flowers, vegetables, sugarcane\nExports:\nUS$957\u00a0million (in 2005)\nExports - commodities:\nrefined petroleum products, bananas, rum, pineapples\nExports - partners:\nMainland France 45%, Guadeloupe 28% (1997)\nImports:\nUS$3,098\u00a0billion (in 2005)\nImports - commodities:\npetroleum products, crude oil, foodstuffs, construction materials, vehicles, clothing and other consumer goods\nImports - partners:\nMainland France 62%, Venezuela 6%, Germany 4%, Italy 4%, US 3% (1997)\nDebt - external:\n$180\u00a0million (1994)\nEconomic aid - recipient:\nMartinique receives substantial annual aid from the French state.\nEconomics.\nCurrency\n1 euro (\u20ac) = 100 cents\nExchange rates:\neuros per US$1 \u2013 0.9867 (January 2000), 0.9386 (1999); French francs (F) per US$1 \u2013 5.65 (January 1999), 5.8995 (1998), 5.8367 (1997), 5.1155 (1996), 4.9915 (1995)\nFiscal year:\ncalendar year\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "19176", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19176", "title": "Transport in Martinique", "text": " \nMartinique is a small Caribbean island that is an overseas department/region and single territorial collectivity of France. An integral part of the French Republic, Martinique is located in the Lesser Antilles of the West Indies in the eastern Caribbean Sea. It has a land area of and a population of 376,480 inhabitants as of January 2016. One of the Windward Islands, it is directly north of Saint Lucia, northwest of Barbados and south of Dominica. Martinique is also an Outermost Region (OMR) of the European Union and a special territory of the European Union; the currency in use is the euro. Virtually the entire population speaks both French (the sole official language) and Martinican Creole.\nGiven its geography, the balance of its transport network is unusual: there are three airports, only 2.5\u00a0km of heritage railway, and 2,105\u00a0km of paved highways (in 2000). Sea transport is also important, and there are two harbours at Fort-de-France and La Trinit\u00e9.\nRoad transport.\nAs of 2000, Martinique had 2,105\u00a0km of paved highways.\nThere is a part of the N5 road that has been upgraded to a motorway, running from the capital Fort-de-France through Lamentin, Ducos and Rivi\u00e8re Sal\u00e9e until Les Coteaux.\nRail transport.\nMartininique has now(2018) only one railway line in operation: The little-known 2.5\u00a0km long Le Train des Plantations is a heritage railway that runs from the Rhum Museum in Sainte-Marie through some sugarcane and banana plantations over two Bailey bridges to the Banana Museum.\nIn former times several narrow gauge sugarcane railways existed. Saint-Pierre had horse-drawn trams, which had an unusually narrow gauge. At least two steam locomotives are preserved in an optically refurbished condition, but not operational.\nAir transport.\nIt has three airports, the main one being Martinique Aim\u00e9 C\u00e9saire International Airport. See List of Airports in Martinique.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19177", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19177", "title": "Martinique/Military", "text": ""}
{"id": "19180", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19180", "title": "History of Mauritania", "text": " \nThe original inhabitants of Mauritania were the Bafour, presumably a Mande ethnic group, connected to the contemporary Arabized minor social group of \"Imraguen\" (\"fishermen\") on the Atlantic coast.\nThe territory of Mauritania was on the fringe of geographical knowledge of Libya in classical antiquity. Berber immigration took place from about the 3rd century. Mauritania takes its name from the ancient Berber kingdom and later Roman province of Mauretania, and thus ultimately from the Mauri people, even though the respective territories do not overlap, historical Mauritania being considerably further north than modern Mauritania.\nThe Umayyads were the first Arab Muslims to enter Mauritania. During the Islamic conquests, they made incursions into Mauritania and were present in the region by the end of the 7th century. Many Berber tribes in Mauritania fled the arrival of the Arabs to the Gao region in Mali.\nThe European colonial powers of the 19th century had little interest in Mauritania. The French Republic was mostly interested in the territory for strategic reason, as a connection between their possessions in North and in West Africa. Mauritania thus became part of French West Africa in 1904, but colonial control was mostly limited to the coast and the Saharan trade routes, and there were territories nominally within French West Africa which were not reached by European control as late as 1955. \nIn 1960, the Islamic Republic of Mauritania became Independent of France. The conflict over the former Spanish territory of Western Sahara in 1976 resulted in partial annexation by Mauritania, withdrawn in favour of Morocco in 1979. The long-serving President Maaouya Ould Sid'Ahmed Taya was ousted by the military of Mauritania and replaced by the Military Council for Justice and Democracy in a coup d'\u00e9tat in 2005. A new constitution was passed in 2006. An indecisive election in 2007 triggered another coup in 2008. A leader of the 2005 coup, Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz, was elected president in 2009. After his ten-year presidency, Mohamed Ould Ghazouani's victory in the 2019 Mauritanian presidential election was presented as having been the country's first peaceful transition of power since independence. \nEarly history.\nThe Sahara has linked rather than divided the peoples who inhabit it and has served as an avenue for migration and conquest. Mauritania, lying next to the Atlantic coast at the western edge of the desert, received and assimilated into its complex society many waves of these migrants and conquerors.\nWhat is now Mauritania was a dry savanna area during classical antiquity, where independent tribes like the Pharusii and the Perorsi (and the Nigritae near the Niger river) lived a semi-nomadic lifestyle facing growing desertification.\nThe Romans explored toward this area and probably reached, with Suetonius Paulinus, the area of Adrar. There is evidence (coins, fibulas) of Roman commerce in Akjoujt and Tamkartkart near Tichit.\nBerbers moved south to Mauritania beginning in the 3rd century, followed by Arabs in the late 7th century, subjugating and assimilating Mauritania's original inhabitants. From the 8th through the 15th century, black kingdoms of the western Sudan, such as Ghana, Mali, and Songhai, brought their political culture from the south.\nThe divisive tendencies of the various groups within Mauritanian society have always worked against the development of Mauritanian unity. Both the Sanhadja Confederation, at its height from the 8th to the 10th century, and the Almoravid Empire, from the 11th to the 12th century, were weakened by internecine warfare, and both succumbed to further invasions from the Ghana Empire and the Almohad Empire, respectively.\nIslamization.\nThe Umayyads were the first Arab Muslims to enter Mauritania. During the Islamic conquests, they made incursions into Mauritania and were present in the region by the end of the 7th century. Many Berber tribes in Mauritania fled the arrival of the Arabs to the Gao region in Mali. By the 11th century, Islamization had reached the region around the Senegal River.\nIn the 11th century, several nomadic Berber confederations in the desert regions overlapping present-day Mauritania joined together to form the Almoravid movement. They expanded north and south, spawning an important empire that stretched from the Sahara to the Iberian Peninsula in Europe. However, the legacy of the southern Almoravids in the Sahara is less well-documented and understood than their subsequent operations in the north. Arabic sources record that Abu Bakr, one of the early leaders of the Almoravids, made Azuggi his base after he left Marrakesh and the northern Almoravids under the control of Yusuf Ibn Tashfin. According to Arabic sources, he also led the Almoravids further south to conquer the ancient and extensive Ghana Empire around 1076, but this narrative has been disputed and debated by modern historians.\nThe decline of the Almoravids after this is not documented. From the 13th century onward, the Banu Ma'qil, an Arab tribal confederation of Yemeni origin, migrated into the Maghreb and into what is now Morocco. Some of them progressively moved south into the Sahara, identifying themselves as the Beni \u1e24ass\u0101n or Awlad Hassan. From 1644 to 1674, the indigenous peoples of the area that is modern Mauritania made what became their final effort to repel the Ma'qil Arabs who were invading their territory. This effort, which was unsuccessful, is known as the Char Bouba War. The invaders were led by the Beni \u1e24ass\u0101n tribe. The descendants of the Beni Hassan warriors became the upper stratum of society. Hassaniya, a bedouin Arabic dialect named for the Beni Hassan, became the dominant language among the largely nomadic population.\nFrom the 15th to the 19th century, European contact with Mauritania was dominated by the trade for gum arabic. Rivalries among European powers enabled the Arab-Berber population to maintain their independence and later to exact annual payments from France, whose sovereignty over the Senegal River and the Mauritanian coast was recognized by the Congress of Vienna in 1815. Although penetration beyond the coast and the Senegal River began in earnest under Louis Faidherbe, governor of Senegal in the mid-19th century, European conquest or \"pacification\" of the entire country did not begin until 1900. Because extensive European contact began so late in the country's history, the traditional social structure carried over into modern times with little change.\nFrench colonization.\nThe history of French colonial policy in Mauritania is closely tied to that of the other French possessions in West Africa, particularly to that of Senegal, on which Mauritania was economically, politically, and administratively dependent until independence. The French policy of assimilation and direct rule, however, was never applied with any vigor in Mauritania, where a system that corresponded more to indirectly ruling the colony developed. Colonial administrators relied extensively on Islamic religious leaders and the traditional warrior groups to maintain their rule and carry out their policies. Moreover, little attempt was made to develop the country's economy. \nAfter World War II, Mauritania, along with the rest of French West Africa, was involved in a series of reforms of the French colonial system, culminating in independence in November 1960. These reforms were part of a trend away from the official policies of assimilation and direct rule in favor of administrative decentralization and internal autonomy. Although the nationalistic fervor sweeping French West Africa at this time was largely absent in Mauritania, continuous politicking (averaging one election every eighteen months between 1946 and 1958) provided training for political leaders and awakened a political consciousness among the populace. On 28 July 1960 France agreed to Mauritania becoming fully independent. Nevertheless, when Mauritania declared its independence on 28 November 1960, its level of political as well as economic development was, at best, embryonic.\nIndependence, Ould Daddah era, and the Saharan War.\nAs the country gained Independence on November 28, 1960, the capital city, Nouakchott, was founded at the site of a small village founded during the colonial period, the Ksar, while 90% of the population was still nomadic. With independence, larger numbers of ethnic Sub-Saharan Africans (Haalpulaar, Soninke, and Wolof) entered Mauritania, moving into the area north of the Senegal River. As before independence, the sedentary lifestyle of these groups made them more receptive to and useful in state formation, and they quickly came to dominate state administration, even if the Moorish groups built up by the French remained in charge of the political process. Moors reacted to this change by increasing pressures for Arabization, to Arabicize many aspects of Mauritanian life, such as law and language, and ethnic tension built up \u2013 helped by a common memory of warfare and slave raids. \nPresident Moktar Ould Daddah, originally assisted to the post by the French, rapidly reformed Mauritania into an authoritarian one-party state in 1964, with his new Mauritanian constitution. Daddah's own \"Parti du Peuple Mauritanien\" (PPM) became the ruling organization. The President justified this decision on the grounds that he considered Mauritania unready for western-style multi-party democracy. Under this one-party constitution, Daddah was reelected in uncontested elections in 1966, 1971 and 1976. \nTo take advantage of the country's sizable iron ore deposits in Zou\u00e9rat, the new Government built a 675-km railway and a mining port. Production began in 1963. The mines were operated by a foreign owned consortium that paid its approximately 3,000 expatriate workers handsomely \u2013 their salaries accounted for two-thirds of the country's entire wages bill. When the Mauritanian miners went on a two-month strike in the late 1960s the army intervened and eight miners were killed. Left-wing opposition to the government mounted and some miners formed a clandestine Marxist union in 1973. President Ould Daddah survived the challenge from left-wing opponents by nationalizing the company in 1974 and withdrawing from the franc zone, substituting the ouguiya for the CFA. \nIn 1975, partly for nationalist reasons and partly for fear of Moroccan expansionism, http:// Mauritania invaded and annexed the southern third of the former Spanish Sahara (now Western Sahara) in 1975, renaming it Tiris al-Gharbiyya. However, after nearly three years of raids by the Sahrawi guerrillas of the Polisario Front, Mauritania's economic and political stability began to crumble. Despite French and Moroccan military aidhttp:// , Polisario raids against the Zouerate railway and mines threatened to bring about economic collapse, and there were deep misgivings in the military about the Saharan adventure. Ethnic unrest contributed to the disarray. Black Africans from the south were conscripted as front-line soldiers, after the northern Sahrawi minorities and their Moorish kin had proven unreliable in the fight against Polisario, but many of the southerners rebelled against having to fight what they considered an inter-Arab war. After the government quarters in Nouakchott had twice been shelled by Polisario forces, unrest simmered, but Daddah's only response was to further tighten his hold on power.\nOn July 10, 1978, Col. Mustafa Ould Salek led a bloodless coup d'\u00e9tat that ousted the President, who would later go into exile in France. Power passed to the military strongmen of the Military Committee for National Recovery (CMRN). Polisario immediately declared a cease-fire, and peace negotiations began under the sponsorship of Polisario's main backer, Algeria. With the CMRN's leader reluctant to break with France and Morocco, the country refused to give in to Polisario demands for a troop retreat, and Ould Salek's careless handling of the ethnic issue (massively discriminating against Black Africans in nominating for government posts http:// ) contributed to further unrest. In early 1979, he was pushed aside by another group of officers, who renamed the junta the Military Committee for National Salvation (CMSN). Col. Mohamed Khouna Ould Haidalla soon emerged as its main strongman.\n1978 to 1984.\nIn 1979, Polisario broke off the cease-fire and unleashed a string of new attacks on military and government targets. Mauritania, under its new government, immediately returned to the table to meet Polisario's goals, declaring full peace, a complete troop retreat, relinquishing their portion of Western Sahara and recognizing the Front as the Sahrawi people's sole representative.http:// \nMorocco, occupying the northern half of Western Sahara and also involved in combat against Polisario, reacted with outrage, and launched a failed 1981 coup against the CMSN. Mauritania broke off relations with Rabat in protest, although ties were later restored.https:// http:// \nIn interior policy, Ould Haidallah sought to improve relations between White Moors and Black Moors, among other things officially decreeing the ban of slavery for the first time in the country's history, but he neither tried nor achieved a radical break with the sectarian and discriminating policies of previous regimes. An attempt to reinstate civilian rule was abandoned after the above-mentioned Moroccan-sponsored coup attempt nearly brought down the regime; foreign-backed plots also involved Persian Gulf countries and Libya, and the country several times appeared to be under military threat from Morocco.http:// \nWith Ould Haidallah's ambitious political and social reform program undone by continuing instability, regime inefficiency and a plethora of coup attempts and intrigues from within the military establishment, the CMSN Chairman turned increasingly autocratic, excluding other \"junta\" officers from power, and provoking discontent by frequently reshuffling the power hierarchy to prevent threats to his position.\nOn December 12, 1984, Col. Maaouya Ould Sid'Ahmed Taya deposed Haidallah and declared himself Chairman of the CMSN. Like other rulers before him, he promised a swift transfer to democracy, but then made little of these promises. \n1984 to present.\nThe discord between conflicting visions of Mauritanian society as either black or Arab, again rose to the surface during the inter-communal violence that broke out in April 1989 (the \"1989 Events\"), when a Mauritania\u2013Senegal border dispute escalated into violence between the two communities. Tens of thousands of black Mauritanians fled or were expelled from the country,https:// and many remain in Senegal as refugees. This is also where the black Mauritanian movement FLAM is based. Although tension has since subsided, the Arab-African racial tension remains an important feature of the political dialogue today. The country continues to experience ethnic tensions between its black minority population and the dominant Maure (Arab\u2013Berber) populace. A significant number from both groups, however, seek a more diverse, pluralistic society. \nOpposition parties were legalized, and a new Constitution approved in 1991 which put an end to formal military rule. However, Ould Taya's election wins were dismissed as fraudulent by both opposition groups and some external observers. In 1998, Mauritania became the third Arab country to recognize Israel, despite strong internal opposition. \nIn 2001, elections incorporated more safeguards against voter fraud, but opposition candidate (and former leader) Mohamed Khouna Ould Haidallah was nevertheless arrested prior to election day on charges of planning a coup, released the same day and rearrested after the election. Attempted military coups and unrest instigated by Islamist opponents of the regime marred the early years of the 21st century, and the Taya regime's heavy-handed crackdowns were criticized by human rights groups. \nOn June 8, 2003, a failed coup attempt was made against President Maaouya Ould Sid'Ahmed Taya by forces unhappy with his imprisonment of Islamic leaders in the wake of the United States-led invasion of Iraq and his establishment of full diplomatic relations with Israel. The coup was suppressed after two days of heavy fighting in the capital when pro-Taya military forces arrived from the countryside. A number of Government officials were detained after the coup including the head of the Supreme Court, Mahfoud Ould Lemrabott, and the Secretary of State for Women's Affairs, Mintata Mint Hedeid. The coup leader, Saleh Ould Hanenna, a former Army major sacked for opposing Taya's pro-Israel policies, was not captured or killed during the coup, he initially escaped capture. (See this https:// on theories behind the coup.) \nOn August 3, 2005, the Mauritanian military, including members of the Presidential guard (BASEP), seized control of key points in the capital of Nouakchott, performing a coup against the Government of President Maaouya Ould Sid'Ahmed Taya who was out of the country attending the funeral of Saudi King Fahd. The officers released the following statement: \n\"The national armed forces and security forces have unanimously decided to put a definitive end to the oppressive activities of the defunct authority, which our people have suffered from during the past years.\" https:// \nTaya was never able to return to the country and remains in exile. The new junta called itself the \"Military Council for Justice and Democracy\", and democracy and rule of law. Col. Ely Ould Mohamed Vall emerged as leader at an early stage. Dissidents were released, and the political climate relaxed. A new constitution was approved in June 2006. Elections were held in March 2007, Sidi Ould Cheikh Abdallahi was elected president and Vall stood down.\nOn August 6, 2008, Mauritania's presidential spokesman Abdoulaye Mamadouba said President Sidi Ould Cheikh Abdallahi, Prime Minister Yahya Ould Ahmed El Waghef and the Interior minister were arrested by renegade Senior Mauritanian army officers, unknown troops and a group of generals and were held under house arrest at the Presidential palace in Nouakchott. In the apparently successful and bloodless coup d'\u00e9tat, Abdallahi's daughter, Amal Mint Cheikh Abdallahi said: \"The security agents of the BASEP (Presidential Security Battalion) came to our home and took away my father.\" The coup plotters are top fired Mauritania's security forces, which include General Muhammad Ould 'Abd Al-'Aziz, General Muhammad Ould Al-Ghazwani, General Philippe Swikri, and Brigadier-General (Aqid) Ahmed Ould Bakri. Mauritanian lawmaker, Mohammed Al Mukhtar, announced that \"many of the country's people were supporting the takeover attempt\" and the government is \"an authoritarian regime\" and that the president had \"marginalized the majority in parliament.\" \nIn August 2019, former General Mohamed Ould Ghazouani was sworn in as Mauritania\u2019s tenth president since its independence from France in 1960. His predecessor Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz ruled the country for 10 years. The ruling party Union for the Republic (UPR) was founded by Aziz in 2009. \nIn December 2023, former president Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz was arrested and sentenced to 5 years in prison for corruption. \nIn June 2024, President Ghazouani was re-elected for a second term.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19182", "revid": "49784051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19182", "title": "Demographics of Mauritania", "text": "Demographic features of the population of Mauritania () include population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to , the total population was in , compared to only 657 000 in 1950. The proportion of children below the age of 15 in 2010 was 39.9%, 57.4% was between 15 and 65 years of age, while 2.7% was 65 years or older.\nStructure of the population.\nStructure of the population (Census 24.II.2013):\nPopulation by Age Group (Estimates 1.VII.2016) (Data refer to national projections.):\nVital statistics.\nRegistration of vital events in Mauritania is incomplete. The Population Department of the United Nations prepared the following estimates.\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nDemographic and Health Surveys.\nTotal Fertility Rate (TFR) (Wanted Fertility Rate) and Crude Birth Rate (CBR):\nFertility data as of 2010 (DHS Program):\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOfficial census figures identify 100% of Mauritanian citizens as Muslim.\nIn practice, approximately 99.2% of the population is Sunni Muslim following the Maliki school, with very small minorities, about 0.8%, made up of foreign residents practicing Christianity, Judaism, or other faiths.\nEthnic groups.\n40% Black Moors (Haratins), 30% sub-Saharan Mauritanians (non-Arabic speaking, largely resident in or originating from the Senegal River Valley, including Halpulaar, Fulani, Soninke, Wolof, Bambara, and Serer ethnic groups 30%), and 30% White Moors (bidhanes).\nLanguages.\nArabic (official and national), Hassaniya Arabic (dialect of Arabic spoken in daily life), French (widely used in media and among educated classes), Pulaar, Soninke, Wolof, and Serer.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19183", "revid": "23551833", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19183", "title": "Politics of Mauritania", "text": " \nMauritania is a presidential democracy, but has suffered from repeated military coups since its Independence in November 1960. For 18 years after independence, Mauritania was a one-party state under Moktar Ould Daddah. This was followed by decades of military rule. The first fully democratic presidential election in Mauritania occurred on 11 March 2007, which marked a transfer from military to civilian rule following the military coup in 2005. The election was won by Sidi Ould Cheikh Abdallahi, who was ousted by another military coup in 2008 and replaced by general Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz. Mauritania underwent its first peaceful transition of power after the 2019 presidential election, although this was between two presidents of the ruling UPR party and former army generals. \nPersonalities have long exercised an important influence in the politics of Mauritania \u2013 the effective exercise of political power in the country depends on control over resources; perceived ability or integrity; and tribal, ethnic, family, and personal considerations. Conflict between white Moor, black Moor, and non-Moor ethnic groups, centering on language, land tenure, and other issues, continues to pose challenges to the idea of national unity. \nPolitical administration.\nThe government bureaucracy comprises traditional ministries, special agencies, and parastatal companies. The Ministry of Interior controls a system of regional governors and prefects modeled on the French system of local administration. Under this system, Mauritania has 13 regions (wilaya), including the capital district, Nouakchott. \nControl remains tightly concentrated in the executive branch of the central government, but a series of national and municipal elections since 1992 have produced some limited decentralization. \nPolitical history.\nMauritania achieved independence from the French colonial empire in 1960. After independence, President Moktar Ould Daddah, originally installed by the French, formalized Mauritania into a one-party state in 1964 with a new constitution, which set up an authoritarian presidential regime. Daddah's own Parti du Peuple Mauritanien (PPM) became the ruling organization. The President justified this decision on the grounds that he considered Mauritania unready for western-style multi-party democracy. Under this one-party constitution, Daddah was reelected in uncontested elections in 1966, 1971 and 1976. Daddah was ousted in a bloodless coup on July 10, 1978. \nA committee of military officers governed Mauritania from July 1978 to April 1992. A popular referendum approved the current Constitution in July 1991. \nMaaouya Ould Sid'Ahmed Taya's rule (1984\u20132005).\nThe \"Parti R\u00e9publicain D\u00e9mocratique et Social\" (PRDS), led by President Maaouya Ould Sid'Ahmed Taya, has dominated Mauritanian politics since the country's first multi-party elections in April 1992 following the approval by referendum of the current constitution in July 1991. President Taya, who won elections in 1992, 1997 and 2003, first became chief of state through a December 12, 1984, bloodless coup which made him Chairman of the committee of military officers that governed Mauritania from July 1978 to April 1992. \nPolitical parties were legalized again in 1991. By April 1992, as civilian rule returned, 16 major political parties had been recognized; 12 major political parties were active in 2004. By April 1992, as civilian rule returned, 15 political parties had gained official recognition. Among the mostly small groupings, two main opposition parties emerged: \nMost opposition parties boycotted the first legislative election in 1992, and for nearly a decade the Democratic and Social Republican Party (PRDS) dominated the Parliament. The opposition participated in municipal elections in January\u2013February 1994 and in subsequent elections for the Senate, gaining representation at the local level as well as one seat in the Senate. Noting procedural changes and opposition gains in municipal and legislative contests, most local observers considered the October 2001 elections open and transparent. The opposition participated in municipal elections in January\u2013February 1994 and subsequent Senate elections, most recently in April 2004, gaining representation at the local level as well as three seats in the Senate. \nIn October 2001, Mauritania held its third legislative and fifth municipal elections since the establishment of multi-party politics under the 1991 Constitution. In an effort to forestall the sort of widespread accusations of fraud and manipulation which had accompanied previous elections, the government introduced new safeguards, including published voter lists and a hard-to-falsify voter identification card. Reversing a trend of election boycotts, 15 opposition parties nominated candidates for more than 3,000 municipal posts and for the 81-member National Assembly. Four opposition parties won a combined 11 seats in the National Assembly and took 15% of the municipal posts. The ruling Democratic and Social Republican Party (PRDS), in conjunction with two coalition parties, won the remaining contests. See 2003 Mauritania election \nMauritania's presidential election, its third since adopting the democratic process in 1992, took place on November 7, 2003. Six candidates, including Mauritania's first female and first Haratine (former slave family) candidates, represented a wide variety of political goals and backgrounds. Incumbent President Maaouya Ould Sid'Ahmed Taya won re-election with 67.02% of the popular vote, according to the Official figures, with ex-head-of-state Col. Mohamed Khouna Ould Haidalla finishing second. \nOuld Sid'Ahmed Taya recognized the State of Israel, and started cooperating with the United States in antiterrorism activities. \nA group identifying itself as the Military Council for Justice and Democracy (CMJD) overthrew the Taya Government on 3 August 2005 during the absence of the President in Saudi Arabia for King Fahd's funeral. The military dictatorship said it would remain in power for two years in order to allow time for implementing democratic institutions. \nAugust 2005 military coup.\nIn August 2005, a military coup led by Col. Ely Ould Mohamed Vall ended Maaouya Ould Sid'Ahmed Taya's 21 years of strong-arm rule. \nOn August 3, the Mauritanian military, including members of the presidential guard (BASEP), seized control of key points in the capital of Nouakchott. They took advantage of President Taya's attendance at the funeral of Saudi King Fahd to organize the coup, which took place without loss of life. The officers, calling themselves the Military Council for Justice and Democracy, released the following statement: \n\"The national armed forces and security forces have unanimously decided to put a definitive end to the oppressive activities of the defunct authority, which our people have suffered from during the past years.\" http:// \nThe Military Council later issued another statement naming as president Col. Ould Mohamed Vall, Director of the national police force, the \"S\u00fbret\u00e9 Nationale\", since 1987, and listing 16 other officers as members. \nCol. Mohamed Vall was once regarded as a firm ally of the now-ousted president Sid'Ahmed Taya, even aiding him in the original coup that brought him to power, and later serving as his security chief. This high-level betrayal of the former president suggests broad discontent within the branches of local government, which is further supported by the lack of bloodshed and the population's support of the rebel militaries. \nApplauded by the Mauritanian people, but cautiously watched by the international community, the coup has since been generally accepted, while the military \"junta\" has promised to organize elections within two years. \nParliamentary and municipal elections were held on the 19 November 2006 http://. \nIsrael's recognition by the Islamic Republic of Mauritania was maintained by the new regime. \nDispute with Woodside Petroleum.\nIn February 2006, the new Mauritanian government denounced amendments to an oil contract made by former Leader Ould Taya with Woodside Petroleum, an Australian company. In 2004, Woodside had agreed to invest $US 600 million in developing Mauritania's Chinguetti offshore oil project. The controversial amendments, which Mauritanian authorities declared had been signed \"outside the legal framework of normal practice, to the great detriment of our country\", could cost Mauritania up to $200 million a year, according to \"BBC News\". Signed by Woodside two weeks after the February 1, 2005, legislation authorizing the four amendments, they provided for a lower state quota in the \"profit-oil\", and reduced taxes by 15 percent in certain zones. They also eased environmental constraints and extended the length and scope of the exploitation and exploration monopoly, among other measures. \nThe disputed amendments were signed by former Oil Minister Zeidane Ould Hmeida in February 2004 and March 2005. Hmeida was arrested in January 2006 on charges of \"serious crimes against the country's essential economic interests\". \nNouakchott's authorities declared that the government would likely seek international arbitration, which Woodside (which operated for Hardman, BG Group, Premier, ROC Oil, Fusion, Petronas, Dana Petroleum, Energy Africa and the Hydrocarbons Mauritanian Society) also contemplated. \nDiscovered in 2001, Chinguetti has proven reserves of about of oil. At the end of December 2005, authorities estimated that in 2006, the oil profits would be 47 billion \"ouguiyas\" (about US$180 million) and represent a quarter of the state budget, according to \"RFI\". \n2007 Presidential election.\nThe first fully democratic Presidential election since 1960 occurred on 11 March 2007. The election is the final transfer from military to civilian rule following the military coup in 2005. This is the first time the president will have been selected by ballot in the country's history. \nThe election was won by Sidi Ould Cheikh Abdallahi. \nSlavery is still said to exist in Mauritania, some 100 years after slavery officially ended in the West and since it was officially abolished in the country in 1981.https:// \n2008 coup d'\u00e9tat.\nOn August 6, 2008, Mauritania's presidential spokesman Abdoulaye Mamadou Ba said President Sidi Ould Cheikh Abdallahi, Prime Minister Yahya Ould Ahmed Waghef and the Interior minister, were arrested by renegade Senior Mauritanian army officers, unknown troops and a group of generals, and were held under house arrest at the Presidential palace in Nouakchott. In the apparently successful and bloodless coup d'\u00e9tat, Abdallahi's daughter Amal Mint Cheikh Abdallahi said, \"The security agents of the BASEP (Presidential Security Battalion) came to our home and took away my father.\" The coup plotters are top fired Mauritania\u2019s security forces, which include General Muhammad Ould \u2018Abd Al-\u2018Aziz, General Muhammad Ould Al-Ghazwani, General Philippe Swikri, and Brigadier General (Aqid) Ahmed Ould Bakri. Mauritanian lawmaker, Mohammed Al Mukhtar, announced that \"many of the country's people were supporting the takeover attempt and the government is 'an authoritarian regime'\" and that the president had \"marginalized the majority in parliament.\" \nAfter the 2008 coup.\nIn August 2019, former General Mohamed Ould Ghazouani was sworn in as Mauritania\u2019s tenth president since its independence from France in 1960. His predecessor Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz ran the African desert country for 10 years. The ruling party Union for the Republic (UPR) was founded by Aziz in 2009 and renamed to Equity Party in 2022. Mohamed Ould Ghazouani's victory in the 2019 Mauritanian presidential election was presented as having been the country's first peaceful transition of power since independence. In June 2024, President Ghazouani was re-elected for a second term.\nExecutive branch.\n!scope=\"col| Office\n!scope=\"col| Name \n!scope=\"col| Party\n!scope=\"col| Since\nLegislative branch.\nThe Parliament (\"Barlamane/Parlement\") has two chambers. The National Assembly (\"Al Jamiya al-Wataniyah/Assembl\u00e9e Nationale\") has 176 members, elected for a five-year term in single-seat constituencies. The Senate (\"Majlis al-Shuyukh/S\u00e9nat\") has 56 members, 53 members elected for a six-year term by municipal councillors with one third renewed every two years and 3. \nAdministrative divisions.\nMauritania is divided in 12 regions (regions, singular \u2013 region) and 1 capital district*; Adrar, Assaba, Brakna, Dakhlet Nouadhibou, Gorgol, Guidimaka, Hodh Ech Chargui, Hodh El Gharbi, Inchiri, Nouakchott*, Tagant, Tiris Zemmour, Trarza. \nInternational organization participation.\nABEDA, ACCT (associate), ACP, AfDB, AFESD, AL, AMF, AMU, CAEU, CCC, ECA, ECOWAS, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO (pending member), ILO, IMF, International Maritime Organization, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU, NAM, OAU, OIC, OPCW, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19184", "revid": "50678897", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19184", "title": "Economy of Mauritania", "text": "The economy of Mauritania is still largely based on agriculture, mining and livestock, even though most of the nomads and many subsistence farmers were forced into the cities by recurring droughts in the 1970s and 1980s. \nMauritania has extensive deposits of iron ore, which account for almost 50% of total exports. The decline in world demand for this ore, however, has led to cutbacks in production. With the current rise in metal prices, gold and copper mining companies are opening mines in the interior.\nThe nation's coastal waters are among the richest fishing areas in the world, but overexploitation by foreigners threatens this key source of revenue. The country's first deep water port opened near Nouakchott in 1986.\nIn recent years, drought and economic mismanagement have resulted in a buildup of foreign debt. In March 1999, the government signed an agreement with a joint World Bank-International Monetary Fund mission on a $54 million enhanced structural adjustment facility (ESAF). The economic objectives have been set for 1999\u20132002. Privatization remains one of the key issues.\nMacro-economic trends.\nThis is a chart of trend of gross domestic product of Mauritania at market prices http:// by the International Monetary Fund with figures in millions of Mauritanian Ouguiyas. \nhttps:// of Mauritania grew 82% in the Sixties reaching a peak growth of 166% in the Seventies. But this proved unsustainable, and growth consequently scaled back to 14% in the Eighties. Finally, it shrank by 29% in the Nineties. Mean wages were $0.97 per man-hour in 2009.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1990\u20132024.\nDiversification.\nIn 2007, mining industries accounted for well over 35 percent of the Mauritanian economy, with the fish industry so much as 54% (with big changes between these industries in the power relationship). Diversification of the economy into non-mining industries remains a long-term issue. Mauritania is a net importer of food, reportedly importing 70% of its domestic food needs.\nNatural Gas and the Tortue/Ahmeyim Project.\nIn 2015, Kosmos Energy made significant natural gas discoveries on the maritime border between Senegal and Mauritania, and in December 2016, it entered into partnership with British Petroleum. The two companies, along with Mauritanian and Senegalese governments and the two countries' national oil companies, are optimistic about the potential of these gas discoveries. The Grand Tortue/Ahmeyim reserves are estimated at 15 trillion cubic feet. According to BP, 'that's equivalent to all of Africa's current gas production for nearly seven years.' The production phase will begin in 2022, starting with 2.3 million tons annually.\nDispute with Woodside Petroleum.\nIn February 2006, the new Mauritanian government denounced amendments to an oil contract made by former Leader Ould Taya with Woodside Petroleum, an Australian company. In 2004, Woodside had agreed to invest US$600 million in developing Mauritania's Chinguetti offshore oil project. The controversial amendments, which Mauritanian authorities declared had been signed \"outside the legal framework of normal practice, to the great detriment of our country\", could cost Mauritania up to $200 million a year, according to BBC News. Signed by Woodside two weeks after the February 1, 2005, legislation authorizing the four amendments, they provided for a lower state quota in the \"profit-oil\", and reduced taxes by 15 percent in certain zones. They also eased environmental constraints and extended the length and scope of the exploitation and exploration monopoly, among other measures.\nThe disputed amendments were signed by former Oil Minister Zeidane Ould Hmeida in February 2004 and March 2005. Hmeida was arrested in January 2006 on charges of \"serious crimes against the country's essential economic interests\".\nNouakchott's authorities declared that the government would likely seek international arbitration, which Woodside (which operated for Hardman, BG Group, Premier Oil, ROC Oil, Fusion, Petronas, Dana Petroleum, Energy Africa and the Hydrocarbons Mauritanian Society) also contemplated.\nDiscovered in 2001, Chinguetti has proven reserves of about of oil. At the end of December 2005, authorities estimated that in 2006, the oil profits would be 47 billion \"ouguiyas\" (about US$180 million) and represent a quarter of the state budget, according to \"RFI\".\nSome U.S. oil companies are alleged to be playing a part in Mauritania's oil related corruption.\nElectricity.\nMauritania has 380 MW of generating capacity, of which 263 MW are fossil fuels and 117 MW are renewable. Its sunny weather makes solar power highly favorable, and eight plants totaling 16.6 MW were installed with the support of Masdar in 2016.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19185", "revid": "17339865", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19185", "title": "Transport in Mauritania", "text": " \nCitizens of Mauritania have limited access to transportation. The single-line railroad serves mining interests with very occasional ad hoc passenger services. Apart from two infrastructural road developments there are few paved roads.\nRailways.\nThere are no rail links with adjacent countries.\nIn 2008, a railway was proposed that would link Nouakchott with Tiguint, Mederdra, R'Kiz, Leguatt, Leeleibatt, Menjem Boffal, Kaedi, and Bofal.\nTimeline.\n2007.\nSudan's Danfodio Holding and China's Transtech Engineering have signed an agreement to build a 460-million-euro ($634 million) railway linking Mauritania's capital Nouakchott with southern phosphate deposits at Bofal. The line would run close to the southern frontier with Senegal. It is hoped that the new line would link with existing lines just across the border in Senegal, Mali. There is no through link to Burkina Faso. There are problems of choice of gauge.\nMotorway.\nThere are 450\u00a0km of Motorway in Mauritania (in 2010), connecting Nouakchott to Nouadhibou along a coastal route. A motorway linking Nouakchott to Rosso is under construction (due for completion in 2012).\nHighways.\nMauritania has only about of surfaced roads, of unsurfaced roads, and of unimproved tracks. \nThe country's size and harsh climate make road maintenance and repair especially problematic. Overland travel is difficult and roadside assistance is almost nonexistent. Public transportation is not safe and road conditions in Mauritania are poor, particularly in the interior. Driving in Mauritania can be treacherous, and many Mauritanians drive without regard to traffic signs or rules. Roadway obstructions and hazards caused by drifting sand, animals, and poor roads often plague motorists.\nInternational highways.\nThe Cairo-Dakar Highway in the Trans-African Highway network passes through Mauritania, linking Nouakchott to Rabat, Tangiers, Algiers, and Tripoli. The section between the capital Nouakchott and the port of Nouadhibou was paved by 2018; only a few kilometers remain unpaved at the Moroccan border . From Dakar there are links throughout western Africa. \nThe north-western end of the Trans\u2013West African Coastal Highway is considered by the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) to originate in Nouakchott.\nAirports (paved).\nSee Airports in Mauritania \nBy city: \nAirports (unpaved).\nSee Airports in Mauritania\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19186", "revid": "4156945", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19186", "title": "Telecommunications in Mauritania", "text": " \nTelephones - main lines in use: 300,500 (2024)\nTelephones - mobile cellular: 200,000 (2003)\nTelephone system: \"general assessment\": limited system of cable and open-wire lines, minor microwave radio relay links, and radiotelephone communications stations (improvements being made) \n\"domestic\": mostly cable and open-wire lines; a recently completed domestic satellite telecommunications system links Nouakchott with regional capitals. \n\"international\": country code +222; satellite earth stations - 9 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean) and 20 Arabsat. \nRadio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 14, shortwave 1 (2001)\nRadios: 410,000 (2001)\nTelevision broadcast stations: 20 (2024)\nTelevisions: 708,000 (2001)\nInternet Service Providers (ISPs): 26 (2014)\nInternet users: 250,000 (2002)\nCountry code (Top level domain): .mr \nBroadband Internet access.\nMauritania has three operators, the original monopoly, Mauritel (now owned by Vivendi's Maroc Telecom), Mattel (owned by Tunisie Telecom) and Chinguitel, which started operating in December 2006. \nThe country only has around 1000 DSL subscribers, and 300,0000 internet subscribers in total, out of a population of 4.5 million. Monthly DSL charges were high, around US$30 per month, but have now dropped to MRO 10,000 (around US$20) per month. "}
{"id": "19187", "revid": "5666248", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19187", "title": "Armed Forces of Mauritania", "text": "The Armed Forces of Mauritania (, ) are the defense force of the Islamic Republic of Mauritania, having an army, navy, air force, gendarmerie, and presidential guard. Other services include the national guard and national police, though they both are subordinated to the Ministry of the Interior. As of 2018, the Mauritanian armed forces budget was 3.9% of the country's GDP.\nThe military forces of Mauritania were listed by the IISS Military Balance 2007 as comprising 15,870 personnel with an additional 5,000 paramilitaries, in the national gendarmerie. The Navy (Marine Mauritanienne) had 620 personnel and 11 patrol and coastal combatants, with bases at Nouadhibou and Nouakchott. The CIA reported that the navy included naval infantry. The small air force (Force A\u00e9rienne Islamique de Mauritanie, FAIM) had 250 personnel, 2 FTB-337 aircraft, 15 transport aircraft of various types, and 4 SF-260E trainers. The 5,000 paramilitaries were divided in the National Gendarmerie (3,000), and the National Guard (2,000) who both reported to the Ministry of the Interior. Other paramilitary services reported by the CIA in 2001 include the National Police, Presidential Guard (BASEP).\nHistory.\nSaleh Ould Hanenna, a former army major, led the 2003 Mauritanian coup d'\u00e9tat attempt in June 2003. It aimed to overthrow President Maaouya Ould Sid'Ahmed Taya. He commanded a rebel section of the Army during two days of heavy fighting in Nouakchott. With the failure of the coup Hanenna initially escaped capture, and formed a group called the 'Knights of Change' with Mohamed Ould Cheikhna, but they were arrested on 9 October 2004. \nGeneral Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz, a career soldier and high-ranking officer, was a leading figure in the 2005 Mauritanian coup d'\u00e9tat that deposed President Maaouya Ould Sid'Ahmed Taya. \nIn August 2008, General Ould Abdel Aziz led the 2008 Mauritanian coup d'\u00e9tat that toppled President Sidi Ould Cheikh Abdallahi. Following the latter coup, Abdel Aziz became President of the High Council of State as part of what was described as a political transition leading to a new election. He resigned from that post in April 2009 to stand as a candidate in the July 2009 presidential election, which he won. He was sworn in on 5 August 2009. \nArmy.\nIn March 1985, the Defense Intelligence Agency reported the army was 8,300 strong with no reserves (Military Intelligence Summary \u2013 Africa South of the Sahara, DDB 2680-104-85, ICOD 15 October 1984, Mauritania pages 4, 5, declassified by letter dated 29 April 2014). Reported regions at the time were Region I \u2013 Nouadhibou, Region II \u2013 Zoueirat, Region III \u2013 Atar, Region IV \u2013 formerly at Tidjikdja, which no longer existed, Region V \u2013 Nema, Region VI \u2013 Nouakchott, and Region VII \u2013 Rosso. The army was organized into the six regions which each supervised several companies, though there was 'one small autonomous infantry battalion stationed in Nouakchott.\nThe Army is 15,000 strong, according to the IISS, with six military regions, two camel corps battalions, one battalion of T-55 battle tanks, one armored reconnaissance squadron, eight garrison infantry battalions, seven motorized infantry battalions, one commando/para battalion, 3 artillery battalions, 4 air defense batteries, one engineer company, and one guard battalion. The 1\u00e8re r\u00e9gion militaire is at Nouadhibou, 2nd Military Region is at Zouerate, 3rd Military Region is at Atar, 4\u00e8me r\u00e9gion militaire may be at Tidjikdja, 5th Military Region headquarters is at N\u00e9ma, The 6th Military Region may be in the area of the capital, and the 7th Military Region may be at Aleg. \nThe Mauritanian military is currently involved in Operation Enduring Freedom \u2013 Trans Sahara. Previous U.S. anti-terrorist engagement included training under the Pan Sahel Initiative. Under the PSI, a 10th Special Forces Group training team carried out a one-week border monitoring training programme in January 2004. \nThe IISS listed equipment in 2007 as including 35 T-55 main battle tanks, 70 reconnaissance vehicles (20 Panhard AML-60, 40 Panhard AML-90, 10 Alvis Saladin), 25 wheeled APCs (estimate 20 Panhard M3 and 5 Alvis Saracen), 194 artillery pieces (80 towed: 36 HM-2/M-101, 20 D-30, 24 D-74; 114 mortars: 60 60-mm, 30 Brandt 120-mm), 24 MILAN ATGM, 114 recoilless rocket launchers (est. 90 M-40A1 106mm, est 24 M-20 75mm), est 50 RPG-7 Knout, 104 SAMs (est 100 SA-7 Grail, and a reported 4 SA-9 Gaskin), and 82 towed anti-aircraft guns (14.5mm, including 12 ZPU-4, ZU-23-2, 37 mm automatic air defense gun M1939 (61-K), 12 57 mm AZP S-60, and 12 100mm KS-19s). \nEquipment.\nAmong reported special forces units are:\nAir Force.\nAfter achieving independence in 1960 the Faidem (Force Aerienne Islamique de Mauritanie) was supplied equipment by France, such as C-47s and MH.1521 Broussards, which was later replaced by the Britten-Norman BN-2A Defender between 1976 and 1978 and had operated as a transport and observation squadron in the Western Sahara War. During the same time two Cessna 337s and two DHC-5 Buffalo STOL transports were supplied in 1977 and 1978 with one DHC-5 crashing almost immediately and the other being returned to De Havilland Canada in 1979. After the Polisario Front shot down one Defender and damaged two in 1978 the Mauritanian government ordered six IA-58 Pucar\u00e1s for ground attack duties from Argentina; this order was later cancelled after a Mauritanian military coup.\nThe Air Force School was created in Atar. It was founded to train pilots, mechanics, other crewmen for the Air Force.\nMore recent procurements have been from China in the form of the Harbin Y-12 II turboprop transports were delivered in September 1995, one crashed in April 1996. A second one crashed on 12 July 2012. The Xian Y7-100C (a copy of the AN-24 transport) was delivered from October 1997, which crashed in May 1998. The Air Force has recently received their order of Embraers.\nFor up-to-date list of the aircraft of the air force, see the main article Mauritania Islamic Air Force.\nNavy.\nMauritania has developed a five-year plan to develop its navy into a force that is capable of defending the country's 235,000\u00a0km squared exclusive economic zone, Admiral Isselkou Ould Cheik El-Weli said during a promotion ceremony held at the Nouadhibou naval base in late May 2017. The Saharamedias.net website reported that the plan includes the acquisition of two 60-meter vessels, which are currently under construction, and \"mid-sized ships\", as well as the formation of three companies of marines. No further details were provided. \nThe Mauritanian Navy was created on 25 January 1966, after the extension of Mauritania's territorial waters from . By 1972 the navy had one small patrol gunboat and two small patrol craft that performed port control and customs duties. In 1987 the navy had thirteen boats. Of these boats, only eight were seaworthy, and the navy could send only two vessels out to open water at a time. Mauritania's exclusive economic zone (EEZ) extended out from the coast, but even if effective coastal surveillance were possible, the navy's vessels would not be able to control Mauritania's waters. Nouadhibou housed the major naval base; Nouakchott housed a secondary base.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19189", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19189", "title": "Mumbai", "text": "Capital of Maharashtra, India\nMumbai ( ; , \u00a0), also known as Bombay ( ; its official name until 1995), is the capital city of the Indian state of Maharashtra. Mumbai is the financial capital and the most populous city proper of India with an estimated population of 12.5 million (1.25\u00a0crore). Mumbai is the centre of the Mumbai Metropolitan Region, which is among the most populous metropolitan areas in the world with a population of over 23\u00a0million (2.3 crore). Mumbai lies on the Konkan coast on the west coast of India and has a deep natural harbour. In 2008, Mumbai was named an alpha world city. Mumbai has the highest number of billionaires out of any city in Asia.\nThe seven islands that constitute Mumbai were earlier home to communities of Marathi language-speaking Koli people. For centuries, the seven islands of Bombay were under the control of successive indigenous rulers before being ceded to the Portuguese Empire, and subsequently to the East India Company in 1661, as part of the dowry of Catherine of Braganza in her marriage to Charles II of England. Beginning in 1782, Mumbai was reshaped by the Hornby Vellard project, which undertook reclamation of the area between the seven islands from the Arabian Sea. Along with the construction of major roads and railways, the reclamation project, completed in 1845, transformed Mumbai into a major seaport on the Arabian Sea. Mumbai in the 19th century was characterised by economic and educational development. During the early 20th century it became a strong base for the Indian independence movement. Upon India's independence in 1947 the city was incorporated into Bombay State. In 1960, following the Samyukta Maharashtra Movement, a new state of Maharashtra was created with Mumbai as the capital.\nMumbai is the financial, commercial, and entertainment capital of India. Mumbai is often compared to New York City, and is home to the Bombay Stock Exchange, situated on Dalal Street. It is also one of the world's top ten centres of commerce in terms of global financial flow, generating 6.16% of India's GDP, and accounting for 25% of the nation's industrial output, 70% of maritime trade in India (Mumbai Port Trust, Dharamtar Port and JNPT), and 70% of capital transactions to India's economy. The city houses important financial institutions and the corporate headquarters of numerous Indian companies and multinational corporations. The city is also home to some of India's premier scientific and nuclear institutes and the Hindi and Marathi film industries. Mumbai's business opportunities attract migrants from all over India.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Mumbai\" (Marathi: ) originated from \"Mumb\u0101\" or \"Mah\u0101-Amb\u0101\"\u2014the name of the patron Hindu goddess (Kula Devata) Mumbadevi of the native Koli community\u2014and from \"\u0101'\u012b\", meaning \"mother\" in the Marathi language, which is the mother tongue of the Koli people and the official language of Maharashtra. According to certain accounts, the Koli community, which hails from Kathiawar and Central Gujarat, is believed to have introduced their deity Mumba from Kathiawar (Gujarat), where her worship continues to this day. However, other sources disagree that Mumbai's name was derived from the goddess Mumba.\nThe oldest known names for the city are \"Kakamuchee\" and \"Galajunkja\"; these are sometimes still used. Portuguese writer Gaspar Correia recorded the name \"Bombaim\" after 1512 in his \"Lendas da \u00cdndia\" (\"Legends of India\"). While some Anglophone authors have suggested this name possibly originated as an alleged Galician-Portuguese phrase \"bom baim\", meaning \"good little bay\", such suggestions lack any scientific basis. Portuguese linguist attributes that interpretation to a deficient knowledge of the Portuguese language of these authors, mixing up the Portuguese word \"bom\" with the English \"bay\", from the English version of the name. In 1516, Portuguese explorer Duarte Barbosa used the name \"Tana-Maiambu\": \"Tana\" appears to refer to the adjoining town of Thane and \"Maiambu\" to \"Mumbadevi\". The form \"Bombaim\" is still commonly used in Portuguese.\nOther variations recorded in the 16th and the 17th centuries include: \"Mombayn\" (1525), \"Bombay\" (1538), \"Bombain\" (1552), \"Bombaym\" (1552), \"Monbaym\" (1554), \"Mombaim\" (1563), \"Mombaym\" (1644), \"Bambaye\" (1666), \"Bombaiim\" (1666), \"Bombeye\" (1676), \"Boon Bay\" (1690) and \"Bon Bahia\". After the English gained possession of the city in the 17th century, the Portuguese name was anglicised as \"Bombay\". Ali Muhammad Khan, imperial dewan or revenue minister of the Gujarat province, in the \"Mirat-i Ahmedi\" (1762) referred to the city as \"Manbai\".\nThe French traveller Louis Rousselet, who visited in 1863 and 1868, states in his book \"L'Inde des Rajahs\", which was first published in 1877: \"Etymologists have wrongly derived this name from the Portuguese B\u00f4a Bahia, or (French: \"bonne baie\", English: \"good bay\"), not knowing that the tutelar goddess of this island has been, from remote antiquity, Bomba, or Mumba Devi, and that she still ... possesses a temple\". British officer and scholar John Briggs stated that the name Bombay was a corruption of \"Mumby\", which was ascribed to a portion of the island where a temple to Mumba Devi was located.\nBy the late 20th century, the city was referred to as \"Mumbai\" or \"Mambai\" in Marathi, Konkani, Gujarati, Kannada and Sindhi, and as \"Bambai\" in Hindi. The Government of India officially changed the English name to \"Mumbai\" in November 1995. This came at the insistence of the Marathi nationalist Shiv Sena party, which had just won the Maharashtra state elections, and mirrored similar name changes across the country and particularly in Maharashtra. According to \"Slate\" magazine, \"they argued that 'Bombay' was a corrupted English version of 'Mumbai' and an unwanted legacy of British colonial rule.\" \"Slate\" also said \"The push to rename Bombay was part of a larger movement to strengthen Marathi identity in the Maharashtra region.\" While Mumbai is still referred to as Bombay by some of its residents and by some Indians from other regions, mention of the city by a name other than \"Mumbai\" has been controversial.\nPeople from Mumbai.\nA resident of Mumbai is called \"Mumbaikar\" () in Marathi, in which the suffix \"-kar\" means a 'resident of'. The term had been in use for quite some time but it gained popularity after the official name change to Mumbai. Older terms such as \"Bombayite\" are also used infrequently.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nMumbai is built on what was once an archipelago of seven islands: Isle of Bombay, Parel, Mazagaon, Mahim, Colaba, Worli, and Old Woman's Island (also known as \"Little Colaba\"). It is not exactly known when these islands were first inhabited. Pleistocene sediments found along the coastal areas around Kandivali in northern Mumbai suggest that the islands were inhabited since the South Asian Stone Age. Perhaps at the beginning of the Common Era, or possibly earlier, they came to be occupied by the Koli fishing community.\nIn the 3rd century BCE, the islands formed part of the Maurya Empire, during its expansion in the south, ruled by the Buddhist emperor Ashoka of Magadha. The Kanheri Caves in Borivali were excavated from basalt rock in the first century CE, and served as an important centre of Buddhism in Western India during ancient Times. The city then was known as \"Heptanesia\" (Ancient Greek: A Cluster of Seven Islands) to the Greek geographer Ptolemy in 150\u00a0CE. The Mahakali Caves in Andheri were cut out between the 1st century BCE and the 6th century CE.\nBetween the 2nd century BCE and 9th century CE, the islands came under the control of successive indigenous dynasties: Satavahanas, Western Satraps, Abhira, Vakataka, Kalachuris, Konkan Mauryas, Chalukyas and Rashtrakutas, before being ruled by the Shilaharas from 810 to 1260. Some of the oldest edifices in the city built during this period are the Jogeshwari Caves (between 520 and 525), Elephanta Caves (between the sixth to seventh century), Walkeshwar Temple (10th century), and Banganga Tank (12th century).\nKing Bhimdev founded his kingdom in the region in the late 13th century and established his capital in \"Mahikawati\" (present day Mahim). The Pathare Prabhus, among the earliest known settlers of the city, were brought to \"Mahikawati\" from Saurashtra in Gujarat around 1298 by Bhimdev. The Delhi Sultanate annexed the islands in 1347\u201348 and controlled it until 1407. During this time, the islands were administered by the Muslim Governors of Gujarat, who were appointed by the Delhi Sultanate.\nThe islands were later governed by the independent Gujarat Sultanate, which was established in 1407. As a result of the Sultanate's support, numerous mosques were built, with one notable example being the Haji Ali Dargah in Worli. Erected in 1431, this magnificent structure pays homage to the revered Muslim saint, Haji Ali. From 1429 to 1431, the islands were a source of contention between the Gujarat Sultanate and the Bahmani Sultanate of Deccan. In 1493, Bahadur Khan Gilani of the Bahmani Sultanate attempted to conquer the islands but was defeated.\nPortuguese and British rule.\nThe Mughal Empire, founded in 1526, was the dominant power in the Indian subcontinent during the mid-16th century. Growing apprehensive of the power of the Mughal emperor Humayun, Sultan Bahadur Shah of Gujarat was obliged to sign the Treaty of Bassein with the Portuguese Empire on 23 December 1534. According to the treaty, the Seven Islands of Bombay, the nearby strategic town of Bassein and its dependencies were offered to the Portuguese. The territories were later surrendered on 25 October 1535.\nThe Portuguese were actively involved in the foundation and growth of their Roman Catholic religious orders in Bombay. They called the islands by various names, which finally took the written form \"Bombaim\". The islands were leased to several Portuguese officers during their regime. The Portuguese Franciscans and Jesuits built several churches in the city, prominent being the St. Michael's Church at Mahim (1534), St. John the Baptist Church at Andheri (1579), St. Andrew's Church at Bandra (1580), and Gloria Church at Byculla (1632). The Portuguese also built several fortifications around the city like the Bombay Castle, \"Castella de Aguada\" (Castelo da Aguada or Bandra Fort), and Madh Fort. The English were in constant struggle with the Portuguese vying for hegemony over Mumbai, as they recognised its strategic natural harbour and its natural isolation from land attacks. By the middle of the 17th century, the growing power of the Dutch Empire forced the English to acquire a station in western India. On 11 May 1661, the marriage treaty of Charles II of England and Catherine of Braganza, daughter of King John IV of Portugal, placed the islands in possession of the English Empire, as part of Catherine's dowry to Charles. However, Salsette, Bassein, Mazagaon, Parel, Worli, Sion, Dharavi, and Wadala still remained under Portuguese possession. From 1665 to 1666, the English managed to acquire Mahim, Sion, Dharavi, and Wadala.\nIn accordance with the Royal Charter of 27 March 1668, England leased these islands to the English East India Company in 1668 for a sum of \u00a310 per annum. The population quickly rose from 10,000 in 1661, to 60,000 in 1675. The islands were subsequently attacked by Yakut Khan, the Muslim Koli admiral of the Mughal Empire, in October 1672, Rickloffe van Goen, the Governor-General of Dutch India on 20 February 1673, and Siddi admiral Sambal on 10 October 1673.\nIn 1687, the English East India Company transferred its headquarters from Surat to Mumbai. The city eventually became the headquarters of the Bombay Presidency. Following the transfer, Mumbai was placed at the head of all the company's establishments in India. Towards the end of the 17th century, the islands again suffered incursions from Yakut Khan in 1689\u201390. The Portuguese presence ended in Mumbai when the Marathas under \"Peshwa\" Baji Rao I captured Salsette in 1737, and Bassein in 1739.\nBy the middle of the 18th century, Mumbai began to grow into a major trading town, and received a huge influx of migrants from across India. Later, the British occupied Salsette on 28 December 1774. With the Treaty of Surat (1775), the British formally gained control of Salsette and Bassein, resulting in the First Anglo-Maratha War. The British were able to secure Salsette from the Marathas without violence through the Treaty of Purandar (1776), and later through the Treaty of Salbai (1782), signed to settle the outcome of the First Anglo-Maratha War.\nFrom 1782 onwards, the city was reshaped with large-scale civil engineering projects aimed at merging all the seven islands of Bombay into a single amalgamated mass by way of a causeway called the Hornby Vellard, which was completed by 1784. In 1817, the British East India Company under Mountstuart Elphinstone defeated Baji Rao II, the last of the Maratha \"Peshwa\" in the Battle of Khadki. Following his defeat, almost the whole of the Deccan Plateau came under British suzerainty, and was incorporated into the Bombay Presidency. The success of the British campaign in the Deccan marked the end of all attacks by native powers.\nBy 1845, the seven islands coalesced into a single landmass by the Hornby Vellard project via large scale land reclamation. On 16 April 1853, India's first passenger railway line was established, connecting Mumbai to the neighbouring town of Thana (now Thane). During the American Civil War (1861\u20131865), the city became the world's chief cotton-trading market, resulting in a boom in the economy that subsequently enhanced the city's stature.\nThe opening of the Suez Canal in 1869 transformed Mumbai into one of the largest seaports on the Arabian Sea. In September 1896, Mumbai was hit by a bubonic plague epidemic where the death toll was estimated at 1,900 people per week. About 850,000 people fled Mumbai and the textile industry was adversely affected. While the city was the capital of the Bombay Presidency, the Indian independence movement fostered the Quit India Movement in 1942 and the Royal Indian Navy mutiny in 1946.\nIndependent India.\nAfter India's independence in 1947, the territory of the Bombay Presidency was restructured into Bombay State. The area of Bombay State increased, after several erstwhile princely states that joined the Indian union were integrated into the state. Subsequently, the city became the capital of Bombay State. In April 1950, municipal limits of Mumbai were expanded by merging the Mumbai Suburban District and Mumbai City to form the Greater Mumbai Municipal Corporation.\nThe Samyukta Maharashtra movement to create a separate Maharashtra state including Mumbai was at its height in the 1950s. In the \"Lok Sabha\" discussions in 1955, the Congress party demanded that the city be constituted as an autonomous city-state. The States Reorganisation Committee recommended a bilingual state for Maharashtra\u2013Gujarat with Mumbai as its capital in its 1955 report. Bombay Citizens' Committee, an advocacy group of leading Gujarati industrialists, lobbied for Mumbai's independent status.\nFollowing protests in which 105 people died in clashes with the police, Bombay State was reorganised on linguistic lines on 1 May 1960. Gujarati-speaking areas of Bombay State were partitioned into the state of Gujarat. Maharashtra State with Mumbai as its capital was formed with the merger of Marathi-speaking areas of Bombay State, eight districts from Central Provinces and Berar, five districts from Hyderabad State, and numerous princely states enclosed between them. As a memorial to the martyrs of the Samyukta Maharashtra movement, Flora Fountain was renamed as \"Hutatma Chowk\" (Martyr's Square) and a memorial was erected.\nThe following decades saw massive expansion of the city and its suburbs. In the late 1960s, Nariman Point and Cuffe Parade were reclaimed and developed. The Mumbai Metropolitan Region Development Authority (BMRDA) was established on 26 January 1975 by the Government of Maharashtra as an apex body for planning and co-ordination of development activities in the Mumbai metropolitan region. In August 1979, a sister township of New Mumbai was founded by the City and Industrial Development Corporation (CIDCO) across the Thane and Raigad districts to help the dispersal and control of Mumbai's population. The textile industry in Mumbai largely disappeared after the widespread 1982 Great Bombay Textile Strike, in which nearly 250,000 workers in more than 50 textile mills went on strike. Mumbai's defunct cotton mills have since become the focus of intense redevelopment. Industrial development began in Mumbai when its economy started focusing on the petrochemical, electronic, and automotive sectors. In 1954 Hindustan Petroleum commissioned Mumbai Refinery at Trombay and BPCL Refinery.\nThe Jawaharlal Nehru Port, which handles 55\u201360% of India's containerised cargo, was commissioned on 26 May 1989 across the creek at Nhava Sheva with a view to de-congest Mumbai Harbour and to serve as a hub port for the city. The geographical limits of Greater Mumbai were coextensive with municipal limits of Greater Mumbai. On 1 October 1990, the Greater Mumbai district was bifurcated to form two revenue districts namely, Mumbai City and Mumbai Suburban, though they continued to be administered by same Municipal Administration.\nThe years from 1990 to 2010 saw an increase in violence and terrorism activities. Following the demolition of the Babri Masjid in Ayodhya, the city was rocked by the Hindu-Muslim riots of 1992\u201393 in which more than 1,000\u00a0people were killed. In March 1993, a series of 13 coordinated bombings at several city landmarks by Islamic extremists and the Mumbai underworld resulted in 257 deaths and over 700 injuries. In 2006, 209 people were killed and over 700 injured when seven bombs exploded on the city's commuter trains. In 2008, a series of ten coordinated attacks by armed terrorists for three days resulted in 173 deaths, 308 injuries, and severe damage to several heritage landmarks and prestigious hotels. The three coordinated bomb explosions in July 2011 that occurred at the Opera house, Zaveri Bazaar and Dadar were the latest in the series of terrorist attacks in Mumbai which resulted in 26 deaths and 130 injuries.\nMumbai is the commercial capital of India and has evolved into a global financial hub. For several decades it has been the home of India's main financial services companies and a focus for both infrastructure development and private investment. From being an ancient fishing community and a colonial centre of trade, Mumbai has become South Asia's largest city and home of the world's most prolific film industry.\nGeography.\nMumbai is on a narrow peninsula on the southwest of Salsette Island, which lies between the Arabian Sea to the west, Thane Creek to the east, and Vasai Creek to the north. Mumbai's suburban district occupies most of the island. Navi Mumbai is east of Thane Creek, and Thane is north of Vasai Creek. Mumbai consists of two distinct regions: Mumbai City district and Mumbai Suburban district, which form two separate revenue districts of Maharashtra. The city district-region is also commonly referred to as the \"Island City\" or South Mumbai. The total area of Mumbai is . Of this, the island city spans , while the suburban district spans , together accounting for under the administration of Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai (MCGM). The remaining areas belong to various defence establishments, the Mumbai Port Trust, the Atomic Energy Commission, and the Borivali National Park, which are out of the jurisdiction of the MCGM. The Mumbai Metropolitan Region which includes portions of Thane, Palghar and Raigad districts in addition to Greater Mumbai, covers an area of .\nMumbai lies at the mouth of the Ulhas River on the western coast of India, in the coastal region known as the Konkan. It sits on Salsette Island (Sashti Island), which it partially shares with the Thane district. Mumbai is bounded by the Arabian Sea to the west. Many parts of the city lie just above sea level, with elevations ranging from . The city has an average elevation of . Northern Mumbai (Salsette) is hilly, and the highest point in the city is at Salsette in the Powai\u2013Kanheri ranges. The Sanjay Gandhi National Park (Borivali National Park) is situated partly in the Mumbai suburban district and partly in the Thane district, covering an area of .\nApart from the Bhatsa Dam, six major lakes supply water to the city: Vihar Lake, Lower Vaitarna, Upper Vaitarna, Tulsi Lake, Tansa, and Powai Lake. Tulsi Lake and Vihar Lake are located within the city's limits in Borivali National Park. The supply from Powai Lake, also within the city limits, is used only for agricultural and industrial purposes. Three small rivers, the Dahisar River, Poisar River (or Poinsar River), and Oshiwara River (or Ohiwara River) originate within the park, while the Mithi River originates from Tulsi Lake and gathers water overflowing from Vihar and Powai Lakes. The coastline of the city is indented with numerous creeks and bays, stretching from the Thane creek in the east to Madh Marve on the western front. The eastern coast of Salsette Island is covered with large mangrove swamps, rich in biodiversity, while the western coast is mostly sandy and rocky.\nSoil cover in the city region is predominantly sandy due to its proximity to the sea. In the suburbs, the soil cover is largely alluvial and loamy. The underlying rock of the region is composed of black Deccan basalt flows, and their acidic and basic variants date back to the late Cretaceous and early Eocene eras. Mumbai sits on a seismically active zone owing to the presence of 23 fault lines in the vicinity. The area is classified as a Seismic Zone III region, which means an earthquake of up to magnitude 6.5 on the Richter magnitude scale could occur.\nClimate.\nMumbai has an extreme tropical wet and dry climate (\"Aw\") under the K\u00f6ppen climate classification. However, the central and northern suburbs experience a tropical monsoon climate (\"Am\") with even heavier rainfall during the wet season. Mumbai generally has a nearly rainless stretch from October to May, with its most intense rainfall occurring during the peak wet period in July. A cooler season from December to February is followed by a hotter season from March to May. The period from June to the end of September constitutes the southwest monsoon season, and October and November form the post-monsoon season.\nBetween June and September, the southwest monsoon rains occur in Mumbai. Pre-monsoon showers are received in May. Occasionally, north-east monsoon showers occur in October and November. The maximum annual rainfall ever recorded was for 1954. The most rainfall recorded in a single day was on 26 July 2005. The average total annual rainfall is for the Island City and for the suburbs.\nThe average annual temperature is , and the average annual precipitation is . In the Island City, the average maximum temperature is , while the average minimum temperature is . In the suburbs, the daily mean maximum temperature range from to , while the daily mean minimum temperature ranges from to . The record high is set on 14 April 1952, and the record low was , set on 27 January 1962.\nTropical cyclones are rare in the city. The worst cyclone to strike the city occurred on 23 November 1948, with gusts reaching in Juhu, resulting in 38 deaths and 47 people missing. The storm reportedly affected Mumbai for 20 hours and left the city devastated.\nMumbai is prone to monsoon floods, exacerbated by climate change, which affects heavy rains and high tides from the sea. According to the World Bank, unplanned drainage systems and informal settlements are key drivers of Mumbai's frequent floods. Among other causes of flooding in Mumbai are its geographic features: Mumbai's urban area is peninsular\u2014comprising land-filled regions connecting seven islands\u2014and is lower in elevation compared to its surrounding suburbs, which sit on higher ground. Over the past few decades, new informal settlements have emerged in the suburbs, leading to a rapid population increase, inadequate waste management, and drainage congestion. Rainwater from these areas flows heavily toward the low-lying urban zones, which include some slums and high-rise buildings. As a result, slums are either flooded, washed away, or collapse, causing heavy casualties. Floodwaters often linger for extended periods, causing blockages of railway lines\u2014the most commonly used public transport in Mumbai\u2014along with traffic jams, flooded roads, and submerged lanes. Flooding in Mumbai occurs frequently, with the 2005 Mumbai floods causing 500-1000 deaths, widespread household displacements, damage to infrastructure\u2014including heritage sites\u2014and resulting in significant financial losses of US$ 1.2\u00a0billion. To reduce flooding in Mumbai, the Maharashtra government adopted a flood mitigation plan that included restructuring the drainage system, restoring the Mithi River, and re-establishing informal settlements. Local civic authorities were tasked with forecasting and issuing eviction notices, while Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC), along with NGOs, would prepare to evacuate residents from vulnerable areas to temporary safe camps.\nAir pollution.\nAir pollution is a major issue in Mumbai. According to the 2016 World Health Organization Global Urban Ambient Air Pollution Database, the annual average PM2.5 concentration in 2013 was 63 \u03bcg/m3, which was 6.3 times higher than that recommended by the WHO Air Quality Guideline for annual mean PM2.5. The Central Pollution Control Board for the Government of India and the Consulate General of the United States, Mumbai monitor and publicly share real-time air quality data. In December 2019, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, in partnership with the McKelvey School of Engineering at Washington University in St. Louis, launched the Aerosol and Air Quality Research Facility to study air pollution in Mumbai, among other Indian cities.\nMumbai has been ranked 24th-best \"National Clean Air City\" (under Category 1 &gt;10L Population cities) in India according to \"Swachh Vayu Survekshan 2024 Results\".\nEconomy.\nMumbai, sometimes described as the \"New York City of India\", is the country's most populous city and its financial and commercial capital, generating 6.16% of the total GDP. It generates 19.8% of the GDP of Maharashtra (34.4% if the Thane district is included). It serves as an economic hub of India: as of 2006, Mumbai contributed 10% of the nation's factory employment, 25% of industrial output, 33% of income tax collections, 60% of customs duty collections, 20% of central excise tax collections, 40% of foreign trade, and billion () in corporate taxes. Along with the rest of India, Mumbai has witnessed an economic boom since the liberalisation of 1991, the finance boom in the mid-nineties, and the information technology, export, services, and outsourcing boom in the 2000s.\nEstimates of the 2017\u201318 economy of the Mumbai Metropolitan Region ranged from $368\u00a0billion to $400\u00a0billion (PPP &amp; metro GDP), making it either the most or second most-productive metro area of India. Many of India's numerous conglomerates (including Larsen &amp; Toubro, State Bank of India (SBI), Life Insurance Corporation of India (LIC), Tata Group, Godrej and Reliance), and five of the Fortune Global 500 companies are based in Mumbai. This is facilitated by the presence of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), the Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE), the National Stock Exchange of India (NSE), and financial sector regulators such as the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI).\nUntil the 1970s, Mumbai owed its prosperity largely to textile mills and the seaport, but the local economy has since then diversified to include finance, engineering, diamond-polishing, healthcare, and information technology.\nThe key sectors contributing to the city's economy are: finance, gems &amp; jewellery, leather processing, IT and ITES, textiles, petrochemical, electronics manufacturing, automobiles, and entertainment. Nariman Point and Bandra Kurla Complex (BKC) are Mumbai's major financial centres.\nState and central government employees comprise a large percentage of the city's workforce. Mumbai also has a large unskilled and semi-skilled self-employed population, who primarily earn their livelihood as hawkers, taxi drivers, mechanics, and other such blue collar professions. The port and shipping industry is well established, with Mumbai Port being one of India's oldest and most significant ports. Dharavi, in central Mumbai, has an increasingly large recycling industry, processing recyclable waste from other parts of the city; the district has an estimated 15,000 single-room factories.\nAs of 2024, Mumbai is home to the third-highest number of billionaires of any city in the world. With a total wealth of around $960\u00a0billion, it is the wealthiest Indian city and one of the richest cities in the world. As of 2008[ [update]], the Globalization and World Cities Research Network has ranked Mumbai as an \"alpha world city\", third in its categories of Global cities. Mumbai is the third most expensive office market in the world, and was ranked among the fastest cities in the country for business startup in 2009.\nPoverty, inequality, and the cost of living.\nHaving the largest concentration of billionaires out of any city in Asia, Mumbai is one of the most unequal cities in the world. 41.8% of the city's population live in urban slums, though slums occupy just around 7% of the city's total land area.\nMumbai suffers from the same major urbanisation problems seen in many fast-growing cities in developing countries: poverty and unemployment. With available land at a premium, Mumbai residents often reside in cramped, relatively expensive housing, usually far from workplaces, and therefore require long commutes on crowded mass transit or clogged roadways. Many live close to bus or train stations, although suburban residents spend significant time travelling southward to the central commercial district. Mumbai's overall per capita residential area is 8.3 square metres, and in the city's slums, it is 2.73 square metres.\nAccording to a paper published in 2010 by the World Bank, the median income was \u20b920,000 while the average was \u20b940,000. By 2019, the overall average salary in Mumbai was \u20b945,000. Meanwhile, the median rental cost of a one-bedroom apartment in Mumbai proper is around \u20b930,000. Much of the city's population lives paycheck to paycheck.\nGovernment and politics.\nCivic administration.\nGreater Mumbai (or Brihanmumbai), an area of , consisting of the Mumbai City and Mumbai Suburban districts, extends from Colaba in the south, to Mulund and Dahisar in the north, and Mankhurd in the east. Its population as per the 2011 census was 12,442,373.\nIt is administered by the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC) (sometimes referred to as the Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai), formerly known as the \"Bombay Municipal Corporation\" (BMC). The BMC is in charge of the civic and infrastructure needs of the metropolis. The mayor, who serves for a term of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2+1\u20442 years, is chosen through an indirect election by the councillors from among themselves.\nThe municipal commissioner is the chief executive officer and head of the executive arm of the municipal corporation. All executive powers are vested in the municipal commissioner who is an Indian Administrative Service (IAS) officer appointed by the state government. Although the municipal corporation is the legislative body that lays down policies for the governance of the city, it is the commissioner who is responsible for the execution of the policies. The commissioner is appointed for a fixed term as defined by state statute. The powers of the commissioner are those provided by statute and those delegated by the corporation or the standing committee.\nThe Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation was ranked 9th out of 21 cities for best governance &amp; administrative practices in India in 2014. It scored 3.5 on 10 compared to the national average of 3.3.\nThe two revenue districts of Mumbai come under the jurisdiction of a District Collector. The collectors are in charge of property records and revenue collection for the central government, and oversee the national elections held in the city.\nThe Mumbai Police is headed by a police commissioner, who is an Indian Police Service (IPS) officer. The Mumbai Police is a division of the Maharashtra Police, under the state Home Ministry. The city is divided into seven police zones and seventeen traffic police zones, each headed by a deputy commissioner of police. The Mumbai Traffic Police is a semi-autonomous body under the Mumbai Police. The Mumbai Fire Brigade, which is under the jurisdiction of the municipal corporation, is headed by the chief fire officer, who is assisted by four deputy chief fire officers and six divisional officers. The Mumbai Metropolitan Region Development Authority (MMRDA) is responsible for infrastructure development and planning of Mumbai Metropolitan Region.\nMumbai is the seat of the Bombay High Court, which exercises jurisdiction over the states of Maharashtra and Goa, and the Union Territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu. Mumbai also has two lower courts, the Small Causes Court for civil matters, and the Sessions Court for criminal cases. Mumbai also has a special Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (TADA) court for people accused of conspiring and abetting acts of terrorism in the city.\nNational politics.\nMumbai had been a traditional stronghold and birthplace of the Indian National Congress, also known as the Congress Party. The first session of the Indian National Congress was held in Mumbai from 28 to 31 December 1885. The city played host to the Indian National Congress six times during its first 50 years, and became a strong base for the Indian independence movement during the 20th century.\nThe 1960s saw the rise of regionalist politics in Mumbai, with the formation of the Shiv Sena on 19 June 1966, under the leadership of Balasaheb Thackeray out of a feeling of resentment about the relative marginalisation of the native Marathi people in Mumbai. Shiv Sena switched from 'Marathi Cause' to larger 'Hindutva Cause' in 1985 and joined hands with Bhartiya Janata Party (BJP) in the same year. The Congress had dominated the politics of Mumbai from independence until the early 1980s, when the Shiv Sena won the 1985 Mumbai Municipal Corporation elections.\nIn 1989, the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), a major national political party, forged an electoral alliance with the Shiv Sena to dislodge the Congress in the Maharashtra Legislative Assembly elections. In 1999, several members left the Congress to form the Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) but later allied with the Congress as part of an alliance known as the Democratic Front. Other parties such as Maharashtra Navnirman Sena (MNS), Samajwadi Party (SP), Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP), All India Majlis-e-Ittehadul Muslimeen (AIMIM) and several independent candidates also contest elections in the city.\nIn the Indian national elections held every five years, Mumbai is represented by six parliamentary constituencies: North, North West, North East, North Central, South Central, and South. A member of parliament (MP) to the \"Lok Sabha\", the lower house of the Indian Parliament, is elected from each of the parliamentary constituencies. In the 2019 national election, all six parliamentary constituencies were won by the BJP and Shiv Sena in alliance, with both parties winning three seats each.\nIn the Maharashtra state assembly elections held every five years, Mumbai is represented by 36 assembly constituencies. A member of the legislative assembly (MLA) to the Maharashtra \"Vidhan Sabha\" (legislative assembly) is elected from each of the assembly constituencies. In the 2019 state assembly election, out of the 36 assembly constituencies, 16 were won by the BJP, 11 by the Shiv Sena, 6 by the Congress, 2 by the NCP and one by independent candidate.\nElections are also held every five years to elect corporators to power in the MCGM. The Corporation comprises 227 directly elected Councillors representing the 24 municipal wards, five nominated Councillors having special knowledge or experience in municipal administration, and a mayor whose role is mostly ceremonial. In the 2012 municipal corporation elections, out of the 227 seats, the Shiv Sena-BJP alliance secured 107 seats, holding power with the support of independent candidates in the MCGM, while the Congress-NCP alliance bagged 64 seats. The tenure of the mayor, deputy mayor, and municipal commissioner is &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2+1\u20442 years.\nTransport.\nPublic transport.\nPublic transport systems in Mumbai include the Mumbai Suburban Railway, Monorail, Metro, Brihanmumbai Electric Supply and Transport (BEST) buses, black-and-yellow meter taxis, auto rickshaws and ferries. Suburban railway and BEST bus services together accounted for about 88% of the passenger traffic in 2008. Auto rickshaws are allowed to operate only in the suburban areas of Mumbai, while taxis are allowed to operate throughout Mumbai, but generally operate in South Mumbai. Taxis and Auto rickshaws in Mumbai are required by law to run on compressed natural gas (CNG), and are a convenient, economical, and easily available means of transport.\nRailway.\nThe Mumbai Suburban Railway, colloquially referred to as \"Locals\", forms the backbone of the city's transport system. It is operated by the Central Railway and Western Railway zones of the Indian Railways. Mumbai's suburban rail systems carried a total of 63\u00a0lakh (6.3\u00a0million) passengers every day in 2007. Trains are overcrowded during peak hours, with twelve-car trains of rated capacity 1,700 passengers, actually carrying around 4,500 passengers at peak hours. The Mumbai rail network is spread at an expanse of . 191 rakes (train-sets) of 12 car and 15 car composition are utilised to run a total of 2,226 train services in the city.\nThe Mumbai Monorail and Mumbai Metro have been built and are being extended in phases to relieve the overcrowding on the existing network. The Monorail opened in early February 2014. The first line of the Mumbai Metro opened in early June 2014.\nMumbai is the headquarters of two zones of the Indian Railways: the Central Railway (CR) headquartered at Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus (formerly Victoria Terminus), and the Western Railway (WR) headquartered at Churchgate. Mumbai is also well connected to most parts of India by the Indian Railways. Long-distance trains originate from Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus, Dadar, Lokmanya Tilak Terminus, Mumbai Central, Bandra Terminus, Andheri and Borivali.\nBus.\nMumbai's bus services carried over 5.5 million passengers per day in 2008, which dropped to 2.8 million in 2015. Public buses run by BEST cover almost all parts of the metropolis, as well as parts of Navi Mumbai, Mira-Bhayandar and Thane. The BEST operates a total of 4,608 buses with CCTV cameras installed, ferrying 4.5 million passengers daily over 390 routes. Its fleet consists of single-decker, double-decker, vestibule, low-floor, disabled-friendly, air-conditioned and Euro III compliant diesel, compressed natural gas, and electric buses. BEST introduced air-conditioned buses in 1998. BEST buses are red in colour, based originally on the Routemaster buses of London. Maharashtra State Road Transport Corporation (MSRTC, also known as ST) buses provide intercity transport connecting Mumbai with other towns and cities of Maharashtra and nearby states. The Navi Mumbai Municipal Transport (NMMT) and Thane Municipal Transport (TMT) also operate their buses in Mumbai, connecting various nodes of Navi Mumbai and Thane to parts of Mumbai.\nBuses are generally favoured for commuting short to medium distances, while train fares are more economical for longer distance commutes.\nThe \"Mumbai Darshan\" is a tourist bus service which explores numerous tourist attractions in Mumbai. Bus Rapid Transit System (BRTS) lanes have been planned throughout Mumbai. Though 88% of the city's commuters travel by public transport, Mumbai still continues to struggle with traffic congestion. Mumbai's transport system has been categorised as one of the most congested in the world.\nWater.\nWater transport in Mumbai consists of ferries, hovercraft and catamarans. Services are provided by both government agencies as well as private partners. Hovercraft services plied briefly in the late 1990s between the Gateway of India and CBD Belapur in Navi Mumbai. They were subsequently scrapped due to lack of adequate infrastructure.\nRoads.\nMumbai is served by National Highway 48, National Highway 66, National Highway 160 and National Highway 61. The Mumbai\u2013Chennai and Mumbai\u2013Delhi prongs of the Golden Quadrilateral system of National Highways start from the city. The Mumbai\u2013Pune Expressway was the first expressway built in India. The Eastern Freeway was opened in 2013. The Bandra-Worli Sea Link bridge, along with Mahim Causeway, links the island city to the western suburbs. The three major road arteries of the city are the Eastern Express Highway from Sion to Thane, the Sion Panvel Expressway from Sion to Panvel and the Western Express Highway from Bandra to Bhayander. The long Mumbai Trans Harbour Link was inaugurated by Prime Minister Narendra Modi on 12 January 2024, connects Mumbai with Navi Mumbai. Mumbai has approximately of roads. There are five tolled entry points to the city by road.\nMumbai had about 721,000 private vehicles as of March 2014, 56,459 black and yellow taxis as of 2005[ [update]], and 106,000 auto rickshaws, as of May 2013.\nMumbai currently has one operational expressway\u00a0\u2013 the Mumbai\u2013Pune Expressway\u00a0\u2013 which directly connects Mumbai with Pune. In the coming years, the great metropolis will be connected with more expressways. They are as follows:\nAir.\nThe Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj International Airport (formerly Sahar International Airport) is the main aviation hub in the city and the second busiest airport in India in terms of passenger traffic. It handled 52.8 million passengers in the Financial Year 2024, an increase of 16 per cent in passenger traffic over the previous Financial Year. An upgrade plan was initiated in 2006, targeted at increasing the capacity of the airport to handle up to 40 million passengers annually and the new terminal T2 was opened in February 2014.\nThe Navi Mumbai International airport, being built in the Kopra-Panvel area, will help relieve the increasing traffic burden on the existing airport.\nThe Navi Mumbai International Airport was inaugurated on 8 October 2025 by Prime Minister Narendra Modi, although flights have not begun immediately. Following testing, the service is aimed to commence operations by the end of the year.\nThe Juhu Aerodrome was India's first airport, and now hosts the Bombay Flying Club and a heliport operated by state-owned Pawan Hans.\nSea.\nMumbai is served by two major ports, Mumbai Port Trust and Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust, which lies just across the creek in Navi Mumbai. Mumbai Port has one of the best natural harbours in the world, and has extensive wet and dry dock accommodation facilities. Jawaharlal Nehru Port, commissioned on 26 May 1989, is the busiest and most modern major port in India. It handles 55\u201360% of the country's total containerised cargo. Ferries from Ferry Wharf in Mazagaon allow access to islands near the city.\nThe city is also the headquarters of the Western Naval Command, and also an important base for the Indian Navy.\nUtility services.\nUnder colonial rule, tanks were the only source of water in Mumbai, with many localities having been named after them. The MCGM supplies potable water to the city from six lakes, most of which comes from the Tulsi and Vihar lakes. The Tansa lake supplies water to the western suburbs and parts of the island city along the Western Railway. The water is filtered at Bhandup, which is Asia's largest water filtration plant. India's first underground water tunnel was completed in Mumbai to supply water to the Bhandup filtration plant.\nAbout 700\u00a0million (70\u00a0crore) litres of water, out of a daily supply of 3.5\u00a0billion (350\u00a0crore) litres, is lost by way of water thefts, illegal connections and leakages, per day in Mumbai. Almost all of Mumbai's daily refuse of , of which is plastic waste, is transported to dumping grounds in Gorai in the northwest, Mulund in the northeast, and to the Deonar dumping ground in the east. Sewage treatment is carried out at Worli and Bandra, and disposed of by two independent marine outfalls of and at Bandra and Worli respectively.\nElectricity is distributed by the Brihanmumbai Electric Supply and Transport (BEST) undertaking in the island city, and by Adani Transmission, Tata Power and the Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution Co. Ltd (Mahavitaran) in the suburbs. Power supply cables are underground, which reduces pilferage, thefts and other losses.\nCooking gas is supplied in the form of liquefied petroleum gas cylinders sold by state-owned oil companies, as well as through piped natural gas supplied by Mahanagar Gas Limited.\nThe largest telephone service provider is the state-owned MTNL, which held a monopoly over fixed line and cellular services up until 2000, and provides fixed line as well as mobile WLL services. Mobile phone coverage is extensive, and the main service providers are Vodafone India, Bharti Airtel, MTNL, and Reliance Jio. Both GSM and CDMA services are available in the city. Mumbai, along with the area served by telephone exchanges in Navi Mumbai and Kalyan is classified as a \"Metro\" telecom circle. Many of the above service providers also provide broadband internet and wireless internet access in Mumbai. As of 2014[ [update]], Mumbai had the highest number of internet users in India with 16.4\u00a0million (1.64\u00a0crore) users.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to the 2011 census, the population of Mumbai city was 12,479,608. The population density is estimated to be about . The living space is per person. Mumbai Metropolitan Region was home to 20,748,395 people by 2011. Greater Mumbai, the area under the administration of the MCGM, has a literacy rate of 94.7%, higher than the national average of 86.7%. The number of slum-dwellers in the Mumbai Metropolitan Region is estimated to be 90\u00a0lakh (9\u00a0million), up from 60\u00a0lakh (6\u00a0million) in 2001 which constitutes approximately 38.5% of the region.\nThe sex ratio in 2011 was 838 females per 1,000 males in the island city, 857 in the suburbs, and 848 as a whole in Greater Mumbai, all numbers lower than the national average of 914 females per 1,000 males. The low sex ratio is partly because of the large number of male migrants who come to the city to work.\nDharavi, Asia's second largest slum (if Karachi's Orangi Town is counted as a single slum) is located in central Mumbai and houses between 800,000 and 10\u00a0lakh (one million) people in , making it one of the most densely populated areas on Earth with a population density of at least .\nThe number of migrants to Mumbai from outside Maharashtra during the 1991\u20132001 decade was 11.2\u00a0lakh (1.12\u00a0million), which amounted to 54.8% of the net addition to the population of Mumbai.\nThe number of households in Mumbai is forecast to rise from 42\u00a0lakh (4.2\u00a0million) in 2008 to 66\u00a0lakh (6.6\u00a0million) in 2020. The number of households with annual incomes of 20\u00a0lakh (2\u00a0million) rupees will increase from 4% to 10% by 2020, amounting to 660,000 families. The number of households with incomes from 10 to 20\u00a0lakh (1\u20132\u00a0million) rupees is also estimated to increase from 4% to 15% by 2020. According to the 2016 report of the Central Pollution Control Board, Mumbai is the noisiest city in India, ahead of Lucknow, Hyderabad and Delhi.\nEthnic groups and religions.\nThe religious groups represented in Greater Mumbai as of 2011 include Hindus (65.99%), Muslims (20.65%), Buddhists (4.85%), Jains (4.10%), Christians (3.27%) and Sikhs (0.49%). The linguistic/ethnic demographics in the Greater Mumbai Area are: Maharashtrians (32%), Gujaratis (20%), with the rest hailing from other parts of India.\nNative Christians include East Indian Catholics, who were converted by the Portuguese during the 16th century, while Goan and Mangalorean Catholics also constitute a significant portion of the Christian community of the city. Jews settled in Mumbai during the 18th century. The Bene Israeli Jewish community of Mumbai, who migrated from the Konkan villages, south of Mumbai, are believed to be the descendants of the Jews of Israel who were shipwrecked off the Konkan coast, probably in the year 175 BCE, during the reign of the Greek ruler, Antiochus IV Epiphanes. Mumbai is also home to the largest population of Parsi Zoroastrians in the world, numbering about 60,000, however their population is declining rapidly. Parsis migrated to India from Greater Iran following the Muslim conquest of Persia in the seventh century. The oldest Muslim communities in Mumbai include the Dawoodi Bohras, Ismaili Khojas, and Konkani Muslims.\nLanguage.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMarathi is the official and working language of the bureaucracy along with English. Mumbai has a large polyglot population like all other metropolitan cities of India. Sixteen major languages of India are spoken in Mumbai, with the most common being Marathi and its dialect East Indian. Marathi, and its dialect, as a single language is spoken by 35.30% of the population around 4,396,870 people. Hindi is spoken by 25.90% of the population around 3,582,719 people, making it the second largest dominant language in Mumbai. Many Hindi speakers are workers from Uttar Pradesh and Bihar who migrate seasonally to Mumbai to work as labourers. Urdu and Gujarati are spoken by 11.73% and 11.45% respectively.\nTamil, Marwari, Bhojpuri, Telugu, Konkani, Bengali and Malayalam are other minority languages spoken by a significant number of people in Mumbai.\nEnglish is extensively spoken and is the principal language of the city's white collar workforce. A colloquial form of Hindi, known as \"Bambaiya\" \u2013 a blend of Hindi, Marathi, Gujarati, Konkani, Urdu, Indian English and some invented words \u2013 is spoken on the streets.\nIn the Suburbs, Marathi is spoken by 36.78% of the population and Gujarati by 31.21%.\nEducation.\nSchools.\nSchools in Mumbai are either \"municipal schools\" (run by the MCGM) or private schools (run by trusts or individuals), which in some cases receive financial aid from the government. The schools are affiliated with either of the following boards:\nThe primary education system of the MCGM is the largest urban primary education system in Asia. The MCGM operates 1,188 primary schools imparting primary education to 485,531 students in eight languages (Marathi, Hindi, Gujarati, Urdu, English, Tamil, Telugu and Kannada). The MCGM also imparts secondary education to 55,576 students through its 49 secondary schools.\nHigher education.\nUnder the 10+2+3/4 plan, students complete ten years of schooling and then enroll for two years in junior college, where they select one of three streams: arts, commerce, or science. This is followed by either a general degree course in a chosen field of study, or a professional degree course, such as law, engineering and medicine. Most colleges in the city are affiliated with the University of Mumbai, one of the largest universities in the world in terms of the number of graduates.\nThe University of Mumbai is one of the premier universities in India. It was ranked 41 among the Top 50 Engineering Schools of the world by America's news broadcasting firm \"Business Insider\" in 2012 and was the only university in the list from the five emerging BRICS nations viz Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa. Moreover, the University of Mumbai was ranked 5th in the list of best universities in India by \"India Today\" in 2013 and ranked at 62 in the QS BRICS University rankings for 2013, a ranking of leading universities in the five BRICS countries (Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa). Its strongest scores in the QS University Rankings: BRICS are for papers per faculty (8th), employer reputation (20th) and citations per paper (28th). It was ranked 10th among the top Universities of India by QS in 2013. With 7 of the top ten Indian Universities being purely science and technology universities, it was India's 3rd best Multi Disciplinary University in the QS University ranking.\nThe Indian Institute of Technology Bombay (IIT Bombay), Mumbai, Institute of Chemical Technology (formerly UDCT / UICT), Veermata Jijabai Technological Institute (VJTI), which are India's premier engineering and technology schools, along with SNDT Women's University are the autonomous universities located in Mumbai. In April 2015, IIT Bombay launched the first US-India joint EMBA program alongside Washington University in St. Louis. Thadomal Shahani Engineering College is the first and the oldest private engineering college affiliated to the federal University of Mumbai and is also pioneered to be the first institute in the city's university to offer undergraduate level courses in Computer Engineering, Information Technology, Biomedical Engineering and Biotechnology. Grant Medical College established in 1845 and Seth G.S. Medical College are the leading medical institutes affiliated with Sir Jamshedjee Jeejeebhoy Group of Hospitals and KEM Hospital respectively. Mumbai is also home to the IIM Mumbai, Jamnalal Bajaj Institute of Management Studies (JBIMS), Narsee Monjee Institute of Management Studies (NMIMS), S P Jain Institute of Management and Research, Tata Institute of Social Sciences (TISS) and several other management schools. Government Law College and Sydenham College, respectively the oldest law and commerce colleges in India, are based in Mumbai. The Sir J. J. School of Art is Mumbai's oldest art institution.\nIt also has one of the best law schools or universities of the country which is National Law Universities (NLU).\nMumbai is home to two prominent research institutions: the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research (TIFR), and the Bhabha Atomic Research Centre (BARC). The BARC operates CIRUS, a 40\u00a0MW nuclear research reactor at their facility in Trombay.\nMumbai Veterinary College is the oldest and premier Veterinary College of India and Asia, established in 1886.\nCulture.\nMumbai's culture offers a blend of traditional and cosmopolitan festivals, food, entertainment, and night life. The city's cosmopolitan and urban-centric modern cultural offerings are comparable to other world capitals. Mumbai bears the distinction of being the most cosmopolitan city of India. Its history as a major trading centre and the expansion of an educated middle class has led to a diverse range of cultures, religions, and cuisines coexisting in the city. The variety and abundance of restaurants, cinemas, theatres, sports events and museums are a product of Mumbai's unique cosmopolitan culture.\nMumbai is the birthplace of Indian cinema\u2014Dadasaheb Phalke laid the foundations with silent movies followed by Marathi talkies\u2014and the oldest film broadcast took place in the early 20th century. Mumbai also has a large number of cinema halls that feature Bollywood, Marathi and Hollywood movies. The Mumbai International Film Festival and the award ceremony of the Filmfare Awards, the oldest and prominent film awards given for Hindi film industry in India, are held in Mumbai. Despite most of the professional theatre groups that formed during the British Raj having disbanded by the 1950s, Mumbai has developed a thriving \"theatre movement\" tradition in Marathi, Hindi, English, and other regional languages.\nContemporary art is featured in both government-funded art spaces and private commercial galleries. The government-funded institutions include the Jehangir Art Gallery and the National Gallery of Modern Art. Built in 1833, the Asiatic Society of Mumbai is one of the oldest public libraries in the city. The Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Vastu Sangrahalaya (formerly The Prince of Wales Museum) is a renowned museum in South Mumbai which houses rare ancient exhibits of Indian history.\nMumbai has a zoo named Jijamata Udyaan (formerly Victoria Gardens), which also harbours a garden. The literary traditions of the city have been highlighted internationally by Booker Prize winners such as Salman Rushdie and Aravind Adiga. Marathi literature has been modernised in the works of Mumbai-based authors such as Mohan Apte, Anant Kanekar, and Gangadhar Gadgil, and is promoted through an annual Sahitya Akademi Award, a literary honour bestowed by India's National Academy of Letters.\nMumbai residents celebrate both Western and Indian festivals. Ganesh Chaturthi is the biggest and most important festival of Mumbai; there are almost 5000 Ganpati Pandals set up in the city for the celebrations. Other festivals like Diwali, Holi, Navratri, Christmas, Rakshabandhan, Makar Sankranti, Dussera, Eid, Durga Puja, Ram Navami, Shiv Jayanti and Maha Shivratri are some of the popular festivals in the city. The Kala Ghoda Arts Festival is an exhibition that encapsulates works of artists in the fields of music, dance, theatre and films.\nThe Banganga Festival is a two-day music festival, held annually in the month of January, which is organised by the Maharashtra Tourism Development Corporation (MTDC) at the historic Banganga Tank in Mumbai. According to a legend, it is associated with Rama and Lakshmana of the Sanskrit epic Ramayana. Similarly it is also linked to Parashurama in Hinduism. On the bank of the Banganga tank, there is a temple known as Parshuram Mandir dedicated to Parshuram. \nThe Elephanta Festival\u2014celebrated every February on the Elephanta Islands\u2014is dedicated to classical Indian dance and music and attracts performers from across the country. Public holidays specific to the city and the state include Maharashtra Day on 1 May, to celebrate the formation of Maharashtra state on 1 May 1960, and Gudi Padwa which is the New Year's Day for Marathi people.\nBeaches are a major tourist attraction in the city. The major beaches in Mumbai are Girgaum Chowpatty, Juhu Beach, Dadar Chowpatty, Gorai Beach, Marve Beach, Versova Beach, Madh Beach, Aksa Beach and Manori Beach. Most of the beaches are unfit for swimming, except Girgaum Chowpatty and Juhu Beach. Essel World is a theme park and amusement centre situated close to Gorai Beach, and includes Asia's largest theme water park, Water Kingdom. Adlabs Imagica opened in April 2013 is located near the city of Khopoli off the Mumbai-Pune Expressway.\nArchitecture.\nThe architecture of the city is a blend of Gothic Revival, Indo-Saracenic, Art Deco, and other contemporary styles. Most of the buildings during the British period, such as the Victoria Terminus and University of Mumbai, were built in Gothic Revival style. Their architectural features include a variety of European influences such as German gables, Dutch roofs, Swiss timbering, Romance arches, Tudor casements, and traditional Indian features. There are also a few Indo-Saracenic styled buildings such as the Gateway of India. Art Deco styled landmarks can be found along Marine Drive and west of the Oval Maidan. Mumbai has the second highest number of Art Deco buildings in the world after Miami. In the newer suburbs, modern buildings dominate the landscape. Mumbai has by far the highest number of skyscrapers in India, with 956 existing skyscrapers and 272 under construction as of 2009[ [update]].\nThe Mumbai Heritage Conservation Committee (MHCC), established in 1995, formulates special regulations and by-laws to assist in the conservation of the city's heritage structures. Mumbai has three UNESCO World Heritage Sites, the Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus, the Elephanta Caves and the Victorian and Art Deco Ensemble. In the south of Mumbai, there are colonial-era buildings and Soviet-style offices. In the east are factories and some slums. On the West coast are former-textile mills being demolished and skyscrapers built on top. There are 237 buildings taller than , compared with 327 in Shanghai and 855 in New York.\nCityscape.\nMumbai's cityscape consists of a variety of tall buildings and structures, most of which have been built in the last two decades. There was a significant lull in construction projects since the mid-1990s after which construction projects began taking the skyline upwards, with a major acceleration in the pace of development since 2000, when the Lower Parel area began developing. \nMumbai with a commanding 77% share of tall buildings in India, is poised to maintain its position as the frontrunner in tall building construction due to its ability to command premium prices compared to other cities, thereby ensuring the economic viability of such developments within the city.\nMumbai has more residential tall buildings rather than commercial, unlike the trend globally. Limited land resources and an exponential increase in urban population were the primary reasons for Mumbai's vertical growth compared to other Tier 1 Indian cities. As of June 2023, Mumbai has a total of around 250 tall buildings out of which more than 100 are completed with more than 90 under construction.\nMedia.\nBollywood, the Hindi film industry based in Mumbai, produces around 150\u2013200 films every year. The name Bollywood is a blend of Bombay and Hollywood. The 2000s saw a growth in Bollywood's popularity overseas. This led filmmaking to new heights in terms of quality, cinematography and innovative story lines as well as technical advances such as special effects and animation. Studios in Goregaon, including Film City, are the location for most movie sets. The city also hosts the Marathi film industry which has seen increased popularity in recent years, and TV production companies. Mumbai is a hub of Indian film making. Several other Indian language films such as Bengali, Bhojpuri, Gujarati, Malayalam, Tamil, Kannada, Telugu and Urdu are also occasionally shot in Mumbai. Slumdog Millionaire, an English language British film, was shot entirely in Mumbai and has garnered 8 Oscar awards.\nMumbai has numerous newspaper publications, television and radio stations. Marathi dailies enjoy the maximum readership share in the city and the top Marathi language newspapers are \"Maharashtra Times\", \"Navakaal\", \"Lokmat\", \"Loksatta\", \"Mumbai Chaufer\", \"Saamana\" and \"Sakaal\". Popular Marathi language magazines are \"Saptahik Sakaal\", \"Grihashobhika\", \"Lokrajya\", \"Lokprabha\" and \"Chitralekha\". Popular English language newspapers published and sold in Mumbai include \"The Times of India\", \"Mid-day\", \"Hindustan Times\", \"DNA India\" and \"The Indian Express\". Newspapers are also printed in other Indian languages. Mumbai is home to Asia's oldest newspaper, \"Bombay Samachar\", which has been published in Gujarati since 1822. \"Bombay Durpan\", the first Marathi newspaper, was started by Balshastri Jambhekar in 1832.\nNumerous Indian and international television channels can be watched in Mumbai through one of the Pay TV companies or the local cable television providers. The metropolis is also the hub of many international media corporations, with many news channels and print publications having a major presence. The national television broadcaster, Doordarshan, provides two free terrestrial channels, while three main cable networks serve most households.\nThe wide range of cable channels available includes Zee Marathi, Zee Talkies, Colors Marathi, Star Pravah, Mi Marathi, DD Sahyadri (All Marathi channels), news channels such as ABP Majha, News 18 Lokmat, Zee 24 Taas, sports channels like ESPN, Star Sports, National entertainment channels like Colors TV, Sony, Zee TV and Star Plus, business news channels like CNBC Awaaz, Zee Business, and ET Now News channels entirely dedicated to Mumbai include Sahara Samay Mumbai. Zing a popular Bollywood gossip channel is also based out of Mumbai. Satellite television (DTH) has yet to gain mass acceptance, due to high installation costs. Prominent DTH entertainment services in Mumbai include Dish TV and Tata Sky.\nThere are twelve radio stations in Mumbai, with nine broadcasting on the FM band, and three All India Radio stations broadcasting on the AM band. Mumbai also has access to Commercial radio providers such as Sirius. The Conditional Access System (CAS) started by the Union Government in 2006 met a poor response in Mumbai due to competition from its sister technology Direct-to-Home (DTH) transmission service.\nSports.\nCricket is more popular than any other sport in Mumbai. It is home to the Board of Control for Cricket in India (BCCI) and Indian Premier League (IPL). Mumbai's first-class team Mumbai cricket team has won 41 Ranji Trophy titles, the most by any team. The city based Mumbai Indians compete in the Indian Premier League. Mumbai has two international cricket stadiums, the Wankhede Stadium and the Brabourne Stadium. The first cricket test match in India was played in Mumbai at the Bombay Gymkhana. The biggest cricketing event to be staged in the city so far is the final of the 2011 ICC Cricket World Cup which was played at the Wankhede Stadium. Mumbai and London are the only two cities to have hosted both a World Cup final and the final of an ICC Champions Trophy which was played at the Brabourne Stadium in 2006.\nFootball is another popular sport in the city, with the FIFA World Cup and the English Premier League being followed widely. The Mumbai City FC of Indian Super League (ISL) play their home matches at the Mumbai Football Arena. While the I-League 2 club Mumbai Kenkre FC uses the Cooperage Ground as home ground. When the Elite Football League of India was introduced in August 2011, Mumbai was noted as one of eight cities to be awarded a team for the inaugural season.\nMumbai's first professional American football franchise, the Mumbai Gladiators, played its first season, in Pune, in late 2012.\nIn field hockey, Mumbai is home to the Mumbai Marines and Mumbai Magicians in the World Series Hockey and Hockey India League respectively. Matches in the city are played at the Mahindra Hockey Stadium.\nThe Indian Badminton League (IBL), now known as the Premier Badminton League is also visiting Mumbai since its inaugural edition in 2013 when the final was held in Mumbai's National Sports Club of India. In the second season, the final of the 2016 Premier Badminton League was held between home-squad Mumbai Rockets and the Delhi Dashers (formerly Delhi Acers), the visitors eventually claiming the title. The opening ceremony was also held in Mumbai while the finals in Delhi.\nIn the 2017 Premier Badminton League (also known as Vodafone PBL 2017 for sponsorship reasons) the Mumbai Rockets beat the Hyderabad Hunters 3\u20131 to proceed to the final. In the final they lost 3\u20134 to the Chennai Smashers.\nU Mumba is the team representing Mumbai in the country's professional Kabaddi league, Pro Kabaddi. The Mumbai Leg of Pro Kabaddi is held at the NSCI, Worli.\nRugby is another growing sport in Mumbai with league matches being held at the Bombay Gymkhana from June to November.\nEvery February, Mumbai holds derby races at the Mahalaxmi Racecourse. Mcdowell's Derby is also held in February at the Turf Club in Mumbai. In March 2004, the Mumbai Grand Prix was part of the F1 powerboat world championship, and the Force India F1 team car was unveiled in the city, in 2008. In 2004, the annual Mumbai Marathon was established as a part of \"The Greatest Race on Earth\". Mumbai had also played host to the Kingfisher Airlines Tennis Open, an International Series tournament of the ATP World Tour, in 2006 and 2007.\nMumbai hosted the 141st IOC Session from 15 to 17 October 2023.\nRegional and professional sports teams from Mumbai\nFormer regional and professional sports teams from Mumbai\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns and sister cities.\nSource: \"Hindustan Times\"\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19190", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19190", "title": "Miami Dolphins", "text": "National Football League franchise in Miami Gardens, Florida\nThe Miami Dolphins are a professional American football team based in the Miami metropolitan area. The Dolphins compete in the National Football League (NFL) as a member of the American Football Conference (AFC) East division. The team plays its home games at Hard Rock Stadium in Miami Gardens, Florida, a northern suburb of Miami. The team is owned by Stephen M. Ross. The Dolphins are the oldest professional sports team in Florida. Of the four AFC East teams, the Dolphins are the only team in the division that was not a charter member of the American Football League (AFL). The Dolphins were also one of the first professional football teams in the southeast, along with the Atlanta Falcons.\nThe Dolphins were founded by Joe Robbie, an attorney and politician, and Danny Thomas, an actor and comedian. They began play in the AFL in 1966. The region had not had a professional football team since the days of the Miami Seahawks, who played in the All-America Football Conference in 1946, before becoming the first incarnation of the Baltimore Colts. For the first few years, the Dolphins' full-time training camp and practice facilities were at Saint Andrew's School, a private, boys boarding prep school in Boca Raton. Miami joined the NFL as a result of the 1970 AFL\u2013NFL merger.\nThe team played in its first Super Bowl in Super Bowl VI, losing to the Dallas Cowboys, 24\u20133. The following year, the Dolphins completed the NFL's only perfect season, culminating in a Super Bowl win, winning all 14 of their regular season games, and all three of their playoff games, including Super Bowl VII. They were the third NFL team to accomplish a perfect regular season, and remain the only team to do so including playoffs since the AFL-NFL merger, the time known as the Super Bowl era. The next year, the Dolphins won Super Bowl VIII, becoming the first team to appear in three consecutive Super Bowls, and the second team (the first AFL/AFC team) to win back-to-back championships. Miami also appeared in Super Bowl XVII and Super Bowl XIX, losing both games.\nFor most of their early history, the Dolphins were coached by Don Shula, the most successful head coach in professional football history in terms of total games won. Under Shula, the Dolphins posted losing records in only two of his 26 seasons as the head coach. During the period spanning 1983 to the end of 1999, quarterback Dan Marino became one of the most prolific passers in NFL history, breaking numerous league passing records. Marino led the Dolphins to five division titles, 10 playoff appearances, and an appearance in Super Bowl XIX before retiring following the 1999 season.\nSince Marino's retirement, they have experienced mediocre levels of success and have just six playoff appearances (2000, 2001, 2008, 2016, 2022, and 2023) and two division titles (2000 and 2008) with one playoff win. They currently have the longest postseason win drought in the NFL.\nIn December 2024, the Dolphins, led by owner Stephen M. Ross, became one of the first teams in NFL history to sell part of their team to outside private equity investors. 13% of the Dolphins franchise was sold at a valuation of $8.1 billion, including 10% to the American investment group Ares Management.\nHistory.\nThe Miami Dolphins joined the American Football League (AFL) when an expansion franchise was awarded to lawyer Joseph Robbie and actor Danny Thomas in 1965 for $7.5 million, although Thomas would eventually sell his stake in the team to Robbie. During the summer of 1966, the Dolphins' training camp was in St. Pete Beach with practices in August at Boca Ciega High School in Gulfport.\nDon Shula.\nThe Dolphins were the worst team with a 15\u201339\u20132 record in their first four seasons under head coach George Wilson, before Don Shula was hired as head coach. Shula was a Paul Brown disciple who had been lured from the Baltimore Colts, after losing Super Bowl III two seasons earlier to the AFL's New York Jets, and finishing 8\u20135\u20131 the following season. Shula got his first NFL coaching job from then-Detroit head coach George Wilson, who hired him as the defensive coordinator. The AFL merged with the NFL in 1970, and the Dolphins were assigned to the AFC East division in the NFL's new American Football Conference.\nFor the rest of the 20th century, the Shula-led Dolphins emerged as one of the most dominant teams in the NFL, with only two losing seasons between 1970 and 1999. They were extremely successful in the 1970s, completing the first complete perfect season in NFL history by finishing with a 14\u20130 regular-season record in 1972 and winning the Super Bowl that year. It was the first of two consecutive Super Bowl wins and one of three appearances in a row. The 1980s and 1990s were also moderately successful. The early 80s teams made two Super Bowls despite losing both times and saw the emergence of future Hall of Fame quarterback Dan Marino, who went on to break numerous NFL passing records, holding many of them until the late 2000s. After winning every game against the division rival Buffalo Bills in the 1970s, the two teams gradually developed a competitive rivalry in the 80s and 90s, often competing for AFC supremacy when Jim Kelly emerged as the quarterback for the Bills. The Dolphins have also maintained a strong rivalry with the New York Jets throughout much of their history.\nAfter Marino and Shula retired and with the rise of Tom Brady and the New England Patriots, the Dolphins suffered a decline in the 2000s and 2010s. During that time, the team's level of play was largely described as mediocre. They have only made the playoffs four times since Marino's retirement and have usually not been able to find a quarterback to replace him.\nJimmy Johnson.\nJimmy Johnson was hired to replace Shula prior to the 1996 season. In his first season at the helm, he led the team to an 8\u20138 record and missed the postseason. In the 1997, the team improved to a 9\u20137 mark and made the postseason. The team saw their season end in the Wild Card Round with a 17\u20133 loss to the New England Patriots. In the 1998 season, the team went 10\u20136 and made the postseason. The Dolphins defeated the Bills 24\u201317 in the Wild Card Round before falling to the Denver Broncos 38\u20133 in the Divisional Round. In the 1999 season, the Dolphins went 9\u20137 and made the postseason. The team defeated the Seattle Seahawks 20\u201317 in the Wild Card Round before falling 62\u20137 to the Jacksonville Jaguars in what would be quarterback Dan Marino's final game. Johnson resigned following the season.\nDave Wannstedt.\nGoing into the 2000 season, the Dolphins named Dave Wannstedt as head coach. In his first season with the Dolphins, he led the team to an 11\u20135 record and an AFC East title. The team defeated the Indianapolis Colts 23\u201317 in the Wild Card Round before losing 27\u20130 to the Oakland Raiders in the Divisional Round. In the 2001 season, the team made the postseason with an 11\u20135 record and runner-up placement in the AFC East. The team lost to the Baltimore Ravens 20\u20133 in the Wild Card Round. In the 2002 season, the team failed to make the postseason despite a 9\u20137 record. In the 2003 season, the team went 10\u20136 but missed the postseason. Following a 1\u20138 start in the 2004 season, Wannstedt resigned. Jim Bates finished out the year with a 3\u20134 mark.\nNick Saban.\nNick Saban coached the Dolphins in the 2005 and 2006 seasons. He went 9\u20137 and 6\u201310 in those two seasons, missing the playoffs in both. Saban resigned following the 2006 season to leave for the University of Alabama.\nCam Cameron.\nPrior to the 2007 season, the Dolphins hired Cam Cameron has head coach. The team suffered a franchise-worst 1\u201315 season in 2007. After the 2007 season, the team fired Cameron.\nTony Sparano.\nTony Sparano was named head coach of the Dolphins prior to the 2008 season. In his first season, he led the team to an 11\u20135 result and an AFC East title. During the season, they became the second team to make a 10-game improvement over the previous season. That same season, the Dolphins upset the New England Patriots on the road during Week 3 thanks to the use of the gimmick Wildcat offense, which handed the Patriots their first regular-season loss since December 10, 2006, in which coincidentally, they were also beaten by the Dolphins. However, this success in 2008 proved to be an outlier during this period in the franchise's history; to date, it is the last season the Dolphins won the AFC East. The team's season ended with a 27\u20139 loss to the Baltimore Ravens in the Wild Card Round. The 2009 and 2010 seasons saw regression with a 7\u20139 record in both years. After a 4\u20139 start to the 2011 season, Sparano was fired. Todd Bowles finished the 6\u201310 season as interim coach.\nJoe Philbin.\nPrior to the 2012 season, the team hired Joe Philbin as head coach. In his first season at the helm, Philbin led the team to a 7\u20139 record. In the 2013, the team improved to an 8\u20138 record but still missed the postseason. In the 2014 season, the team added Bill Lazor as offensive coordinator. The Dolphins once again finished 8\u20138. After a 1\u20133 start to the 2015 season, Philbin was fired. Dan Campbell was named as interim coach and finished the year with a 5\u20137 mark.\nAdam Gase.\nPrior to the 2016 season, the team hired Adam Gase as head coach. He led the team to a 10\u20136 record and a postseason berth in the 2016 season. The team's season ended with a 30\u201312 loss to the Pittsburgh Steelers in the Wild Card Round. In the 2017 season, the Dolphins regressed to a 6\u201310 record. In the 2018 season, the Dolphins finished with a 7\u20139 record. After a cumulative 23\u201325 record, Gase was fired by the Dolphins.\nBrian Flores.\nPrior to the 2019 season, the Dolphins hired Brian Flores as head coach. He led the team to a 5\u201311 record in the 2019 season. The team drafted Alabama quarterback Tua Tagovailoa in the first round of the 2020 NFL draft. In the 2020 season, the team improved to a 10\u20136 mark but still missed the postseason. In the 2021 season, the team went 9\u20138 but missed the postseason. Following the end of the 2021 season, Flores was fired as head coach.\nMike McDaniel.\nPrior to the 2022 season, Mike McDaniel was hired as head coach. In his first season, he led the Dolphins to a 9\u20138 record and a 34\u201331 loss to the Bills in the Wild Card Round. In the 2023 season, the team improved to an 11\u20136 mark but the season again ended in the Wild Card Round with a 26\u20137 loss to the Kansas City Chiefs. The Dolphins finished with an 8\u20139 record in 2024, missing the playoffs for the first time in McDaniel's head coaching tenure.\nRivalries.\nDivisional.\nNew England Patriots.\nThe Dolphins dominated the New England Patriots during the 1970s and the 1990s, but there were some notable moments as well, including a 1982 game now known as the Snowplow Game. Fortunes changed when Tom Brady became the franchise quarterback for the Patriots, and during his tenure with the Patriots, New England dominated the AFC, especially the AFC East, winning 16 of 17 division titles between 2003 and 2019, with the Dolphins winning the only non-Patriots division title in that time frame when Brady was out due to injury. Miami posed the biggest divisional challenge to the Brady-led Patriots, however, winning more games against them than the Bills or Jets did during that era.\nNotable wins over New England by the Dolphins include the Miracle in Miami, which involved a dramatic last-minute game-winning touchdown that paralleled \"The Night that Courage Wore Orange\", where in 2004, the Dolphins, at 2\u201311, upset the defending Super Bowl champion Patriots 28\u201329, and handed them the second of their 2 losses that season. The rivalry briefly intensified in 2005 when Nick Saban, Bill Belichick's former Browns defensive coordinator was hired as their new head coach and when Saban nearly signed quarterback Drew Brees, as well as in 2008, when the two teams battled for the AFC East division title. Miami and New England are also the only two franchises to have posted undefeated regular-season records since the NFL-AFL merger, with Miami going 14\u20130 in 1972 and New England going 16\u20130 in 2007. Only the 1972 Dolphins were able to win the Super Bowl. As of the 2024 season, the Dolphins lead the all-time series 64\u201355.\nBuffalo Bills.\nThe Dolphins and the Buffalo Bills have a long-standing rivalry, as there are stark characteristic differences between the cities of Miami and Buffalo, especially in climate and culture. The rivalry was extremely lopsided in favor of Miami during the 1970s, as the Dolphins won all 20 games against the Bills during that decade. Fortunes changed in the 1980s and 1990s when Jim Kelly became the Bills' starting quarterback. Though both teams were extremely dominant during that period, the Bills ultimately held the edge and dominated the Dolphins during their four playoff matchups in the 1990s, with the Dolphins' only playoff win coming after Kelly's retirement. With the rise of Tom Brady and the Patriots during the 2000s and the retirements of Kelly and Dolphins quarterback Dan Marino, the Bills-Dolphins rivalry faded in relevance, but remains somewhat intense to this day. Some former Dolphins have gone to play for the Bills as well, most notably Dan Carpenter, Chris Hogan, and Charles Clay.\nIn the 2020s, the rivalry intensified again, with Dolphins quarterback Tua Tagovailoa, drafted in 2020, leading a resurgent Dolphins team against the Josh Allen-led Bills, who had gained a streak of success after Brady's departure from the Patriots and the division. Though Allen's career record against Miami currently stands at 13\u20132, Tagovailoa led the Dolphins to their first win over Bills in 8 games in 2022, and the Dolphins played the Bills tightly in the teams' two other meetings that year despite losing both, including the playoffs. As of the 2024 season, the Dolphins lead the all-time series 62\u201360\u20131.\nNew York Jets.\nThe New York Jets are perhaps Miami's most bitter rivals. Dolphins fans despise the Jets due to the sheer amount of New York City transplants who have moved to South Florida and the Jets' misplaced cocky demeanor. Just as the Bills-Dolphins rivalry is motivated by differences, the Dolphins-Jets series is also notable for the differences between New York and Miami. Unlike the former, this rivalry has been more consistent over the years. Some of the more memorable moments in this rivalry include Dan Marino's fake spike, Vinny Testaverde leading the Jets to a notable comeback on Monday Night Football, and former Jets quarterback Chad Pennington signing with the Dolphins and leading them to a divisional title. The two teams have also played in the 1982 AFC Championship, with Miami winning to face the Washington Redskins in Super Bowl XVII. As of the 2024 season, the Dolphins lead the all-time series 61\u201357\u20131.\nConference.\nJacksonville Jaguars.\nThe Dolphins have taken part in a minor rivalry with the Jacksonville Jaguars as both teams are the only two AFC franchises located in Florida. The two teams first met during the 1998 NFL season on a Monday Night Football matchup. Both teams later met in the 1999 AFC Divisional Round in what would ultimately be the final career game for Dolphins' hall-of-fame quarterback Dan Marino. The Dolphins entered the game as heavy underdogs as they had finished the 1999 season 9\u20137, securing the lowest wild card berth. Meanwhile; the Jaguars had boasted an impressive 14\u20132 campaign under pro-bowl quarterback Mark Brunell; culminating in the Jaguars destroying Miami in a 62\u20137 blowout loss. The Jaguars managed an improbable upset victory during the 2021 Season as the team had declined severely under controversial head coach Urban Meyer. Despite this; the Jaguars managed a comeback victory against the Dolphins in London during week 6. Miami leads the series 6\u20135 all time, though the Jaguars lead 1\u20130 in the postseason.\nIndianapolis Colts.\nWhen the then-Baltimore Colts were inserted into the AFC East following the AFL/NFL merger, they sparked a heated rivalry with the Dolphins, as a controversy involving the hiring of former Colts coach Don Shula forced Miami to forfeit a first-round draft pick. The Dolphins and Colts faced off several times in the AFC playoffs during the 1970s, including the AFC championship game leading up to Super Bowl VI, which the Dolphins lost to the Dallas Cowboys. The rivalry cooled down in the 1980s after the Colts struggled and moved to Indianapolis, but heated up once again in the late 90s until the Colts were reassigned into the AFC South as a result of the 2002 realignment of the NFL's divisions. As of 2024, the Dolphins lead the all-time series 48\u201329.\nInterconference.\nTampa Bay Buccaneers.\nSince the founding of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers in 1976, the Dolphins and Buccaneers have shared a mellow in-state rivalry and were the only two teams in Florida until the Jacksonville Jaguars joined the NFL in 1995. As of the 2023 season, the Buccaneers lead the all-time series 7\u20135.\nHistoric.\nKansas City Chiefs.\nThe Dolphins won a notable pair of games against the Kansas City Chiefs, defeating them in \"The Longest Game\", the final game in Municipal Stadium, and then the first regular season game at Arrowhead Stadium in 1972. As of the 2023 season, the Chiefs lead the all-time series 17\u201316.\nOakland Raiders, San Diego Chargers, Pittsburgh Steelers.\nThe Dolphins also share historic rivalries with other AFC teams such as the Las Vegas Raiders, Los Angeles Chargers, and Pittsburgh Steelers, stemming from often competing against these teams in the playoffs during the Don Shula era. As of the 2023 season, the Raiders lead the all-time series 21\u201320\u20131.\nFacilities.\nStadiums.\nThe Dolphins originally played all home games in the Orange Bowl in Miami. They moved to the new Joe Robbie Stadium after the 1986 season. From 1993 to 2011, the Dolphins shared the stadium with Major League Baseball's Florida Marlins (now known as the Miami Marlins). The venue has had multiple naming rights deals since 1996, carrying the names Pro Player Stadium, Dolphins Stadium, Dolphin Stadium, LandShark Stadium, Sun Life Stadium, New Miami Stadium and, as of August 2016, Hard Rock Stadium. The facility is located in Miami Gardens, a suburb of Miami located approximately north of downtown Miami. The Miami Dolphins share Hard Rock Stadium with the NCAA Miami Hurricanes. The 2015\u20132016 season was the first season in the newly renovated Hard Rock Stadium. The Dolphins spent more than two years and over $400 million on a major overhaul to Hard Rock Stadium. Every seat was replaced and the lower-level seats were moved closer to the field. There are roughly 10,000 fewer seats.\nTraining.\nSt. Petersburg Beach hosted the Dolphins' first training camp in 1966. St. Andrew's School in Boca Raton hosted training camp in the late 1960s. The Dolphins subsequently trained in Miami Gardens at Biscayne College, later renamed St. Thomas University, from 1970 until 1993. In 1993, the Dolphins opened the Miami Dolphins Training Facility at Nova Southeastern University in Davie. In 2006, the facility added a domed field that allows the team to practice during thunderstorms which are common in the area during the summer.\nIn 2021, the Dolphins opened a new, 135 million training facility, dubbed the Baptist Health Training Complex, the Dolphins will practice in. The complex is located next to Hard Rock Stadium in Miami Gardens.\nFranchise information.\nLogos and uniforms.\nLeaping dolphin (1966\u20132012).\nThe Dolphins logo and uniforms remained fairly consistent from the team's founding through 2012. The team's colors were originally aqua and coral, with the coral color paying tribute to the Miami Seahawks and to the many natural coral reefs in Biscayne Bay. The team's original logo consisted of a sunburst with a leaping dolphin wearing a football helmet bearing the letter M. At their debut in 1966, a lighter &amp; brighter orange was used instead of the deep coral color. The dolphin's head was near the center of the sunburst. In the 1967 season, the dolphin was centered on the sunburst, but it reverted to the original placement between 1968 and 1973. By 1974, the dolphin's body was centered on the sunburst in a slightly smaller logo than the 1967 version. The uniforms featured white pants with aqua and orange stripes, paired with either a white or aqua jersey. On the white jersey, aqua block numbers and names were outlined in orange, with aqua and orange sleeve stripes. Starting with the 1972 perfect season, these uniforms were used as the primary uniforms for road games and daytime home games, due to the extreme heat of South Florida. The team also had an aqua jersey used mainly for night home games or road games in which the opponent chose to wear white. The aqua jersey featured white block numbers and names with an orange outline, and orange and white sleeve stripes.\nAn update was given to the logo in 1997 \u2013 the sunburst was simplified and the dolphin was darkened and given a more serious game-face expression. The uniforms remained the same; however, a different block number font was used and navy drop shadows were added.\nOn very rare occasions, an orange jersey was used for primetime games. The uniforms essentially swapped the location of orange and aqua from the aqua jersey. The orange jersey was first used on a Sunday night in 2003 against Washington, a Dolphin win. In 2004, the orange jersey was brought back for a \"Monday Night Football\" match pitting the 2\u201311 Dolphins against the 12\u20131 defending champion New England Patriots. The Dolphins scored a huge upset win after trailing by 11 points with less than 5 minutes remaining. Due to the unusual orange jerseys, the game has become known within some Dolphin circles as \"\". The orange jerseys were used for a 2009 Monday night win against the New York Jets. However, the Dolphins would lose a 2010 Sunday night matchup with the Jets, their first loss in orange, and the orange jerseys in the original style would not be worn again.\nIn 2009, the Dolphins switched to black shoes for the first time since the early 1970s glory days, following a recent trend among NFL teams. However, by 2011, they returned to wearing white shoes.\nThe Dolphins' final game in the original style uniforms with block numbers and the iconic leaping dolphin logo was the final game of the 2012 season, a 28\u20130 shutout loss to the New England Patriots in Foxboro. The white jerseys were worn for the game, and as rumors of a new look had been swirling, many fans watching knew that it would likely be the last time their team would wear the leaping dolphin logo.\nStylized swimming dolphin (2013\u2013present).\nA new logo and new uniforms were unveiled shortly before the 2013 NFL draft. The new logo features a stylized aqua dolphin swimming in front of a heavily modified version of the orange sunburst. The dolphin in the logo is more vague and artistic, and is not wearing a helmet as it is merely a silhouette of a dolphin cast in aqua and navy.\nNavy was incorporated as featured color for the first time, with orange becoming greatly de-emphasized. The uniforms feature both white pants and aqua pants, with a white or aqua jersey. The Dolphins continue to wear white at home, just as they had with the previous uniforms, with aqua being used for primetime home games. The white jersey features aqua numbers and names in a unique custom font, with orange and navy outlines on the numbers; however, the names only use navy as an outline color. The aqua jerseys use white numbers with an orange and aqua outline, and white names with a navy outline. The helmets are white with a white facemask, just like the final years of the previous look; however, navy is a prominent color on the helmet stripe, joining aqua and a de-emphasized orange. Both jerseys have large \"Dolphins\" text above the numbers, written in the team's new script. The pants are either aqua or white, and contain no markings other than a small team wordmark.\nIn 2018, the team made some slight modifications to the logo and uniform set: The shades of orange and aqua were tweaked, and navy blue was removed from the color scheme, only remaining on the logo.\nThrowback uniforms.\nIn 2015, the Dolphins brought back their 1970s aqua uniforms for a few select games. Four years later, they brought back a white version from the same era as a second alternate uniform. The aqua throwbacks were worn during the now-famous 2018 Miracle in Miami play against the Patriots.\nColor Rush uniform.\nOn September 29, 2016, the Dolphins debuted their new Color Rush uniform in a Thursday Night Football game against the Cincinnati Bengals. The all-orange uniform marked the first time since 2010 that the Dolphins wore an orange uniform. However, the set was only used for that game as the Dolphins immediately retired the uniform soon after.\nIn later years, the Dolphins wore similar all-aqua or all-white uniforms in select games as the NFL gradually relaxed its rules regarding hosiery.\nRivalries uniform.\nOn August 28, 2025, the Dolphins released a new \"Rivalries\" uniform that would be worn at home against each of their AFC East opponents over a three-year span. The design featured a dark blue base with aqua numbers and orange trim, along with a \"MIAMI\" wordmark in orange with aqua drop shadows. The helmet is dark blue with aqua and orange striping, and featured a modified \"swimming dolphin\" logo without white elements.\nFight song.\nThe song was written and composed by Lee Ofman, and has similar instrumentation and lyrics to the fight song of the Houston Oilers. Ofman approached the Dolphins with it before the 1972 season because he wanted music to inspire his favorite team. The fight song would soon serve as a good luck charm for the Dolphins that season. The Dolphins became the first team in NFL history to record an undefeated season, going 17\u20130 en route to victory over the Washington Redskins in Super Bowl VII. The following season, Miami posted an equally impressive 15\u20132 record and capped the season with another title, defeating the Minnesota Vikings in Super Bowl VIII. The back-to-back championship runs, coupled with the popularity of the fight song amongst Dolphins fans, have ensured the song's longevity. The Dolphins revealed a new fight song by T-Pain and Jimmy Buffett featuring Pitbull on August 7, 2009, which was introduced for the 2009 NFL season. The fight song was played during the preseason home opener against the Jacksonville Jaguars on August 17, 2009, but was not played during the second preseason game against the Carolina Panthers on August 22, 2009, after being booed heavily in the first game. Furthermore, the team has preferred to play Buffett's song \"Fins\" after scores during the 2009 regular season instead of the traditional fight song.\nCheerleaders.\nThe team's cheerleaders are known collectively as the Miami Dolphins Cheerleaders. The company had its debut in 1978 as the Dolphins Starbrites. (The name referred to the co-sponsor, Starbrite Car Polish.) The cheerleaders' founding choreographer was June Taylor, famed colleague of Jackie Gleason, who led the squad until her retirement in 1990.\nSpecial Teams/Volunteer Program.\nIn April 2010, the Dolphins started the first Volunteer Program in the NFL. Special Teams is a unique volunteer organization created to enlist and mobilize the ongoing services of the community with the Dolphins staff, players and alumni. The mission of the Special Teams is to offer hands-on services to communities and families in need, to partner with existing organizations on worthwhile social, civic and charitable programs, to provide assistance at Miami Dolphins Foundation events, and to support community efforts in times of emergency. This program is headed by Leslie Nixon and Sergio Xiques. Since its inception, Special Teams has given over 250,000 community services hours to the South Florida and Mexico community.\nMascots.\nT.D..\nOn Friday, April 18, 1997, the first \"official\" mascot of the Miami Dolphins was introduced. The 7-foot mascot made his public debut on April 19 at Pro Player Stadium during the team's draft-day party. The team then made a \"Name the Mascot\" contest that drew over 13,000 entries covering all 50 states and 22 countries. 529 names were suggested. The winning entry was announced at the annual Dolphins Awards Banquet on June 4, 1997.\nDolfan Denny.\nDenny Sym cheered on the Miami Dolphins for 33 years as a one-man sideline show, leading Miami crowds in cheers and chants in his glittering coral (orange) and aqua hat from the Dolphins' first game in 1966 until 2000. Sym died on March 18, 2007. He was 72.\nFlipper.\nFrom 1966 to 1968, and in the 1970s a live dolphin was situated in a water tank in the open (east) end of the Orange Bowl. He would jump in the tank to celebrate touchdowns and field goals. The tank that was set up in the 1970s was manufactured by Evan Bush and maintained during the games by Evan Bush and Dene Whitaker. Flipper was removed from the Orange Bowl after 1968 to save costs, and in the 1970s due to stress.\nRadio and television.\nIn August 2010, the team launched its own regional TV network to carry preseason games and in-season content such as coach and player shows. The Dolphins Television Network comprises 10 South Florida TV stations that agreed to carry the team-produced coverage. Preseason games are broadcast on television through CBS-owned WFOR-TV in Miami-Dade and Broward counties, WTVX in West Palm Beach, WBBH-TV in Fort Myers, and WRDQ in Orlando. Longtime TV and radio personality Dick Stockton provides play-by-play commentary, with Dolphins Hall-of-Fame QB Bob Griese and former Dolphins WR Nat Moore providing color commentary. The radio broadcast team features Jimmy Cefalo providing play-by-play commentary and Joe Rose providing color commentary during preseason games, along with Griese for regular-season games. Griese replaced longtime color commentator Jim Mandich after his death in 2011, who played for the Dolphins under Don Shula. Radio coverage as of the 2023 season is carried WINZ (940 AM) and WBGG-FM (105.9 FM). Additionally, games can also be heard in Spanish on WNMA (1210 AM), with Ra\u00fal Striker Jr. and Joaquin Duro providing play-by-play and color commentary, respectively.\nCBS-owned WFOR, in addition to preseason telecasts, airs most of the Dolphins' regular season games and \"Thursday Night Football\", with rare home games moved or delayed by hurricanes carried by sister station WBFS-TV due to network conflicts, and some games carried by WSVN when flexed to Fox. When playing on Sunday night, the team's matches will be broadcast on NBC's WTVJ.\nThe Dolphins' radio affiliates:\nPlayers.\nMiami Dolphins in the Pro Football Hall of Fame.\nThe Dolphins currently have ten players, and one coach enshrined in the Pro Football Hall of Fame, that have spent the majority (or entirety) of their careers, or made significant contributions with the Miami Dolphins. Three other players and four coaches/contributors that have spent only a \"minor portion\" of their careers with the Dolphins, have also been enshrined in the Pro Football Hall of Fame, but have been enshrined primarily with other teams.\nRetired numbers.\nThe Miami Dolphins have three retired jersey numbers. \nThe Dolphins also have two numbers that have not been reissued to any player, or that are in reduced circulation but not yet officially retired. \nAs of 2025, neither Taylor nor Thomas have had their numbers retired despite being inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 2017 and 2023, respectively.\nIndividual award winners.\nListed below are the individuals who have won the following NFL, Super Bowl, and Pro Bowl MVP awards, the Offensive and Defensive Rookie and Player of the Year awards, the Comeback Player of the Year winners, the winners of the prestigious NFL Walter Payton Man of the Year Award, and the winner of the Coach of the Year Award for the Miami Dolphins. Bold indicates those elected to the Pro Football Hall of Fame.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNFL All-Decade Team and 100th Anniversary All-Time Team selections.\nThe following are Miami Dolphins (players and/or coaches) who have been selected to an \"All-Decade Team\", or the NFL 100th Anniversary All-Time Team by the Pro Football Hall of Fame selection committee. Bold indicates those elected to the Pro Football Hall of Fame.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPro Bowl selections.\nMany former and current Miami Dolphins players have represented the franchise in the Pro Bowl (or the AFL All-Star Game). Below is a list of current or former players that play or have played for the Miami Dolphins that have been selected to at least three Pro Bowls.\n50 greatest players.\nIn 2015, to commemorate the Miami Dolphins' 50th NFL season, the Dolphins organization announced through voting from the South Florida Media and Miami Dolphin fans the results of the 50 greatest players in Miami Dolphins franchise history. The results were announced during halftime on Monday Night Football between the Dolphins and the Giants. Here are the 50 greatest Dolphins broken down by position. Bold indicates those elected to the Pro Football Hall of Fame.\nOffense:\nDefense:\nSpecial teams:\nMiami Dolphins Ring of Honor/Honor Roll.\nThe Miami Dolphins Ring of Honor, formerly known as the Honor Roll, is a ring around the second tier of Hard Rock Stadium that honors former players, coaches, owners and contributors who have made significant contributions to the franchise throughout their history. Each of these players is honored with a placard on the facing of the upper level around Hard Rock Stadium including team founder-owner Joe Robbie. In place of a jersey number, Don Shula has the number 347, representing his record number of NFL coaching victories, 274 of them as Dolphins head coach. Dan Marino's name includes his career passing statistics of attempts (8,358), completions (4,967), passing yards (61,361), and touchdown passes (420). Pro Football Hall of Fame inductees are additionally denoted by a hall of fame logo next to their names.\nIn 1992, at the 20-year anniversary, Miami's \"1972 Undefeated Team\" was enshrined into the Honor Roll. At the 40 year anniversary, which enshrined former defensive coordinator Bill Arnsparger into the Honor Roll, his name went on the Honor Roll where the \"1972 Undefeated Team\" inductee previously and originally was enshrined, and an updated \"1972 Perfect Season Team 17\u20130\" inductee was put into one corner of Hard Rock Stadium with special placards of Super Bowl VII and Super Bowl VIII included next to it on each side.\nThe inductees as of 2024 include:\nJoe Robbie Alumni Plaza Walk of Fame.\nThe Joe Robbie Alumni Plaza Walk of Fame was first established in 2011, designed to be all-encompassing and recognize the best of the Miami Dolphins alumni, including those in the Pro Football Hall of Fame, the Honor Roll, and as well as the many other players who were among the unsung heroes and community leaders that the organization has produced. The \"Walk of Fame\" is located at the north end of Hard Rock Stadium, with a life-size bronze statue of Joe Robbie, the original founder and owner of the Miami Dolphins from 1966 to 1989. Bold indicates those elected to the Pro Football Hall of Fame.\nThe inductees as of 2018 (by yearly class) are:\nStaff.\nHead coaches.\nThe Dolphins have had 14 head coaches in franchise history.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "19191", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19191", "title": "M", "text": "Thirteenth letter of the Latin alphabet\nM, or m, is the thirteenth letter of the Latin alphabet, used in the modern English alphabet, the alphabets of several western European languages and others worldwide. Its name in English is \"em\" (pronounced ), plural \"ems\".\nHistory.\nThe letter M is derived from the Phoenician Mem via the Greek Mu (\u039c,\u00a0\u03bc). Semitic Mem is most likely derived from a \"Proto-Sinaitic\" (Bronze Age) adoption of the \"water\" ideogram in Egyptian writing. The Egyptian sign had the acrophonic value , from the Egyptian word for \"water\", \"nt\"; the adoption as the Semitic letter for was presumably also on acrophonic grounds, from the Semitic word for \"water\", \"*m\u0101(y)-\".\nUse in writing systems.\nEnglish.\nIn English, \u27e8m\u27e9 represents the voiced bilabial nasal .\nThe Oxford English Dictionary (first edition) says that \u27e8m\u27e9 is sometimes a vowel, such as in words like \"spasm\" and in the suffix \"-ism\". In modern terminology, this is described as a syllabic consonant (IPA: ).\nThe digraph, \"mn,\" when used in the beginning of words, such as mnemonic, is pronounced as /n/. This digraph is the only instance where the letter \u27e8m\u27e9 is silent.\nM is the fourteenth most frequently used letter in the English language.\nOther languages.\nThe letter \u27e8m\u27e9 represents the voiced bilabial nasal in the orthography of Latin as well as in those of many modern languages. \nIn Washo, lower-case \u27e8m\u27e9 represents a voiced bilabial nasal , while upper-case \u27e8M\u27e9 represents a voiceless bilabial nasal .\nOther systems.\nIn the International Phonetic Alphabet, \u27e8m\u27e9 represents the voiced bilabial nasal .\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19192", "revid": "41363991", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19192", "title": "Mean", "text": "Numeric quantity representing the center of a collection of numbers\nA mean is a quantity representing the \"center\" of a collection of numbers and is intermediate to the extreme values of the set of numbers. There are several kinds of means (or \"measures of central tendency\") in mathematics, especially in statistics. Each attempts to summarize or typify a given group of data, illustrating the magnitude and sign of the data set. Which of these measures is most illuminating depends on what is being measured, and on context and purpose.\nThe \"arithmetic mean\", also known as \"arithmetic average\", is the sum of the values divided by the number of values. The arithmetic mean of a set of numbers \"x\"1, \"x\"2, ..., x\"n\" is typically denoted using an overhead bar, formula_1. If the numbers are from observing a sample of a larger group, the arithmetic mean is termed the \"sample mean\" (formula_1) to distinguish it from the group mean (or expected value) of the underlying distribution, denoted formula_3 or formula_4.\nOutside probability and statistics, a wide range of other notions of mean are often used in geometry and mathematical analysis; examples are given below.\nTypes of means.\nPythagorean means.\nIn mathematics, the three classical Pythagorean means are the arithmetic mean (AM), the geometric mean (GM), and the harmonic mean (HM). These means were studied with proportions by Pythagoreans and later generations of Greek mathematicians because of their importance in geometry and music.\nArithmetic mean (AM).\nThe arithmetic mean (or simply \"mean\" or \"average\") of a list of numbers, is the sum of all of the numbers divided by their count. Similarly, the mean of a sample formula_5, usually denoted by formula_1, is the sum of the sampled values divided by the number of items in the sample.\nformula_7\nFor example, the arithmetic mean of five values: 4, 36, 45, 50, 75 is:\nformula_8\nGeometric mean (GM).\nThe geometric mean is an average that is useful for sets of positive numbers, that are interpreted according to their product (as is the case with rates of growth) and not their sum (as is the case with the arithmetic mean):\nformula_9 \nFor example, the geometric mean of five values: 4, 36, 45, 50, 75 is:\nformula_10\nHarmonic mean (HM).\nThe harmonic mean is an average which is useful for sets of numbers which are defined in relation to some unit, as in the case of speed (i.e., distance per unit of time):\nformula_11\nFor example, the harmonic mean of the five values: 4, 36, 45, 50, 75 is\nformula_12\nIf we have five pumps that can empty a tank of a certain size in respectively 4, 36, 45, 50, and 75 minutes, then the harmonic mean of formula_13\ntells us that these five different pumps working together will pump at the same rate as five pumps that can each empty the tank in formula_13 minutes.\nRelationship between AM, GM, and HM.\nAM, GM, and HM of nonnegative real numbers satisfy these inequalities:\nformula_15\nEquality holds if all the elements of the given sample are equal.\nStatistical location.\nIn descriptive statistics, the mean may be confused with the median, mode or mid-range, as any of these may colloquially be called an \"average\" (more formally, a measure of central tendency). The mean of a set of observations is the arithmetic average of the values; however, for skewed distributions, the mean is not necessarily the same as the middle value (median), or the most likely value (mode). For example, mean income is typically skewed upwards by a small number of people with very large incomes, so that the majority have an income lower than the mean. By contrast, the median income is the level at which half the population is below and half is above. The mode income is the most likely income and favors the larger number of people with lower incomes. While the median and mode are often more intuitive measures for such skewed data, many skewed distributions are in fact best described by their mean, including the exponential and Poisson distributions.\nMean of a probability distribution.\nThe mean of a probability distribution is the long-run arithmetic average value of a random variable having that distribution. If the random variable is denoted by formula_16, then the mean is also known as the expected value of formula_16 (denoted formula_18). For a discrete probability distribution, the mean is given by formula_19, where the sum is taken over all possible values of the random variable and formula_20 is the probability mass function. For a continuous distribution, the mean is formula_21, where formula_22 is the probability density function. In all cases, including those in which the distribution is neither discrete nor continuous, the mean is the Lebesgue integral of the random variable with respect to its probability measure. The mean need not exist or be finite; for some probability distributions the mean is infinite (+\u221e or \u2212\u221e), while for others the mean is undefined.\nGeneralized means.\nPower mean.\nThe generalized mean, also known as the power mean or H\u00f6lder mean, abstracts several other means. It is defined for positive numbers formula_23 by\nformula_24\nThis, as a function of formula_25, is well defined on formula_26, but can be extended continuously to formula_27.\nBy choosing different values for formula_28, other well known means are retrieved.\nQuasi-arithmetic mean.\nA similar approach to the power mean is the formula_29-mean, also known as the quasi-arithmetic mean.\nFor an injective function formula_30 on an interval formula_31 and real numbers formula_32 we define their formula_29-mean as\n formula_34\nBy choosing different functions formula_29, other well known means are retrieved. \nWeighted arithmetic mean.\nThe weighted arithmetic mean (or weighted average) is used if one wants to combine average values from different sized samples of the same population, and is define by\nformula_36 \nwhere formula_37 and formula_38 are the mean and size of sample formula_39 respectively. In other applications, they represent a measure for the reliability of the influence upon the mean by the respective values.\nTruncated mean.\nSometimes, a set of numbers might contain outliers (i.e., data values which are much lower or much higher than the others). Often, outliers are erroneous data caused by artifacts. In this case, one can use a truncated mean. It involves discarding given parts of the data at the top or the bottom end, typically an equal amount at each end and then taking the arithmetic mean of the remaining data. The number of values removed is indicated as a percentage of the total number of values.\nInterquartile mean.\nThe interquartile mean is a specific example of a truncated mean. It is simply the arithmetic mean after removing the lowest and the highest quarter of values.\n formula_40\nassuming the values have been ordered, so is simply a specific example of a weighted mean for a specific set of weights.\nMean of a function.\nIn some circumstances, mathematicians may calculate a mean of an infinite (or even an uncountable) set of values. This can happen when calculating the mean value formula_41 of a function formula_22. Intuitively, a mean of a function can be thought of as calculating the area under a section of a curve, and then dividing by the length of that section. This can be done crudely by counting squares on graph paper, or more precisely by integration. The integration formula is written as:\n formula_43\nIn this case, care must be taken to make sure that the integral converges. But the mean may be finite even if the function itself tends to infinity at some points.\nMean of angles and cyclical quantities.\nAngles, times of day, and other cyclical quantities require modular arithmetic to add and otherwise combine numbers. These quantities can be averaged using the circular mean. In all these situations, it is possible that no mean exists, for example if all points being averaged are equidistant. Consider a color wheel\u2014there is no mean to the set of all colors. Additionally, there may not be a \"unique\" mean for a set of values: for example, when averaging points on a clock, the mean of the locations of 11:00 and 13:00 is 12:00, but this location is equivalent to that of 00:00.\nFr\u00e9chet mean.\nThe Fr\u00e9chet mean gives a manner for determining the \"center\" of a mass distribution on a surface or, more generally, Riemannian manifold. Unlike many other means, the Fr\u00e9chet mean is defined on a space whose elements cannot necessarily be added together or multiplied by scalars.\nIt is sometimes also known as the \"Karcher mean\" (named after Hermann Karcher).\nTriangular sets.\nIn geometry, there are thousands of different\ndefinitions for the center of a triangle that can all be interpreted as the mean of a triangular set of points in the plane.\nSwanson's rule.\nThis is an approximation to the mean for a moderately skewed distribution. It is used in hydrocarbon exploration and is defined as:\n formula_44\nwhere formula_45, formula_46 and formula_47 are the 10th, 50th and 90th percentiles of the distribution, respectively.\nOther means.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19193", "revid": "44585638", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19193", "title": "MIT License", "text": "Permissive free software license\nThe MIT License is a permissive software license originating at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in the late 1980s. As a permissive license, it puts few restrictions on reuse and has high license compatibility.\nUnlike copyleft software licenses, the MIT License allows reuse within proprietary software, provided that all copies of the software or its substantial portions include a copy of the terms of the MIT License and also a copyright notice. In 2015 and 2025, the MIT License was the most popular software license on GitHub.\nNotable projects that use the MIT License include the X Window System, Ruby on Rails, Node.js, Lua, jQuery, .NET, Angular, and React.\nLicense terms.\nThe MIT License has the identifier codice_1 in the SPDX License List. It is also known as the \"Expat License\" &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;. It has the following terms:\nHistory.\nComputer scientist Jerry Saltzer has published his recollections of its early development, along with documentary evidence. According to Saltzer, the idea for the license came when working on a TCP/IP implementation in the Computer Systems Research (CSR) Group of the MIT Laboratory for Computer Science (MIT-LCS). The group believed that licensing revenue for their software would be small, and wanted to avoid what could sometimes be a large amount of time working with MIT's attorneys negotiating licensing agreements, so they decided to give the software away for free with a copyright notice. Saltzer and Larry Allen worked with attorneys to draft and refine the proposal wording, versions of which were circulated to attorneys by email on January 10, 1984 and used in software publication on February 1, 1984. A new version of the license was put together later in 1985 for the development and release of the X Window System and Project Athena, and was released in February 1986.\nVariations.\nX11 License.\nThe X11 License, also known as the MIT/X Consortium License, is a variation on the MIT license, most known for its usage by the X Consortium. It has the identifier codice_2 in the SPDX License List.\nIt differs from the MIT License mainly by an additional clause restricting use of the copyright holders' name for advertisement.\nIt has the following terms:\nMIT No Attribution License.\nThe MIT No Attribution License, a variation of the MIT License, has the identifier codice_3 in the SPDX License List. A request for legacy approval to the Open Source Initiative was filed on May 15, 2020, which led to a formal approval on August 5, 2020. By doing so, it forms a public-domain-equivalent license, the same way as BSD Zero Clause. It has the following terms:\nOther variations.\nThe SPDX License List contains extra MIT license variations. Examples include , a variation with an additional advertising clause, and , a variation which covers the removal or replacement of attributions in cases the software is significantly modified for bug reporting purposes.\nAmbiguity and variants.\nThe name \"MIT License\" is potentially ambiguous. The Massachusetts Institute of Technology has used many licenses for software since its creation; for example, MIT offers four licensing options for the FFTW C source code library, one of which is the GPL v2.0 and the other three of which are not open-source. The term \"MIT License\" has also been used to refer to the Expat License (used for the XML parsing library Expat) and to the X11 License (also called \"MIT/X Consortium License\"; used for X Window System by the MIT X Consortium). Furthermore, the \"MIT License\" as published by the Open Source Initiative is the same as the Expat License. Due to this differing use of terms, some prefer to avoid the name \"MIT License\". The Free Software Foundation argues that the term is misleading and ambiguous, and recommends against its use.\nThe X Consortium was dissolved late in 1996, and its assets transferred to The Open Group, which released X11R6 initially under the same license. The X11 License and the X11R6 \"MIT License\" chosen for ncurses by the Free Software Foundation both include the following clause, absent in the Expat License:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Except as contained in this notice, the name(s) of the above copyright holders shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written authorization.\nAs of 2020, the successor to the X Window System is the X.Org Server, which is licensed under what is effectively the common MIT license, according to the X.org licensing page:\nThe X.Org Foundation has chosen the following format of the MIT License as the preferred format for code included in the X Window System distribution. This is a slight variant of the common MIT license form published by the Open Source Initiative\nThe \"slight variant\" is the addition of the phrase \"(including the next paragraph)\" to the second paragraph of the license text, resulting in: \"The above copyright notice and this permission notice (including the next paragraph) shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\" This inclusion clarifies that the liability paragraph must also be included for the conditions of the license to be met.\nThe license-management features at popular source code repository GitHub, as well as its \"Choose a License\" service, do not differentiate between MIT/Expat license variants. The text of the Expat variant is presented as simply the \"MIT License\" (represented by the metadata tag codice_4).\nComparison to other licenses.\nBSD.\nThe original BSD license also includes a clause requiring all advertising of the software to display a notice crediting its authors. This \"advertising clause\" (since disavowed by UC Berkeley) is present in the modified MIT License used by XFree86.\nThe University of Illinois/NCSA Open Source License combines text from both the MIT and BSD licenses; the license grant and disclaimer are taken from the MIT License.\nThe ISC license contains similarities to both the MIT and simplified BSD licenses, the biggest difference being that language deemed unnecessary by the Berne Convention is omitted.\nGNU General Public License.\nThe GPL is explicit about the patent rights an owner grants when the code or derivative work is distributed, while the MIT license does not discuss patents. Moreover, the GPL license impacts derivative works, but the MIT license does not.\nRelation to patents.\nLike the BSD license, the MIT license does not include an express patent license although some commentators state that the grant of rights covers all potential restrictions including patents. Both the BSD and the MIT licenses were drafted before the patentability of software was generally recognized under US law. The Apache License version 2.0 is a similarly permissive license that includes an explicit contributor's patent license.\nOf specific relevance to US jurisdictions, the MIT license uses the terms \"sell\" and \"use\" that are also used in defining the rights of a patent holder in Title 35 of the United States Code section 154. This has been construed by some commentators as an unconventional but implicit license in the US to use any underlying patents.\nReception and popularity.\nAccording to a 2020 post by WhiteSource Software, the MIT license was used in 27% of four million open source packages. In a 2015 GitHub blog post, the MIT license was the most popular open-source license, used by 45% of repositories, with the GNU GPLv2 coming second at 13% in their sample of repositories.\nGitHub\u2019s 2025 \"Innovation Graph\" found that repositories under the MIT License account for about one-third of all projects on the platform that declare a license, giving it the largest share of any license tracked. The Open Source Initiative reported that its MIT License page drew more than a million unique visitors in 2024\u2014over four times the traffic of the next most-viewed OSI-approved license.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19195", "revid": "20318", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19195", "title": "MU", "text": "MU, Mu or \u03bc may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMicro- (\u03bc), metric prefix for one millionth\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "19196", "revid": "6727347", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19196", "title": "Mu-metal", "text": "Nickel-iron alloy with high magnetic permeability\nMu-metal or \u03bc-metal is a nickel\u2013iron soft ferromagnetic alloy with very high permeability, which is used for shielding sensitive electronic equipment against static or low-frequency magnetic fields.\nThe name came from the Greek letter mu (\u03bc), which represents permeability in physics and engineering formulas.\nProperties.\nMu-metal has several compositions. One such composition is approximately\n 77% nickel,\n 16% iron,\n 5% copper, and\n 2% chromium or molybdenum.\nMore recently, mu-metal is considered to be ASTM A753 Alloy\u00a04 and is composed of approximately\n 80% nickel,\n 12-15% iron,\n 5% molybdenum,\n and small amounts of various other elements such as silicon.\nA number of different proprietary formulations of the alloy are sold under trade names such as \"MuMETAL\", \"Mumetall\", and \"Mumetal2\".\nMu-metal typically has relative permeability values of 80,000\u2013100,000 compared to several thousand for ordinary steel. It is a \"soft\" ferromagnetic material; it has low magnetic anisotropy and magnetostriction, giving it a low coercivity so that it saturates at low magnetic fields. This gives it low hysteresis losses when used in alternating current (AC) magnetic circuits. Other high-permeability nickel\u2013iron alloys such as permalloy have similar magnetic properties; mu-metal's advantage is that it is more ductile, malleable and workable, allowing it to be easily formed into the thin sheets needed for magnetic shields.\nMu-metal objects require heat treatment after they are in final form\u2014annealing in a magnetic field in hydrogen atmosphere, which increases the magnetic permeability about 40 times. The annealing alters the material's crystal structure, aligning the grains and removing some impurities, especially carbon, which obstruct the free motion of the magnetic domain boundaries. Bending or mechanical shock after annealing may disrupt the material's grain alignment, leading to a drop in the permeability of the affected areas, which can be restored by repeating the hydrogen annealing step.\nApplication.\nMu-metal is a soft magnetic alloy with exceptionally high magnetic permeability. The high permeability of mu-metal provides a low reluctance path for magnetic flux, leading to its use in magnetic shields against static or slowly varying magnetic fields. Magnetic shielding made with high-permeability alloys like mu-metal works not by blocking magnetic fields but by providing a path for the magnetic field lines around the shielded area. Thus, the best shape for shields is a closed container surrounding the shielded space. \nThe effectiveness of mu-metal shielding decreases with the alloy's permeability, which drops off at both low field strengths and, due to saturation, at high field strengths. Thus, mu-metal shields are often made of several enclosures one inside the other, each of which successively reduces the field inside it. Because mu-metal saturates at relatively low fields, sometimes the outer layer in such multilayer shields is made of ordinary steel. Its higher saturation value allows it to handle stronger magnetic fields, reducing them to a lower level that can be shielded effectively by the inner mu-metal layers.\nRadio frequency (RF) magnetic fields above about 100 kHz can be shielded by Faraday shields: ordinary conductive metal sheets or screens which are used to shield against electric fields. Superconducting materials can also expel magnetic fields by the Meissner effect, but require cryogenic temperatures.\nThe alloy has a low coercivity, near zero magnetostriction, and significant anisotropic magnetoresistance. The low magnetostriction is critical for industrial applications, where variable stresses in thin films would otherwise cause a ruinously large variation in magnetic properties.\nExamples.\nMu-metal is used to shield equipment from magnetic fields. For example:\nSimilar materials.\nOther materials with similar magnetic properties include Co-Netic, supermalloy, supermumetal, nilomag, sanbold, molybdenum permalloy, Sendust, M-1040, Hipernom, HyMu-80 and Amumetal. Electrical steel is used similarly in some transformers as a cheaper, less permeable option.\nCeramic ferrites are used for similar purposes, and have even higher permeability at high frequencies, but are brittle and nearly non-conductive, so can only replace mu-metals where conductivity and pliability aren't required.\nHistory.\nMu-metal was developed by British scientists Willoughby S. Smith and Henry J. Garnett and patented in 1923 for inductive loading of submarine telegraph cables by The Telegraph Construction and Maintenance Co. Ltd. (now Telcon Metals Ltd.), a British firm that built the Atlantic undersea telegraph cables. The conductive seawater surrounding an undersea cable added a significant capacitance to the cable, causing distortion of the signal, which limited the bandwidth and slowed signaling speed to 10\u201312 words per minute. The bandwidth could be increased by adding inductance to compensate. This was first done by wrapping the conductors with a helical wrapping of metal tape or wire of high magnetic permeability, which confined the magnetic field. \nTelcon invented mu-metal to compete with permalloy, the first high-permeability alloy used for cable compensation, whose patent rights were held by competitor Western Electric. Mu-metal was developed by adding copper to permalloy to improve ductility. of fine mu-metal wire were needed for each 1.6\u00a0km of cable, creating a great demand for the alloy. The first year of production Telcon was making 30 tons per week. In the 1930s this use for mu-metal declined, but by World War II many other uses were found in the electronics industry (particularly shielding for transformers and cathode-ray tubes), as well as the fuzes inside magnetic mines. Telcon Metals Ltd. abandoned the trademark \"MUMETAL\" in 1985. The last listed owner of the mark \"MUMETAL\" is Magnetic Shield Corporation, Illinois.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19197", "revid": "43698778", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19197", "title": "Monastir", "text": "Monastir may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "19198", "revid": "7291611", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19198", "title": "Michael Reagan", "text": "American television personality and journalist\nMichael Edward Reagan (born John Charles Flaugher; March 18, 1945) is an American conservative political commentator, Republican strategist, and former radio talk show host. He is the adopted son of former U.S. president Ronald Reagan and his first wife, actress Jane Wyman. He works as a columnist for Newsmax.\nEarly life.\nMichael Edward Reagan was born John Charles Flaugher at Hollywood Presbyterian Medical Center in Los Angeles to Essie Irene Flaugher (October 18, 1916 \u2013 December 26, 1985), an unmarried woman from Kentucky who became pregnant through a relationship with John Bourgholtzer (1918\u20131993), a U.S. Army corporal. He was adopted by Ronald Reagan and Jane Wyman shortly after his birth.\nReagan was expelled from Loyola High School after a short period at the school and in 1964, he graduated from the Judson School, a boarding school outside of Scottsdale, Arizona. He attended Arizona State University for less than one semester and Los Angeles Valley College but never graduated.\nIn 1965, the FBI warned Ronald Reagan that in the course of an organized crime investigation it had discovered that Michael was associated with the son of crime boss Joseph Bonanno, which would have become a campaign issue had it been publicly known. Reagan thanked the FBI and said he would tell his son to discreetly discontinue the association.\nCareers.\nSalesman.\nSometime before September 1970, Reagan was working as a salesman for the clothing company Hart, Schaffner, &amp; Marx. He then became a director of special events catering at Michaelson Food Service Company in Los Angeles. In 1981, Reagan was hired as a salesman for Industrial Circuits, a circuit board company owned by Robert Herring Sr.\nActor.\nReagan has had small roles in movies and television shows since 1985, including \"Falcon Crest\", which starred his mother, Jane Wyman.\nTelevision.\nIn 1987, Reagan served as the host for the first season of the television game show \"Lingo\".\nRadio.\nHis work in talk radio started in the Southern California local market as a guest host for radio commentator Michael Jackson's talk radio show slot on KABC in Los Angeles. After this beginning, he landed a talk show spot on KSDO radio in San Diego.\nReagan also hosted \"The Michael Reagan Show\" nationwide for most of the 2000s. The show was variously syndicated on Premiere Networks and Radio America. Since then he has focused on public speaking about his father.\nAuthor.\nIn 1988, he wrote, with Joe Hyams, an autobiography, \"Michael Reagan: On the Outside Looking In\". He also wrote that he was sexually abused at the age of seven by a camp counselor.\nIn 2005, he wrote \"Twice Adopted\" about his feelings of rejection being adopted, parents divorcing and becoming a born-again Christian.\nPolitical commentary.\nSame-sex marriage.\nIn April 2013, in a syndicated column, Reagan accused American churches of not fighting hard enough to block same-sex marriage. He wrote that, in regard to arguments supporting gay marriage, similar arguments could be used to support polygamy, bestiality, and murder. As he wrote: \"There is also a very slippery slope leading to other alternative relationships and the unconstitutionality of any law based on morality. Think about polygamy, bestiality, and perhaps even murder.\"\nCall for the execution of Mark Dice.\nIn June 2008, Mark Dice launched a campaign urging people to send letters and DVDs to US troops stationed in Iraq which support the theory that the September 11 attacks were an \"inside job\". \"Operation Inform the Soldiers\", as Dice has called it, prompted Reagan to comment that Dice should be executed for treason. Fairness and Accuracy in Reporting, a liberal/progressive media criticism organization, asked Radio America at the time to explain whether it permits \"its hosts to call for murder on the air\". \nSupport for profiling.\nHe spoke out in support of profiling in October 2014. In a piece called \"Profile or Die\", he wrote that it would be left to citizens to defend themselves if there were an attack against them by terrorists such as the Islamic State.\nDonald Trump.\nIn 2016, Reagan said he would not vote for Trump and endorsed Ted Cruz in the primary. Later he said via X (formerly Twitter) that he voted Trump in 2020 and 2024 election. In 2025, he defended the Trump tariffs.\nLegal problems.\nIn 1981, Reagan was accused of felony violations of California securities laws in court documents. The Los Angeles County District Attorney alleged that Reagan had baited investors into unlawful stock arrangements, and selling stocks despite the fact that he was not legally permitted to do so. The D.A.'s office investigated allegations that Reagan improperly spent money invested by others in a company, Agricultural Energy Resources, he operated out of his house in a venture to develop the potential of gasohol, a combination of alcohol and gasoline. Investigators said they were also checking whether he had spent up to $17,500 of investors' money for his living expenses. The district attorney's office cleared Reagan of both charges later that year.\nOn September 20, 2012, Reagan, Tim Kelly and Jay Hoffman were sued by a fellow partner, for allegedly withholding the partner's interest in an e-mail business built around the Reagan.com domain name. In 2015, a Los Angeles Superior Court jury found Reagan liable for conversion and breach of fiduciary duty. Reagan and his business partners were ordered to pay $662,500 each in damages.\nPersonal life.\nIn June 1971, Reagan married Pamela Gail Putnam (born 1952), daughter of Duane Putnam, former Atlanta Falcons football line coach. The couple divorced in 1972.\nHe married Colleen Sterns, an interior decorator, in 1975 at The Church on the Way. They have two children, Cameron and Ashley. Reagan and his wife live in the Toluca Lake area of Los Angeles.\nIn January 2011, he called his adoptive brother Ron Reagan, the biological son of Ronald Reagan and his second wife, Nancy Reagan, \"an embarrassment\" for speculating in a memoir that their father suffered from Alzheimer's disease while president.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19200", "revid": "11689218", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19200", "title": "Molecular biology", "text": "Branch of biology that studies biological systems at the molecular level\nMolecular biology is a branch of biology that seeks to understand the molecular basis of biological activity in and between cells, including biomolecular synthesis, modification, mechanisms, and interactions.\nThough cells and other microscopic structures had been observed in organisms as early as the 18th century, a detailed understanding of the mechanisms and interactions governing their behavior did not emerge until the 20th century, when technologies used in physics and chemistry had advanced sufficiently to permit their application in the biological sciences. The term 'molecular biology' was first used in 1945 by the English physicist William Astbury, who described it as an approach focused on discerning the underpinnings of biological phenomena\u2014i.e. uncovering the physical and chemical structures and properties of biological molecules, as well as their interactions with other molecules and how these interactions explain observations of so-called classical biology, which instead studies biological processes at larger scales and higher levels of organization. In 1953, Francis Crick, James Watson, Rosalind Franklin, and their colleagues at the Medical Research Council Unit, Cavendish Laboratory, were the first to describe the double helix model for the chemical structure of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), which is often considered a landmark event for the nascent field because it provided a physico-chemical basis by which to understand the previously nebulous idea of nucleic acids as the primary substance of biological inheritance. They proposed this structure based on previous research done by Franklin, which was conveyed to them by Maurice Wilkins and Max Perutz. Their work led to the discovery of DNA in other microorganisms, plants, and animals.\nThe field of molecular biology includes techniques which enable scientists to learn about molecular processes. These techniques are used to efficiently target new drugs, diagnose disease, and better understand cell physiology. Some clinical research and medical therapies arising from molecular biology are covered under gene therapy, whereas the use of molecular biology or molecular cell biology in medicine is now referred to as molecular medicine.\nHistory of molecular biology.\nMolecular biology sits at the intersection of biochemistry and genetics; as these scientific disciplines emerged and evolved in the 20th century, it became clear that they both sought to determine the molecular mechanisms which underlie vital cellular functions. Advances in molecular biology have been closely related to the development of new technologies and their optimization.\nThe field of genetics arose from attempts to understand the set of rules underlying reproduction and heredity, and the nature of the hypothetical units of heredity known as genes. Gregor Mendel pioneered this work in 1866, when he first described the laws of inheritance he observed in his studies of mating crosses in pea plants. One such law of genetic inheritance is the law of segregation, which states that diploid individuals with two alleles for a particular gene will pass one of these alleles to their offspring. Because of his critical work, the study of genetic inheritance is commonly referred to as Mendelian genetics.\nA major milestone in molecular biology was the discovery of the structure of DNA. This work began in 1869 by Friedrich Miescher, a Swiss biochemist who first proposed a structure called \"nuclein\", which we now know to be (deoxyribonucleic acid), or DNA. He discovered this unique substance by studying the components of pus-filled bandages, and noting the unique properties of the \"phosphorus-containing substances\". Another notable contributor to the DNA model was Phoebus Levene, who proposed the \"polynucleotide model\" of DNA in 1919 as a result of his biochemical experiments on yeast. In 1950, Erwin Chargaff expanded on the work of Levene and elucidated a few critical properties of nucleic acids: first, the sequence of nucleic acids varies across species. Second, the total concentration of purines (adenine and guanine) is always equal to the total concentration of pyrimidines (cytosine and thymine). This is now known as Chargaff's rule. In 1953, James Watson and Francis Crick published the double helical structure of DNA, based on the X-ray crystallography work done by Rosalind Franklin which was conveyed to them by Maurice Wilkins and Max Perutz. Watson and Crick described the structure of DNA and conjectured about the implications of this unique structure for possible mechanisms of DNA replication. Watson and Crick were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1962, along with Wilkins, for proposing a model of the structure of DNA.\nIn 1961, it was demonstrated that when a gene encodes a protein, three sequential bases of a gene's DNA specify each successive amino acid of the protein. Thus the genetic code is a triplet code, where each triplet (called a codon) specifies a particular amino acid. Furthermore, it was shown that the codons do not overlap with each other in the DNA sequence encoding a protein, and that each sequence is read from a fixed starting point.\nDuring 1962\u20131964, through the use of conditional lethal mutants of a bacterial virus, fundamental advances were made in our understanding of the functions and interactions of the proteins employed in the machinery of DNA replication, DNA repair, DNA recombination, and in the assembly of molecular structures.\nGriffith's experiment.\nIn 1928, Frederick Griffith, encountered a virulence property in pneumococcus bacteria, which was killing lab rats. According to Mendel, prevalent at that time, gene transfer could occur only from parent to daughter cells. Griffith advanced another theory, stating that gene transfer occurring in member of same generation is known as horizontal gene transfer (HGT). This phenomenon is now referred to as genetic transformation.\nGriffith's experiment addressed the pneumococcus bacteria, which had two different strains, one virulent and smooth and one avirulent and rough. The smooth strain had glistering appearance owing to the presence of a type of specific polysaccharide \u2013 a polymer of glucose and glucuronic acid capsule. Due to this polysaccharide layer of bacteria, a host's immune system cannot recognize the bacteria and it kills the host. The rough strain lacks this polysaccharide capsule, resulting in a dull, rough colony appearance and making it avirulent because it is more readily recognized and destroyed by the host immune system.\nPresence or absence of capsule in the strain, is known to be genetically determined. Smooth and rough strains occur in several different type such as S-I, S-II, S-III, etc. and R-I, R-II, R-III, etc. respectively. All this subtypes of S and R bacteria differ with each other in antigen type they produce.\nAvery\u2013MacLeod\u2013McCarty experiment.\nThe Avery\u2013MacLeod\u2013McCarty experiment was an experimental demonstration by Oswald Avery, Colin MacLeod, and Maclyn McCarty that, in 1944, reported that DNA is the substance that causes bacterial transformation, in an era when it had been widely believed that it was proteins that served the function of carrying genetic information (with the very word \"protein\" itself coined to indicate a belief that its function was \"primary\"). It was the culmination of research in the 1930s and early 20th century at the Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research to purify and characterize the \"transforming principle\" responsible for the transformation phenomenon first described in Griffith's experiment of 1928: killed \"Streptococcus pneumoniae\" of the virulent strain type III-S, when injected along with living but non-virulent type II-R pneumococci, resulted in a deadly infection of type III-S pneumococci. In their paper \"Studies on the Chemical Nature of the Substance Inducing Transformation of Pneumococcal Types: Induction of Transformation by a Desoxyribonucleic Acid Fraction Isolated from Pneumococcus Type III\", published in the February 1944 issue of the \"Journal of Experimental Medicine\", Avery and his colleagues suggest that DNA, rather than protein as widely believed at the time, may be the hereditary material of bacteria, and could be analogous to genes and/or viruses in higher organisms.\nHershey\u2013Chase experiment.\nConfirmation that DNA is the genetic material which is cause of infection came from the Hershey\u2013Chase experiment. They used \"E.coli\" and bacteriophage for the experiment. This experiment is also known as blender experiment, as kitchen blender was used as a major piece of apparatus. Alfred Hershey and Martha Chase demonstrated that the DNA injected by a phage particle into a bacterium contains all information required to synthesize progeny phage particles. They used radioactivity to tag the bacteriophage's protein coat with radioactive sulfur and DNA with radioactive phosphorus, into two different test tubes respectively. After mixing bacteriophage and \"E.coli\" into the test tube, the incubation period starts in which phage transforms the genetic material in the \"E.coli\" cells. Then the mixture is blended or agitated, which separates the phage from \"E.coli\" cells. The whole mixture is centrifuged and the pellet which contains \"E.coli\" cells was checked and the supernatant was discarded. The \"E.coli\" cells showed radioactive phosphorus, which indicated that the transformed material was DNA not the protein coat.\nThe transformed DNA gets attached to the DNA of \"E.coli\" and radioactivity is only seen onto the bacteriophage's DNA. This mutated DNA can be passed to the next generation and the theory of Transduction came into existence. Transduction is a process in which the bacterial DNA carry the fragment of bacteriophages and pass it on the next generation. This is also a type of horizontal gene transfer.\nMeselson\u2013Stahl experiment.\nThe Meselson\u2013Stahl experiment is an experiment by Matthew Meselson and Franklin Stahl in 1958 which supported Watson and Crick's hypothesis that DNA replication was semiconservative. In semiconservative replication, when the double-stranded DNA helix is replicated, each of the two new double-stranded DNA helices consisted of one strand from the original helix and one newly synthesized. It has been called \"the most beautiful experiment in biology\". Meselson and Stahl decided the best way to trace the parent DNA would be to tag them by changing one of its atoms. Since nitrogen is present in all of the DNA bases, they generated parent DNA containing a heavier isotope of nitrogen than would be present naturally. This altered mass allowed them to determine how much of the parent DNA was present in the DNA after successive cycles of replication.\nModern molecular biology.\nIn the early 2020s, molecular biology entered a golden age defined by both vertical and horizontal technical development. Vertically, novel technologies are allowing for real-time monitoring of biological processes at the atomic level. Molecular biologists today have access to increasingly affordable sequencing data at increasingly higher depths, facilitating the development of novel genetic manipulation methods in new non-model organisms. Likewise, synthetic molecular biologists will drive the industrial production of small and macro molecules through the introduction of exogenous metabolic pathways in various prokaryotic and eukaryotic cell lines.\nHorizontally, sequencing data is becoming more affordable and used in many different scientific fields. This will drive the development of industries in developing nations and increase accessibility to individual researchers. Likewise, CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing experiments can now be conceived and implemented by individuals for under $10,000 in novel organisms, which will drive the development of industrial and medical applications.\nRelationship to other biological sciences.\nThe following list describes a viewpoint on the interdisciplinary relationships between molecular biology and other related fields.\nWhile researchers practice techniques specific to molecular biology, it is common to combine these with methods from genetics and biochemistry. Much of molecular biology is quantitative, and recently a significant amount of work has been done using computer science techniques such as bioinformatics and computational biology. Molecular genetics, the study of gene structure and function, has been among the most prominent sub-fields of molecular biology since the early 2000s. Other branches of biology are informed by molecular biology, by either directly studying the interactions of molecules in their own right such as in cell biology and developmental biology, or indirectly, where molecular techniques are used to infer historical attributes of populations or species, as in fields in evolutionary biology such as population genetics and phylogenetics. There is also a long tradition of studying biomolecules \"from the ground up\", or molecularly, in biophysics.\nTechniques of molecular biology.\nMolecular cloning.\nMolecular cloning is used to isolate and then transfer a DNA sequence of interest into a plasmid vector. This recombinant DNA technology was first developed in the 1960s. In this technique, a DNA sequence coding for a protein of interest is cloned using polymerase chain reaction (PCR), and/or restriction enzymes, into a plasmid (expression vector). The plasmid vector usually has at least three distinctive features: an origin of replication, a multiple cloning site (MCS), and a selective marker (usually antibiotic resistance). Additionally, upstream of the MCS are the promoter regions and the transcription start site, which regulate the expression of cloned gene.\nThis plasmid can be inserted into either bacterial or animal cells. Introducing DNA into bacterial cells can be done by transformation via uptake of naked DNA, conjugation via cell-cell contact or by transduction via viral vector. Introducing DNA into eukaryotic cells, such as animal cells, by physical or chemical means is called transfection. Several different transfection techniques are available, such as calcium phosphate transfection, electroporation, microinjection and liposome transfection. The plasmid may be integrated into the genome, resulting in a stable transfection, or may remain independent of the genome and expressed temporarily, called a transient transfection.\nDNA coding for a protein of interest is now inside a cell, and the protein can now be expressed. A variety of systems, such as inducible promoters and specific cell-signaling factors, are available to help express the protein of interest at high levels. Large quantities of a protein can then be extracted from the bacterial or eukaryotic cell. The protein can be tested for enzymatic activity under a variety of situations, the protein may be crystallized so its tertiary structure can be studied, or, in the pharmaceutical industry, the activity of new drugs against the protein can be studied.\nPolymerase chain reaction.\nPolymerase chain reaction (PCR) is an extremely versatile technique for copying DNA. In brief, PCR allows a specific DNA sequence to be copied or modified in predetermined ways. The reaction is extremely powerful and under perfect conditions could amplify one DNA molecule to become 1.07 billion molecules in less than two hours. PCR has many applications, including the study of gene expression, the detection of pathogenic microorganisms, the detection of genetic mutations, and the introduction of mutations to DNA. The PCR technique can be used to introduce restriction enzyme sites to ends of DNA molecules, or to mutate particular bases of DNA, the latter is a method referred to as site-directed mutagenesis. PCR can also be used to determine whether a particular DNA fragment is found in a cDNA library. PCR has many variations, like reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR) for amplification of RNA, and, more recently, quantitative PCR which allow for quantitative measurement of DNA or RNA molecules.\nGel electrophoresis.\nGel electrophoresis is a technique which separates molecules by their size using an agarose or polyacrylamide gel. This technique is one of the principal tools of molecular biology. The basic principle is that DNA fragments can be separated by applying an electric current across the gel - because the DNA backbone contains negatively charged phosphate groups, the DNA will migrate through the agarose gel towards the positive end of the current. Proteins can also be separated on the basis of size using an SDS-PAGE gel, or on the basis of size and their electric charge by using what is known as a 2D gel electrophoresis.\nThe Bradford protein assay.\nThe Bradford assay is a molecular biology technique which enables the fast, accurate quantitation of protein molecules utilizing the unique properties of a dye called Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250. Coomassie Blue undergoes a visible color shift from reddish-brown to bright blue upon binding to protein. In its unstable, cationic state, Coomassie Blue has a background wavelength of 465\u00a0nm and gives off a reddish-brown color. When Coomassie Blue binds to protein in an acidic solution, the background wavelength shifts to 595\u00a0nm and the dye gives off a bright blue color. Proteins in the assay bind Coomassie blue in about 2 minutes, and the protein-dye complex is stable for about an hour, although it is recommended that absorbance readings are taken within 5 to 20 minutes of reaction initiation. The concentration of protein in the Bradford assay can then be measured using a visible light spectrophotometer, and therefore does not require extensive equipment.\nThis method was developed in 1975 by Marion M. Bradford, and has enabled significantly faster, more accurate protein quantitation compared to previous methods: the Lowry procedure and the biuret assay. Unlike the previous methods, the Bradford assay is not susceptible to interference by several non-protein molecules, including ethanol, sodium chloride, and magnesium chloride. However, it is susceptible to influence by strong alkaline buffering agents, such as sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS).\nMacromolecule blotting and probing.\nThe terms \"northern\", \"western\" and \"eastern\" blotting are derived from what initially was a molecular biology joke that played on the term \"Southern blotting\", after the technique described by Edwin Southern for the hybridisation of blotted DNA. Patricia Thomas, developer of the RNA blot which then became known as the \"northern blot\", actually did not use the term.\nSouthern blotting.\nNamed after its inventor, biologist Edwin Southern, the Southern blot is a method for probing for the presence of a specific DNA sequence within a DNA sample. DNA samples before or after restriction enzyme (restriction endonuclease) digestion are separated by gel electrophoresis and then transferred to a membrane by blotting via capillary action. The membrane is then exposed to a labeled DNA probe that has a complement base sequence to the sequence on the DNA of interest. Southern blotting is less commonly used in laboratory science due to the capacity of other techniques, such as PCR, to detect specific DNA sequences from DNA samples. These blots are still used for some applications, however, such as measuring transgene copy number in transgenic mice or in the engineering of gene knockout embryonic stem cell lines.\nNorthern blotting.\nThe northern blot is used to study the presence of specific RNA molecules as relative comparison among a set of different samples of RNA. It is essentially a combination of denaturing RNA gel electrophoresis, and a blot. In this process RNA is separated based on size and is then transferred to a membrane that is then probed with a labeled complement of a sequence of interest. The results may be visualized through a variety of ways depending on the label used; however, most result in the revelation of bands representing the sizes of the RNA detected in sample. The intensity of these bands is related to the amount of the target RNA in the samples analyzed. The procedure is commonly used to study when and how much gene expression is occurring by measuring how much of that RNA is present in different samples, assuming that no post-transcriptional regulation occurs and that the levels of mRNA reflect proportional levels of the corresponding protein being produced. It is one of the most basic tools for determining at what time, and under what conditions, certain genes are expressed in living tissues.\nWestern blotting.\nA western blot is a technique by which specific proteins can be detected from a mixture of proteins. Western blots can be used to determine the size of isolated proteins, as well as to quantify their expression. In western blotting, proteins are first separated by size, in a thin gel sandwiched between two glass plates in a technique known as SDS-PAGE. The proteins in the gel are then transferred to a polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF), nitrocellulose, nylon, or other support membrane. This membrane can then be probed with solutions of antibodies. Antibodies that specifically bind to the protein of interest can then be visualized by a variety of techniques, including colored products, chemiluminescence, or autoradiography. Often, the antibodies are labeled with enzymes. When a chemiluminescent substrate is exposed to the enzyme it allows detection. Using western blotting techniques allows not only detection but also quantitative analysis. Analogous methods to western blotting can be used to directly stain specific proteins in live cells or tissue sections.\nEastern blotting.\nThe eastern blotting technique is used to detect post-translational modification of proteins. Proteins blotted on to the PVDF or nitrocellulose membrane are probed for modifications using specific substrates.\nMicroarrays.\nA DNA microarray is a collection of spots attached to a solid support such as a microscope slide where each spot contains one or more single-stranded DNA oligonucleotide fragments. Arrays make it possible to put down large quantities of very small (100 micrometre diameter) spots on a single slide. Each spot has a DNA fragment molecule that is complementary to a single DNA sequence. A variation of this technique allows the gene expression of an organism at a particular stage in development to be qualified (expression profiling). In this technique the RNA in a tissue is isolated and converted to labeled complementary DNA (cDNA). This cDNA is then hybridized to the fragments on the array and visualization of the hybridization can be done. Since multiple arrays can be made with exactly the same position of fragments, they are particularly useful for comparing the gene expression of two different tissues, such as a healthy and cancerous tissue. Also, one can measure what genes are expressed and how that expression changes with time or with other factors.\nThere are many different ways to fabricate microarrays; the most common are silicon chips, microscope slides with spots of ~100 micrometre diameter, custom arrays, and arrays with larger spots on porous membranes (macroarrays). There can be anywhere from 100 spots to more than 10,000 on a given array. Arrays can also be made with molecules other than DNA.\nAllele-specific oligonucleotide.\nAllele-specific oligonucleotide (ASO) is a technique that allows detection of single base mutations without the need for PCR or gel electrophoresis. Short (20\u201325 nucleotides in length), labeled probes are exposed to the non-fragmented target DNA, hybridization occurs with high specificity due to the short length of the probes and even a single base change will hinder hybridization. The target DNA is then washed and the unhybridized probes are removed. The target DNA is then analyzed for the presence of the probe via radioactivity or fluorescence. In this experiment, as in most molecular biology techniques, a control must be used to ensure successful experimentation.\nIn molecular biology, procedures and technologies are continually being developed and older technologies abandoned. For example, before the advent of DNA gel electrophoresis (agarose or polyacrylamide), the size of DNA molecules was typically determined by rate sedimentation in sucrose gradients, a slow and labor-intensive technique requiring expensive instrumentation; prior to sucrose gradients, viscometry was used. Aside from their historical interest, it is often worth knowing about older technology, as it is occasionally useful to solve another new problem for which the newer technique is inappropriate.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19201", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19201", "title": "Mauritius", "text": "Island country in the Indian Ocean\nMauritius, officially the Republic of Mauritius, is an island country in the Indian Ocean, about off the southeastern coast of East Africa, east of Madagascar. It includes the main island (also called Mauritius), as well as Rodrigues, Agal\u00e9ga, St. Brandon (Cargados Carajos shoals) and the Chagos Archipelagos. The islands of Mauritius and Rodrigues, along with nearby R\u00e9union (a French overseas department), are part of the Mascarene Islands. The main island of Mauritius, where the population is concentrated, hosts the capital and largest city, Port Louis. The country spans and has an exclusive economic zone covering approximately .\nThe 1502 Portuguese Cantino planisphere has led some historians to speculate that Arab sailors were the first to discover the uninhabited island around 975, naming it \"Dina Arobi\". Called \"Ilha do Cirne\" or \"Ilha do Cerne\" on early Portuguese maps, the island was visited by Portuguese sailors in 1507. A Dutch fleet, under the command of Admiral Van Warwyck, landed at what is now the Grand Port District and took possession of the island in 1598, renaming it after Maurice, Prince of Orange. Short-lived Dutch attempts at permanent settlement took place over a century aimed at exploiting the local ebony forests, establishing sugar and arrack production using cane plant cuttings from Java together with over three hundred Malagasy slaves, all in vain. When French colonisation began in 1715, the island was renamed \"Isle de France\". In 1810, the United Kingdom seized the island and under the Treaty of Paris, France ceded Mauritius and its dependencies to the United Kingdom. The British colony of Mauritius now included Rodrigues, Agal\u00e9ga, St. Brandon, the Chagos Archipelago, and, until 1906, the Seychelles. Mauritius and France dispute sovereignty over the island of Tromelin, the treaty failing to mention it specifically. Mauritius became the British Empire's main sugar-producing colony and remained a primarily sugar-dominated plantation-based colony until independence, in 1968. In 1992, the country abolished the monarchy, replacing it with the president.\nIn 1965, three years before the independence of Mauritius, the United Kingdom split the Chagos Archipelago away from Mauritius, and the islands of Aldabra, Farquhar, and Desroches from the Seychelles, to form the British Indian Ocean Territory (BIOT). The local population was forcibly expelled and the largest island, Diego Garcia, was leased to the United States restricting access to the archipelago. Ruling on the sovereignty dispute, the International Court of Justice has ordered the return of the Chagos Islands to Mauritius leading to a 2025 bilateral agreement on the recognition of its sovereignty on the islands, signed in May 2025.\nGiven its geographic location and colonial past, the people of Mauritius are diverse in ethnicity, culture, language and faith. It is the only country in Africa where Hinduism is the most practised religion. Indo-Mauritians make up the bulk of the population with significant Creole, Sino-Mauritian and Franco-Mauritian minorities. The island's government is closely modelled on the Westminster parliamentary system with Mauritius highly ranked for economic and political freedom. The Economist Democracy Index ranks Mauritius as the only country in Africa with full democracy while the V-Dem Democracy Indices classified it as an electoral autocracy. Mauritius ranks 73rd (very high) in the Human Development Index and the World Bank classifies it as a high-income economy. It is amongst the most competitive and most developed economies in the African region. The country is a welfare state. The government provides free universal health care, free education up through the tertiary level, and free public transportation for students, senior citizens, and the disabled. Mauritius is consistently ranked as the most peaceful country in Africa.\nAlong with the other Mascarene Islands, Mauritius is known for its biodiverse flora and fauna with many unique species endemic to the country. The main island was the only known home of the dodo, which, along with several other avian species, became extinct soon after human settlement. Other endemic animals, such as the echo parakeet, the Mauritius kestrel and the pink pigeon, have survived and are subject to intensive and successful ongoing conservation efforts.\nEtymology.\nThe first historical evidence of the existence of the island now known as Mauritius is on a 1502 map called the Cantino planisphere which was smuggled out of Portugal, for the Duke of Ferrara, by the Italian 'spy' Alberto Cantino. On this purloined copy of a Portuguese map, Mauritius bore the name \"Dina Arobi\" or \"Dina Arobin\" (likely \"Daniyah 'Ar\u016bbi\" or corruption of \"D\u012bbah 'Ar\u016bbi\"). In 1507, Portuguese sailors visited the uninhabited island after being blown off course from their route to India via the Mozambique channel. The island appears with the Portuguese names \"Cirne\" (a typographical error where the 's' of the Portuguese 'Cisne' (Swan) became an 'r') or \"Do-Cerne\" (typo of 'do Cisne' meaning 'of' or 'belonging to the Swan') on early Portuguese maps, almost certainly from the name of a ship called \"Cisne\" which was captained by Diogo Fernandes Pereira in the 1507 expedition which discovered Mauritius and Rodrigues which he called \"ilha de Diogo Fernandes\" but poorly transcribed by non-Portuguese speakers as \"Domigo Friz\" or \"Domingo Frias\". Diogo Fernandes Pereira may have been the first European to sail east of Madagascar island ('outer route' to the East Indies) rather than through the perceived safer route through the Mozambique channel, following the East African shore line.\nIn 1598, a Dutch squadron under Admiral Wybrand van Warwyck landed at Grand Port and named the island \"Mauritius\", in honour of Prince Maurice van Nassau, stadtholder of the Dutch Republic. Later the island became a French colony and was renamed Isle de France. On 3 December 1810, the French surrendered the island to the United Kingdom during the Napoleonic Wars. Under British rule, the island's name reverted to \"Mauritius\" . Mauritius is also commonly known as \"Maurice\" () and \"\u00cele Maurice\" in French, as well as \"Moris\" () in Mauritian Creole.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThe island of Mauritius was uninhabited before its first recorded visit by Arab sailors in the end of the 10th century. Its name Dina Arobi has been associated with Arab sailors who first discovered the island.\nThe Treaty of Tordesillas, designed to prevent conflict between Portugal and Spain, gave the Kingdom of Portugal the right to colonise this part of the world. In 1507, Portuguese sailors came to the uninhabited island and established a visiting base. Diogo Fernandes Pereira, a Portuguese navigator, was the first European known to land in Mauritius. He named the island \"Ilha do Cisne\" (\"Island of the Swan\"). The Portuguese did not stay long as they were not interested in these islands. The Mascarene Islands were named after Pedro Mascarenhas, Viceroy of Portuguese India, after his visit to the islands in 1512. Rodrigues Island was named after Portuguese explorer Diogo Rodrigues, who first came upon the island in 1528.\nIn 1598, a Dutch squadron under Admiral Wybrand Van Warwyck landed at Grand Port and named the island \"Mauritius\" after Prince Maurice of Nassau (Dutch: \"Maurits van Nassau\") of the Dutch Republic. The Dutch inhabited the island in 1638, from which they exploited ebony trees and introduced sugar cane, domestic animals and deer. It was from here that Dutch navigator Abel Tasman set out to seek the Great Southern Land, mapping parts of Tasmania, New Zealand and New Guinea. The first Dutch settlement lasted 20 years. In 1639, the Dutch East India Company brought enslaved Malagasy to cut down ebony trees and to work in the new tobacco and sugar cane plantations. Several attempts to establish a colony permanently were subsequently made, but the settlements never developed enough to produce dividends, causing the Dutch to abandon Mauritius in 1710. A \n1755 article in the English \"Leeds Intelligencer\" claims that the island was abandoned due to the large number of long tailed macaque monkeys \"which destroyed everything in it,\" and that it was also known at the time as the Island of Monkeys. Portuguese sailors had brought these monkeys to the island from their native habitat in Southeast Asia, prior to Dutch rule.\nFrench Mauritius (1715\u20131810).\nFrance, which already controlled neighbouring \u00cele Bourbon (now R\u00e9union), took control of Mauritius in 1715 and renamed it Isle de France. In 1723, the \"Code Noir\" was established to regulate slavery; it categorised one group of human beings as \"goods\", allowing the owner of these \"goods\" to be able to obtain insurance money and compensation in case of loss of his \"goods\". The 1735 arrival of French governor Bertrand-Fran\u00e7ois Mah\u00e9 de La Bourdonnais coincided with the development of a prosperous economy based on sugar production. Mah\u00e9 de La Bourdonnais established Port Louis as a naval base and a shipbuilding centre. Under his governorship, numerous buildings were erected, a number of which are still standing. These include part of Government House, the Ch\u00e2teau de Mon Plaisir, and the Line Barracks, the headquarters of the police force. The island was under the administration of the French East India Company, which maintained its presence until 1767. \nDuring the French rule, slaves were brought from parts of Africa such as Mozambique and Zanzibar. As a result, the island's population rose dramatically from 15,000 to 49,000 within thirty years. \nSlave traders from Madagascar\u2014Sakalava or Arabs\u2014bought slaves from slavers in the Arab Swahili coast or Portuguese Mozambique and stopped at Seychelles for supplies before shipping the slaves to the slave markets of Mauritius, R\u00e9union and India. \nOf the 80,000 slaves imported to R\u00e9union and Mauritius between 1769 and 1793, 45% was provided by slave traders of the Sakalava people in North West Madagascar, who raided East Africa and the Comoros for slaves, and the rest was provided by Arab slave traders who bought slaves from Portuguese Mozambique and transported them to R\u00e9union via Madagascar.\nDuring the late eighteenth century, African slaves accounted for around 80 percent of the island's population, and by the early nineteenth century there were 60,000 slaves on the island. In early 1729, Indians from Pondicherry, India, arrived in Mauritius aboard the vessel \"La Sir\u00e8ne\". Work contracts for these craftsmen were signed in 1734 at the time when they acquired their freedom.\nFrom 1767 to 1810, except for a brief period during the French Revolution when the inhabitants set up a government virtually independent of France, the island was controlled by officials appointed by the French government. Jacques-Henri Bernardin de Saint-Pierre lived on the island from 1768 to 1771, then went back to France, where he wrote \"Paul et Virginie\", a love story that made the Isle de France famous wherever the French language was spoken. In 1796 the settlers broke away from French control when the government in Paris attempted to abolish slavery. Two famous French governors were the Vicomte de Souillac (who constructed the Chauss\u00e9e in Port Louis and encouraged farmers to settle in the district of Savanne) and Antoine Bruni d'Entrecasteaux (who saw to it that the French in the Indian Ocean should have their headquarters in Mauritius instead of Pondicherry in India). Charles Mathieu Isidore Decaen was a successful general in the French Revolutionary Wars and, in some ways, a rival of Napol\u00e9on I. He ruled as Governor of Isle de France and R\u00e9union from 1803 to 1810. British naval cartographer and explorer Matthew Flinders was arrested and detained by General Decaen on the island from 1803 to 1810, in contravention of an order from Napol\u00e9on. During the Napoleonic Wars, Mauritius became a base from which French corsairs organised successful raids on British commercial ships. The raids continued until 1810, when a Royal Navy expedition led by Commodore Josias Rowley, R.N., an Anglo-Irish aristocrat, was sent to capture the island. Despite winning the Battle of Grand Port against the British, the French could not prevent the British from landing at Cap Malheureux three months later. They formally surrendered the island on the fifth day of the invasion, 3 December 1810, on terms allowing settlers to keep their land and property and to use the French language and law of France in criminal and civil matters. Under British rule, the island's name reverted to Mauritius.\nBritish Mauritius (1810\u20131968).\nThe British administration, which began with Sir Robert Farquhar as its first governor, oversaw rapid social and economic changes. However, it was tainted by the Ratsitatane episode. Ratsitatane, nephew of King Radama of Madagascar, was brought to Mauritius as a political prisoner. He managed to escape from prison and plotted a rebellion that would free the island's slaves. He was betrayed by his associate Laizaf and was caught by a group of militiamen and summarily executed.\nIn 1832, d'\u00c9pinay launched the first Mauritian newspaper (\"Le Cern\u00e9en\"), which was not controlled by the government. In the same year, there was a move by the \"procureur-general\" to abolish slavery without compensation to the slave owners. This gave rise to discontent, and, to check an eventual rebellion, the government ordered all the inhabitants to surrender their arms. Furthermore, a stone fortress, Fort Adelaide, was built on a hill (now known as the Citadel hill) in the centre of Port Louis to quell any uprising. Slavery was gradually abolished over several years after 1833, and the planters ultimately received two million pounds sterling in compensation for the loss of their slaves, who had been imported from Africa and Madagascar during the French occupation. The abolition of slavery had important effects on Mauritius's society, economy and population. The planters brought a large number of indentured labourers from India to work in the sugar cane fields. Between 1834 and 1921, around half a million indentured labourers were present on the island. They worked on sugar estates, factories, in transport and on construction sites. Additionally, the British brought 8,740 Indian soldiers to the island. Aapravasi Ghat, in the bay at Port Louis and now a UNESCO site, was the first British colony to serve as a major reception centre for indentured servants. The labourers brought from India were not always fairly treated, and a Frenchman of German origin, Adolphe de Plevitz, made himself the unofficial protector of these immigrants. In 1871 he helped them to write a petition that was sent to Governor Gordon. A commission was appointed and recommended several measures that would affect the lives of Indian labourers during the next fifty years.\nIn 1885, a new constitution was introduced. It was referred to as \"Cens D\u00e9mocratique\" and it incorporated some of the principles advocated by one of the Creole leaders, On\u00e9sipho Beaugeard. It created elected positions in the Legislative Council \u2013 although the franchise was restricted mainly to the white French and fair-skinned Indian elite who owned real estate. In 1886, Governor John Pope Hennessy nominated Gnanadicarayen Arlanda as the first ever Indo-Mauritian member of the ruling council \u2013 despite the sugar oligarchy's preference for rival Indo-Mauritian Emile Sandapa. Arlanda served until 1891. In 1903, motorcars were introduced in Mauritius, and in 1910, the first taxis came into service. The electrification of Port Louis took place in 1909, and in the same decade the Mauritius Hydro Electric Company of the Atchia Brothers was authorised to provide power to the towns of upper Plaines Wilhems.\nThe 1910s were a period of political agitation. The rising middle class (made up of doctors, lawyers, and teachers) began to challenge the political power of the sugar cane landowners. Eug\u00e8ne Laurent, mayor of Port Louis, was the leader of this new group; his party, Action Lib\u00e9rale, demanded that more people should be allowed to vote in the elections. Action Lib\u00e9rale was opposed by the Parti de l'Ordre, led by Henri Lecl\u00e9zio, the most influential of the sugar magnates. In 1911, there were riots in Port Louis due to a false rumour that Laurent had been murdered by the oligarchs in Curepipe. This became known as the 1911 Curepipe riots. Shops and offices were damaged in the capital, and one person was killed. In the same year, 1911, the first public cinema shows took place in Curepipe, and, in the same town, a stone building was erected to house the Royal College. In 1912, a wider telephone network came into service, used by the government, business firms, and a few private households.\nWorld War I broke out in August 1914. Many Mauritians volunteered to fight in Europe against the Germans and in Mesopotamia against the Turks. But the war affected Mauritius much less than the wars of the eighteenth century. In fact, the 1914\u20131918 war was a period of great prosperity, due to a boom in sugar prices. In 1919, the Mauritius Sugar Syndicate came into being, which included 70% of all sugar producers. The 1920s saw the rise of a \"retrocessionism\" movement, which favoured the retrocession of Mauritius to France. The movement rapidly collapsed because none of the candidates who wanted Mauritius to be given back to France were elected in the 1921 elections. In the post-war recession, there was a sharp drop in sugar prices. Many sugar estates closed down, marking the end of an era for the sugar magnates who had not only controlled the economy but also the political life of the country.\nFrom the end of nominated Arlanda's term in 1891, until 1926, there had been no Indo-Mauritian representation in the Legislative Council. However, at the 1926 elections, Dunputh Lallah and Rajcoomar Gujadhur became the first Indo-Mauritians to be elected to the Legislative Council. At Grand Port, Lallah won over rivals Fernand Louis Morel and Gaston Gebert; at Flacq, Gujadhur defeated Pierre Montocchio. 1936 saw the birth of the Labour Party, launched by Maurice Cur\u00e9. Emmanuel Anquetil rallied the urban workers while Pandit Sahadeo concentrated on the rural working class. The Uba riots of 1937 resulted in reforms by the local British government that improved labour conditions and led to the un-banning of labour unions. Labour Day was celebrated for the first time in 1938. More than 30,000 workers sacrificed a day's wage and came from all over the island to attend a giant meeting at the Champ de Mars. Following the dockers' strikes, trade unionist Emmanuel Anquetil was deported to Rodrigues, Maurice Cur\u00e9 and Pandit Sahadeo were placed under house arrest, whilst numerous strikers were jailed. Governor Sir Bede Clifford assisted Mr Jules Leclezio of the Mauritius Sugar Syndicate to counter the effects of the strike by using alternative workers known as 'black legs'.\nAt the outbreak of World War II in 1939, many Mauritians volunteered to serve under the British flag in Africa and the Near East, fighting against the German and Italian armies. Mauritius was never really threatened, but in 1943, several British ships were sunk outside Port Louis by German submarines. In the initial stages of the war, locally recruited military formations were raised in order to defend the country in case the British imperial troops had to leave. On 24 March 1943, the Mauritius Regiment, was created as an imperial unit and a new subsidiary of the East Africa Command (EAC). In late 1943, the 1st Battalion of the Mauritius Regiment (1MR) was sent to Madagascar for training, and in their place a battalion of the King's African Rifles (KAR) was stationed in Mauritius. The dispatch of the 1MR proved to be politically unpopular on the basis of some troops resenting conscription and the battalion overseas comprising solely non-white troops, exacerbating racial tensions in the country. The 1MR troops were further aggrieved at the segregation they were subject to, unequal pay, physically demanding training, and were fearful of the Japanese soldiers, all these factors culminated in the 1MR mutinying.\nDuring World War II, conditions were hard in the country; the prices of commodities doubled but workers' salaries increased only by 10 to 20 percent. There was civil unrest, and the colonial government censored all trade union activities. However, the labourers of Belle Vue Harel Sugar Estate went on strike on 27 September 1943. Police officers eventually fired directly at the crowd, resulting in the deaths of four labourers. This became known as the 1943 Belle Vue Harel Massacre. Social worker and leader of the Jan Andolan movement Basdeo Bissoondoyal organised the funeral ceremonies of the four dead labourers. Three months later, on 12 December 1943, Bissoondoyal organised a mass gathering at \"Marie Reine de la Paix\" in Port Louis, and the significant crowd of workers from all over the island confirmed the popularity of the Jan Andolan movement.\nAfter the proclamation of the 1947 Constitution of Mauritius, the general elections were held on 9 August 1948 \u2013 and, for the first time, the colonial government expanded the franchise to all adults who could write their name in one of the island's 19 languages, abolishing the previous gender and property qualifications. Guy Rozemont's Labour Party won the majority of the votes with 11 of the 19 elected seats won by Hindus. However, the Governor-General Donald Mackenzie-Kennedy appointed 12 Conservatives to the Legislative Council on 23 August 1948 to perpetuate the predominance of white Franco-Mauritians. In 1948, Emilienne Rochecouste became the first woman to be elected to the Legislative Council. Guy Rozemont's party bettered its position in 1953, and, on the strength of the election results, demanded universal suffrage. Constitutional conferences were held in London in 1955 and 1957, and the ministerial system was introduced. Voting took place for the first time on the basis of universal adult suffrage on 9 March 1959. The general election was again won by the Labour Party, led this time by Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam.\nA Constitutional Review Conference was held in London in 1961, and a programme of further constitutional advance was established. The 1963 election was won by the Labour Party and its allies. The Colonial Office noted that politics of a communal nature was gaining ground in Mauritius and that the choice of candidates (by parties) and the voting behaviour (of electors) were governed by ethnic and caste considerations. Around that time, two eminent British academics, Richard Titmuss and James Meade, published a report of the island's social problems caused by overpopulation and the monoculture of sugar cane. This led to an intense campaign to halt the population explosion, and the decade registered a sharp decline in population growth.\nIn early 1965, a political assassination took place in the suburb of Belle-Rose, in the town of Quatre Bornes, where Labour activist Rampersad Surath was beaten to death by thugs of rival party Parti Mauricien. On 10 May 1965, racial riots broke out in the village of \"Trois Boutiques\" near Souillac and progressed to the historic village of Mah\u00e9bourg. A nationwide state of emergency was declared on the whole British colony. The riot was initiated by the murder of Police Constable Beesoo in his vehicle by a Creole gang. This was followed by the murder of a civilian named Mr. Robert Brousse in Trois Boutiques. The Creole gang then proceeded to the coastal historic village of Mah\u00e9bourg to assault the Indo-Mauritian spectators who were watching a Hindustani movie at Cin\u00e9ma Od\u00e9on. Mah\u00e9bourg police recorded nearly 100 complaints of assaults on Indo-Mauritians.\nIndependence and constitutional monarchy (1968\u20131992).\nAt the Lancaster Conference of 1965, it became clear that Britain wanted to relieve itself of the colony of Mauritius. In 1959, Harold Macmillan had made his famous \"Wind of Change Speech\" in which he acknowledged that the best option for Britain was to give complete independence to its colonies. Thus, since the late fifties, the way was paved for independence.\nLater in 1965, after the Lancaster Conference, the Chagos Archipelago was excised from the territory of Mauritius to form the British Indian Ocean Territory (BIOT). A general election took place on 7 August 1967, and the Independence Party obtained the majority of seats. In January 1968, six weeks before the declaration of independence the 1968 Mauritian riots occurred in Port Louis, leading to the deaths of 25 people.\nMauritius adopted a new constitution, and independence was proclaimed on 12 March 1968. Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam became the first prime minister of an independent Mauritius \u2013 with Queen Elizabeth II remaining head of state as Queen of Mauritius.\nIn 1969, the opposition party, Mauritian Militant Movement (MMM), was founded, led by Paul B\u00e9renger. Later, in 1971, the MMM \u2013 backed by unions \u2013 called a series of strikes in the port, which caused a state of emergency in the country.\nThe coalition government of the Labour Party and the PMSD (Parti Mauricien Social D\u00e9mocrate) reacted by curtailing civil liberties and curbing freedom of the press. Two unsuccessful apparent assassination attempts were made against Paul B\u00e9renger in 1971, killing his supporter Fareed Muttur and dock worker and activist Azor Ad\u00e9la\u00efde. General elections were postponed and public meetings were prohibited. Members of the MMM, including Paul B\u00e9renger, were imprisoned on 23 December 1971. The MMM leader was released a year later.\nIn 1973, Mauritius became the first country in Africa to be free from diagnoses of malaria.\nIn May 1975, a protest of high school and university students swept across the country. The students were unsatisfied with an education system that did not meet their aspirations, and that gave limited prospects for future employment. On 20 May, thousands of students tried to enter Port-Louis over the Grand River North West bridge, and clashed with police. An act of Parliament was passed on 16 December 1975 to extend the right to vote to 18-year-olds. This was seen as an attempt to appease the frustration of the younger generation.\nThe next general elections took place on 20 December 1976. The Labour-CAM coalition won only 28 seats out of 62. The MMM secured 34 seats in Parliament but outgoing Prime Minister Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam managed to remain in office, with a two-seat majority, after striking an alliance with the PMSD of Gaetan Duval.\nIn 1981, United States newspapers reported that the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) was planning a covert operation to support the government of Mauritius as part of CIA strategy in the larger Cold War. According to the Washington Post, citing U.S. government sources, the planned operation was \"mainly a quiet CIA effort to slip money\" to the Mauritian government. This claim was repeated in a 1987 book by journalist Bob Woodward, who further wrote that the U.S. government feared that Mauritius could become a Soviet naval base if a \"pro-Western\" government did not remain in power.\nIn 1982 an MMM-PSM government (led by PM Anerood Jugnauth, Deputy PM Harish Boodhoo and Finance Minister Paul B\u00e9renger) was elected. However, ideological and personality differences emerged within the MMM and PSM leadership. The power struggle between B\u00e9renger and Jugnauth peaked in March 1983. Jugnauth travelled to New Delhi to attend the 7th Summit of the Non-Aligned Movement summit; on his return, B\u00e9renger proposed constitutional changes that would strip power from the Prime Minister. At Jugnauth's request, PM Indira Gandhi of India planned an armed intervention involving the Indian Navy and Indian Army to prevent a coup under the code name Operation Lal Dora.\nThe MMM-PSM government split up nine months after the June 1982 election. According to an Information Ministry official the nine months was a \"socialist experiment\". Harish Boodhoo dissolved his party PSM to enable all PSM parliamentarians to join Jugnauth's new party MSM, thus remaining in power whilst distancing themselves from MMM. The MSM-Labour-PMSD coalition was victorious at the August 1983 elections, resulting in Anerood Jugnauth as PM and Ga\u00ebtan Duval as Deputy PM.\nThat period saw growth in the EPZ (Export Processing Zone) sector. Industrialisation began to spread to villages as well, and attracted young workers from all ethnic communities. As a result, the sugar industry began to lose its hold on the economy. Large retail chains began opening stores in 1985 and offered credit facilities to low-income earners, thus allowing them to afford basic household appliances. There was also a boom in the tourism industry, and new hotels sprang up throughout the island. In 1989 the stock exchange opened its doors, and in 1992, the freeport began operation. In 1990, the Prime Minister lost the vote on changing the Constitution to make the country a republic with B\u00e9renger as president.\nRepublic (since 1992).\nOn 12 March 1992, Mauritius was proclaimed a republic within the Commonwealth of Nations and the monarch removed as head of state. The last Governor-General of Mauritius, Sir Veerasamy Ringadoo, became the first President. This was under a transitional arrangement, in which he was replaced by Cassam Uteem later that year. Political power remained with the prime minister.\nDespite an improvement in the economy, which coincided with a fall in the price of petrol and a favourable dollar exchange rate, the government did not enjoy full popularity. As early as 1984, there was discontent. Through the \"Newspapers and Periodicals Amendment Act\", the government tried to make every newspaper provide a bank guarantee of half a million rupees. Forty-three journalists protested by participating in a public demonstration in Port Louis, in front of Parliament. They were arrested and freed on bail. This caused a public outcry and the government had to review its policy.\nThere was also dissatisfaction in the education sector. There were not enough high-quality secondary colleges to answer the growing demand of primary school leavers who had got through their CPE (Certificate of Primary Education). In 1991, a master plan for education failed to get national support and contributed to the government's downfall.\nIn December 1995, Navin Ramgoolam was elected as PM of the Labour\u2013MMM alliance. In October 1996, the triple murder of political activists at Gorah-Issac Street in Port Louis led to several arrests and a long investigation.\nThe year 1999 was marked by civil unrest and riots in February and then in May. Following the Kaya riots, President Cassam Uteem and Cardinal Jean Marg\u00e9ot toured the country and calm was restored after four days of turmoil. A commission of enquiry was set up to investigate the root causes of the social disturbance. The resulting report delved into the cause of poverty and qualified many tenacious beliefs as perceptions. In January 2000, political activist Rajen Sabapathee was shot dead after he escaped from La Bastille jail.\nSir Anerood Jugnauth of the MSM returned to power in September 2000 after securing an alliance with the MMM. In 2002, the island of Rodrigues became an autonomous entity within the republic and was thus able to elect its own representatives to administer the island. In 2003, the prime ministership was transferred to Paul B\u00e9renger of the MMM, and Sir Anerood Jugnauth became president. B\u00e9renger was the first Franco-Mauritian Prime Minister in the country's post-Independence history.\nIn the 2005 elections, Navin Ramgoolam became PM under the new coalition of Labour\u2013PMXD\u2013VF\u2013MR\u2013MMSM. In the 2010 elections the Labour\u2013MSM\u2013PMSD alliance secured power and Navin Ramgoolam remained PM until 2014.\nThe MSM\u2013PMSD\u2013ML coalition was victorious at the 2014 elections under Anerood Jugnauth's leadership. Despite disagreements within the ruling alliance that led to the departure of PMSD, the MSM\u2013ML stayed in power for their full 5-year term.\nOn 21 January 2017, Sir Anerood Jugnauth announced his resignation and that his son and Finance Minister Pravind Jugnauth would assume the office of prime minister. The transition took place as planned on 23 January 2017.\nIn 2018, Mauritian president Ameenah Gurib-Fakim resigned over a financial scandal. The incumbent president is Prithvirajsing Roopun who has served since December 2019.\nIn the November 2019 Mauritius general elections, the ruling Militant Socialist Movement (MSM) won more than half of the seats in parliament, securing incumbent Prime Minister Pravind Kumar Jugnauth a new five-year term.\nOn 25 July 2020, Japanese-owned bulk carrier MV Wakashio ran aground on a coral reef off the coast of Mauritius, leaking up to 1,000 tonnes of heavy oil into a pristine lagoon. Its location on the edge of protected fragile marine ecosystems and a wetland of international importance made the \"MV Wakashio\" oil spill one of the worst environmental disasters ever to hit the western Indian Ocean.\nOn 10 November 2024, the opposition coalition, Alliance du Changement, won 60 of the 64 seats in the Mauritian general election. Its leader, former prime minister Navin Ramgoolam, became new prime minister.\nGeography.\nThe total land area of the country is . It is the 170th largest nation in the world by size. The Republic of Mauritius comprises Mauritius Island and several outlying islands. The nation's exclusive economic zone covers about of the Indian Ocean, including approximately jointly managed with the Seychelles.\nMauritius Island.\nMauritius is off the southeast coast of Africa, between latitudes 19\u00b058.8'S and 20\u00b031.7'S and longitudes 57\u00b018.0'E and 57\u00b046.5'E. It is long and wide. Its land area is . The island is surrounded by more than of white sandy beaches, and the lagoons are protected from the open sea by the world's third-largest coral reef, which surrounds the island. Just off the Mauritian coast lie some 49 uninhabited islands and islets, several of which have been declared natural reserves for endangered species.\nMauritius Island (Mauritian Creole: \"Lil Moris\"; , ) is relatively young geologically, having been created by volcanic activity some 8 million years ago. Together with Saint Brandon, R\u00e9union, and Rodrigues, the island is part of the Mascarene Islands. These islands emerged as a result of gigantic underwater volcanic eruptions that happened thousands of kilometres to the east of the continental block made up of Africa and Madagascar. They are no longer volcanically active and the hotspot now rests under R\u00e9union Island. Mauritius is encircled by a broken ring of mountain ranges, varying in height from above sea level. The land rises from coastal plains to a central plateau where it reaches a height of ; the highest peak is in the south-west, Piton de la Petite Rivi\u00e8re Noire at . Streams and rivers speckle the island, many formed in the cracks created by lava flows.\nRodrigues Island.\nThe autonomous island of Rodrigues is located to the east of Mauritius, with an area . Rodrigues is a volcanic island rising from a ridge along the edge of the Mascarene Plateau. The island is hilly with a central spine culminating in the highest peak, Mont Limon at . The island also has a coral reef and extensive limestone deposits. According to Statistics Mauritius, at 1 July 2019, the population of the island was estimated at 43,371.\nChagos Archipelago.\nThe Chagos Archipelago is composed of atolls and islands, and is located approximately 2,200 kilometres north-east of the main island of Mauritius. The islands are set to be transferred to Mauritius in 2025, having previously formed the British Indian Ocean Territory, with the exception of Diego Garcia, which remains under British administration on a 99-year lease.\nTo the north of the Chagos Archipelago are Peros Banhos, the Salomon Islands and Nelsons Island; to the south-west are The Three Brothers, Eagle Islands, Egmont Islands and Danger Island. Diego Garcia is in the south-east of the archipelago. In 2016, the Chagossian population was estimated at 8,700 in Mauritius, including 483 natives; 350 Chagossians live in the Seychelles, including 75 natives, while 3,000, including 127 natives, live in the UK (the population having grown from the 1200 Chagossians who moved there).\nSt. Brandon.\nSt. Brandon, also known as the Cargados Carajos shoals, is located northeast of Mauritius Island. Saint Brandon is an archipelago composed of the remnants of the lost micro continent of Mauritia and consists of five island groups, with between 28 and 40 islands in total, depending on seasonal storms, cyclones, and related sand movements. In 2008, the Privy Council (United Kingdom) judgment (Article 71) confirmed Rapha\u00ebl Fishing Company as \"the holder of a Permanent Grant of the thirteen islands mentioned in the 1901 Deed (transcribed in Vol TB25 No 342) subject to the conditions therein referred to\"\"\". In 2002, St. Brandon was classified in 10th place globally by UNESCO for inclusion as a World Heritage Site well ahead of any other Mauritian candidates at the time.\nOn 8 May 2024, the Saint Brandon Conservation Trust was launched internationally at the Corporate Council on Africa in Dallas, Texas. The trust's mission is to protect, restore and conserve St. Brandon.\nAgal\u00e9ga Islands.\nThe twin islands of Agal\u00e9ga are located some to the north of Mauritius. Its North Island is long and wide, while its South Island is . The total area of both islands is . According to Statistics Mauritius, at 1 July 2019, the population of Agal\u00e9ga and St. Brandon was estimated at 274.\nTromelin.\nTromelin Island lies 430\u00a0km north-west of Mauritius. Mauritius claims sovereignty over Tromelin island, though it is registered as a part of France.\nThe French took control of Mauritius in 1715, renaming it Isle de France. France officially ceded Mauritius including all its dependencies to Britain through the Treaty of Paris, signed on 30 May 1814 and in which R\u00e9union was returned to France. The British Colony of Mauritius consisted of the main island of Mauritius along with its dependencies Rodrigues, Agal\u00e9ga, St. Brandon, Tromelin (disputed) and the Chagos Archipelago, while the Seychelles became a separate colony in 1906. It is disputed whether the transfer of Isle de France (as Mauritius was previously known under French rule) and its dependencies to Britain in 1814 included Tromelin island. Article 8 of the Treaty of Paris stipulate the cession by France to Britain of Isle de France \"and its dependencies, namely Rodrigues and the Seychelles\". France considers that the sovereignty of Tromelin island was never transferred to Britain. Mauritius's claim is based on the fact that the transfer of Isle de France and its dependencies to Britain in 1814 was general in nature, that it was beyond those called out in the Treaty of Paris, and that all the dependencies of Isle de France were not specifically mentioned in the Treaty. Mauritius's claim is that since Tromelin was a dependency of Isle de France, it was 'de facto' transferred to Britain in 1814. The islands of Agal\u00e9ga, St Brandon and the Chagos Archipelago were also not specifically mentioned in the Treaty of Paris but became part of the British Colony of Mauritius as they were dependencies of Isle de France at that time. In addition, the British authorities in Mauritius had been taking administrative measures with respect to Tromelin over the years; for instance, British officials granted four guano operating concessions on Tromelin island between 1901 and 1951. In 1959, British officials in Mauritius informed the World Meteorological Organization that it considered Tromelin to be part of its territory. A co-management treaty was reached by France and Mauritius in 2010 but has not been ratified.\nChagos Archipelago territorial dispute.\nMauritius has long sought sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago, located to the north-east. Chagos was administratively part of Mauritius from the 18th century when the French first settled the islands. All of the islands forming part of the French colonial territory of Isle de France (as Mauritius was then known) were ceded to the British in 1810 under the Act of Capitulation signed between the two powers.\nIn 1965, three years before the independence of Mauritius, the United Kingdom split the Chagos Archipelago away from Mauritius, and the islands of Aldabra, Farquhar, and Desroches from the Seychelles, to form the British Indian Ocean Territory. The islands were formally established as an overseas territory of the United Kingdom on 8 November 1965. During UK-US discussions on the Indian Ocean in November 1975, the United Kingdom expressed its intention to return the islands of Aldabra, Farquhar, and Desroches to Seychelles to facilitate its peaceful transition to independence by June 1976. Both the UK and the United States acknowledged that these islands could not be used for defense purposes, as they were populated, and forcibly removing inhabitants, as had occurred in the Chagos Archipelago, would be politically unfeasible. On 18 March 1976, the UK and Seychelles signed an agreement to transfer the islands, which officially returned to Seychelles on its Independence Day, 29 June 1976. The BIOT now comprises the Chagos Archipelago only. The UK leased the main island of the archipelago, Diego Garcia, to the United States under a 50-year lease to establish a military base. In 2016, Britain extended the lease to the US till 2036. Mauritius has repeatedly asserted that the separation of its territories is a violation of United Nations resolutions banning the dismemberment of colonial territories before independence and claims that the Chagos Archipelago, including Diego Garcia, forms an integral part of the territory of Mauritius under both Mauritian law and international law. Between 1968 and 1973, British officials forcibly expelled over 1,000 Chagossians to Mauritius and the Seychelles. As part of the deportation, British officials have been accused of ordering the island's dog population of 1,000 to be gassed. At the United Nations and in statements to its Parliament, the UK stated that there was no \"permanent population\" in the Chagos Archipelago and described the population as \"contract labourers\" who were relocated. Since 1971, only the atoll of Diego Garcia is inhabited, home to some 3,000 UK and US military and civilian contracted personnel. Chagossians have since engaged in activism to return to the archipelago, claiming that their forced expulsion and dispossession were illegal.\nMauritius considers the territorial sea of the Chagos Archipelago and Tromelin island as part of its exclusive economic zone.\nOn 20 December 2010, Mauritius initiated proceedings against the United Kingdom under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) to challenge the legality of the Chagos Marine Protected Area (MPA), which the UK purported to declare around the Chagos Archipelago in April 2010. The dispute was arbitrated by the Permanent Court of Arbitration. The Tribunal's decision determined that the UK's undertaking to return the Chagos Archipelago to Mauritius gives Mauritius an interest in significant decisions that bear upon possible future uses of the archipelago.\nOn 25 February 2019, the judges of the International Court of Justice by thirteen votes to one stated that the United Kingdom is under an obligation to bring to an end its administration of the Chagos Archipelago as rapidly as possible. Only the American judge, Joan Donoghue, voted in favor of the UK. The president of the court, Abdulqawi Ahmed Yusuf, said the detachment of the Chagos Archipelago in 1965 from Mauritius had not been based on a \"free and genuine expression of the people concerned\". \"This continued administration constitutes a wrongful act\", he said, adding \"The UK has an obligation to bring to an end its administration of the Chagos Archipelago as rapidly as possible and that all member states must co-operate with the United Nations to complete the decolonization of Mauritius.\"\nOn 22 May 2019, the United Nations General Assembly debated and adopted a resolution that affirmed that the Chagos Archipelago, which has been occupied by the UK for more than 50 years, \"forms an integral part of the territory of Mauritius\". The resolution gives effect to an advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice (ICJ), demanded that the UK \"withdraw its colonial administration ... unconditionally within a period of no more than six months\". 116 states voted in favour of the resolution, 55 abstained and only Australia, Hungary, Israel and Maldives supported the UK and US. During the debate, the Mauritian Prime Minister described the expulsion of Chagossians as \"a crime against humanity\". While the resolution is not legally binding, it carries significant political weight since the ruling came from the UN's highest court and the assembly vote reflects world opinion. The resolution also has immediate practical consequences: the UN, its specialised agencies, and all other international organisations are now bound, as a matter of UN law, to support the decolonisation of Mauritius even if the UK claim that it has no doubt about its sovereignty.\nOn 3 October 2024 it was announced through a joint statement by the UK and Mauritian governments that the archipelago was to have its sovereignty transferred to Mauritius. The island of Diego Garcia, which contains the military base Camp Justice, was the only exception to this new treaty, with administration being leased to the United Kingdom by the Mauritian government for a period of at least 99 years. The transfer agreement was signed on 22 May 2025, with the provision that the island of Diego Garcia would be leased back to the UK for at least 99 years. The UK government \nEnvironment and climate.\nThe environment in Mauritius is typically tropical in the coastal regions with forests in the mountainous areas. Seasonal cyclones are destructive to its flora and fauna, although they recover quickly. Mauritius ranked second in an air quality index released by the World Health Organization in 2011. It had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 5.46/10, ranking it 100th globally out of 172 countries.\nSituated near the Tropic of Capricorn, Mauritius has a tropical climate. There are 2 seasons: a warm humid summer from November to April, with a mean temperature of and a relatively cool dry winter from June to September with a mean temperature of . The temperature difference between the seasons is only 4.3\u00b0C (7.7\u00b0F). The warmest months are January and February with average day maximum temperature reaching and the coolest months are July and August with average overnight minimum temperatures of . Annual rainfall ranges from on the coast to on the central plateau. Although there is no marked rainy season, most of the rainfall occurs in the summer months. Sea temperature in the lagoon varies from . The central plateau is much cooler than the surrounding coastal areas and can experience as much as twice the rainfall. The prevailing trade winds keep the east side of the island cooler and bring more rain. Occasional tropical cyclones generally occur between January and March and tend to disrupt the weather for about three days, bringing heavy rain.\nPrime Minister Pravind Jugnauth declared an environmental state of emergency after the 25 July 2020 \"MV Wakashio\" oil spill. France sent aircraft and specialists from R\u00e9union and Greenpeace said that the leak threatened the survival of thousands of species, who are at \"risk of drowning in a sea of pollution\".\nMauritius is increasingly vulnerable to climate change, facing rising temperatures, sea levels, and more frequent extreme weather events. The island faces stronger tropical cyclones, prolonged droughts, flash floods, landslides, and marine heatwaves which leading to coral bleaching. Coastal erosion, driven by rising sea levels, threatens infrastructure and freshwater supplies. Climate change is also impacting key sectors such as tourism and fisheries, with significant economic consequences. To adapt, Mauritius is implementing disaster preparedness measures, protecting coastal ecosystems like mangroves, and raising public awareness.\nBiodiversity.\n \nThe country is home to some of the world's rarest plants and animals, but human habitation and the introduction of non-native species have threatened its indigenous flora and fauna. Due to its volcanic origin, age, isolation, and unique terrain, Mauritius is home to a diversity of flora and fauna not usually found in such a small area. Before the Portuguese arrival in 1507, there were no terrestrial mammals on the island. This allowed the evolution of a number of flightless birds and large reptile species. The arrival of humans saw the introduction of invasive alien species, the rapid destruction of habitat and the loss of much of the endemic flora and fauna. In particular, the extinction of the flightless dodo bird, a species unique to Mauritius, has become a representative example of human-driven extinction. The dodo is prominently featured as a (heraldic) supporter of the national coat of arms of Mauritius.\nLess than 2% of the native forest now remains, concentrated in the Black River Gorges National Park in the south-west, the Bambous Mountain Range in the south-east, and the Moka-Port Louis Ranges in the north-west. There are some isolated mountains, Corps de Garde, Le Morne Brabant, and several offshore islands, with remnants of coastal and mainland diversity. Over 100 species of plants and animals have become extinct and many more are threatened. Conservation activities began in the 1980s with the implementation of programmes for the reproduction of threatened bird and plant species as well as habitat restoration in the national parks and nature reserves.\nIn 2011, the Ministry of Environment &amp; Sustainable Development issued the \"Mauritius Environment Outlook Report,\" which recommended that St Brandon be declared a Marine protected area. In the President's Report of the Mauritian Wildlife Foundation (MWF) dated March 2016, St Brandon is declared an official MWF project to promote the conservation of the atoll.\nThe Mauritian flying fox is the only remaining mammal endemic to the island, and has been severely threatened in recent years due to the government sanctioned culling introduced in November 2015 due to the belief that they were a threat to fruit plantations. Prior to 2015 the lack of severe cyclone had seen the fruit bat population increase and the status of the species was then changed by the IUCN from Endangered to Vulnerable in 2014. October 2018, saw the authorisation of the cull of 20% of the fruit bat population, amounting to 13,000 of the estimated 65,000 fruit bats remaining, although their status had already reverted to Endangered due to the previous years' culls.\nGovernment and politics.\nThe politics of Mauritius take place in a framework of a parliamentary representative democratic republic, in which the President is the head of state and the Prime Minister is the head of government, assisted by a Council of Ministers. Mauritius has a multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the Government. Legislative power is vested in both the Government and the National Assembly.\nThe National Assembly is Mauritius's unicameral legislature, which was called the Legislative Assembly until 1992, when the country became a republic. It consists of 70 members, 62 elected for four-year terms in multi-member constituencies and eight additional members, known as \"best losers\", appointed by the Electoral Service Commission to ensure that ethnic and religious minorities are equitably represented. The UN Human Rights Committee (UNHRC), which monitors member states' compliance with the International Covenant on Political and Civil Rights (ICPCR), has criticised the country's Best Loser System following a complaint by a local youth and trade union movement. The president is elected for a five-year term by the Parliament.\nThe island of Mauritius is divided into 20 constituencies that return three members each. The island of Rodrigues is a single district that returns two members.\nAfter a general election, the Electoral Supervisory Commission may nominate up to eight additional members with a view to correct any imbalance in the representation of ethnic minorities in Parliament. This system of nominating members is commonly called the best loser system.\nThe political party or party alliance that wins the majority of seats in Parliament forms the government. Its leader becomes the Prime Minister, who selects the Cabinet from elected members of the Assembly, except for the Attorney General of Mauritius, who may not be an elected member of the Assembly. The political party or alliance which has the second largest group of representatives forms the Official Opposition and its leader is normally nominated by the President of the Republic as the Leader of the Opposition. The Assembly elects a Speaker, a Deputy Speaker and a Deputy Chairman of Committees as some of its first tasks.\nMauritius is a democracy with a government elected every five years. The most recent National Assembly Election was held on 7 November 2019 in all the 20 mainland constituencies, and in the constituency covering the island of Rodrigues. Elections have tended to be a contest between two major coalitions of parties.\nThe 2018 Ibrahim Index of African Governance ranked Mauritius first in good governance. According to the 2023 Democracy Index compiled by the Economist Intelligence Unit that measures the state of democracy in 167 countries, Mauritius ranks 20th worldwide and is the only African-related country with \"full democracy\". The V-Dem Democracy Report described 2024 Mauritius as the 18th most electoral democratic country in Africa and autocratizing.\nAdministrative subdivisions.\n \nSavanne \nFlacq \nRivi\u00e8reNoire \nPort Louis \nRivi\u00e8reduRempart \nPamplemousses \nPlainesWilhems \nGrand Port \nMoka \nMauritius has a single first-order administrative division, the Outer Islands of Mauritius (), which consists of several outlying islands.\nThe following are the island-groups in Mauritius:\nThe island of Mauritius is subdivided into nine districts, which are the country's second-order administrative divisions.\nMilitary.\nAll military, police, and security functions in Mauritius are carried out by 10,000 active-duty servicemembers under the Commissioner of Police. The 8,000-member National Police Force is responsible for domestic law enforcement. The 1,400-strong Special Mobile Force (SMF) and the 688-strong coast guard are the only two paramilitary units in Mauritius. Both units are composed of police officers on lengthy rotations to those services. Mauritius also has a special operations military known as GIPM that will intervene in any terrorist attack or high risk operations.\nForeign relations.\nMauritius has strong and friendly relations with various African, American, Asian, European and Oceanic countries. Considered part of Africa geographically, Mauritius has friendly relations with African states in the region, particularly South Africa, by far its largest continental trading partner. Mauritian investors are gradually entering African markets, notably Madagascar, Mozambique and Zimbabwe. The country's political heritage and dependence on Western markets have led to close ties with the European Union and its member states, particularly France. Relations with India are very strong for both historical and commercial reasons. Mauritius established diplomatic relations with China in April 1972 and was forced to defend this decision, along with naval contracts with the USSR in the same year. It has also been extending its Middle East outreach with the setting up of an embassy in Saudi Arabia whose Ambassador also doubles as the country's ambassador to Bahrain.\nMauritius is a member of the United Nations, the World Trade Organization, the African Union, the Commonwealth of Nations, La Francophonie, the Southern Africa Development Community, the Indian Ocean Commission, the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa, and the Indian Ocean Rim Association.\nLegal system.\nMauritius has a hybrid legal system derived from English common law and the French civil law. The Constitution of Mauritius established the separation of powers between the legislature, the executive and the judiciary and guaranteed the protection of the fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual. Mauritius has a single-structured judicial system consisting of two tiers, the Supreme Court and subordinate courts. The Supreme Court is composed of various divisions exercising jurisdiction such as the Master's Court, the Family Division, the Commercial Division (Bankruptcy), the Criminal Division, the Mediation Division, the Court of First Instance in civil and criminal proceedings, the Appellate jurisdiction: the Court of Civil Appeal and the Court of Criminal Appeal. Subordinate courts consist of the Intermediate Court, the Industrial Court, the District Courts, the Bail and Remand Court and the Court of Rodrigues. The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council is the final court of appeal of Mauritius. After the independence of Mauritius in 1968, Mauritius maintained the Privy Council as its highest court of appeal. Appeals to the Judicial Committee from decisions of the Court of Appeal or the Supreme Court may be as of right or with the leave of the Court, as set out in section 81 of the Constitution and section 70A of the Courts Act. The Judicial Committee may also grant special leave to appeal from the decision of any court in any civil or criminal matter as per section 81(5) of the Constitution.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMauritius had a population of 1,235,260 (608,090 males, 627,170 females) according to the final results of the 2022 Census. The population on the island of Mauritius was 1,191,280 (586,590 males and 604,690 females), and that of Rodrigues island was 43,650 (21,330 males and 22,320 females); Agalega island total population of 330 (170 males and 160 females). Mauritius has the second highest population density in the region of Africa. According to the 2022 census, the average age of the population was 38 years. The 2022 Census indicated that the proportion of children aged below 15 years went down from 20.7% in 2011 to 15.4% in 2022 while the share of persons aged 60 years and over has risen from 12.7% to 18.7% in the same period.\nSubsequent to a Constitutional amendment in 1982, the census does not compile data on ethnic identities anymore but still does on religious affiliation. The 1972 census was the last one to measure ethnicity. Mauritius is a multiethnic society, drawn from Indian, African, Chinese and European (mostly French) origin. Mauritian Creoles carry the Bantu haplotype and their mitochondrial genetics show significant ancestry with enslaved populations from East Africa and Madagascar while Indo-Mauritians carry genes associated with the Chota Nagpur Plateau in Ranchi District, Jharkhand.\nAccording to the Constitution of Mauritius, there are 4 distinct communities on the island for the purposes of representation in the National Assembly. Schedule I, Paragraph 3(4) of the Constitution states that \"The population of Mauritius shall be regarded as including a Hindu community, a Muslim community, and a Sino-Mauritian community, and every person who does not appear, from his way of life, to belong to one or other of those three communities shall be regarded as belonging to the General Population, which shall itself be regarded as a fourth community.\" Thus each ethnic group in Mauritius falls within one of the four main communities known as Hindus, General Population, Muslims and Sino-Mauritians.\nAs per the above constitutional provision, the 1972 ethnic statistics are used to implement the Best Loser System, the method used in Mauritius since the 1950s to guarantee ethnic representation across the entire electorate in the National Assembly without organising the representation wholly by ethnicity.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to the 2022 census conducted by Statistics Mauritius, 47.87% of the Mauritian population follows Hinduism; 32.29% follows Christianity, with more than three-fourths of that number practicing Catholicism; Islam (18.24%) and other religions (0.86%) (including Chinese ethnic religions). 0.63% reported themselves as non-religious and 0.11% did not answer.\nThe constitution prohibits discrimination on religious grounds and provides for freedom to practice, change one's religion or not have any. The Catholic Church, Church of England, Presbyterian Church of Mauritius, Seventh-day Adventists, Hindu Temples Associations and Muslim Mosques Organisations enjoy tax-exemptions and are allocated financial support based on their respective share of the population. Other religious groups can register and be tax-exempt but receive no financial support. Public holidays of religious origins are the Hindu festivals of Maha Shivaratri, Ougadi, Thaipoosam Cavadee, Ganesh Chaturthi, and Diwali; the Christian festivals of All Saints Day and Christmas; and the Muslim festival of Eid al-Fitr. The state actively participates in their organisation with special committees presiding over the pilgrimage to Ganga Talao for Maha Shivaratri and the annual Catholic procession to Jacques-D\u00e9sir\u00e9 Laval's resting place at Sainte-Croix.\nLanguages.\nThe Mauritian constitution makes no mention of an official language. It only mentions that the official language of the National Assembly is English; however, any member can also address the chair in French. English and French are generally considered to be de facto national and common languages of Mauritius, as they are the languages of government administration, courts, and business. The constitution of Mauritius is written in English, while some laws, such as the Civil and Criminal codes, are in French. The Mauritian currency features the Latin, Tamil and Devanagari scripts.\nThe Mauritian population is multilingual; while Mauritian Creole is the mother tongue of most Mauritians, most people are also fluent in English and French; they tend to switch languages according to the situation. French and English are favoured in educational and professional settings, while Asian languages are used mainly in music, religious and cultural activities. The media and literature are primarily in French.\nThe Mauritian Creole language, which is French-based with some additional influences, is spoken by the majority of the population as a native language. The Creole languages spoken in different islands of the country are more or less similar: Mauritian Creole, Rodriguan creole, Agalega creole and Chagossian creole are spoken by people from the islands of Mauritius, Rodrigues, Agal\u00e9ga and Chagos. The following ancestral languages, also spoken in Mauritius, have received official recognition by acts of parliament: Bhojpuri, Chinese, Hindi, Marathi, Sanskrit, Tamil, Telugu and Urdu. Bhojpuri, once widely spoken as a mother tongue, has become less commonly spoken over the years. According to the 2022 census, Bhojpuri was spoken by 5.1% of the population compared to 12.1% in 2000.\nSchool students must learn English and French; they may also opt for an Asian language or Mauritian Creole. The medium of instruction varies from school to school but is usually English for public and government subsidised private schools and mainly French for paid private ones. O-Level and A-Level Exams are organised in public and government subsidised private schools in English by Cambridge International Examinations while paid private schools mostly follow the French Baccalaureate model.\nEducation.\nThe education system in Mauritius consists of pre-primary, primary, secondary and tertiary sectors. The education structure consists of two to three years of pre-primary school, six years of primary schooling leading to the Primary School Achievement Certificate, five years of secondary education leading to the School Certificate, and two years of higher secondary ending with the Higher School Certificate.\nSecondary schools have \"college\" as part of their title. \nThe O-Level and A-Level examinations are carried out by the University of Cambridge through University of Cambridge International Examinations in collaboration with the MES.\nThe tertiary education sector includes universities and other technical institutions in Mauritius. The two main public universities are the University of Mauritius and the University of Technology, in addition to the Universit\u00e9 des Mascareignes, founded in 2012, and the Open University of Mauritius. These four public universities and several other technical institutes and higher education colleges are tuition-free for students as of 2019.\nThe government of Mauritius provides free education to its citizens from pre-primary to tertiary level. In 2013 government expenditure on education was estimated at \u20a8\u00a013,584\u00a0million, representing 13% of total expenditure. As of January 2017, the government has introduced changes to the education system with the Nine-Year Continuous Basic Education programme, which abolished the Certificate of Primary Education (CPE).\nThe adult literacy rate was at 91.9% in 2022 with 8.8% of the total population holding a tertiary level qualification. Mauritius was ranked 53rd in the Global Innovation Index in 2025, 1st in Africa.\nEconomy.\nMauritius is often described as the most developed country in the region of Africa. Since independence from Britain in 1968, Mauritius has developed from a low-income, agriculture-based economy to a high-income diversified economy, based on tourism, textiles, sugar, and financial services. The economic history of Mauritius since independence has been called \"the Mauritian Miracle\" and the \"success of Africa\" (Romer, 1992; Frankel, 2010; Stiglitz, 2011).\nIn recent years, information and communication technology, seafood, hospitality and property development, healthcare, renewable energy, and education and training have emerged as important sectors, attracting substantial investment from both local and foreign investors. Mauritius has one of the largest exclusive economic zones in the world, and in 2012 the government announced its intention to develop the marine economy.\nMauritius has no exploitable fossil fuel reserves and so relies on petroleum products to meet most of its energy requirements. Local and renewable energy sources are biomass, hydro, solar and wind energy. Mauritius contributes approximately 0.01% of global greenhouse gas emissions. The country has pledged to cut emissions by 40% by 2030 compared to projected levels without intervention, with a goal of reaching net zero by 2070. As part of its climate change strategy, Mauritius plans to eliminate coal from electricity generation by 2030, reduce landfill waste by diverting 70% of it through a circular economy approach, and increase the share of electric vehicles to 15% by the same year.\nMauritius is ranked high in terms of economic competitiveness, a friendly investment climate, good governance and a free economy. The Gross Domestic Product (PPP) was estimated at US$29.187\u00a0billion in 2018, and GDP (PPP) per capita was over US$22,909, the second highest in Africa.\nMauritius has a high-income economy, according to the World Bank in 2019. The World Bank's 2019 Ease of Doing Business Index ranks Mauritius 13th worldwide out of 190 economies in terms of ease of doing business. According to the Mauritian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the country's challenges are heavy reliance on a few industry sectors, high brain drain, scarcity of skilled labour, ageing population and inefficient public companies and para-statal bodies.\nAccording to the 2019 Economic Freedom of the World report, Mauritius is ranked as having the 9th most free economy in the world.\nMauritius has historically relied on external financial inflows like tourism revenue, offshore finance and foreign aid.\nFinancial services.\nAccording to the Financial Services Commission, financial and insurance activities contributed to 11.1% of the country's GDP in 2018. Over the years, Mauritius has been positioning itself as the preferred hub for investment into Africa due its strategic location between Asia and Africa, hybrid regulatory framework, ease of doing business, investment protection treaties, non-double taxation treaties, highly qualified and multilingual workforce, political stability, low crime rate coupled with modern infrastructure and connectivity. It is home to a number of international banks, legal firms, corporate services, investment funds and private equity funds. Financial products and services include private banking, global business, insurance and reinsurance, limited companies, protected cell companies, trust and foundation, investment banking, global headquarter administration.\nCorporate tax rate ranges from 15% to 17% and individual tax rate ranges from 10% to 25%. While the country also offers incentives such as tax holidays and exemptions in some specific sectors to boost its competitiveness, the country is often tagged as a tax haven by the press due to individuals and companies who engaged in abusive practices in its financial sector. The country has built up a solid reputation by making use of best practices and adopting a strong legal and regulatory framework to demonstrate its compliance with international demands for greater transparency. In June 2015, Mauritius adhered to the multilateral Convention on Mutual Administrative Assistance in Tax Matters, and has an exchange information mechanism with 127 jurisdictions. Mauritius is a founding member of the Eastern and Southern Africa Anti Money Laundering Group and has been at the forefront in the fight against money laundering and other forms of financial crime. The country has adopted exchange of information on an automatic basis under the Common Reporting Standard and the Foreign Accounts Tax Compliance Act.\nTourism.\nMauritius is a major tourist destination, and the tourism sector is one of the main pillars of the Mauritian economy. The island nation enjoys a tropical climate with clear warm sea waters, beaches, tropical fauna and flora, complemented by a multi-ethnic and cultural population. The forecast of tourist arrivals for the year 2019 is maintained at 1,450,000, representing an increase of 3.6% over the figure of 1,399,408 in 2018.\nMauritius currently has two UNESCO World Heritage Sites, namely, Aapravasi Ghat and Le Morne Cultural Landscape. Additionally, Black River Gorges National Park is currently in the UNESCO tentative list.\nTransport.\nSince 2005 public buses, and later trains, in Mauritius have been free of charge for students, people with disabilities, and senior citizens. The Metro Express railway currently links all five cities and the University of Mauritius at R\u00e9duit with planned expansion to the east and south. Former privately owned industrial railways have been abandoned since the 1960s. The harbour of Port Louis handles international trade as well as a cruise terminal. The Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam International Airport, the largest one in the Indian Ocean, is the main international airport and serves as the home operating base for the national airline Air Mauritius. The Plaine Corail Airport operates from Rodrigues ensuring air link with the main island of Mauritius and international flights with R\u00e9union.\nInformation and communications technology (ICT).\nThe information and communications technology (ICT) sector has contributed to 5.7% of its GDP in 2016.\nAdditionally, the African Network Information Centre (AFRINIC) \u2013 the regional Internet registry for Africa \u2013 is based in Ebene.\nMauritius is also connected to global Internet infrastructure via multiple optical fibre submarine communications cables, including the Lower Indian Ocean Network (LION) cable, the Mauritius\u2013Rodrigues Submarine Cable, and the South Africa Far East (SAFE) cable.\nCulture.\nArt.\nProminent Mauritian painters include Henri Le Sidaner, Malcolm de Chazal, Raouf Oderuth and Vaco Baissac while Gabrielle Wiehe is a prominent illustrator and graphic designer.\nThe Mauritius \"Post Office\" stamps, the first stamps produced outside Great Britain, among the rarest postage stamps in the world, are widely considered \"the greatest item in all philately\".\nArchitecture.\nThe distinctive architecture of Mauritius reflects the island nation's history as a colonial trade base connecting Europe with the East. Styles and forms introduced by Dutch, French, and British settlers from the seventeenth century onward, mixed with influences from India and East Africa, resulted in a unique hybrid architecture of international historic, social, and artistic significance. Mauritian structures present a variety of designs, materials, and decorative elements that are unique to the country and inform the historical context of the Indian Ocean and European colonialism.\nDecades of political, social, and economic change have resulted in the routine destruction of Mauritian architectural heritage. Between 1960 and 1980, the historic homes of the island's high grounds, known locally as campagnes, disappeared at alarming rates. More recent years have witnessed the demolition of plantations, residences, and civic buildings as they have been cleared or drastically renovated for new developments to serve an expanding tourism industry. The capital city of Port Louis remained relatively unchanged until the mid-1990s, yet now reflects the irreversible damage that has been inflicted on its built heritage. Rising land values are pitted against the cultural value of historical structures in Mauritius, while the prohibitive costs of maintenance and the steady decline in traditional building skills make it harder to invest in preservation.\nThe general populace historically lived in what are termed creole houses.\nLiterature.\nMauritius is remembered in literature mostly for the novel Paul et Virginie, a classic of French literature, by Bernardin de Saint-Pierre and for Alice's Adventures in Wonderland's Dodo\nJean-Marie Le Cl\u00e9zio, Ananda Devi, Nathacha Appanah, Malcolm de Chazal, Eug\u00e9nie Poujade, Marie-Th\u00e9r\u00e8se Humbert, Shenaz Patel, Khal Torabully, Aqiil Gopee, South-African born Lindsey Collen-Seegobin writing in English and French, Dev Virahsawmy writing mostly in Mauritian Creole and Abhimanyu Unnuth writing in Hindi are some of the most prominent Mauritian writers. Le Cl\u00e9zio, who won the Nobel Prize for Literature in 2008, is of Mauritian heritage and holds dual French-Mauritian citizenship. The island plays host to the Le Prince Maurice Prize. In keeping with the island's literary culture the prize alternates on a yearly basis between English-speaking and French-speaking writers.\nMusic.\nThe major musical genres of Mauritius are sega and its fusion genre, seggae, Bhojpuri folk songs and Indian film music especially Bollywood. Western classical music and Indian classical music are taught, respectively, at the Fran\u00e7ois Mitterand Conservatory and the Mahatma Gandhi Institute.\nCuisine.\nMauritian cuisine is a combination of Indian, Creole, French and Chinese cuisines, with many dishes unique to the island. Local variants of Asian and European cusines include vegetarian and non vegetarian curries, parathas locally known as \"farata\", the potato rich briani, wok prepared mines frires and diriz frires, a chop suey dish known as \"bol renvers\u00e9\" (upside-down bowl), sausage and tomato based \"rougaille\" and Mughlai-origin alouda, a cold beverage, amongst others. Locally made French pastry and bread are sold in most localities with locally unique desserts like \"napolitaine\", a local version of sabl\u00e9 coated with a pink icing, coconut based \"g\u00e2teau coco\" and \"macacha coco\" and iced kulfi.\nMasala spices, dals, \"zassar\" from Indian-origin achar and leaf vegetables known as br\u00e8des are commonly consumed in all households. Street food sold by hawkers include popular wraps \"dholl puri\" and roti, local versions of Indian pakoras like \"g\u00e2teau piment\" and chana puris.\nHolidays and festivals.\nThe public holidays of Mauritius involve the blending of several cultures from Mauritius's history. There are Hindu festivals, Christian festivals, Chinese festivals, and Muslim festivals. There are 14 annual public holidays in Mauritius with New Year celebrated over two days if it falls on a weekend. All the public holidays related to religious festivals have dates that vary from year to year except for Christmas. Other festivals such as Holi, Raksha Bandhan, Durga Puja, Makar Sankranti and P\u00e8re Laval Pilgrimage also enrich the cultural landscape of Mauritius.\nSports.\nThe most popular sport in Mauritius is football and the national team is known as The Dodos or Club M. Other popular sports in Mauritius include cycling, table tennis, horse racing, badminton, volleyball, basketball, handball, boxing, judo, karate, taekwondo, weightlifting, bodybuilding and athletics. Water sports include swimming, sailing, scuba diving, windsurfing and kitesurfing.\nKim le Court is a successful professional cyclist. With multiple podium places in the African Road Championships, she is the 2024 national road race and time trial champion. She won stage 8 of the 2024 Giro d'Italia Women. In 2025, she won Liege-Bastogne-Liege Femmes, came 3rd overall in the UAE Tour Women and 5th in the Tour of Flanders for Women.\nHorseracing, which dates from 1812 when the Champ de Mars Racecourse was inaugurated, remains popular. The country hosted the second (1985), fifth (2003) and tenth editions (2019) of the Indian Ocean Island Games. Mauritius won its first Olympic medal at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing when boxer Bruno Julie won the bronze medal.\nIn golf, the former Mauritius Open and the current AfrAsia Bank Mauritius Open have been part of the European Tour.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nNovels"}
