{"id": "17076", "revid": "47366019", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17076", "title": "Kenilworth Castle", "text": "Castle in Kenilworth, Warwickshire, England\nKenilworth Castle is a castle in the town of Kenilworth in Warwickshire, England, managed by English Heritage; much of it is in ruins. The castle was founded after the Norman Conquest of 1066; with development through to the Tudor period. It has been described by the architectural historian Anthony Emery as \"the finest surviving example of a semi-royal palace of the later Middle Ages, significant for its scale, form and quality of workmanship\". \nKenilworth played an important historical role: it was the subject of the six-month-long siege of Kenilworth in 1266, thought to be the longest siege in medieval English history, and formed a base for Lancastrian operations in the Wars of the Roses. Kenilworth was the scene of the removal of Edward II from the English throne, the perceived French insult to Henry V in 1414 of a gift of tennis balls (said by John Strecche to have prompted the campaign that led to the Battle of Agincourt), and the Earl of Leicester's lavish reception of Elizabeth I in 1575. It has been described as \"one of two major castles \"[with Caerphilly Castle]\" in Britain which may be classified as water-castles or lake-fortresses...\".\nThe castle was built over several centuries. Founded in the 1120s around a powerful Norman great tower, the castle was significantly enlarged by King John at the beginning of the 13th century. Huge water defences were created by damming the local streams, and the resulting fortifications proved able to withstand assaults by land and water in 1266. John of Gaunt spent lavishly in the late 14th century, turning the medieval castle into a palace fortress designed in the latest perpendicular style. The Earl of Leicester then expanded the castle during his tenure in the 16th century, constructing new Tudor buildings and exploiting the medieval heritage of Kenilworth to produce a fashionable Renaissance palace.\nArchitecture and landscape.\nAlthough now ruined as a result of the slighting, or partial destruction of the castle by Parliamentary forces in 1649 to prevent it being used as a military stronghold after the English Civil War, Kenilworth illustrates five centuries of English military and civil architecture. The castle is built almost entirely from local New Red Sandstone.\nEntrance and outer bailey wall.\nTo the south-east of the main castle lie the Brays, a corruption of the French word \"braie\", meaning an external fortification with palisades. Only earthworks and fragments of masonry remain of what was an extensive 13th-century barbican structure including a stone wall and an external gatehouse guarding the main approach to the castle. The area now forms part of the car park for the castle.\nBeyond the Brays are the ruins of the Gallery Tower, a second gatehouse remodelled in the 15th century. The Gallery Tower originally guarded the long, narrow walled-causeway that still runs from the Brays to the main castle. This causeway was called the Tiltyard, as it was used for tilting, or jousting, in medieval times. The Tiltyard causeway acted both as a dam and as part of the barbican defences. To the east of the Tiltyard is a lower area of marshy ground, originally flooded and called the Lower Pool, and to the west an area once called the Great Mere. The Great Mere has been drained and cultivated as a meadow, but it was originally a large lake covering around , dammed by the Tiltyard causeway.\nThe outer bailey of Kenilworth Castle is usually entered through Mortimer's Tower, today a modest ruin but originally a Norman stone gatehouse, extended in the late 13th and 16th centuries. The outer bailey wall, long and relatively low, was built mainly by King John; it has numerous buttresses but only a few towers, being designed to be defended primarily by the water system of the Great Mere and Lower Pool. The north side of the outer bailey wall was almost entirely destroyed during the slighting. Moving clockwise around the outer bailey from Mortimer's Tower, the defences include a west-facing watergate, which would originally have led onto the Great Mere; the King's gate, a late 17th-century agricultural addition; the Swan Tower, a late 13th-century tower with 16th-century additions, then named after the swans that lived on the Great Mere; the early 13th-century Lunn's Tower; and the 14th-century Water Tower, so named because it overlooked the Lower Pool.\nInner court.\nKenilworth's inner court consists of a number of buildings set against a bailey wall, originally of Norman origin. It exploits the defensive value of a natural knoll that rises up steeply from the surrounding area. The 12th-century great tower occupies the knoll itself and forms the north-east corner of the bailey. Ruined during the slighting, the great tower is notable for its huge corner turrets, essentially hugely exaggerated Norman pilaster buttresses. Its walls are thick, and the towers high. Although Kenilworth's great tower is larger, it is similar to that of Brandon Castle near Coventry; both were built by the local Clinton family in the 1120s. The tower can be termed a hall keep, as it is longer than it is wide. The lowest floor is filled with earth, possibly taken from the earlier motte that may have been present on the site, and is further protected by a sloping stone plinth around the base. The tall Tudor windows at the top of the tower date from the 1570s.\nMuch of the northern part of the inner bailey was built by John of Gaunt, a son of King Edward III, between 1372 and 1380. This part of the castle is considered by historian Anthony Emery to be \"the finest surviving example of a semi-royal palace of the later middle ages, significant for its scale, form and quality of workmanship\". Gaunt's architectural style emphasised rectangular design, the separation of ground floor service areas from the upper stories and a contrast of austere exteriors with lavish interiors, especially on the 1st floor of the inner bailey buildings. The result is considered \"an early example of the perpendicular style\".\nThe most significant of Gaunt's buildings is his great hall. The great hall replaced an earlier sequence of great halls on the same site, and was strongly influenced by Edward III's design at Windsor Castle. The hall consists of a \"ceremonial sequence of rooms\", approached by a particularly grand staircase, now lost. From the great hall, visitors could look out through huge windows to admire the Great Mere or the inner court. The undercroft to the hall, used by the service staff, was lit with slits, similar to design at the contemporary Wingfield Manor. The roof was built in 1376 by William Wintringham, producing the widest hall, unsupported by pillars, existing in England at the time. There is some debate amongst historians as to whether this roof was a hammerbeam design, a collar and truss-brace design, or a combination of the two.\nThere was an early attempt at symmetry in the external appearance of the great hall\u00a0\u2013 the Strong and Saintlowe Towers architecturally act as near symmetrical \"wings\" to the hall itself, while the plinth of the hall is designed to mirror that of the great tower opposite it. An unusual multi-sided tower, the Oriel, provides a counterpoint to the main doorway of the hall and was intended for private entertainment by Gaunt away from the main festivities on major occasions. The Oriel tower is based on Edward III's \"La Rose\" Tower at Windsor, which had a similar function. Gaunt's Strong Tower is so named for being entirely vaulted in stone across all its floors, an unusual and robust design. The great hall influenced the design of Bolton and Raby castles. The hall's roof design was independently famous and was copied at Arundel Castle and Westminster Hall.\nOther parts of the castle built by Gaunt include the southern range of state apartments, Gaunt's Tower and the main kitchen. Although now extensively damaged, these share the same style as the great hall; this would have unified the appearance of Gaunt's palace in a distinct break from the more eclectic medieval tradition of design. Gaunt's kitchen replaced the original 12th-century kitchens, built alongside the great tower in a similar fashion to the arrangement at Conisbrough. Gaunt's new kitchen was twice the size of that in equivalent castles, measuring .\nThe remainder of the inner court was built by Robert Dudley, the Earl of Leicester, in the 1570s. He built a tower now known as Leicester's building on the south edge of the court as a guest wing, extending out beyond the inner bailey wall for extra space. Leicester's building was four floors high and built in a fashionable contemporary Tudor style with \"brittle, thin walls and grids of windows\". The building was intended to appear well-proportioned alongside the ancient great tower, one of the reasons for its considerable height. Leicester's building set the style for later Elizabethan country house design, especially in the Midlands, with Hardwick Hall being a classic example. Modern viewing platforms, installed in 2014, provide views from Elizabeth I's's former bedroom.\nLeicester also built a loggia, or open gallery, beside the great keep to lead to the new formal gardens. The loggia was designed to elegantly frame the view as the observer slowly admired the gardens, and was a new design in the 16th century, only recently imported from Italy.\nBase, left-hand and right-hand courts.\nThe rest of Kenilworth Castle's interior is divided into three areas: the base court, stretching between Mortimer's Tower and Leicester's gatehouse; the left-hand court, stretching south-west around the outside of the inner court; and the right-hand court, to the north-west of the inner court. The line of trees that cuts across the base court today is a relatively modern mid-19th century addition, and originally this court would have been more open, save for the collegiate chapel that once stood in front of the stables. Destroyed in 1524, only the chapel's foundations remain. Each of the courts was designed to be used for different purposes: the base court was considered a relatively public area, with the left and right courts used for more private occasions.\nLeicester's gatehouse was built on the north side of the base court, replacing an older gatehouse to provide a fashionable entrance from the direction of Coventry. The external design, with its symbolic towers and, originally, battlements, echoes a style popular a century or more before, closely resembling Kirby Muxloe and the Beauchamp gatehouse at Warwick Castle. By contrast the interior, with its contemporary wood panelling, is in the same, highly contemporary Elizabethan fashion of Leicester's building in the inner court. Leicester's gatehouse is one of the few parts of the castle to remain intact. The stables built by John Dudley in the 1550s also survive and lie along the east side of the base court. The stable block is a large building built mostly in stone, but with a timber-framed, decoratively panelled first storey designed in an anachronistic, vernacular style. Both buildings could have easily been seen from Leicester's building and were therefore on permanent display to visitors. Leicester's intent may have been to create a deliberately anachronistic view across the base court, echoing the older ideals of chivalry and romance alongside the more modern aspects of the redesign of the castle.\nGarden and landscape.\nMuch of the right-hand court of Kenilworth Castle is occupied by the castle garden. For most of Kenilworth's history the role of the castle garden, used for entertainment, would have been very distinct from that of the surrounding chase, used primarily for hunting. From the 16th century onwards there were elaborate knot gardens in the base court. The gardens today are designed to reproduce as closely as possible the primarily historical record of their original appearance in 1575, with a steep terrace along the south side of the gardens and steps leading down to eight square knot gardens. In Elizabethan gardens \"the plants were almost incidental\", and instead the design focus was on sculptures, including four wooden obelisks painted to resemble porphyry and a marble fountain with a statue of two Greek mythological figures. A timber aviary contains a range of birds. The original garden was heavily influenced by the Italian Renaissance garden at Villa d'Este.\nTo the north-west of the castle are earthworks marking the spot of the \"Pleasance\", created in 1414 by Henry V. The Pleasance was a banqueting house built in the style of a miniature castle. Surrounded by two diamond-shaped moats with its own dock, the Pleasance was positioned on the far side of the Great Mere and had to be reached by boat. It resembled Richard II's retreat at Sheen from the 1380s, and was later copied by his younger brother, Duke Humphrey of Gloucester, at Greenwich in the 1430s, as well by his son, John of Lancaster at Fulbrook. The Pleasance was eventually dismantled by Henry VIII and partially moved into the left-hand court inside the castle itself, possibly to add to the anachronistic appearance. These elements were finally destroyed in the 1650s.\nHistory.\n12th century.\nKenilworth Castle was founded in the early 1120s by Geoffrey de Clinton, Lord Chamberlain and treasurer to Henry I. The castle's original form is uncertain. It has been suggested that it consisted of a motte, an earthen mound surmounted by wooden buildings; however, the stone great tower may have been part of the original design. Clinton was a local rival to Roger de Beaumont, the Earl of Warwick and owner of the neighbouring Warwick Castle, and the king made Clinton the sheriff in Warwickshire to act as a counterbalance to Beaumont's power. It appears Clinton had begun to lose the king's favour when in 1130 he was tried for treason, although he was soon acquitted, and when he died in 1133, his son, also called Geoffrey, was only a minor when he inherited his father's estates. These included the family estates at Stewkley and Aston Clinton in Buckinghamshire. Geoffrey II built the church of http:// in Stewkley in 1150, which is considered one of the finest surviving original Norman Churches in England. The disputes with Beaumont continued with Geoffrey II and his uncle William de Clinton, until Geoffrey was forced to come to terms with Beaumont and the dispute was eventually settled when he married Beaumont's daughter, Agnes. These disputes and the difficult years of the Anarchy (1135\u201354), delayed any further development of the castle at Kenilworth.\nHenry II succeeded to the throne at the end of the Anarchy but during the revolt of 1173\u201374 he faced a significant uprising led by his son, Henry, backed by the French crown. The conflict spread across England and Kenilworth was garrisoned by Henry II's forces; Geoffrey II de Clinton died in this period and the castle was taken fully into royal possession, a sign of its military importance. The de Clintons by now had moved to their estates in Buckinghamshire. By this point Kenilworth Castle consisted of the great keep, the inner bailey wall, a basic causeway across the smaller lake that preceded the creation of the Great Mere, and the local chase for hunting.\n13th century.\nHenry's successor, Richard I, paid relatively little attention to Kenilworth, but under King John significant building resumed at the castle. When John was excommunicated in 1208, he embarked on a programme of rebuilding and enhancing several major royal castles. These included Corfe, Odiham, Dover, Scarborough as well as Kenilworth. John spent \u00a31,115 on Kenilworth Castle between 1210 and 1216, building the outer bailey wall in stone and improving the other defences, including creating Mortimer's and Lunn's Towers. He also significantly improved the castle's water defences by damming the Finham and Inchford Brooks, creating the Great Mere. The result was to turn Kenilworth into one of the largest English castles of the time, with one of the largest artificial lake defences in England. Because John had poured so many resources into the building of the castle and considered it an important strategic castle, he appointed household knights such as Robert of Ropsley to act as castellans. John was forced to cede the castle to the baronial opposition as part of the guarantee of the Magna Carta, before it reverted to royal control early in the reign of his son, Henry III.\nHenry III granted Kenilworth in 1244 to Simon de Montfort, Earl of Leicester, who later became a leader in the Second Barons' War (1263\u201367) against the king, using Kenilworth as the centre of his operations. Initially the conflict went badly for King Henry, and after the Battle of Lewes in 1264 he was forced to sign the Mise of Lewes, under which his son, Prince Edward, was given over to the rebels as a hostage. Edward was taken back to Kenilworth, where chroniclers considered he was held in unduly harsh conditions. Released in early 1265, Edward then defeated Montfort at the Battle of Evesham; the surviving rebels under the leadership of Henry de Hastings, Montfort's constable at Kenilworth, regrouped at the castle the following spring. Edward's forces proceeded to lay siege to the rebels.\nThe siege of Kenilworth Castle in 1266 was \"probably the longest in English history\" according to historian Norman Pounds, and at the time was also the largest siege to have occurred in England in terms of the number of soldiers involved. Simon de Monfort's son, Simon de Montfort the Younger, promised in January 1266 to hand over the castle to the king. Five months later this had not happened, and Henry III laid siege to Kenilworth Castle on 21 June. Protected by the extensive water defences, the castle withstood the attack, despite Edward targeting the weaker north wall, employing huge siege towers and even attempting a night attack using barges brought from Chester. The distance between the royal trebuchets and the walls severely reduced their effectiveness, and heavier trebuchets had to be sent for from London. Papal intervention through the legate Ottobuono finally resulted in the compromise of the Dictum of Kenilworth, under which the rebels were allowed to re-purchase their confiscated lands provided they surrendered the castle; the siege ended on 14 December 1266. The water defences at Kenilworth influenced the construction of later castles in Wales, most notably Caerphilly.\nHenry granted Kenilworth to his son, Edmund Crouchback, in 1267. Edmund held many tournaments at Kenilworth in the late 13th century, including a huge event in 1279, presided over by the royal favourite Roger de Mortimer, in which a hundred knights competed for three days in the tiltyard in an event called \"the Round Table\", in imitation of the popular Arthurian legends.\n14th century.\nEdmund Crouchback passed on the castle to his eldest son, Thomas, Earl of Lancaster, in 1298. Lancaster married Alice de Lacy, which made him the richest nobleman in England. Kenilworth became the primary castle of the Lancaster estates, replacing Bolingbroke, and acted as both a social and a financial centre for Thomas. Thomas built the first great hall at the castle from 1314 to 1317 and constructed the Water Tower along the outer bailey, as well as increasing the size of the chase. Lancaster, with support from many of the other English barons, found himself in increasing opposition to Edward II. War broke out in 1322, and Lancaster was captured at the Battle of Boroughbridge and executed. His estates, including Kenilworth, were confiscated by the crown. Edward and his wife, Isabella of France, spent Christmas 1323 at Kenilworth, amidst major celebrations.\nIn 1326, however, Edward was deposed by an alliance of Isabella and her lover, Roger Mortimer. Edward was eventually captured by Isabella's forces and the custody of the king was assigned to Henry, Earl of Lancaster, who had backed Isabella's invasion. Henry, reoccupying most of the Lancaster lands, was made constable of Kenilworth and Edward was transported there in late 1326; Henry's legal title to the castle was finally confirmed the following year. Kenilworth was chosen for this purpose by Isabella probably both because it was a major fortification, and also because of the symbolism of its former owners' links to popular ideals of freedom and good government. Royal writs were issued in Edward's name by Isabella from Kenilworth until the next year. A deputation of leading barons led by Bishop Orleton was then sent to Kenilworth to first persuade Edward to resign and, when that failed, to inform him that he had been deposed as king. Edward formally resigned as king in the great hall of the castle on 21 January 1327. As the months went by, however, it became clear that Kenilworth was proving a less than ideal location to imprison Edward. The castle was in a prominent part of the Midlands, in an area that held several nobles who still supported Edward and were believed to be trying to rescue him. Henry's loyalty was also coming under question. In due course, Isabella and Mortimer had Edward moved by night to Berkeley Castle, where he died shortly afterwards. Isabella continued to use Kenilworth as a royal castle until her fall from power in 1330.\nHenry of Grosmont, the Duke of Lancaster, inherited the castle from his father in 1345 and remodelled the great hall with a grander interior and roof. On his death Blanche of Lancaster inherited the castle. Blanche married John of Gaunt, the third son of Edward III; their union, and combined resources, made John the second richest man in England next to the king himself. After Blanche's death, John married Constance, who had a claim to the kingdom of Castile, and John styled himself the king of Castile and Le\u00f3n. Kenilworth was one of the most important of his thirty or more castles in England. John began building at Kenilworth between 1373 and 1380 in a style designed to reinforce his royal claims in Iberia. John constructed a grander great hall, the Strong Tower, Saintlowe Tower, the state apartments and the new kitchen complex. He made these renovations before his nephew took over his position. When not campaigning abroad, John spent much of his time at Kenilworth and Leicester, and used Kenilworth even more after 1395 when his health began to decline. In his final years, John made extensive repairs to the whole of the castle complex.\n15th century.\nMany castles, especially royal castles, were left to decay in the 15th century; Kenilworth, however, continued to be used as a centre of choice, forming a late medieval \"palace fortress\". Henry IV, John of Gaunt's son, returned Kenilworth to royal ownership when he took the throne in 1399 and made extensive use of the castle. Henry V also used Kenilworth extensively, but preferred to stay in the Pleasance, the mock castle he had built on the other side of the Great Mere. According to the contemporary chronicler John Strecche, who lived at the neighbouring Kenilworth Priory, the French openly mocked Henry in 1414 by sending him a gift of tennis balls at Kenilworth. The French aim was to imply a lack of martial prowess; according to Strecche, the gift spurred Henry's decision to fight the Agincourt campaign. The account was used by Shakespeare as the basis for a scene in his play \"Henry V\".\nEnglish castles, including Kenilworth, did not play a decisive role during the Wars of the Roses (1455\u201385), which were fought primarily in the form of pitched battles between the rival factions of the Lancastrians and the Yorkists. With the mental collapse of King Henry VI, Queen Margaret used the Duchy of Lancaster lands in the Midlands, including Kenilworth, as one of her key bases of military support. Margaret removed Henry from London in 1456 for his own safety and until 1461, Henry's court divided almost all its time among Kenilworth, Leicester and Tutbury Castle for the purposes of protection. Kenilworth remained an important Lancastrian stronghold for the rest of the war, often acting as a military balance to the nearby castle of Warwick. With the victory of Henry VII at Bosworth, Kenilworth again received royal attention; Henry visited frequently and had a tennis court constructed at the castle for his use. His son, Henry VIII, decided that Kenilworth should be maintained as a royal castle. He abandoned the Pleasance and had part of the timber construction moved into the base court of the castle.\n16th century.\nThe castle remained in royal hands until it was given to John Dudley in 1553. Dudley came to prominence under Henry VIII and became the leading political figure under Edward VI. Dudley was a patron of John Shute, an early exponent of classical architecture in England, and began the process of modernising Kenilworth. Before his execution in 1553 by Queen Mary for attempting to place Lady Jane Grey on the throne, Dudley had built the new stable block and widened the tiltyard to its current form.\nKenilworth was restored to Dudley's son, Robert, Earl of Leicester, in 1563, four years after the succession of Elizabeth I to the throne. Leicester's lands in Warwickshire were worth between \u00a3500\u2013\u00a3700, but Leicester's power and wealth, including monopolies and grants of new lands, depended ultimately on his remaining a favourite of the queen.\nLeicester continued his father's modernisation of Kenilworth, attempting to ensure that Kenilworth would attract the interest of Elizabeth during her regular tours around the country. Elizabeth visited in 1566 and 1568, by which time Leicester had commissioned the royal architect Henry Hawthorne to produce plans for a dramatic, classical extension of the south side of the inner court. However, this proved unachievable, and instead Leicester employed William Spicer to rebuild and extend the castle to provide modern accommodation for the royal court and symbolically boost his own claims to noble heritage. After negotiation with his tenants, Leicester also increased the size of the chase once again. The result has been termed an English \"Renaissance palace\".\nElizabeth viewed the partially finished results at Kenilworth in 1572, but the complete effect of Leicester's work was only apparent during the queen's last visit in 1575. Leicester was keen to impress Elizabeth in a final attempt to convince her to marry him, and no expense was spared. Elizabeth brought an entourage of thirty-one barons and four hundred staff for the royal visit that lasted an exceptional nineteen days; twenty horsemen a day arrived at the castle to communicate royal messages. Leicester entertained the Queen and much of the neighbouring region with pageants, fireworks, bear baiting, mystery plays, hunting and lavish banquets. The cost was reputed to have amounted to many thousand pounds, almost bankrupting Leicester, though it probably did not exceed \u00a31,700 in reality. The event was considered a huge success and formed the longest stay at such a property during any of Elizabeth's tours, yet the queen did not decide to marry Leicester.\nAn inventory of the furnishings of the castle in 1583 including paintings and tapestry runs to 50 pages. Eight tapestries had been bought from Margaret Douglas, Countess of Lennox with subjects including \"Josias\", \"Demophon and Achilles\", and the \"History of Noah\". Kenilworth Castle was valued at \u00a310,401 in 1588, when Leicester died without legitimate issue and heavily in debt. In accordance with his will, the castle passed first to his brother Ambrose, Earl of Warwick, and after the latter's death in 1590, to his illegitimate son, Sir Robert Dudley.\n17th century.\nSir Robert Dudley, having tried and failed to establish his legitimacy in front of the Court of the Star Chamber, went to Italy in 1605. In the same year Sir Thomas Chaloner, governor (and from 1610 chamberlain) to James I's eldest son Prince Henry, was commissioned to oversee repairs to the castle and its grounds, including the planting of gardens, the restoration of fish-ponds and improvement to the game park. During 1611\u201312 Dudley arranged to sell Kenilworth Castle to Henry, by then Prince of Wales. Henry died before completing the full purchase, which was finalised by his brother, Charles, who bought out the interest of Dudley's abandoned wife, Alice Dudley. When Charles became king, he gave the castle to his wife, Henrietta Maria; he bestowed the stewardship on Robert Carey, Earl of Monmouth, and after his death gave it to Carey's sons Henry and Thomas. Kenilworth remained a popular location for both King James I and his son Charles, and accordingly was well maintained. The most famous royal visit occurred in 1624, when Ben Jonson's \"The Masque of Owls at Kenilworth\" was performed for Charles.\nThe First English Civil War broke out in 1642. During its early campaigns, Kenilworth formed a useful counterbalance to the Parliamentary stronghold of Warwick. Kenilworth was used by Charles on his advance to Edgehill in October 1642 as a base for raids on Parliamentary strongholds in the Midlands. After the battle, however, the royalist garrison was withdrawn on the approach of Lord Brooke, and the castle was then garrisoned by Parliamentary forces. In April 1643 the new governor of the castle, Hastings Ingram, was arrested as a suspected Royalist double agent. By January 1645 the Parliamentary forces in Coventry had strengthened their hold on the castle, and attempts by Royalist forces to dislodge them from Warwickshire failed. Security concerns continued after the end of the First Civil War in 1646, and in 1649 Parliament ordered the slighting of Kenilworth. One wall of the great tower, various parts of the outer bailey and the battlements were destroyed, but not before the building was surveyed by the antiquarian William Dugdale, who published his results in 1656.\nColonel Joseph Hawkesworth, who was responsible for the implementation of the slighting, acquired the estate for himself and converted Leicester's gatehouse into a house; part of the base court was turned into a farm, and many of the remaining buildings were stripped for their materials. In 1660 Charles II was restored to the throne, and Hawkesworth was promptly evicted from Kenilworth. The Queen Mother, Henrietta Maria, briefly regained the castle, with the Earls of Monmouth acting as stewards once again, but after her death King Charles II granted the castle to Sir Edward Hyde, whom he later created Baron Hyde of Hindon and Earl of Clarendon. The ruined castle continued to be used as a farm, with the gatehouse as the principal dwelling; the King's Gate was added to the outer bailey wall during this period for the use of farm workers.\n18th and 19th centuries.\nKenilworth remained a ruin during the 18th and 19th centuries, still used as a farm but increasingly also popular as a tourist attraction. The first guidebook to the castle, \"A Concise history and description of Kenilworth Castle\", was printed in 1777 with many later editions following in the coming decades.\nThe castle's cultural prominence increased after Sir Walter Scott wrote \"Kenilworth\" in 1821, describing the royal visit of Queen Elizabeth. Very loosely based on the events of 1575, Scott's story reinvented aspects of the castle and its history to tell the story of \"the pathetic, beautiful, undisciplined heroine Amy Robsart and the steely Elizabeth I\". Although considered today as a less successful literary novel than some of his other historical works, it popularised Kenilworth Castle in the Victorian imagination as a romantic Elizabethan location. \"Kenilworth\" spawned \"numerous stage adaptations and burlesques, at least eleven operas, popular redactions, and even a scene in a set of dioramas for home display\", including Sir Arthur Sullivan's 1865 cantata \"The Masque at Kenilworth\". J. M. W. Turner painted several watercolours of the castle.\nThe number of visitors increased, including Queen Victoria and Charles Dickens. Work was undertaken during the 19th century to protect the stonework from further decline, with particular efforts to remove ivy from the castle in the 1860s.\n20th and 21st centuries.\nThe castle remained the property of the Clarendons until 1937, when Lord Clarendon found the maintenance of the castle too expensive and sold Kenilworth to the industrialist Sir John Siddeley, created Baron Kenilworth. Siddeley, whose tax accounting in the 1930s had been at least questionable, was keen to improve his public image and gave over the running of the castle, complete with a charitable donation, to the Commissioner of Works. In 1958 his son gave the castle itself to the town of Kenilworth and English Heritage has managed the property since 1984 and is open to the public. The castle is classed as a Grade I listed building and as a scheduled monument.\nBetween 2005 and 2009, English Heritage attempted to restore Kenilworth's garden more closely to its Elizabethan form, using as a basis the description in the Langham letter and details from recent archaeological investigations. The reconstruction cost more than \u00a32\u00a0million and was criticised by some archaeologists as being a \"matter of simulation as much as reconstruction\", due to the limited amount of factual information on the nature of the original gardens. In 2008 plans were put forward to re-create and flood the original Great Mere around the castle. As well as re-creating the look of the castle it was hoped that a new mere would be part of the ongoing flood alleviation plan for the area and that the lake could be used for boating and other waterside recreations.\nSince 2017 an exhibition, 'Speed and Power: John Siddeley, Pioneer of the Motor Age' has been on display. BBC One's \"Antiques Roadshow\" was filmed at the castle in 2020.\nIn June 2024, during a project to improve accessibility at the site for pedestrians and wheelchair users, eight thirteenth-century catapult shots were discovered in the grounds of the Castle. They ranged between 1kg and 105kg in weight. The shots have been dated to the 1266 siege, with reference to a similar find unearthed in the 1960s. Dr Coutts, Principal Historic Buildings Officer at Archaeology Warwickshire, has also said of the find that \"these shots were found pretty much where they would have fallen, [so] we've been able to extrapolate where the siege camps could have been located around the castle.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17077", "revid": "47773670", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17077", "title": "Konrad Lorenz", "text": "Austrian zoologist (1903\u20131989)\nKonrad Zacharias Lorenz ( ; 7 November 1903 \u2013 27 February 1989) was an Austrian zoologist, ethologist, and ornithologist. He shared the 1973 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine with Nikolaas Tinbergen and Karl von Frisch. He is often regarded as one of the founders of modern ethology, the study of animal behavior. He developed an approach that began with an earlier generation, including his teacher Oskar Heinroth.\nLorenz studied instinctive behavior in animals, especially in greylag geese and jackdaws. Working with geese, he investigated the principle of imprinting, the process by which some nidifugous birds (i.e. birds that leave their nest early) bond instinctively with the first moving object that they see within the first hours of hatching. Although Lorenz did not discover the topic, he became widely known for his descriptions of imprinting as an instinctive bond. In 1936, he met Tinbergen, and the two collaborated in developing ethology as a separate sub-discipline of biology. A \"Review of General Psychology\" survey, published in 2002, ranked Lorenz the 65th most cited scholar of the 20th century in the technical psychology journals, introductory psychology textbooks, and survey responses.\nLorenz's work was interrupted by the onset of World War II and in 1941 he was recruited into the German Army as a medic. In 1944, he was sent to the Eastern Front where he was captured by the Soviet Red Army and spent four years as a German prisoner of war in Soviet Armenia. After the war, he regretted his membership in the Nazi Party.\nLorenz wrote numerous books, some of which, such as \"King Solomon's Ring\", \"On Aggression\", and \"Man Meets Dog\", became popular reading. His last work \"Here I Am \u2013 Where Are You?\" is a summary of his life's work and focuses on his famous studies of greylag geese.\nBiography.\nLorenz was the son of Adolf Lorenz, a wealthy and distinguished surgeon, and his wife Emma (n\u00e9e Lecher), a physician who had been her husband's assistant. The family lived on a large estate at Altenberg, and had a city apartment in Vienna. He was educated at the Public Schottengymnasium of the Benedictine monks in Vienna.\nIn his autobiographical essay, published in 1973 in \"Les Prix Nobel\" (winners of the prizes are requested to provide such essays), Lorenz credits his career to his parents, who \"were supremely tolerant of my inordinate love for animals\", and to his childhood encounter with Selma Lagerl\u00f6f's \"The Wonderful Adventures of Nils\", which filled him with a great enthusiasm about wild geese.\"\nAt the request of his father, Adolf Lorenz, he began a premedical curriculum in 1922 at Columbia University, but he returned to Vienna in 1923 to continue his studies at the University of Vienna. He graduated as Doctor of Medicine (MD) in 1928 and became an assistant professor at the Institute of Anatomy until 1935. He finished his zoological studies in 1933 and received his second doctorate (PhD).\nWhile still a student, Lorenz began developing what would become a large menagerie, ranging from domestic to exotic animals. In his popular book \"King Solomon's Ring\", Lorenz recounts that while studying at the University of Vienna he kept a variety of animals at his parents' apartment, ranging from fish to a capuchin monkey named Gloria.\nIn 1936, at an international scientific symposium on instinct, Lorenz met his great friend and colleague Nikolaas Tinbergen. Together they studied geese\u2014wild, domestic, and hybrid. One result of these studies was that Lorenz \"realized that an overpowering increase in the drives of feeding as well as of copulation and a waning of more differentiated social instincts is characteristic of very many domestic animals\". Lorenz began to suspect and fear \"that analogous processes of deterioration may be at work with civilized humanity.\" This observation of bird hybrids caused Lorenz to believe that domestication resulting from urbanisation in humans might also cause dysgenic effects, and to argue in two papers that the Nazi eugenics policies against this were therefore scientifically justified.\nIn 1940 he became a professor of psychology at the University of K\u00f6nigsberg. He was drafted into the Wehrmacht in 1941. He sought to be a motorcycle mechanic, but instead he was assigned as a military psychologist, conducting racial studies on humans in occupied Pozna\u0144 under Rudolf Hippius. The objective was to study the biological characteristics of \"German-Polish half-breeds\" to determine whether they 'benefited' from the same work ethics as 'pure' Germans. The degree to which Lorenz participated in the project is unknown, but the project director Hippius referred a couple of times to Lorenz as an \"examining psychologist\".\nLorenz later described that he once saw transports of concentration camp inmates at Fort VII near Pozna\u0144, which made him \"fully realize the complete inhumanity of the Nazis\".\nHe was sent to the Russian front in 1944 where he quickly became a prisoner of war in the Soviet Union from 1944 to 1948. In captivity in Soviet Armenia, he continued to work as a medic and \"became tolerably fluent in Russian and got quite friendly with some Russians, mostly doctors.\" When he was repatriated, he was allowed to keep the manuscript of a book he had been writing and his pet starling. He arrived back in Altenberg (his family home, near Vienna) both \"with manuscript and bird intact.\" The manuscript became his 1973 book \"\".\nThe Max Planck Society established the Lorenz Institute for Behavioral Physiology in Buldern, Germany, in 1950. In his memoirs, Lorenz described the chronology of his war years differently from what historians have been able to document after his death. He himself claimed that he was captured in 1942, where in reality he was only sent to the front and captured in 1944, leaving out entirely his involvement with the Pozna\u0144 project.\nIn 1958, Lorenz transferred to the Max Planck Institute for Behavioral Physiology in Seewiesen. He shared the 1973 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine \"for discoveries in individual and social behavior patterns\" with two other important early ethologists, Nikolaas Tinbergen and Karl von Frisch. In 1969, he became the first recipient of the Prix mondial Cino Del Duca.\nHe was a friend and student of renowned biologist Sir Julian Huxley (grandson of \"Darwin's bulldog\", Thomas Henry Huxley). Famed psychoanalyst Ralph Greenson and Sir Peter Scott were good friends. Lorenz and Karl Popper were childhood friends; many years after they met, during the celebration of Popper's 80 years, they wrote together a book entitled \"Die Zukunft ist offen\".\nHe retired from the Max Planck Institute in 1973 but continued to research and publish from Altenberg and Gr\u00fcnau im Almtal in Austria. He died on 27 February 1989 in Altenberg.\nPersonal life.\nLorenz wed his childhood companion, Margarethe Gebhardt, a gynaecologist and the daughter of a local market gardener.; the couple had three children, one son and two daughters. He resided on the Lorenz family estate, notable for its \"fantastical neo-baroque mansion\", formally belonging to his father.\nEthology.\nLorenz is recognized as one of the founding fathers of the field of ethology, the study of animal behavior. He is best known for his research of the principle of attachment, or imprinting, through which in some species a bond is formed between a newborn animal and its caregiver. This principle had been discovered by Douglas Spalding in the 19th century, and Lorenz's mentor Oskar Heinroth had also worked on the topic, but Lorenz's description of \"Pr\u00e4gung\", imprinting, in nidifugous birds such as greylag geese in his 1935 book \"Der Kumpan in der Umwelt des Vogels\" (\"The Companion in the Environment of Birds\") became the foundational description of the phenomenon.\nHere, Lorenz used Jakob von Uexk\u00fcll's concept of Umwelt to understand how the limited perception of animals filtered out certain phenomena with which they interacted instinctively. For example, a young goose instinctively bonds with the first moving stimulus it perceives, whether it be its mother, or a person. Lorenz showed that this behavior of imprinting is what allows the goose to learn to recognize members of its own species, enabling them to be the object of subsequent behavior patterns such as mating. He developed a theory of instinctive behavior that saw behavior patterns as largely innate but triggered through environmental stimuli, for example the hawk/goose effect. He argued that animals have an inner drive to carry out instinctive behaviors, and that if they do not encounter the right stimulus they will eventually engage in the behavior with an inappropriate stimulus.\nLorenz's approach to ethology derived from a skepticism towards the studies of animal behavior done in laboratory settings. He considered that in order to understand the mechanisms of animal behavior, it was necessary to observe their full range of behaviors in their natural context. Lorenz did not carry out much traditional fieldwork but observed animals near his home. His method involved empathizing with animals, often using anthropomorphization to imagine their mental states. He believed that animals were capable of experiencing many of the same emotions as humans.\nTinbergen, Lorenz's friend with whom he conjointly received the Nobel Prize, summarized Lorenz's major contribution to ethology as making behavior a topic of biological inquiry, considering behavior a part of an animal's evolutionary equipment. Tinbergen and Lorenz contributed to making Ethology a recognized sub-discipline within Biology and founded the first specialized journal of the field \"Ethology\" (originally \"Zeitschift f\u00fcr Tierpsychologie\").\nInvolvement with Nazism.\nNazism.\nLorenz joined the Nazi Party in 1938 and accepted a university chair under the Nazi regime. In his application for party membership he wrote, \"I'm able to say that my whole scientific work is devoted to the ideas of the National Socialists.\" His publications during that time led in later years to allegations that his scientific work had been contaminated by Nazi sympathies. His published writing during the Nazi period included support for Nazi ideas of \"racial hygiene\" couched in pseudoscientific metaphors.\nIn his autobiography, Lorenz wrote:\nThe same individual geese on which we conducted these experiments, first aroused my interest in the process of domestication. They were F1 hybrids of wild Greylags and domestic geese and they showed surprising deviations from the normal social and sexual behaviour of the wild birds. I realised that an overpowering increase in the drives of feeding as well as of copulation and a waning of more differentiated social instincts is characteristic of very many domestic animals. I was frightened \u2013 as I still am \u2013 by the thought that analogous genetical processes of deterioration may be at work with civilized humanity. Moved by this fear, I did a very ill-advised thing soon after the Germans had invaded Austria: I wrote about the dangers of domestication and, in order to be understood, I couched my writing in the worst of Nazi-terminology. I do not want to extenuate this action. I did, indeed, believe that some good might come of the new rulers. The precedent narrow-minded catholic regime in Austria induced better and more intelligent men than I was to cherish this naive hope. Practically all my friends and teachers did so, including my own father who certainly was a kindly and humane man. None of us as much as suspected that the word \"selection\", when used by these rulers, meant murder. I regret those writings not so much for the undeniable discredit they reflect on my person as for their effect of hampering the future recognition of the dangers of domestication.\nAfter the war, Lorenz denied having been a party member, until his membership application was made public; and he denied having known the extent of the genocide, despite his position as a psychologist in the Office of Racial Policy. This practice of denial was common practice in postwar Austria, as it allowed Nazi-involved academics to return to their posts after WWII and the postwar administration was all too happy not to ask too many questions. These rehirings included Nazi functionaries (e.g. Eberhard Kranzmayer, Richard Wolfram), and very early NSDAP members (e.g. Otto H\u00f6fler), who were thus able to influence entire fields. Lorenz, for instance, was shown to have made anti-Semitic jokes on 'Jewish characteristics' in letters to his mentor Heinroth. In 2015, the University of Salzburg posthumously rescinded an honorary doctorate awarded to Lorenz in 1983, citing his party membership and his assertions in his application that he was \"always a National Socialist\", and that his work \"stands to serve National Socialist thought\". The university also accused him of using his work to spread \"basic elements of the racist ideology of National Socialism\".\nEcology.\nDuring the final years of his life, Lorenz supported the fledgling Austrian Green Party and in 1984 became the figurehead of the Konrad Lorenz Volksbegehren, a grass-roots movement that was formed to prevent the building of a power plant at the Danube near Hainburg an der Donau and thus the destruction of the surrounding woodland.\nContributions and legacy.\nLorenz has been called 'The father of ethology', by Niko Tinbergen. Perhaps Lorenz's most important contribution to ethology was his idea that behavior patterns can be studied as anatomical organs. This concept forms the foundation of ethological research. However, Richard Dawkins called Lorenz a \"'good of the species' man\", stating that the idea of group selection was \"so deeply ingrained\" in Lorenz's thinking that he \"evidently did not realize that his statements contravened orthodox Darwinian theory.\"\nTogether with Nikolaas Tinbergen, Lorenz developed the idea of an innate releasing mechanism to explain instinctive behaviors (fixed action patterns). They experimented with \"supernormal stimuli\" such as giant eggs or dummy bird beaks which they found could release the fixed action patterns more powerfully than the natural objects for which the behaviors were adapted. Influenced by the ideas of William McDougall, Lorenz developed this into a \"psychohydraulic\" model of the motivation of behavior, which tended towards group selectionist ideas, which were influential in the 1960s. Another of his contributions to ethology is his work on imprinting. His influence on a younger generation of ethologists; and his popular works, were important in bringing ethology to the attention of the general public.\nLorenz claimed that there was widespread contempt for the descriptive sciences. He attributed this to the denial of perception as the source of all scientific knowledge: \"a denial that has been elevated to the status of religion.\" He wrote that in comparative behavioral research, \"it is necessary to describe various patterns of movement, record them, and above all, render them unmistakably recognizable.\"\nThere are three research institutions named after Lorenz in Austria: the Konrad Lorenz Institute for Evolution and Cognition Research (KLI) was housed in Lorenz' family mansion at Altenberg before moving to Klosterneuburg in 2013; the Konrad Lorenz Forschungsstelle (KLF) at his former field station in Gr\u00fcnau; and the Konrad Lorenz Institute of Ethology, an external research facility of the University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna.\nVision of the challenges facing humanity.\nLorenz predicted the relationship between market economics and the threat of ecological catastrophe. In his 1973 book, \"Civilized Man's Eight Deadly Sins\", Lorenz addresses the following paradox:\nAll the advantages that man has gained from his ever-deepening understanding of the natural world that surrounds him, his technological, chemical and medical progress, all of which should seem to alleviate human suffering... tends instead to favor humanity's destruction\nLorenz adopts an ecological model to attempt to grasp the mechanisms behind this contradiction. Thus \"all species... are adapted to their environment... including not only inorganic components... but all the other living beings that inhabit the locality.\" p31.\nFundamental to Lorenz's theory of ecology is the function of negative feedback mechanisms, which, in hierarchical fashion, dampen impulses that occur beneath a certain threshold. The thresholds themselves are the product of the interaction of contrasting mechanisms. Thus pain and pleasure act as checks on each other:\nTo gain a desired prey, a dog or wolf will do things that, in other contexts, they would shy away from: run through thorn bushes, jump into cold water and expose themselves to risks which would normally frighten them. All these inhibitory mechanisms... act as a counterweight to the effects of learning mechanisms... The organism cannot allow itself to pay a price which is not worth paying. p53.\nIn nature, these mechanisms tend towards a 'stable state' among the living beings of an ecology:\nA closer examination shows that these beings... not only do not damage each other, but often constitute a community of interests. It is obvious that the predator is strongly interested in the survival of that species, animal or vegetable, which constitutes its prey. ... It is not uncommon that the prey species derives specific benefits from its interaction with the predator species... pp31\u201333.\nLorenz states that humanity is the one species not bound by these mechanisms, being the only one that has defined its own environment:\n[The pace of human ecology] is determined by the progress of man's technology (p35)... human ecology (economy) is governed by mechanisms of POSITIVE feedback, defined as a mechanism which tends to encourage behavior rather than to attenuate it (p43). Positive feedback always involves the danger of an 'avalanche' effect... One particular kind of positive feedback occurs when individuals OF THE SAME SPECIES enter into competition among themselves... For many animal species, environmental factors keep... intraspecies selection from [leading to] disaster... But there is no force which exercises this type of healthy regulatory effect on humanity's cultural development; unfortunately for itself, humanity has learned to overcome all those environmental forces which are external to itself p44.\nRegarding aggression in human beings, Lorenz states:\nLet us imagine that an absolutely unbiased investigator on another planet, perhaps on Mars, is examining human behavior on earth, with the aid of a telescope whose magnification is too small to enable him to discern individuals and follow their separate behavior, but large enough for him to observe occurrences such as migrations of peoples, wars, and similar great historical events. He would never gain the impression that human behavior was dictated by intelligence, still less by responsible morality. If we suppose our extraneous observer to be a being of pure reason, devoid of instincts himself and unaware of the way in which all instincts in general and aggression in particular can miscarry, he would be at a complete loss how to explain history at all. The ever-recurrent phenomena of history do not have reasonable causes. It is a mere commonplace to say that they are caused by what common parlance so aptly terms \"human nature.\" Unreasoning and unreasonable human nature causes two nations to compete, though no economic necessity compels them to do so; it induces two political parties or religions with amazingly similar programs of salvation to fight each other bitterly, and it impels an Alexander or a Napoleon to sacrifice millions of lives in his attempt to unite the world under his scepter. We have been taught to regard some of the persons who have committed these and similar absurdities with respect, even as \"great\" men, we are wont to yield to the political wisdom of those in charge, and we are all so accustomed to these phenomena that most of us fail to realize how abjectly stupid and undesirable the historical mass behavior of humanity actually is\nLorenz does not see human independence from natural ecological processes as necessarily bad. He states that:A completely new [ecology] which corresponds in every way to [humanity's] desires... could, theoretically, prove as durable as that which would have existed without his intervention (36).\nHowever, the principle of competition, typical of Western societies, destroys any chance of this:\nThe competition between human beings destroys with cold and diabolic brutality... Under the pressure of this competitive fury we have not only forgotten what is useful to humanity as a whole, but even that which is good and advantageous to the individual. [...] One asks, which is more damaging to modern humanity: the thirst for money or consuming haste... in either case, fear plays a very important role: the fear of being overtaken by one's competitors, the fear of becoming poor, the fear of making wrong decisions or the fear of not being up to snuff... (pp. 45\u201347)\nPhilosophical speculations.\nIn his 1973 book \"\", Lorenz considers the old philosophical question of whether our senses correctly inform us about the world as it is, or provide us only with an illusion. His answer comes from evolutionary biology. Only traits that help us survive and reproduce are transmitted. If our senses gave us wrong information about our environment, we would soon be extinct. Therefore, we can be sure that our senses give us correct information, for otherwise we would not be here to be deceived.\nWorks.\nLorenz's best-known books are \"King Solomon's Ring\" and \"On Aggression\", both written for a popular audience. His scientific work appeared mainly in journal articles, written in German; it became widely known to English-speaking scientists through its description in Tinbergen's 1951 book \"The Study of Instinct\", though many of his papers were later published in English translation in the two volumes titled \"Studies in Animal and Human Behavior\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nKonrad &amp; Adolf Lorenz Museum KALM https://www.kalm.at"}
{"id": "17078", "revid": "50441038", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17078", "title": "K. W. Jeter", "text": "American novelist\nKevin Wayne Jeter (born March 26, 1950) is an American science fiction and horror author known for his literary writing style, dark themes, and paranoid, unsympathetic characters. He has written novels set in the \"Star Trek\" and \"Star Wars\" universes, and has written three sequels to \"Blade Runner\". Jeter coined the term \"steampunks\".\nBiography.\nHe went to Buena Park High School. Jeter attended college at California State University, Fullerton where he became friends with James P. Blaylock and Tim Powers, and through them, Philip K. Dick. Jeter was actually the inspiration for \"Kevin\" in Dick's semi-autobiographical novel, \"Valis\". Many of Jeter's books focus on the subjective nature of reality in a way reminiscent of Dick's.\nPhilip K. Dick enthusiastically recommended Jeter's early cyberpunk novel, \"Dr. Adder\". Due to its violent and sexually provocative content, it took Jeter around ten years to find a publisher for it. Jeter would also coin the term steampunk, in reference to cyberpunk in a letter to \"Locus\" in April 1987, in order to describe the steam-technology, alternate-history works that he published along with his friends, Blaylock and Powers. Jeter's steampunk novels are \"Morlock Night\", \"Infernal Devices\", and its sequels \"Fiendish Schemes\" (2013) and \"Grim Expectations\" (2017).\nAs well as his own original novels, K. W. Jeter has written three authorized novel sequels to the critically acclaimed 1982 motion picture \"Blade Runner\", which was adapted from Philip K. Dick's novel \"Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17079", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17079", "title": "Kay Redfield Jamison", "text": "American bipolar disorder researcher\nKay Redfield Jamison (born June 22, 1946) is an American clinical psychologist and writer. Her work has centered on bipolar disorder, which she has had since her early adulthood. She holds the post of the Dalio Professor in Mood Disorders and Psychiatry at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine and is an Honorary Professor of English at the University of St Andrews.\nEducation and career.\nJamison began her study of clinical psychology at University of California, Los Angeles in the late 1960s, receiving both B.A. and M.A. degrees in 1971. She continued on at UCLA, receiving a C.Phil. in 1973 and a PhD in 1975, and became a faculty member at the university. She went on to found and direct the school's Affective Disorders Clinic, a large teaching and research facility for outpatient treatment. She also studied zoology and neurophysiology as an undergraduate at the University of St. Andrews in Scotland.\nAfter several years as a tenured professor at UCLA, Jamison was offered a position as Assistant Professor and then Professor of Psychiatry at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. Jamison has given visiting lectures at a number of different institutions while maintaining her professorship at Hopkins. She was distinguished lecturer at Harvard University in 2002 and the Litchfield lecturer at the University of Oxford in 2003. She was Honorary President and board member of the Canadian Psychological Association from 2009 to 2010. In 2010, she was a panelist in the series of discussions on the latest research into the brain, hosted by Charlie Rose with series scientist Eric Kandel on PBS.\nAwards and recognition.\nJamison has won numerous awards and published over 100 academic articles. She has been named one of the \"Best Doctors in the United States\" and was chosen by \"Time\" as a \"Hero of Medicine.\" She was also chosen as one of the five individuals for the public television series \"Great Minds of Medicine\". Jamison is the recipient of the National Mental Health Association's William Styron Award (1995), the American Foundation for Suicide Prevention Research Award (1996), the Community Mental Health Leadership Award (1999), and was a 2001 MacArthur Fellowship recipient.\nIn 2010, Jamison was conferred with an Honorary Degree of Doctor of Letters from the University of St Andrews in recognition of all her life's work. In May 2011, The General Theological Seminary of the Episcopal Church, New York, made her a Doctor of Divinity \"honoris causa\" at its annual Commencement. In 2017 Jamison was elected a Corresponding Fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh (CorrFRSE).\nAcademic contributions.\nHer latest book, \"Robert Lowell: Setting the River on Fire\", was a Pulitzer Prize Finalist for Biography in 2018.\nHer book \"Manic-Depressive Illness\", first published in 1990 and co-authored with psychiatrist Frederick K. Goodwin is considered a classic textbook on bipolar disorder. The Acknowledgements section states that Goodwin \"received unrestricted educational grants to support\nthe production of this book from Abbott, AstraZeneca, Bristol Meyers Squibb, Forest, GlaxoSmithKline, Janssen, Eli Lilly, Pfizer, and Sanofi\", but that although Jamison has \"received occasional lecture honoraria\nfrom AstraZeneca, GlaxoSmithKline, and Eli Lilly\" she \"has received no research support from any pharmaceutical or biotechnology company\" and donates her royalties to a non-profit foundation.\nHer seminal works among laypeople are her memoir \"An Unquiet Mind\", which details her experience with severe mania and depression, and \"Night Falls Fast: Understanding Suicide\", providing historical, religious, and cultural responses to suicide, as well as the relationship between mental illness and suicide. In \"Night Falls Fast\", Jamison dedicates a chapter to American public policy and public opinion as it relates to suicide. Her second memoir, \"Nothing Was the Same\", examines her relationship with her second husband, the psychiatrist Richard Jed Wyatt, who was Chief of the Neuropsychiatry Branch of the National Institute of Mental Health until his death in 2002.\nIn her study \"Exuberance: The Passion for Life\", she cites research that suggests that 15 percent of people who could be diagnosed as bipolar may never actually become depressed; in effect, they are permanently \"high\" on life. She mentions President Theodore Roosevelt as an example.\n\"Touched with Fire: Manic-Depressive Illness and the Artistic Temperament\" is Jamison's exploration of how bipolar disorder can run in artistic or high-achieving families. As an example, she cites Lord Byron and his relatives.\nJamison wrote \"An Unquiet Mind: A Memoir of Moods and Madness\" in part to help clinicians see what patients find helpful in therapy. J. Wesley Boyd, an assistant professor at the Department of Psychiatry at Tufts University's School of Medicine, wrote, \"Jamison's description [of the debt she owed her psychiatrist] illustrates the importance of merely being present for our patients and not trying to soothe them with platitudes or promises of a better future.\"\nPersonal life.\nJamison has said she is an \"exuberant\" person who longs for peace and tranquility but in the end prefers \"tumultuousness coupled to iron discipline\" to a \"stunningly boring life.\" In \"An Unquiet Mind\", she concluded:\nI long ago abandoned the notion of a life without storms, or a world without dry and killing seasons. Life is too complicated, too constantly changing, to be anything but what it is. And I am, by nature, too mercurial to be anything but deeply wary of the grave unnaturalness involved in any attempt to exert too much control over essentially uncontrollable forces. There will always be propelling, disturbing elements, and they will be there until, as Lowell put it, the watch is taken from the wrist. It is, at the end of the day, the individual moments of restlessness, of bleakness, of strong persuasions and maddened enthusiasms, that inform one's life, change the nature and direction of one's work, and give final meaning and color to one's loves and friendships.\nJamison was born to Dr. Marshall Verdine Jamison (1916\u20132012), an officer in the U.S. Air Force, and Mary Dell Temple Jamison (1916\u20132007). Jamison's father, and many others in his family, had bipolar disorder.\nAs a result of Jamison's military background, she grew up in many different places, including Florida, Puerto Rico, California, Tokyo, and Washington, D.C. She has two older siblings, a brother and a sister, who are three years and half a year older, respectively. Her niece is writer Leslie Jamison. Jamison's interest in science and medicine began at a young age and was fostered by her parents. She worked as a candy striper at the hospital on Andrews Air Force Base.\nJamison moved to California during adolescence, and soon thereafter began to struggle with bipolar disorder. She continued to struggle in college at UCLA. At first she wanted to become a doctor, but because of increasing occurring manic episodes, she decided she could not maintain the rigorous discipline needed for medical school. Jamison then found her calling in psychology. Here she flourished and was extremely interested in mood disorders. Despite her studies, Jamison did not realize that she was bipolar until three months into her first job as a professor in UCLA's Department of Psychology. After her diagnosis, she was put on lithium, a drug that has commonly been used to regulate and moderate moods. At times, she would refuse the medication because it impaired her motor skills, but after a greater depression she decided to continue to take it. Jamison once attempted suicide by overdosing on lithium during a severe depressive episode.\nJamison is an Episcopalian, and she was married to her first husband, Alain Andr\u00e9 Moreau, an artist, during her graduate school years. She later married Dr. Richard Wyatt in 1994; and they remained married until his death in 2002. Wyatt was a psychiatrist who studied schizophrenia at the National Institutes of Health. Their romance is detailed in her memoir \"Nothing Was the Same\".\nIn 2010, Jamison married Thomas Traill, a cardiology professor at Johns Hopkins.\n*\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17080", "revid": "30717234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17080", "title": "Karaoke", "text": "Form of entertainment involving singing to recorded music\n is a type of interactive entertainment system usually offered in nightclubs and bars, where people sing along to pre-recorded accompaniment using a microphone. \nIts musical content is an instrumental rendition of a well-known popular song. In recent times, lyrics are typically displayed on a video screen, along with a moving symbol, changing colour, or music video images, to guide the singer. In Chinese-speaking countries and regions such as mainland China, Hong Kong, Taiwan and Singapore, a karaoke box is called a KTV. The global karaoke market has been estimated to be worth nearly $10\u00a0billion.\nKaraoke's global popularity has been fueled by technological advancements, making it a staple of social gatherings and entertainment venues all over the world. The precursors of karaoke machines using cassette tapes made their first appearances in Japan and the Philippines in the 1970s. Commercial versions manufactured by Japanese companies using LaserDisc became available worldwide in the 1980s, leading to a surge in popularity. Karaoke machines are commonly found in lounges, nightclubs, and bars; as well as in-home versions which later combined with home theater systems. Over time, karaoke has evolved with digital music, video games, smartphone apps, and online platforms, allowing users to sing anytime and anywhere. Beyond leisure, karaoke is used for professional training in music and public speaking, highlighting its broad appeal and impact on popular culture.\nHistory.\n1960s: Development of audio-visual-recording devices.\nFrom 1961 to 1966, the American TV network NBC carried a karaoke-like series, \"Sing Along with Mitch\", featuring host Mitch Miller and a chorus, which superimposed the lyrics to their songs near the bottom of the TV screen for home audience participation. The primary difference between karaoke and sing-along songs is the absence of the lead vocalist.\nSing-alongs (present since the beginning of singing) fundamentally changed with the introduction of new technology. In the late 1960s and into the 1970s, stored audible materials began to dominate the music recording industry and revolutionized the portability and ease of use of band and instrumental music by musicians and entertainers as the demand for entertainers increased globally. This may have been attributable to the introduction of music cassette tapes, technology that arose from the need to customize music recordings and the desire for a \"handy\" format that would allow fast and convenient duplication of music and thereby meet the requirements of the entertainers' lifestyles and the 'footloose' character of the entertainment industry.\n1970s: Development of the karaoke machine.\nDespite the Japanese provenance of the term \"karaoke\" (first attested in 1977), the invention of karaoke-styled machines is controversial. It is usually credited to two people, depending on the sources: Daisuke Inoue of Japan or Roberto del Rosario of the Philippines, neither of whom significantly benefited from the worldwide surge of popularity of the karaoke starting from the 1980s. The profits in the karaoke industry went to later machines developed by larger Japanese corporations. Other people have also claimed to have invented karaoke-styled machines at various dates, but only del Rosario has a patent on his machine. The fact that the karaoke machine is simply an aggregate of existing technologies and is built on the older concept of sing-alongs makes it likely that it was developed independently multiple times.\nDaisuke Inoue.\nIn a 1996 interview with a Singapore-based all-karaoke TV channel, the Japanese nightclub musician Daisuke Inoue claimed to have invented the first karaoke-style machine in the city of Kobe in 1971. He was also credited for the invention of karaoke when he was later also featured on a \"Time\" magazine article in 1999.\nInoue, a bandleader, drummer, and Electone keyboardist, specialized in leading sing-alongs at nightclubs in Sannomiya, the entertainment district of the city of Kobe. In 1970, he and six bandmates played instruments in fancy drinking establishments to accompany middle-aged businessmen who would sing traditional Japanese songs. He claimed to have first thought of the idea of a karaoke-style machine when he was asked by a prominent client to play for him on an overnight trip to an onsen. Not being able to do so, he instead provided a tape of his accompaniment to the client. Realizing its potential, he thought of merging these pre-taped accompaniments with a jukebox.\nLacking the skills to make the machine himself, one of his bandmates introduced him to a friend who owned an electronics shop. He described his idea to him and commissioned 11 home-made machines which he called \"8 Juke.\" Each machine cost around $425 per unit and consisted of a box containing an amplifier, a microphone, a coin box, and a car stereo which used specially made 8-track tapes. The machines metered out several minutes of singing time and used \u00a5100 coins.\nHe initially recorded his own versions of popular songs with his bandmates for the tapes. Starting from 1971, Inoue loaned the machines to establishments for free in exchange for a portion of the monthly earnings from the machines. He placed the first 8 Jukes in Sannomiya's \"snack bars\", but they initially failed to take off. Inoue then hired hostesses to ostentatiously sing on them, which successfully sparked interest. This also caused a great deal of friction with Inoue's fellow musicians, who saw it as drawing customers away from them. \nWhen profits improved at around four years of operation, he hired professional musicians and rented a recording studio to create the 8-tracks for the machines. He made the songs in keys that made them easier for casual singers. As such he also included a rudimentary reverb function to help mask singers' deficiencies. By this time, the number of units he rented had increased from the initial eleven to around 25,000. Club owners from Kobe had started bringing his machines to new clubs in Osaka which became the birthplace of the karaoke boom in Japan. He also managed to convince large record labels to include their songs in the tracks for the 8 Jukes. For these reasons, Inoue is often considered to be the inventor of the modern business model for karaoke.\nInoue never patented his machine. While initially successful and earning approximately half a million dollars a year, Inoue lost interest in the business. He eventually handed over the company to his brother. By the 1980s, the idea of coin-operated sing-along machines was picked up by larger Japanese corporations who started manufacturing commercial versions of their own with better technologies like LaserDiscs.\nIn 2004, Daisuke Inoue was awarded the tongue-in-cheek Ig Nobel Peace Prize for inventing karaoke, \"thereby providing an entirely new way for people to learn to tolerate each other.\"\nRoberto del Rosario.\nIn 1975, the Filipino entrepreneur and piano manufacturer Roberto del Rosario also claimed to have invented the first karaoke-type machine known as the \"Sing-Along System\" (SAS). The machine included multiple features enclosed in a single portable cabinet casing; including an amplifier, a speaker, a double or single tape deck, an optional tuner or radio, and a microphone mixer that enhances the singer's voice using effects like reverb and echo. The machine used cassette tapes of instrumental versions of popular songs which would later become more widely known as Minus-One. The machine did not have video, but it included songbooks with lyrics.\nThe SAS was originally developed since the late 1960s as a teaching device for students taking singing lessons at del Rosario's Trebel School of Music. It was refashioned for amateur and recreational use from 1975 to 1977. Unlike Inoue's \"8 Juke\", it was not coin-operated.\nDel Rosario was himself a pianist and was a member of the amateur jazz group Executive Combo Band (composed mainly of politicians and prominent businessmen). He owned a company, Trebel Industries, that was the leading manufacturer of pianos and harpsichords in the Philippines. Del Rosario also invented and patented other audio equipment before and after the SAS. His other inventions included the 1972 \"One-Man Band\" (OMB), an acoustic piano that automatically plays a full orchestra accompaniment; the \"Piano Tuners' Guide\", an electronic push-button device for piano tuning; and \"Voice Color Tapes\", ready-made multiplex tapes with songs recorded and programmed to match a specific vocal range.\nUnlike Inoue, del Rosario patented the \"Sing-Along System\" (issued in 1983 and 1986) and is recognized as the sole holder of a patent for a karaoke system in the world after he won a patent infringement case against a Chinese company in the 1990s. Despite this, he also did not profit significantly from his invention. Like Inoue, his machines were eventually replaced by more advanced commercial versions made by larger corporations that became available by the 1980s.\nIn 1985, Del Rosario was awarded the Gold Medal for Best Inventor by the World Intellectual Property Organization for the Sing-Along System, among other awards. He was also elected to the executive board of the International Federation of Inventors' Associations (IFIA). He also lobbied for more government support for inventors in the Congress of the Philippines, leading to the successful passage of Republic Act No. 7459, better known as the Inventor and Inventions Incentives Act of 1992.\nOther possible inventors.\nJapanese engineer Shigeichi Negishi, who ran a consumer electronics assembly business, also claimed to have made the first karaoke-styled machine in 1967; He subsequently began mass producing coin-operated versions under the brand name \"Sparko Box\", making it the first commercially available karaoke machine. For media, it used 8-track cassette tapes of commercially available instrumental recordings. Lyrics were provided in a paper booklet. However, he ran into distribution troubles and ceased production of the Sparko Box shortly thereafter. Despite being credited by some as the first to automate and commercialize the karaoke singalong, Negishi, who died in 2024, never patented his invention. \nAnother possible early pioneer was Toshiharu Yamashita, who worked as a singing coach, and in 1970 sold an 8-track playback deck with microphone for sing-alongs.\nLater developments.\nShortly after the development of the LaserDisc, Pioneer started to offer Video Karaoke machines in the 1980s. These are capable of displaying lyrics over a video that accompanies the music.\n In 1992, a scientist named Yuichi Yasutomo created a networked karaoke system for Brother Industries. Called , it served up songs in MIDI format via phone lines to modem-equipped karaoke machines. This new technology swept Japan; by 1998, 94% of karaoke was being sung on networked karaoke machines. As an early form of music on demand, it could be called the first successful audio streaming service. It also allowed for big data analysis of songs popularity in realtime.\nKaraoke soon spread to the rest of Asia and other countries all over the world. In-home karaoke machines soon followed but lacked success in the American and Canadian markets. When creators became aware of this problem, karaoke machines were no longer being sold strictly for the purpose of karaoke but as home theater systems to enhance television watching to \"movie theater like quality\". Home theater systems took off, and karaoke went from being the main purpose of the stereo system to a side feature.\nAs more music became available for karaoke machines, more people within the industry saw karaoke as a profitable form of lounge and nightclub entertainment. It is not uncommon for some bars to have karaoke performances seven nights a week, commonly with high-end sound equipment superior to the small, stand-alone consumer versions. Dance floors and lighting effects are also becoming common sights in karaoke bars. Lyrics are often displayed on multiple television screens around the bar.\nTechnology.\nA basic karaoke machine consists of a music player, microphone inputs, a means of altering the pitch of the played music, and an audio output. Some low-end machines attempt to provide vocal suppression so that one can feed regular songs into the machine and remove the voice of the original singer; however this was, historically, rarely effective. Most common machines are CD+G, Laser Disc, VCD or DVD players with microphone inputs and an audio mixer built in, though VHS VCRs are sometimes used. CD+G players use a special track called subcode to encode the lyrics and pictures displayed on the screen while other formats natively display both audio and video.\nMost karaoke machines have technology that electronically changes the pitch of the music so that amateur singers can choose a key that is appropriate for their vocal range, while maintaining the original tempo of the song. (Old systems which used cassettes changed the pitch by altering playback speed, but none are still on the market, and their commercial use is virtually nonexistent.)\nA popular game using karaoke is to type in a random number and call up a song, which participants attempt to sing. In some machines, this game is pre-programmed and may be limited to a genre so that they cannot call up an obscure national anthem that none of the participants can sing. This game has come to be called \"Kamikaze Karaoke\" or \"Karaoke Roulette\" in some parts of the United States and Canada.\nMany low-end entertainment systems have a karaoke mode that attempts to remove the vocal track from regular audio CDs, using an Out Of Phase Stereo (OOPS) technique. This is done by center channel extraction, which exploits the fact that in most stereo recordings the vocals are in the center. This means that the voice, as part of the music, has equal volume on both stereo channels and no phase difference. To get the quasi-karaoke (mono) track, the left channel of the original audio is subtracted from the right channel. The Sega Saturn also has a \"mute vocals\" feature that is based on the same principle and is also able to adjust the pitch of the song to match the singer's vocal range.\nThis crude approach results in the often-poor performance of voice removal. Common effects are hearing the reverb effects on the voice track (due to stereo reverb on the vocals not being in the center); also, other instruments (snare/bass drum, bass guitar and solo instruments) that happen to be mixed into the center get removed, degrading this approach to hardly more than a gimmick in those devices. Recent years have seen the development of new techniques based on the fast Fourier transform. Although still not perfect, the results are usually much better than the old technique, because the stereo left-right comparison can be done on individual frequencies.\nEarly age.\nEarly karaoke machines used 8-track cartridges (The Singing Machine) and cassette tapes, with printed lyric sheets, but technological advances replaced this with CDs, VCDs, LaserDiscs and, currently, DVDs. In the late 1980s and 1990s, Pioneer Electronics dominated the international karaoke music video market, producing high quality karaoke music videos (inspired by the music videos such as those on MTV).\nIn 1992, Taito introduced the X2000, which fetched music via a dial-up telephone network. Its repertoire of music and graphics was limited, but its smaller size and the advantage of continuous updates saw it gradually replace traditional machines. Karaoke machines which are connected via fiber-optic links enabling them to provide instant high-quality music and video are becoming increasingly popular.\n\"Karaoke direct\" is an Internet division established in 1997 been serving the public online since 1998. They released the first karaoke player that supports MP3+G and now the KDX2000 model supporting karaoke in DIVX, Format.\nOne of the long-running karaoke device is the DVD and HDD karaoke systems, which comes with thousands of songs that are popular in business such as karaoke machine rentals and KTV bars, and became popular in Asia, especially the Philippines. This device also provides MIDI format with on-screen lyrics on a background video and scoring after you sing, the score will appear from 60 (lowest) to 100 (highest) based on timing and pitch.\nVideo games.\nThe earliest karaoke-based music video game, called \"Karaoke Studio\", was released for the Family Computer in 1987, but its limited computing ability made for a short catalog of songs and therefore reduced replay value. As a result, karaoke games were considered little more than collector's items until they saw release in higher-capacity DVD formats.\n\"Karaoke Revolution\", created for the PlayStation 2 by Harmonix and released by Konami in North America in 2003, is a console game in which a single player sings along with on-screen guidance and receives a score based on pitch, timing, and rhythm. The game soon spawned several follow-ups including \"Karaoke Revolution Vol. 2\", \"Karaoke Revolution Vol. 3\", \"Karaoke Revolution Party Edition\", \"CMT Presents Karaoke Revolution: Country\" and \"Karaoke Revolution Presents: American Idol\". While the original \"Karaoke Revolution\" was also eventually released for the Microsoft Xbox console in late 2004, the new online-enabled version included the ability to download additional song packs through the console's exclusive Xbox Live service.\nA similar series, \"SingStar\", published by Sony Computer Entertainment Europe, is particularly popular in the European and Australasian markets. Other music video game titles that involve singing by the player include \"Boogie\" and its sequel \"Boogie Superstar\", \"Disney Sing It\", \"Get On Da Mic\", the \"Guitar Hero\" series starting with \"World Tour\", \"\", \"Lips\", the \"Rock Band\" series, \"SingSong\", \"UltraStar\", and \"Xbox Music Mixer\".\nAn Xbox Live App with the same name created by iNiS and powered by The Karaoke Channel/Stingray Karaoke was released on 12 December 2012. The app uses Unreal Engine 3.\nVCDs.\nMany VCD players in Southeast Asia have a built-in karaoke function. On stereo recordings, one speaker will play the music with the vocal track, and the other speaker will play the music without the vocal track. So, to sing karaoke, users play the music-only track through both speakers. In the past, there were only pop-song karaoke VCDs. Nowadays, different types of karaoke VCDs are available. Cantonese opera karaoke VCD is now a big hit among the elderly in China.\nOn computers and the Internet.\nSince 2003, much software has been released for hosting karaoke shows and playing karaoke songs on a personal computer. Instead of having to carry around hundreds of CD-Gs or LaserDiscs, karaoke jockeys can rip their entire libraries onto their hard drives and play the songs and lyrics from the computer.\nAdditionally, new software permits singers to sing and listen to one another over the Internet.\nKaraoke devices in the 2000s saw a shift towards the use of hard drives to store large collections of karaoke tracks and touch screen devices that allows users to select their songs. This trend was driven by the declining cost of hard drive storage and improvement in touchscreen technology in the consumer space.\nIn 2005, Freeware Karaoke software from Thailand on Windows \"All In One Karaoke Player\" Version 2.0 has released It can play all MIDI Karaoke file (.MID, .KAR, .RMS etc.), Video Karaoke file (VCD, MP4, DVD, MPG, DAT, WMV) and Audio Karaoke file (MP3, OGG+HotBeat).\nIn 2006, first released of eXtreme Karaoke is a paid software by bank transfer pay 500 THB and send to E-mail for activate license key and also can play same with All In One Karaoke Player. and in 2008 eXtreme Karaoke changed from License file to HardLock (USB Dongle) the price is 2,000 THB for software. In 2006, Recisio was founded as a downloadable karaoke software.\nIn 2010, a new concept of home karaoke system through the use of live streaming from a cloud server emerged. The earliest cloud based streaming device, KaraOK!, was released by StarHub on 14 January 2010, licensing songs from RIMMS. The use of cloud streaming allows for smaller devices with over the air updates compared to costly and bulky hard drive-based systems. Recisio transitioned into Karafun, an online subscription based system in 2011. In 2015, Singa (karaoke) was launched, providing karaoke for Android and iOS mobile devices, in addition to a web browser product for a subscription fee. Other similar service providers include Smule and Starmaker.\nIn August 2017, ROXI home music system launched in the UK, and later that year in the US, providing on-demand music streaming and a karaoke singalong feature called Sing with the Stars. ROXI matches songs in its cloud based licensed music streaming catalogue to a lyrics database to provide real time scrolling on-screen lyrics. The music system also uses a hand-held Wii style point and click controller with built-in microphone allowing users to select and sing along to thousands of songs from its catalogue.\nIn July 2023, YouTube channel Sing King Karaoke reached 11 million subscribers, making it the largest karaoke channel on the platform.\nOn mobile phones.\nIn 2003, several companies started offering a karaoke service on mobile phones, using a Java MIDlet that runs with a text file containing the words and a MIDI file with the music. More usual is to contain the lyrics within the same MIDI file. Often the file extension is then changed from .mid to .kar, both are compatible with the standard for MIDI files.\nResearchers have also developed karaoke games for cell phones to boost music database training. In 2006, the Interactive Audio Lab at Northwestern University released a game called Karaoke Callout for the Nokia Series 60 phone. The project has since then expanded into a web-based game and will be released soon as an iPhone application.\nKaraoke is now available for the Android, iPhone and other playback devices at many internet storefronts.\nIn automobiles.\nTaxicabs equipped with sound systems and a microphone appeared in South Korea in the 1990s.\nChinese automobile maker Geely Automobile received much press in 2003 for being the first to equip a car, their Beauty Leopard, with a karaoke machine as standard equipment. Europe's first commercial \"karaokecab\" which was a London TX4 taxi with a karaoke machine inside for occupants of the cab to use to sing whilst in the cab. The idea and installation were made by Richard Harfield of karaokeshop.com and was featured on Channel 4's Big Breakfast and several German TV stations featured the karaokecab. Granada TV also featured the cab, which is now in its 4th vehicle and operates in Bolton, Greater Manchester as Clint's Karaoke Cab. Karaoke is often also found as a feature in aftermarket in-car DVD players.\nIn 2010, karaoke taxis were available in London, England in the 'Kabeoke' fleet of private hire vehicles.\nTesla's newer cars have an infotainment system that features a \"Car-a-oke\" app.\nMini karaoke box.\nMini karaoke box or karaoke booth is a device similar in shape and size to a phone booth, equipped with a karaoke machine inside. Typically made from soundproof glass, it can be installed anywhere and is suitable for use by one or two people. It is popular in East Asia.\nAlternative playback devices.\nThe CD+G format of a karaoke disc, which contains the lyrics on a specially encoded subcode track, has heretofore required special\u2014and expensive\u2014equipment to play. Commercial players have come down in price, though, and some unexpected devices (including the Sega Saturn video game console and XBMC Media Center on the first Xbox) can decode the graphics; in fact, karaoke machines, including video and sometimes recording capability, are often popular electronics items for sale in toy stores and electronics stores.\nAdditionally, there is software for Windows, Pocket PC, Linux, and Macintosh PCs that can decode and display karaoke song tracks, though usually these must be ripped from the CD first, and possibly compressed.\nIn addition to CD+G and software-based karaoke, microphone-based karaoke players enjoy popularity mainly in North America and some Asian countries such as the Philippines. Microphone-based karaoke players only need to be connected to a TV\u2014and in some cases to a power outlet; in other cases they run on batteries. These devices often support advanced features, such as pitch correction and special sound effects. Some companies offer karaoke content for paid download to extend the song library in microphone-based karaoke systems.\nCD+G, DVD, VCD and microphone-based players are most popular for home use. Due to song selection and quality of recordings, CD+G is the most popular format for English and Spanish. It is also important to note that CD+G has limited graphical capabilities, whereas VCD and DVD usually have a moving picture or video background. VCD and DVD are the most common format for Asian singers due to music availability and largely due to the moving picture/video background.\n (\u5341\u516b\u756a. also \"ohako\"). Many karaoke singers have one song which they are especially good at and which they use to show off their singing abilities. In Japan, this is called \"j\u016bhachiban\" in reference to Kabuki J\u016bhachiban, the 18 best kabuki plays. \u5341\u516b\u756a means eighteen in Japanese as well.\n Karaoke using scenes from movies. Amateur actors replace their favorite movie stars in popular movies. Usually facilitated by software or remote control muting and screen blanking/freezing. Karamovie originated in 2003.\nA karaoke jockey plays and manages the music for a venue. The role of the KJ often includes announcing song titles and whose turn it is to use the microphone.\nSinging karaoke alone is called hitokara (\u30d2\u30c8\u30ab\u30e9, abbreviation for \u3072\u3068\u308a\u30ab\u30e9\u30aa\u30b1; \u3072\u3068\u308a \"hitori\", \"one person\" or \"alone\" + \u30ab\u30e9\u30aa\u30b1 \"karaoke\") in Japan. Recently this trend has become very popular amongst amateur singers in Japan, India and China, though mostly Japan.\nIn culture.\nPublic places.\nAsia.\nIn Asia, a karaoke box is the most popular type of karaoke venue. A karaoke box is a small or medium-sized room containing karaoke equipment rented by the hour or half-hour, providing a more intimate atmosphere. Karaoke venues of this type are often dedicated businesses, some with multiple floors and a variety of amenities including food service, but hotels and business facilities sometimes provide karaoke boxes as well. In South Korea, karaoke boxes are called \"noraebangs\". In mainland China and Taiwan, a karaoke establishment is called a KTV.\nIn some traditional Chinese restaurants, there are so-called \"mahjong-karaoke rooms\" where the elderly play mahjong while teenagers sing karaoke. The result is fewer complaints about boredom, but more noise. Noise regulations can be an issue, especially when karaoke is brought into residential areas.\nViolent reactions to karaoke singing have made headlines in Malaysia, Thailand and the Philippines, with reports of killings by listeners disturbed by the singing. In the Philippines, at least half a dozen killings of people singing \"My Way\" caused newspapers there to label the phenomenon \"My Way killings\"; such that some bars refused to allow the song, and some singers refrained from vocalizing it among strangers.\nProstitution became an issue implicating karaoke in Cambodia, Sri Lanka, Thailand and other parts of Southeast Asia. In Thailand, \"karaoke girls\" are brought in not only from Thailand itself but from neighboring countries and are sent to other parts of the world.\nAsian karaoke establishments are often fronts for gentlemen's clubs, where men pay for female hosts to drink, sing, and dance with them. In Japan, such a business is called a piano bar.\nAfter the COVID-19 outbreak, karaoke bars in Japan reopened with rules such as mask wearing, mic covers, and singer must face same direction as onlookers. \nPhilippines.\nInstrumental tracks on cassette tapes were initially the format used by Roberto del Rosario's \"Sing-Along System\". By the 1980s, including instrumental-only tracks on the B-side of commercial song and album releases had become standard practice in the Philippine recording industry, popularly known as Minus-One. \nDel Rosario's \"Sing-Along System\" led to the rapid growth of popularity of \"sing-alongs\" in the Philippines. Singing contests were staged in town fiestas, where amateurs from all walks of life competed. In later years, the audio-only Sing-Along Systems were replaced by Japanese-style coin-operated machines with video and running lyrics that came to be known as \"videoke\". It became a popular domestic recreational pastime among Filipinos. It also led to the popularity of nighttime videoke bars.\nTaiwan.\nIn Taiwan, karaoke bars similar to those in Japan and South Korea are called KTVs, which stands for karaoke television. Karaoke is a highly popular form of recreation in Taiwan. The biggest KTV chains in Taiwan are Partyworld Cashbox, Holiday KTV and NewCBParty.\nSouth Korea.\nA noraebang (Hangul: \ub178\ub798\ubc29) refers to a singing venue in South Korea where private sound-proof rooms are available for rent, equipped for singing \u2013 typically microphones, remote controls, a large video screen, couches, and mood d\u00e9cor such as disco lights and tambourines. The term noraebang is a Korean compound word, blending norae (Hangul: \ub178\ub798, English: song) and bang (Hangul: \ubc29, English: room). It is the regional equivalent to the Karaoke box in Japan.\nSinging is an important part of social life in Korea, where people will perform, and be persuaded to perform, an impromptu song at virtually any social occasion. As such, noraebangs are popular and widespread, often identifiable by bright neon signs with musical notes or microphones.\nOften the last stop after a night of alcohol-lined entertainment for youths and businesspeople alike, noraebangs are also a favorite family pastime, and many are surprisingly dry venues. People also frequent noraebangs as a form of stress relief, and some noraebangs cater to those who seek to sing alone.\nNorth America and Europe.\nA karaoke bar, restaurant, club or lounge is a bar or restaurant that provides karaoke equipment so that people can sing publicly, sometimes on a small stage. Most of these establishments allow patrons to sing for free, with the expectation that sufficient revenue will be made selling food and drink to the singers. Less commonly, the patron wishing to sing must pay a small fee for each song they sing. Both are financially beneficial for the establishment by not having to pay a professional singer or a cabaret tax which is usually applied to any entertainment of more than one person.\nMany establishments offer karaoke on a weekly schedule, while some have shows every night. Such establishments commonly invest more in both equipment and song discs, and are often extremely popular, with an hour or more wait between a singer's opportunities to take the stage (called the \"rotation\").\nPrivate karaoke rooms, similar to Asia's karaoke boxes, are commonplace in major cities.\nKaraoke is very popular in Scotland with dedicated karaoke venues in most reasonably large towns. Aberdeen is home to a number of notable karaoke bars including Weagleys, The Spirit Level, Bardot's Karaoke Bar, Sing City. In North America, the Tri State area is known to have many lounges that participate in weekly karaoke shows. New Jersey has many establishments that are frequented by people of different backgrounds who also participate in karaoke. Hugo's Lounge and Love Lounge located in Plainfield, New Jersey are just a couple of the many establishments with weekly karaoke schedules.\nThroughout much of North America, live band karaoke is also popular. With live band karaoke, singers sing with a live band instead of the prerecorded backing track.\nRock critic Rob Sheffield claims that the 1986 music video for the song \"Wild Wild Life\" by Talking Heads was the first depiction of karaoke in American popular culture. The video features a variety of characters taking turns singing portions of the song to an audience at a bar. However a karaoke bar in Honolulu called \"Sing Sing\" is depicted in an episode of the American TV series \"Magnum, P.I.\" entitled \"The Man from Marseilles\" first broadcast on March 14, 1985.\nIn Italy, karaoke had become popular by early 1994, popularized by television personality Rosario Fiorello who had a karaoke program that appeared weekly on national television.\n Karaoke made a brief appearance in Sofia Coppola's 2003 movie \"Lost in Translation\", and it was, three years before, the primary focus of Bruce Paltrow's 2000 film \"Duets,\" written by John Bynum and starring Paltrow's daughter Gwyneth and Huey Lewis, \"anchor-man\" of Huey Lewis and the News.\nAlso popular among the international performing arts community in Europe, a group of Finnish producers organized an international karaoke competition called KWC (Karaoke World Championships). Their 2011 international karaoke competition has attracted ABC producers to help host America's karaoke competition in Las Vegas Nevada called Karaoke Battle USA. The competition is promised to select 1 male and 1 female contestant to represent the U.S. in the international arena. Largely supported by the Broadway community in Times Square, Pulse Karaoke Lounge sponsored 2011's New York state karaoke finals to select individuals representing New York in the eastern finals.\nAccording to \"The New York Times\", the dozens of karaoke bars in Portland, Oregon make it not just \"the capital of karaoke\" in the United States, but \"one of the most exciting music scenes in America.\"\nAustralia.\nIn Australia, karaoke was gradually popularized in the late 1980s. A number of Filipino migrants brought with them their own 'minus-one' music from cassette music tapes and video tapes purchased mainly in the Philippines. A number of Philippine-imported karaoke units with two cassette drives were used in private households. Video TV tapes, mainly consisted of popular and contemporary songs rendered by Filipino artists, and with a mix of English and Tagalog songs were soon used. Projected lyrics on TV screens became very common as the main source of karaoke renditions. These tapes were soon replaced by CD+Gs, but a plug-n-play karaoke microphone that housed a factory built-in songchip loaded with hundreds of karaoke songs quickly became a favourite. This unit would usually be purchased in the Philippines and brought into Australia, becoming a common household item and is popularly used during gatherings.\nCommercially, karaoke was first introduced into Australia in 1989 by Robin Hemmings who had seen karaoke operating in Fiji. Prior to this, karaoke was generally unknown to the broader population. Hemmings, of Adelaide, South Australia, offered systems manufactured by Pioneer which used 12in (30\u00a0cm) double-sided laser discs containing a maximum of 24 songs with accompanying video track and subtitled lyrics.\nDespite some initial resistance, Adelaide hoteliers The Booze Brothers offered limited access to their hotels and the karaoke phenomenon was born. Hemmings business, Karaoke Hire Systems, operated seven machines on a casual rental basis to numerous hotels, clubs and private parties in and around Adelaide with an additional machine on snow-season lease at Jindabyne, NSW. Each system came complete with up to 24 discs containing a maximum of 576 music video tracks. In Adelaide, karaoke reached its zenith in 1991 with virtually every hotel offering at least one karaoke night per week with many having undertaken alterations to their premises with the addition of purpose built stages and sound systems. Karaoke rental suppliers had proliferated during this period and Hemmings is known to have sold his business in late 1991 as a going concern.\nKaraoke's popularity in Adelaide waned from mid 1992 and was virtually extinguished by early 1993, until recently where karaoke bars have largely regained their former popularity among the city's increasing international population. In 2021, the University of Adelaide Karaoke Club was formed, re-popularizing karaoke among the student population of Adelaide.\nIn the mid-2000s, a number of karaoke bars sprouted in Sydney with karaoke boxes frequented by Japanese students and tourists and a few locals, especially on Thursday nights and weekends. A number of clubs such as RSL, League Clubs and restaurants and bars mainly feature karaoke nights to entice more customers and to entertain guests. Sunfly Karaoke is probably the major karaoke brand in Australia as well as the UK.\nProduction methods.\nKaraoke is very popular in Asian countries, and many artists distribute a karaoke track at the same time the song is released. The most common form of karaoke nowadays is released in MIDI format with on-screen lyrics on a DVD background video.\nIn Europe and North America, karaoke tracks are almost never done by the original artist, but are re-recorded by other musicians.\nSouth Korean firms TJ Media, Magic Sing, Kumyoung produce digital music content in MIDI format and manufacture computer music players for the Asian market.\nContests.\nSince the rise of karaoke around the world, karaoke contests have become a phenomenon of mainstream culture, giving non-professional singers opportunity to showcase their talent, win prizes, and at times, travel the world. Contest participants are usually rated 50% by customer votes and 50% by judges' votes, but this may vary, depending on the venue and the level of competition.\nKaraoke World Championship is one of the most popular karaoke contests and has been around since 2003. In September 2025, the Karaoke World Championships will be held in Bangkok, Thailand.\nWorld records.\nAs of 2009, the world record for the most people singing karaoke was at Bristol Motor Speedway in the United States. Over 160,000 people began to sing Garth Brooks' song \"Friends in Low Places\" before the NASCAR Sharpie 500 race began.\nHungary holds the record for the longest Karaoke marathon, with multiple participants for an event organized in the Honey Grill Restaurant by Gabor D\u00e1niel Szab\u00f3 (REVVOX Music). It lasted for 1,011 hours, 1 minute, between 20 July 2011, and 31 August 2011. Each song was over 3 minutes long and the gap between songs was no longer than 30 seconds. No song was repeated in any two-hour period.\nThe record for the longest Karaoke solo marathon is held by the Italian Leonardo Polverelli, who sang 1,295 songs in 101 hours, 59 minutes, and 15 seconds.\nViolence in karaoke bars.\nBetween 2002 and 2012, numerous fatal incidents in the Philippines occurred in connection to karaoke bars and the song \"My Way\", popularized by Frank Sinatra. Similar violent and fatal incidents connected to karaoke bars have also occurred in other countries, including Malaysia, Thailand, and China.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17083", "revid": "7126005", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17083", "title": "Keykode", "text": "Barcode-based film markings developed by Eastman Kodak\nKeykode (also written as either KeyKode or KeyCode) is an Eastman Kodak Company advancement on edge numbers, which are letters, numbers and symbols placed at regular intervals along the edge of 35 mm and 16 mm film to allow for frame-by-frame specific identification. It was introduced in 1990.\nKeykode is a variation of timecode used in the post-production process which is designed to uniquely identify film frames in a film stock.\nEdge numbers.\nEdge numbers (also called key numbers or footage numbers) are a series of numbers with key lettering printed along the edge of a 35\u00a0mm negative at intervals of one foot (16 frames or 64 perforations) and on a 16\u00a0mm negative at intervals of six inches (twenty frames). The numbers are placed on the negative at the time of manufacturing by one of two methods:\n\"Latent image\" exposes the edge of the film while it passes through the perforation machine. This method is primarily used for color negative films.\n\"Visible ink\" is sometimes used to imprint on the edge of the film \u2013 again in manufacturing \u2013 at the time of perforations. The ink, which is not affected by photographic chemicals, is normally printed onto the base surface of the film. The numbers are visible on both the raw stock (unexposed) and processed (exposed and developed) film. This method is primarily used for black &amp; white negative film.\nThe edge numbers serve a number of purposes. Every key frame is numbered with a multi-digit identifier that may be referred to later. In addition, a date of manufacturing is imprinted, then the type of emulsion and the batch number. This information is transferred from the negative (visible once developed) to the positive prints. The print may be edited and handled while the original negative remains safely untouched. When the film editing is complete, the edge numbers on the final cut film correspond back to their identical frames on the original negative so that a conform edit can be made of the original negative to match the work print.\nLaboratories can also imprint their own edge numbers on the processed film negative or print to identify the film for their own means. This is normally done in yellow ink. A common workflow for film editing involves edge-coding printed film simultaneously with the film's synchronized audio track, on 35mm magnetic film, so that a foot of film and its synchronized audio have identical edge numbers.\nEastman Kodak began using latent image edge numbering on their manufactured 35mm raw film stocks in 1919.\nKeykode.\nWith the popularity of telecine transfers and video edits, Kodak invented a machine readable edge number that could be recorded via computer, read by the editing computer and automatically produce a \"cut list\" from the video edit of the film.\nTo do this, Kodak utilized the USS-128 barcode alongside the human-readable edge numbers. They also improved the quality and readability of the human-readable information to make it easier to identify. The Keykode consists of 12 characters in human-readable form followed by the same information in barcode form. Keykode is a form of metadata identifier for film negatives.\nKeykode deciphered.\nAn example Keykode:\nKU 22 9611 1802+02.3\nEASTMAN 5279 167 3301 122 KD\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17085", "revid": "202276", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17085", "title": "Kissing Bug", "text": ""}
{"id": "17086", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17086", "title": "Knout", "text": "Type of whip\nA knout (, ) is a Russian whip that consists of a rawhide thong or a rope attached to a long wooden handle. Commonly used for prodding horses or cattle, knouts were also used for flagellation as a corporal punishment in Russian history. The English word is a spelling-pronunciation of a French transliteration of the Russian word \u043a\u043d\u0443\u0442 (\"knut\"), which means \"whip\".\nEtymology.\nThe word may be derived from the Swedish \"knutpiska\", a kind of whip with \"knots\". The stem \"knut\" is of generic Germanic origin; compare with the German \"Knute\", Dutch \"knoet\" (both meaning knout) and with Old Norse \"knutr\", Anglo-Saxon \"cnotta\" and English \"knot\".\nFor corporal punishment.\nAccording to \"Brockhaus and Efron\", a typical knout used by Russian executioners consisted of a wooden handle about half \"arshin\" () to which attached was a thick braided rawhide piece, one \"arshin\" () long. The latter piece ended in a metal ring, to which was attached a wide rawhide belt made as long, also of one \"arshin\" length with a stiffened beak-like end.\nKnouts were used in Russia for flogging as formal corporal punishment of criminals and political offenders. The victim was tied to a post or on a triangle of wood and stripped, receiving the specified number of strokes on the back. A sentence of 100 or 120 lashes was equivalent to a death sentence.\nEmperor Nicholas I abolished punishment by knout in 1845, after years of deliberation, and replaced it with the \"pleti\", a lighter whip, commonly with three tails, which was used previously for punishment as well.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17087", "revid": "51025196", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17087", "title": "Konstantin Tsiolkovsky", "text": "Russian scientist (1857\u20131935)\n&lt;section begin=KTsiol-rocketry/&gt;\nKonstantin Eduardovich Tsiolkovsky (; Russian: , ; 17 September\u00a0[O.S. 5 September]\u00a01857 \u2013 19 September 1935) was a Russian rocket scientist who pioneered astronautics. Along with Hermann Oberth and Robert H. Goddard, he is one of the pioneers of space flight and the founding father of modern rocketry and astronautics. \nHis works later inspired Wernher von Braun and leading Soviet rocket engineers Sergei Korolev and Valentin Glushko, who contributed to the success of the Soviet space program.\n&lt;section end=KTsiol-rocketry/&gt;\nTsiolkovsky spent most of his life in a log house on the outskirts of Kaluga, about southwest of Moscow. A recluse by nature, his unusual habits made him appear eccentric to his fellow townsfolk.\nEarly life.\nTsiolkovsky was born in Izhevskoye (now in Spassky District, Ryazan Oblast), in the Russian Empire, to a middle-class family. His father, Makary Edward Erazm Cio\u0142kowski, was a Polish forester of Roman Catholic faith who relocated to Russia. His Russian Orthodox mother Maria Ivanovna Yumasheva was of mixed Volga Tatar and Russian origin. According to family tradition, Tsiolkovsky family is of the Zaporozhian Cossack descent, related to Cossack Hetman Nalyvaiko. His father was successively a forester, teacher, and minor government official. At the age of 9, Konstantin caught scarlet fever and lost his hearing. \nWhen he was 13, his mother died. He was not admitted to elementary schools because of his hearing problem, so he was self-taught. As a reclusive home-schooled child, he passed much of his time by reading books and became interested in mathematics and physics. As a teenager, he began to contemplate the possibility of space travel.\nTsiolkovsky spent three years attending a Moscow library, where Russian cosmism proponent Nikolai Fyodorov worked. He later came to believe that colonizing space would lead to the perfection of the human species, with immortality and a carefree existence.\nInspired by the fiction of Jules Verne, Tsiolkovsky theorized many aspects of space travel and rocket propulsion. He is considered the father of spaceflight and the first person to conceive the space elevator, becoming inspired in 1895 by the newly constructed Eiffel Tower in Paris.\nDespite the youth's growing knowledge of physics, his father was concerned that he would not be able to provide for himself financially as an adult and brought him back home at the age of 19 after learning that he was overworking himself and going hungry. Afterwards, Tsiolkovsky passed the teacher's exam and went to work at a school in Borovsk near Moscow. He met and married his wife Varvara Sokolova during this time. Despite being stuck in Kaluga, a small town far from major learning centers, Tsiolkovsky managed to make scientific discoveries on his own.\nThe first two decades of the 20th century were marred by personal tragedy. In 1902, Tsiolkovsky's son Ignaty committed suicide. In 1908, many of his accumulated papers were lost in a flood. In 1911, his daughter Lyubov was arrested for engaging in revolutionary activities.\nScientific achievements.\nTsiolkovsky stated that he developed the theory of rocketry only as a supplement to philosophical research on the subject. He wrote more than 400 works including approximately 90 published pieces on space travel and related subjects. Among his works are designs for rockets with steering thrusters, multistage boosters, space stations, airlocks for exiting a spaceship into the vacuum of space, and closed-cycle biological systems to provide food and oxygen for space colonies.\nTsiolkovsky's first scientific study dates back to 1880\u20131881. He wrote a paper called \"Theory of Gases,\" in which he outlined the basis of the kinetic theory of gases, but after submitting it to the Russian Physico-Chemical Society (RPCS), he was informed that his discoveries had already been made 25 years earlier. Undaunted, he pressed ahead with his second work, \"The Mechanics of the Animal Organism\". It received favorable feedback, and Tsiolkovsky was made a member of the Society. Tsiolkovsky's main works after 1884 dealt with four major areas: the scientific rationale for the all-metal balloon (airship), streamlined airplanes and trains, hovercraft, and rockets for interplanetary travel.\nIn 1892, he was transferred to a new teaching post in Kaluga where he continued to experiment. During this period, Tsiolkovsky began working on a problem that would occupy much of his time during the coming years: an attempt to build an all-metal dirigible that could be expanded or shrunk in size.\nTsiolkovsky developed the first aerodynamics laboratory in Russia in his apartment. In 1897, he built the first Russian wind tunnel with an open test section and developed a method of experimentation using it. In 1900, with a grant from the Academy of Sciences, he made a survey using models of the simplest shapes and determined the drag coefficients of the sphere, flat plates, cylinders, cones, and other bodies. \nTsiolkovsky's work in the field of aerodynamics was a source of ideas for Russian scientist Nikolay Zhukovsky, the father of modern aerodynamics and hydrodynamics. Tsiolkovsky described the airflow around bodies of different geometric shapes. Because the RPCS did not provide any financial support for this project, he was forced to pay for it largely out of his own pocket.\nTsiolkovsky studied the mechanics of lighter-than-air powered flying machines. He first proposed the idea of an all-metal dirigible and built a model of it. The first printed work on the airship was \"A Controllable Metallic Balloon\" (1892), in which he gave the scientific and technical rationale for the design of an airship with a metal sheath. Tsiolkovsky was not supported on the airship project, and the author was refused a grant to build the model. An appeal to the General Aviation Staff of the Russian army also had no success. \nIn 1892, he turned to the new and unexplored field of heavier-than-air aircraft. Tsiolkovsky's idea was to build an airplane with a metal frame. In the article \"An Airplane or a Birdlike (Aircraft) Flying Machine\" (1894) are descriptions and drawings of a monoplane, which in its appearance and aerodynamics anticipated the design of aircraft that would be constructed 15 to 18 years later. In an Aviation Airplane, the wings have a thick profile with a rounded front edge and the fuselage is faired. \nWork on the airplane, as well as on the airship, did not receive recognition from the official representatives of Russian science, and Tsiolkovsky's further research had neither monetary nor moral support. In 1914, he displayed his models of all-metal dirigibles at the Aeronautics Congress in St. Petersburg, but was met with a lukewarm response.\nDisappointed at this, Tsiolkovsky gave up on space and aeronautical problems with the onset of World War I and turned his attention to the problem of alleviating poverty. This occupied his time during the war years until the Russian Revolution in 1917.\nStarting in 1896, Tsiolkovsky systematically studied the theory of motion of rocket apparatus. Thoughts on the use of the rocket principle in the cosmos were expressed by him as early as 1883, and a rigorous theory of rocket propulsion was developed in 1896. Tsiolkovsky derived the formula, which he called the \"formula of aviation\", now known as Tsiolkovsky rocket equation, establishing the relationship between:\nformula_5\nAfter writing out this equation, Tsiolkovsky recorded the date: 10 May 1897. In the same year, the formula for the motion of a body of variable mass was published in the thesis of the Russian mathematician I. V. Meshchersky (\"Dynamics of a Point of Variable Mass,\" I. V. Meshchersky, St. Petersburg, 1897).\nHis most important work, published in May 1903, was \"Exploration of Outer Space by Means of Rocket Devices\" (). Tsiolkovsky calculated, using the Tsiolkovsky equation, that the horizontal speed required for a minimal orbit around the Earth is 8,000\u00a0m/s (5 miles per second) and that this could be achieved by means of a multistage rocket fueled by liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen. In the article \"Exploration of Outer Space by Means of Rocket Devices\", it was suggested for the first time that a rocket could perform space flight. In this article and its sequels (1911 and 1914), he developed some ideas of missiles and considered the use of liquid rocket engines.\nThe outward appearance of Tsiolkovsky's spacecraft design, published in 1903, was a basis for modern spaceship design. The design had a hull divided into three main sections. The pilot and copilot would occupy the first section, while the second and third sections held the liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen needed to fuel the spacecraft.\nThe result of the first publication was not what Tsiolkovsky expected. No foreign scientists appreciated his research, which today is a major scientific discipline. In 1911, he published the second part of the work \"Exploration of Outer Space by Means of Rocket Devices\". Here Tsiolkovsky evaluated the work needed to overcome the force of gravity, determined the speed needed to propel the device into the Solar System (\"escape velocity\"), and examined calculation of flight time. The publication of this article made a splash in the scientific world, and Tsiolkovsky found many friends among his fellow scientists.\nIn 1926\u20131929, Tsiolkovsky solved the practical problem regarding the role played by rocket fuel in getting to escape velocity and leaving the Earth. He showed that the final speed of the rocket depends on the rate of gas flowing from it and on how the weight of the fuel relates to the weight of the empty rocket.\nTsiolkovsky conceived a number of ideas that have been later used in rockets. They include: gas rudders (graphite) for controlling a rocket's flight and changing the trajectory of its center of mass, the use of components of the fuel to cool the outer shell of the spacecraft (during re-entry to Earth) and the walls of the combustion chamber and nozzle, a pump system for feeding the fuel components, the optimal descent trajectory of the spacecraft while returning from space, etc. \nIn the field of rocket propellants, Tsiolkovsky studied a large number of different oxidizers and combustible fuels and recommended specific pairings: liquid oxygen and hydrogen, and oxygen with hydrocarbons. Tsiolkovsky did much fruitful work on the creation of the theory of jet aircraft, and invented his chart Gas Turbine Engine. In 1927, he published the theory and design of a train on an air cushion. He first proposed a \"bottom of the retractable body\" chassis. \nSpace flight and the airship were the main problems to which he devoted his life. Tsiolkovsky had been developing the idea of the hovercraft since 1921, publishing a fundamental paper on it in 1927, entitled \"Air Resistance and the Express Train\" (). In 1929, Tsiolkovsky proposed the construction of multistage rockets in his book \"Space Rocket Trains\" ().\nTsiolkovsky championed the idea of the diversity of life in the universe and was the first theorist and advocate of human spaceflight.\nHearing problems did not prevent the scientist from having a good understanding of music, as outlined in his work \"The Origin of Music and Its Essence.\"\nLater life.\nAfter the October Revolution, the Cheka jailed him in the Lubyanka prison for several weeks.\nStill, Tsiolkovsky supported the Bolshevik revolution, and eager to promote science and technology, the new Soviet government elected him a member of the Socialist Academy in 1918.\nHe worked as a high school mathematics teacher until retiring in 1920 at the age of 63. In 1921, he received a lifetime pension.\nIn his late lifetime, from the mid-1920s onwards, Tsiolkovsky was honored for his pioneering work, and the Soviet state provided financial backing for his research. He was initially popularized in Soviet Russia in 1931\u20131932 mainly by two writers: Yakov Perelman and Nikolai Rynin. Tsiolkovsky died in Kaluga on 19 September 1935 after undergoing an operation for stomach cancer. He bequeathed his life's work to the Soviet state.\nLegacy.\nTsiolkovsky influenced later rocket scientists throughout Europe, including Wernher von Braun. Soviet search teams at Peenem\u00fcnde found a German translation of a book by Tsiolkovsky of which \"almost every page...was embellished by von Braun's comments and notes.\" Leading Soviet rocket-engine designer Valentin Glushko and rocket designer Sergey Korolev studied Tsiolkovsky's works as youths, and both sought to turn Tsiolkovsky's theories into reality. In particular, Korolev saw traveling to Mars as the more important priority, until in 1964 he decided to compete with the American Project Apollo for the Moon.\nIn 1989, Tsiolkovsky was inducted into the International Air &amp; Space Hall of Fame at the San Diego Air &amp; Space Museum.\nPhilosophical work.\nIn 1928, Tsiolkovsky wrote a book called \"The Will of the Universe: The Unknown Intelligence\", in which he propounded a philosophy of panpsychism. He believed humans would eventually colonize the Milky Way galaxy. His thought preceded the Space Age by several decades, and some of what he foresaw in his imagination has come into being since his death. In a letter written in 1911 he indicated his belief that, \u201cEarth is the cradle of humanity, but one cannot live in a cradle forever.\u201d\nTsiolkovsky did not believe in traditional religious cosmology, but instead, and to the chagrin of the Soviet authorities, he believed in a cosmic being that governed humans as \"marionettes, mechanical puppets, machines, movie characters\". He adhered to a mechanical view of the universe, which he believed would be controlled in the millennia to come through the power of human science and industry. In a short article in 1933, he explicitly formulated what was later to be known as the Fermi paradox.\nHe wrote a few works on ethics, espousing negative utilitarianism.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17088", "revid": "3145267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17088", "title": "Konstantin Eduardovitch Tsiolkovsky", "text": ""}
{"id": "17089", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17089", "title": "Kangaroo code", "text": ""}
{"id": "17090", "revid": "6675779", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17090", "title": "KAOS", "text": "KAOS or Kaos may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "17091", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17091", "title": "Khornerstone", "text": "In computer performance testing, Khornerstone is a multipurpose benchmark from Workstation Labs used in various periodicals such as \"UNIX Review\".\nThe benchmark consists of 22 separate tests, including public domain components (such as Sieve and Dhrystone) as well as proprietary components. Since it contains proprietary components, the source is not free. The results of the 22 tests are normalized, producing a result measured in \"Khornerstones\".\nThe benchmark was introduced in 1986 and was commonly used until the mid-1990s.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17094", "revid": "50737525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17094", "title": "Ket", "text": "Ket or KET may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "17095", "revid": "49276436", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17095", "title": "Kary Mullis", "text": "American biochemist (1944\u20132019)\nKary Banks Mullis (December 28, 1944\u00a0\u2013 August 7, 2019) was an American biochemist. In recognition of his role in the invention of the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technique, he shared the 1993 Nobel Prize in Chemistry with Michael Smith and was awarded the Japan Prize in the same year. PCR became a central technique in biochemistry and molecular biology, described by \"The New York Times\" as \"highly original and significant, virtually dividing biology into the two epochs of before PCR and after PCR.\"\nMullis downplayed humans' role in climate change, expressed doubt that HIV is the cause of AIDS, and professed a belief in astrology and the paranormal. He also practiced clandestine chemistry by producing LSD. Mullis's unscientific statements about topics outside his area of expertise have been named by \"Skeptical Inquirer\" as an instance of \"Nobel disease\".\nEarly life and education.\nMullis was born in Lenoir, North Carolina, near the Blue Ridge Mountains, on December 28, 1944, to Cecil Banks Mullis and Bernice Barker Mullis. His family had a background in farming in this rural area. As a child, Mullis said, he was interested in observing organisms in the countryside. He and his cousins would often taunt livestock by feeding them through electric fences, and Kary was mostly interested in the spiders in his grandparents' basement. He grew up in Columbia, South Carolina, where he attended Dreher High School, graduating in the class of 1962. He recalled his interest in chemistry beginning when he learned how to chemically synthesize and build solid fuel propulsion rockets as a high school student during the 1960s.\nHe earned a Bachelor of Science in chemistry from the Georgia Institute of Technology in Atlanta in 1966, during which time he married his first wife, Richards Haley, and started a business. He earned his PhD in 1973 in biochemistry at the University of California, Berkeley (UC Berkeley), in J. B. Neilands' laboratory, which focused on synthesis and structure of bacterial iron transporter molecules. Although he published a sole-author paper in \"Nature\" in the field of astrophysics in 1968, he struggled to pass his oral exams (with a colleague recalling that \"He didn\u2019t get his propositions right. He didn\u2019t know general biochemistry\"), and his dissertation was accepted only after several friends pitched in to \"cut all the whacko stuff out of it\" while his advisor lobbied the committee to reconsider its initial decision.\nHis doctoral dissertation was on the structure of the bacterial siderophore schizokinen. J. B. Neilands was known for his groundbreaking work on siderophores, and Mullis was a part of that with his characterization of schizokinen. Following his graduation, Mullis completed postdoctoral fellowships in pediatric cardiology at the University of Kansas Medical Center (1973\u20131977) and pharmaceutical chemistry at the University of California, San Francisco (1977\u20131979).\nCareer.\nAfter receiving his doctorate, Mullis briefly left science to write fiction before accepting the University of Kansas fellowship. During his postdoctoral work, he managed a bakery for two years. Mullis returned to science at the encouragement of UC Berkeley friend and colleague Thomas White, who secured Mullis's UCSF position and later helped Mullis land a position with the biotechnology company Cetus Corporation of Emeryville, California. Despite little experience in molecular biology, Mullis worked as a DNA chemist at Cetus for seven years, ultimately serving as head of the DNA synthesis lab under White, then the firm's director of molecular and biological research; it was there, in 1983, that Mullis invented the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) procedure.\nMullis acquired a reputation for erratic behavior at Cetus, once threatening to bring a gun to work; he also engaged in \"public lovers' quarrels\" with his then-girlfriend (a fellow chemist at the company) and \"nearly came to blows with another scientist\" at a staff party, according to \"California Magazine\". White recalled: \"It definitely put me in a tough spot. His behavior was so outrageous that the other scientists thought that the only reason I didn't fire him outright was that he was a friend of mine.\"\nAfter resigning from Cetus in 1986, Mullis served as director of molecular biology for Xytronyx, Inc. in San Diego for two years. While inventing a UV-sensitive ink at Xytronyx, he became skeptical of the existence of the ozone hole.\nThereafter, Mullis worked intermittently as a consultant for multiple corporations and institutions on nucleic acid chemistry and as an expert witness specializing in DNA profiling. In 1992, Mullis founded a business to sell pieces of jewelry containing the amplified DNA of deceased famous people such as Elvis Presley and Marilyn Monroe. In the same year, he also founded Atomic Tags in La Jolla, California. The venture sought to develop technology using atomic-force microscopy and bar-coded antibodies tagged with heavy metals to create highly multiplexed, parallel immunoassays.\nMullis was a member of the USA Science and Engineering Festival's Advisory Board. In 2014, he was named a distinguished researcher at the Children's Hospital Oakland Research Institute in Oakland, California.\nPCR (polymerase chain reaction) and other inventions.\nIn 1983, Mullis was working for Cetus Corporation as a chemist. Mullis recalled that, while driving in the vicinity of his country home in Mendocino County (with his girlfriend, who also was a chemist at Cetus), he had the idea to use a pair of primers to bracket the desired DNA sequence and to copy it using DNA polymerase; a technique that would allow rapid amplification of a small stretch of DNA and become a standard procedure in molecular biology laboratories. Longtime professional benefactor and supervisor Thomas White reassigned Mullis from his usual projects to concentrate on PCR full-time after the technique was met with skepticism by their colleagues. Mullis succeeded in demonstrating PCR on December 16, 1983, but the staff remained circumspect as he continued to produce ambiguous results amid alleged methodological problems, including a perceived lack of \"appropriate controls and repetition.\" In his Nobel Prize lecture, he remarked that the December 16 breakthrough did not make up for his girlfriend breaking up with him: \"I was sagging as I walked out to my little silver Honda Civic. Neither [assistant] Fred, empty Beck's bottles, nor the sweet smell of the dawn of the age of PCR could replace Jenny. I was lonesome.\"\nOther Cetus scientists who were regarded as \"top-notch experimentalists\", including Randall Saiki, Henry Erlich, and Norman Arnheim, were placed on parallel PCR projects to work on determining if PCR could amplify a specific human gene (betaglobin) from genomic DNA. Saiki generated the needed data and Erlich authored the first paper to include use of the technique, while Mullis was still working on the paper that would describe PCR itself. Mullis's 1985 paper with Saiki and Erlich, \"Enzymatic Amplification of \u03b2-globin Genomic Sequences and Restriction Site Analysis for Diagnosis of Sickle Cell Anemia\" \u2014 the polymerase chain reaction invention (PCR) \u2014 was honored by a Citation for Chemical Breakthrough Award from the Division of History of Chemistry of the American Chemical Society in 2017.\nA drawback of the technique was that the DNA polymerase in the reaction was destroyed by the high heat used at the start of each replication cycle and had to be replaced. In 1986, Saiki started to use \"Thermophilus aquaticus\" (Taq) DNA polymerase to amplify segments of DNA. The Taq polymerase was heat resistant and needed to be added to the reaction only once, making the technique dramatically more affordable and subject to automation. This modification of Mullis's invention revolutionized biochemistry, molecular biology, genetics, medicine, and forensics. UC Berkeley biologist David Bilder said, \"PCR revolutionized everything. It really superpowered molecular biology\u2014which then transformed other fields, even distant ones like ecology and evolution. \u2026 It\u2019s impossible to overstate PCR\u2019s impact. The ability to generate as much DNA of a specific sequence as you want, starting from a few simple chemicals and some temperature changes\u2014it\u2019s just magical.\" Although he received a $10,000 bonus from Cetus for the invention, the company's later sale of the patent to Roche Molecular Systems for $300\u00a0million would lead Mullis to condemn White and members of the parallel team as \"vultures.\"\nMullis also invented a UV-sensitive plastic that changes color in response to light.\nHe founded Altermune LLC in 2011 to pursue new ideas on the immune system. Mullis described the company's product thusly:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is a method using specific synthetic chemical linkers to divert an immune response from its nominal target to something completely different which you would right now like to be temporarily immune to. Let's say you just got exposed to a new strain of the flu. You\u2019re already immune to alpha-1,3-galactosyl-galactose bonds. All humans are. Why not divert a fraction of those antibodies to the influenza strain you just picked up. A chemical linker synthesized with an alpha-1,3-gal-gal bond on one end and a DNA aptamer devised to bind specifically to the strain of influenza you have on the other end, will link anti-alpha-Gal antibodies to the influenza virus and presto, you have fooled your immune system into attacking the new virus.\nIn a TED Talk, Mullis describes how the US government paid $500,000 for Mullis to use this new technology against anthrax. He said the treatment was 100% effective, compared to the previous anthrax treatment which was 40% effective.\nAnother proof-of-principle of this technology, re-targeting pre-existing antibodies to the surface of a pathogenic strep bacterium using an alpha-gal modified aptamer (\"alphamer\"), was published in 2015 in collaboration with scientists at the University of California, San Diego. Mullis said he was inspired to fight this particular strep bacterium because it had killed his friend.\nAccreditation of the PCR technique.\nA concept similar to that of PCR had been described before Mullis's work. Nobel laureate H. Gobind Khorana and Kjell Kleppe, a Norwegian scientist, authored a paper 17 years earlier describing a process they termed \"repair replication\" in the \"Journal of Molecular Biology\". Using repair replication, Kleppe duplicated and then quadrupled a small synthetic molecule with the help of two primers and DNA polymerase. The method developed by Mullis used repeated thermal cycling, which allowed the rapid and exponential amplification of large quantities of any desired DNA sequence from an extremely complex template. Later a heat-stable DNA polymerase was incorporated into the process.\nHis co-workers at Cetus contested the notion that Mullis was solely responsible for the idea of using Taq polymerase in PCR. However, biochemist Richard T. Pon has written that the \"full potential [of PCR] was not realized\" until Mullis's work in 1983, and journalist Michael Gross states that Mullis's colleagues failed to see the potential of the technique when he presented it to them. As a result, some controversy surrounds the balance of credit that should be given to Mullis versus the team at Cetus. In practice, credit has accrued to both the inventor and the company (although not its individual workers) in the form of a Nobel Prize and a $10,000 Cetus bonus for Mullis and $300\u00a0million for Cetus when the company sold the patent to Roche Molecular Systems. After DuPont lost out to Roche on that sale, the company unsuccessfully disputed Mullis's patent on the alleged grounds that PCR had been previously described in 1971. Mullis and Erlich took Cetus' side in the case, and Khorana refused to testify for DuPont; the jury upheld Mullis's patent in 1991. However, in February 1999, the patent of Hoffman-La Roche (United States Patent No. 4,889,818) was found by the courts to be unenforceable, after Dr. Thomas Kunkel testified in the case \"Hoffman-La Roche v. Promega Corporation\" on behalf of the defendants (Promega Corporation) that \"prior art\" (i.e. articles on the subject of Taq polymerase published by other groups prior to the work of Gelfand and Stoffel, and their patent application covering the purification of Taq polymerase) existed, in the form of two articles, published by Alice Chien et al. in 1976, and A. S. Kaledin et al. in 1980.\nThe anthropologist Paul Rabinow wrote a book on the history of the PCR method in 1996, in which he discusses whether Mullis \"invented\" PCR or merely came up with the concept of it.\nViews on HIV/AIDS and climate change.\nIn his 1998 autobiography, Mullis expressed disagreement with the scientific evidence for humans' role in climate change and ozone depletion. Mullis claimed that scientific theories about ozone depletion and climate change were the product of scientists and government bureaucrats conspiring to secure funding, saying that \"science is being practiced by people who are dependent on being paid for what they are going to find out\" instead of searching for the truth. \"The New York Times\" listed Mullis as one of several scientists who, after success in their area of research, go on to make unfounded, sometimes bizarre statements in other areas, especially in regard to contradicting the scientific consensus on climate change and ozone depletion.\nMullis also questioned the scientific validity of the link between HIV and AIDS, despite never having done any scientific research on either subject, leading Seth Kalichman and Paroma Basu to call him an AIDS denialist. He wrote that he began to question the AIDS consensus while compiling a report for a project's sponsor and being unable to find a published reference for HIV being the cause of AIDS. Mullis published an alternative hypothesis for AIDS in 1994, claiming that AIDS is an arbitrary diagnosis used when HIV antibodies are found in a patient's blood. Seth Kalichman, AIDS researcher and author of \"Denying AIDS\", names Mullis \"among the who's who of AIDS pseudoscientists\". Mullis was often cited in the press as a supporter of molecular biologist and AIDS denialist Peter Duesberg. According to \"California Magazine\", Mullis's HIV skepticism influenced Thabo Mbeki's denialist policymaking throughout his tenure as president of South Africa from 1999 to 2008, contributing to as many as 330,000 unnecessary deaths.\nAccording to \"Skeptical Inquirer\", Mullis's statements on HIV/AIDS and human-caused climate change are an instance of \"Nobel disease\", i.e. the tendency of some Nobel laureates to go on to embrace ideas that are scientifically implausible, rejected by most scientific experts, and based mostly on anecdotal or uncorroborated evidence.\nUse of hallucinogens.\nMullis practiced clandestine chemistry throughout his graduate studies, specializing in the synthesis of LSD; according to his friend Tom White, \"I knew he was a good chemist because he'd been synthesizing hallucinogenic drugs at UC Berkeley.\" He detailed his experiences synthesizing and testing various psychedelic amphetamines and a difficult trip on DET in his autobiography. In a Q&amp;A interview published in the September 1994 issue of \"California Monthly\", Mullis said, \"Back in the 1960s and early 1970s I took plenty of LSD. A lot of people were doing that in Berkeley back then. And I found it to be a mind-opening experience. It was certainly much more important than any courses I ever took.\" During a symposium held for centenarian Albert Hofmann, Hofmann said Mullis had told him that LSD had \"helped him develop the polymerase chain reaction that helps amplify specific DNA sequences\".\nInterest in the paranormal.\nMullis expressed interest in the paranormal. For example, he said that he had witnessed the \"non-substantial form\" of his deceased grandfather, even offering it a beer. In his autobiography, Mullis professed a belief in astrology and wrote about an encounter with a fluorescent, talking raccoon that he suggested might have been an extraterrestrial alien.\nPersonal life.\nMullis was a surfer as well as a musician, being both a guitarist and vocalist. He married four times, and he had three children by two of his wives. At the time of his death, he had two grandchildren and was survived by his fourth wife, Nancy (\"n\u00e9e\" Cosgrove).\nMullis died on August 7, 2019, at his home in Newport Beach, California, from complications of pneumonia.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17096", "revid": "40325647", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17096", "title": "Kinsey Reports", "text": "Two books on human sexual behavior by Alfred Kinsey and others\nThe Kinsey Reports are two scholarly books on human sexual behavior, Sexual Behavior in the Human Male (1948) and Sexual Behavior in the Human Female (1953), written by Alfred Kinsey, Wardell Pomeroy, Clyde Martin, and (for \"Sexual Behavior in the Human Female\") Paul Gebhard and published by W.B. Saunders. Kinsey was a zoologist at Indiana University and the founder of the Kinsey Institute for Research in Sex, Gender, and Reproduction (more widely known as the Kinsey Institute). Jean Brown, Cornelia Christenson, Dorothy Collins, Hedwig Leser, and Eleanor Roehr were all acknowledged as research assistants on the book's title page. Alice Field was a sex researcher, criminologist, and social scientist in New York; as a research associate for Sexual Behavior in the Human Female, she provided assistance with legal questions.\nThe sociological data underlying the analysis and conclusions found in \"Sexual Behavior in the Human Male\" was collected from approximately 5,300 men over a fifteen-year period. \"Sexual Behavior in the Human Female\" was based on personal interviews with approximately 6,000 women. In the latter, Kinsey analyzed data for the frequency with which women participate in various types of sexual activity and looked at how factors such as age, social-economic status, and religious adherence influence sexual behavior.\nThe two best-selling books were immediately controversial, both within the scientific community and the general public, because they challenged conventional beliefs about sexuality and discussed subjects that had previously been taboo. The validity of Kinsey's methods were sometimes called into question. Despite this, Kinsey's work is considered pioneering and some of the best-known sex research of all time.\nBackground and method.\nSurveys of sexual behavior were unprecedented in American society, although Clelia Duel Mosher had conducted a survey of Victorian women. Qualitative studies had been done by Havelock Ellis and Magnus Hirschfeld, but these researchers did not attempt to gather quantitative data. Kinsey built up academic prestige over decades of study and gained the support of Rockefeller family-backed philanthropists for a large-scale analysis. His research was unprecedented in scale, involving 18,000 interviews.\nData was gathered primarily by means of subjective report interviews, conducted according to a structured questionnaire memorized by the experimenters (but not marked on the response sheet in any way). The response sheets were encoded in this way to maintain the confidentiality of the respondents, being entered on a blank grid using response symbols defined in advance. The data were later computerized for processing. All of this material, including the original researchers' notes, remains available from the Kinsey Institute to qualified researchers who demonstrate a need to view such materials. The institute also allows researchers to use statistical software in order to analyze the data.\nFindings.\nSexual orientation.\nParts of the Kinsey Reports regarding diversity in sexual orientations are frequently used to support the common estimate of 10% for homosexuality in the general population. Instead of three categories (heterosexual, bisexual and homosexual), a seven-point Kinsey scale system was used.\nThe reports also state that nearly 46% of the male subjects had \"reacted\" sexually to persons of both sexes in the course of their adult lives, and 37% had at least one homosexual experience. 11.6% of white males (ages 20\u201335) were given a rating of 3 (about equal heterosexual and homosexual experience/response) throughout their adult lives. The study also reported that 10% of American males surveyed were \"more or less exclusively homosexual for at least three years between the ages of 16 and 55\" (in the 5 to 6 range on the Kinsey scale).\nSeven percent of single females (ages 20\u201335) and four percent of previously married females (ages 20\u201335) were given a rating of 3 (about equal heterosexual and homosexual experience/response) on Kinsey Heterosexual-Homosexual Rating Scale for this period of their lives. 2 to 6% of females, aged 20\u201335, were more or less exclusively homosexual in experience/response, and 1 to 3% of unmarried females aged 20\u201335 were exclusively homosexual in experience/response.\nKinsey scale.\nThe Kinsey scale is used to measure a person's overall balance of heterosexuality and homosexuality, and takes into account both sexual experience and psychosexual reactions. The scale ranges from 0 to 6, with 0 being completely heterosexual and 6 completely homosexual. An additional category, X, was mentioned to describe those who had \"no socio-sexual contacts or reactions,\" which has been cited by scholars to mean asexuality. The scale was first published in \"Sexual Behavior in the Human Male\" (1948) by Kinsey, Wardell Pomeroy and others, and was also prominent in the complementary work \"Sexual Behavior in the Human Female\" (1953). Introducing the scale, Kinsey wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Males do not represent two discrete populations, heterosexual and homosexual. The world is not to be divided into sheep and goats. It is a fundamental of taxonomy that nature rarely deals with discrete categories [...] The living world is a continuum in each and every one of its aspects.\nWhile emphasising the continuity of the gradations between exclusively heterosexual and exclusively homosexual histories, it has seemed desirable to develop some sort of classification which could be based on the relative amounts of heterosexual and homosexual experience or response in each history... An individual may be assigned a position on this scale, for each period in his life. [...] A seven-point scale comes nearer to showing the many gradations that actually exist.\nThe scale is as follows:\nMarital coitus.\nThe average frequency of marital sex reported by women was 2.8 times a week in the late teens, 2.2 times a week by age 30, and 1.0 times a week by age 50. Kinsey estimated that approximately 50% of all married males had extramarital sex at some time during their married lives. Among the sample, 26% of females had extramarital sex by their forties. Between 1 in 6 and 1 in 10 females from age 26 to 50 were engaged in extramarital sex. However, Kinsey classified couples who have lived together for at least a year as \"married\", inflating the statistics for extra-marital sex.\nSadomasochism.\n12% of females and 22% of males reported having an erotic response to a sadomasochistic story.\nBiting.\nResponses to being bitten:\nZoophilia.\nThe report estimated the amount of American citizens that have engaged in zoophilia to be approximately eight million.\nCriticism.\nKinsey's statistics in his Reports have been criticized both at the time he published and today. Although Kinsey sought to work on a more complete report involving 100,000 interviews and considered the initial 1948 publication to be a sample progress report, academics have criticized the sample selection and sample bias in the reports' methodology. The main issues cited by researchers are that Kinsey did not use random sampling procedures when collecting his data, that significant portions of his samples come from prison populations and male prostitutes, and that people who volunteer to be interviewed about taboo subjects are likely to create a self-selection bias. These issues would undermine the usefulness of the sample in terms of determining the tendencies of the overall population.\nStatistics.\nIn 1948, the same year as the original publication, a committee of the American Statistical Association, including notable statisticians such as John Tukey, condemned the sampling procedure. In a tense meeting with Kinsey, Tukey supposedly declared that even a sample as small as three to five, chosen randomly, would be preferable to hundreds in Kinsey's sample. In 1954, leading statisticians, including William Gemmell Cochran, Frederick Mosteller, John Tukey, and W. O. Jenkins issued for the American Statistical Association a critique of Kinsey's 1948 \"Male\" report, stating:\nCritics are justified in their objections that many of the most interesting and provocative statements in the [Kinsey 1948] book are not based on the data presented therein, and it is not made clear to the reader on what evidence the statements are based. Further, the conclusions drawn from data presented in the book are often stated by KPM [Kinsey, Pomeroy, and Martin] in much too bold and confident a manner. Taken cumulatively, these objections amount to saying that much of the writing in the book falls below the level of good scientific writing.\nIn response, Paul Gebhard, Kinsey's close colleague, \"Sexual Behavior in the Human Female\" co-author, and successor as director of the Kinsey Institute for Sex Research, cleaned the Kinsey data of purported contaminants, removing, for example, all material derived from prison populations in the basic sample. (Gebhard had, while working with Kinsey, raised serious concerns about the use of prison populations especially, but had been shot down by Kinsey at the time.) In 1979, Gebhard (with Alan B. Johnson) published \"The Kinsey Data: Marginal Tabulations of the 1938\u20131963 Interviews Conducted by the Institute for Sex Research\". Their conclusion, to Gebhard's surprise, was that none of Kinsey's original estimates were significantly affected by this bias: that is, the prison population and male prostitutes had the same statistical tendencies as the rest of the men Kinsey interviewed. The results were summarized by historian, playwright, and gay-rights activist Martin Duberman: \"Instead of Kinsey's 37% (men who had at least one homosexual experience), Gebhard and Johnson came up with 36.4%; the 10% figure (men who were \"more or less exclusively homosexual for at least three years between the ages of 16 and 55\"), with prison inmates excluded, came to 9.9% for white, college-educated males and 12.7% for those with less education. \nKinsey himself was extremely frustrated by the criticisms of his sampling procedures, because he maintained that there was no way to do a successful study about sex using random probability sampling. As Kinsey biographer Jonathan Gathorne-Hardy points out, because of the sensitive nature of a sex study, contacting a truly random sample will garner a very high refusal rate--as modern sex studies using random sampling have shown. If the study is trying to gather information about any sort of population subgroups, as Kinsey was, the small percentages of the population plus the high rates of refusal may make these subgroups effectively disappear, despite their importance to the study.\nVolunteer bias.\nIn the 1950s, psychologist Abraham Maslow stated that Kinsey did not consider \"volunteer bias.\" The data represented only those volunteering to participate in discussion of taboo topics. Most Americans were reluctant to discuss the intimate details of their sex lives even with their spouses and close friends. Before the publication of Kinsey's reports, Maslow tested Kinsey's volunteers for bias. He concluded that Kinsey's sample was unrepresentative of the general population.\nThe charge of an over-reliance on volunteers is also critiqued in the Gathorne-Hardy biography. \"All\" surveys rely on volunteers. Kinsey attempted to correct for this by gathering as many \"100 percent groups\" as he could--that is, collecting all (or nearly all) of the sex histories of a given group that had gathered together for reasons other than sex, such as law societies, sororities, or even a small group of hikers. Kinsey would ask the president or leader of the group to agree to an interview, and then that leader's influence would get him an initial batch of volunteers from the group, a second batch who did not want to be seen volunteering but would agree to be interviewed, and then a third batch brought in by, essentially, peer pressure. While all the participants were still volunteers, he got interviews and thus samples he would not have otherwise gotten. In addition, the groups themselves, though any one was not representative of the population as a whole, provided a random element while encouraging greater participation. These \"100 percent groups\" made up about a quarter of Kinsey's overall data.\nOther criticisms.\nMore recent researchers have also criticized Kinsey's sampling methods and believe that he overestimated the frequency of nonheterosexual behaviors and attractions, because the Kinsey Reports show higher frequencies of homosexuality than more modern studies do. This may be explained in part by Kinsey's interview style, which focused on in-depth conversations with subjects carried out by himself or highly trained members of his team; they emphasized creating rapport with the interviewee and making them feel comfortable and secure. Modern interviewers tend to be less thoroughly trained and emphasize scientific detachment, which may make respondents less likely to share sensitive personal details.\nIt has been suggested that some data in the reports could not have been obtained without collaborations with child molesters. The Kinsey Institute denies this charge, though it acknowledges that men who have had sexual experiences with children were interviewed, with Kinsey balancing what he saw as the need for their anonymity to solicit \"honest answers on such taboo subjects\" against the likelihood that their crimes would continue.\nHistorian Peter Gay described \"Sexual Behavior in the Human Male\" as \"methodologically far from persuasive\".\nSociologist Edward Laumann stated that the Kinsey Reports were limited to the biology of sex and lacked psychological and clinical information and analysis and that this \"meant that sex research did not move into the mainstream of academic credibility. People took their reputations in their hands if they attempted to pursue it.\" Laumann also acknowledged that \"The Kinsey report was a cultural event of enormous consequence.\"\nContext and significance.\nOnly 5,000 copies of \"Sexual Behavior in the Human Male\" were initially printed in 1948, and its success surprised the publisher. The popular late-1948 Cole Porter song \"Too Darn Hot\" makes reference to it. Prior to the release of the second report in 1953, the first book had sold over 265,000 copies in the United States. Together, the Kinsey Reports sold three-quarters of a million copies and were translated into thirteen languages, and may be considered as some of the most successful and influential scientific books of the 20th century. They were associated with a change in the public perception of sexuality, in conjunction with Masters and Johnson's texts about their 1960s investigations into the physiology of sex, breaking taboos and misapprehensions.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17097", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17097", "title": "Kenotron", "text": ""}
{"id": "17098", "revid": "43272954", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17098", "title": "Kendo", "text": "Modern Japanese martial art\n is a modern Japanese martial art, descended from kenjutsu (one of the old Japanese martial arts, swordsmanship), that uses bamboo swords (shinai) as well as protective armor (b\u014dgu). It began as samurai warriors' customary swordsmanship exercises, and today, it is widely practiced within Japan and has spread to many other nations across the world.\nHistory.\nSwordsmen in Japan established schools of \"kenjutsu\" (the ancestor of kendo). These continued for centuries and form the basis of kendo practice today. Formal kendo exercises known as \"kata\" were developed several centuries ago as \"kenjutsu\" practice for warriors. They are still studied today, in a modified form.\nThe introduction of bamboo practice swords and armor to sword training is attributed to during the Shotoku Era (1711\u20131715). Naganuma developed the use of this armor and established a training method using bamboo swords.\n, third son of Naganuma and the eighth headmaster of the Kashima Shinden Jikishinkage-ry\u016b Kenjutsu, is credited with improving the art with Japanese wooden and bamboo swords, according to his gravestone's inscription. He is also credited with refining the armor by adding a metal grille to the headpiece (\u9762; \"men\") and thick cotton protective coverings to the gauntlets that cover the wrists and hands (\u5c0f\u624b; \"kote\"). inherited the tradition from his father, Heizaemon, in 1708, and the two of them collaborated to improve what would become modern kendo training armor.\nSh\u016bsaku Narimasa Chiba , founder of the Hokushin Itt\u014d-ry\u016b Hy\u014dh\u014d (\u5317\u8fb0\u4e00\u5200\u6d41\u5175\u6cd5), introduced \"gekiken\" (\u6483\u5263) (full-contact duels with bamboo swords and training armor) to the curriculum of tradition arts in the 1820s. Due to the large number of students of the Hokushin Itt\u014d-ry\u016b Hy\u014dh\u014d at the end of the Edo period, the use of bamboo swords and armor as a form of practice became popular. Modern kendo techniques, such as Suriage-Men and Oikomi-Men, were originally Hokushin Itt\u014d-ry\u016b techniques, were named by Chiba Sh\u016bsaku. After the Meiji Restoration in the late 1800s, Sakakibara Kenkichi popularized public \"gekiken\" for commercial gain, resulting in increased interest in kendo and kenjutsu.\nIn 1876, five years after a voluntary surrender of swords, the government banned the use of swords by the surviving samurai and initiated sword hunts. Meanwhile, in an attempt to standardize the sword styles (\"kenjutsu\") used by policemen, Kawaji Toshiyoshi recruited swordsmen from various schools to come up with a unified swordsmanship style. This led to the rise of the \"Battotai\" (\u629c\u5200\u968a, lit. \"Drawn Sword Corps\"), consisting mainly of sword-wielding policemen. However, it proved difficult to integrate all sword arts, leading to a compromise of ten practice moves (\"kata\") for police training. This integration effort led to the development of modern kendo. In 1878, Kawaji wrote a book on swordsmanship, \"Gekiken Saik\u014d-ron\" (\"Revitalizing Swordsmanship\"), stressing sword styles should not disappear with modernization, but should be integrated as necessary skills for the police. He draws a particular example from his experience with the Satsuma Rebellion. The Junsa Ky\u014dsh\u016bjo (Patrolman's Training Institute), founded in 1879, provided a curriculum that allowed policemen to study \"gekiken\" during their off-hours. In the same year, Kawaji wrote another book on swordsmanship, \"Kendo Saik\u014d-ron\" (\"Revitalizing Kendo\"), defending the significance of such sword art training for the police. While Junsa Ky\u014dsh\u016bjo remained active only until 1881, the police continued to support such practice.\nThe Dai Nippon Butoku Kai (DNBK) was established in 1895 to promote martial arts in Japan. It changed the name of the sporting form of swordsmanship, \"gekiken\", (Ky\u016bjitai: and Shinjitai: , \"hitting sword\") to \"kend\u014d\" in 1920.\nKendo (along with other martial arts) was banned in Japan in 1946 by the occupying powers. This was part of \"the removal and exclusion from public life of militaristic and ultra-nationalistic persons\" in response to the wartime militarization of martial arts instruction in Japan. The DNBK was also disbanded. Kendo was allowed to return to the curriculum in 1950, first as and then as kendo in 1952.\nThe All Japan Kendo Federation (AJKF or ZNKR) was founded in 1952, immediately after Japan's independence was restored and the ban on martial arts in Japan was lifted. It was formed on the principle of kendo not as a martial art, but as educational sport and it has continued to be practiced as such.\nThe International Kendo Federation (FIK) was founded in April 1970. It is an international federation of national and regional kendo federations, and the world governing body for kendo. The FIK is a non-governmental organization, and it aims to promote and popularize kendo, iaido and jodo.\nThe International Martial Arts Federation (IMAF), established in Kyoto 1952, was the first international organization founded since World War II to promote the development of martial arts worldwide. Today, IMAF includes kendo as one of the Japanese disciplines.\nPractitioners.\nPractitioners of kendo are called , meaning \"someone who practices kendo\", or occasionally , meaning \"swordsman\". Additionally, the old term of \"kendoists\" is sometimes used.\nThe Kodansha Meibo, a register of \"dan\" graded members of the AJKF, lists (as of September 2007) 1.48\u00a0million registered \"dan\" graded \"kend\u014dka\" in Japan. According to a survey conducted by AJKF, the number of active kendo practitioners in Japan is 477,000, including 290,000 \"dan\" holders. From these figures, AJKF estimates that the number of \"kend\u014dka\" in Japan is 1.66\u00a0million, with over 6\u00a0million practitioners worldwide, with registered \"dan\" holders and active kendo practitioners without \"dan\" grade.\nConcept and purpose.\nIn 1975, the All Japan Kendo Federation developed and published \"The Concept and Purpose of Kendo\" (reproduced below).\nConcept.\nKendo is a way to discipline the human character through the application of the principles of the \"katana\".\nTo mold the mind and body.\nTo cultivate a vigorous spirit\nAnd through correct and structured training,\nTo strive for improvement in the art of Kendo.\nTo hold in esteem courtesy and honor.\nTo associate with others with sincerity.\nAnd to forever pursue the cultivation of oneself.\nThus will one be able:\nTo love one's country and society;\nTo contribute to the development of culture;\nAnd to promote peace and prosperity among all people.\nEquipment and clothing.\nKendo is practiced wearing a traditional Japanese style of clothing, and using one or, less commonly two, .\nEquipment.\nThe \"shinai\" is meant to represent a Japanese sword (\"katana\") and is made up of four bamboo slats which are held together by leather fittings. A modern variation of a \"shinai\" with carbon fiber reinforced resin slats is also used.\nAge Group Shinai Size\n\"Kend\u014dka\" also use hard to practice \"kata\".\nKendo employs strikes involving both one edge and the tip of the \"shinai\" or \"bokut\u014d\".\nProtective armor is worn to protect specified target areas on the head, arms, and body. The head is protected by a stylized helmet, called , with a to protect the face, a series of hard leather and to protect the throat, and padded to protect the side of the neck and shoulders. The forearms, wrists, and hands are protected by long, thickly padded fabric gloves called . The torso is protected by a , while the waist and groin area are protected by the , consisting of three thick vertical fabric flaps or faulds.\nClothing.\nThe clothing worn under the \"b\u014dgu\" comprise a jacket (\"kendogi\" or \"keikogi\") and \"hakama\", a garment separated in the middle to form two wide trouser legs.\nA is wrapped around the head, under the \"men\", to absorb perspiration and provide a base for the \"men\" to fit comfortably.\nModern practice.\nKendo training is quite noisy in comparison to some other martial arts or sports. This is because \"kend\u014dka\" use a shout, or , to express their fighting spirit when striking. Additionally, \"kend\u014dka\" execute , an action similar to a stamp of the front foot, during a strike.\nLike some other martial arts, \"kend\u014dka\" train and fight barefoot. Kendo is ideally practiced in a purpose-built \"d\u014dj\u014d\", though standard sports halls and other venues are often used. An appropriate venue has a clean and wooden sprung floor, suitable for \"fumikomi-ashi\".\nKendo techniques comprise both strikes and thrusts. Strikes are only made towards specified on the wrists, head, or body, all of which are protected by armor. The targets are \"men\", \"sayu-men\" or \"Yoko-men\" (upper, left or right side of the \"men\"), the right \"kote\" at any time, the left \"kote\" when it is in a raised position, and the left or right side of the \"d\u014d\". are only allowed to the throat. However, since an incorrectly performed thrust could cause serious injury to the opponent's neck, thrusting techniques in free practice and competition are often restricted to senior \"dan\" graded \"kend\u014dka\".\nOnce a \"kend\u014dka\" begins practice in armor, a practice session may include any or all of the following types of practice:\nStriking the left and right \"men\" target points in succession; practicing centering, distance, and correct technique while building spirit and stamina.\n\"Waza\" or technique practice in which the student learns and refines the techniques of kendo with a receiving partner.\nShort, intense, attack practice which teaches continuous alertness and readiness to attack, as well as building spirit and stamina.\nUndirected practice where the \"kend\u014dka\" tries all that has been learned during practice against an opponent.\nPractice between two \"kend\u014dka\" of similar skill level.\nPractice where a senior \"kend\u014dka\" guides a junior through practice.\nCompetition practice which may also be judged.\nTechniques.\nTechniques are divided into \"shikake-waza\" (\u4ed5\u639b\u3051\u6280; to initiate a strike) and \"\u014dji-waza\" (\u5fdc\u3058\u6280; a response to an attempted strike). \"Kend\u014dka\" who wish to use such techniques during practice or competitions often practice each technique with a \"motodachi\". This is a process that requires patience. The \"kend\u014dka\" and \"motodachi\" practice the technique slowly at first; as familiarity and confidence build, they increase the speed to the level used in matches and competitions.\nShikake-waza.\nThese attack techniques are used to create an opening in an opponent by initiating an attack, or striking boldly when the opponent has created an opening. Such techniques include:\nThis is a technique used when one's opponent has weak \"kisei\" (spirit, vigor) or when they yield an opening under pressure. Always hold \"kisei\" and strike quickly.\nBody and \"shinai\" will lose balance as the initiator strikes or when being attacked. This technique takes advantage of this to help execute a strike. A good example is \"Hikibana-kote\" when a strike is made to an opponent's \"kote\" as they feel threatened and raise their \"kensen\" as the initiator pushes forward.\nThis provides a surprise attack by lifting the \"shinai\" over the initiator's shoulder before striking. Here a skillful use of the \"kensen\" and spirited attack is crucial for effective \"katsugi-waza\" or luring the opponent into breaking their posture.\nThere are two types. The first is for moving to the next \"waza\" after a failed first strike, and the second holds the opponent's attention and posture to create the opening for a second strike. The former requires a continuous rhythm of correct strikes. The latter requires continuous execution of \"waza\", to take advantage of the opponent's opening.\nThis can be used if one's opponent's stance has no opening when the opponent tries to attack. The opponent's \"shinai\" is either knocked down from above or swept up from below with a resulting strike just when their stance is broken.\nThis technique involves striking the opponent as they are about to strike. This is because their concentration will be on striking and their posture will have no flexibility to respond. Thus \"debana-waza\" is ideal. This can be to any part of the opponent's body, with valid strikes being: \"debana-men\", \"debana-kote\", and \"debana-Tsuki\".\n\u014cji-waza.\nThese counter-attack techniques are performed by executing a strike after responding or avoiding an attempted strike by the opponent. This can also be achieved by inducing the opponent to attack, then employing one of the \"\u014cji-waza\".\nAvoiding an attack from another, then instantly responding. Here, timing has to be correct. A response that is too slow or fast may not be effective. Therefore, close attention to an opponent's every move is required.\nIf struck by an opponent's \"shinai\", this technique sweeps up their \"shinai\" in a rising-slide motion, with the right (\"ura\") or left (\"omote\") side of the \"shinai\". Then strike in the direction of their \"shinai\", or at the opening resulting from their composure's collapse. This technique needs to be smooth. That is, do not separate the rising-slide motion and the upward-sweeping motion or it will not be successful. Valid strikes include: \"men-suriage-men\", \"kote-suriage-men\", \"men-suriage-do\", \"kote-suriage-kote\", and \"Tsuki-suriage-men\".\nThis \"waza\" knocks an opponent's \"shinai\" to the right or left. This neutralises a potential strike and gives the ideal chance to strike as an opponent is off-balance. For success, the distance between oneself and the opponent has to be correctly perceived, and then one knocks down their \"shinai\" before their arm fully extends. Valid strikes include: \"do-uchiotoshi-men\" and \"Tsuki-uchiotoshi-men\".\nThis technique is a response. As the opponent strikes, the opponent parries their \"shinai\" with the initiator's. They then flip over (turn over the hands) and strike their opposite side. Valid strikes include: \"men-kaeshi-men\", \"men-kaeshi-kote\", \"men-kaeshi-do\", \"kote-kaeshi-men\", \"kote-kaeshi-kote\", and \"do-kaeshi-men\".\nRules of competition.\nA scorable in a kendo competition (\"tai-kai\") is defined as an accurate strike or thrust made onto a \"datotsu-bui\" of the opponent's \"kendo-gu\" with the \"shinai\" making contact at its \"datotsu-bu\", the competitor displaying high spirits, correct posture and followed by \"zanshin\".\n\"Datotsu-bui\" or point scoring targets in kendo are defined as:\n\"Datotsu-bu\" of the \"shinai\" is the forward, or blade side (\"jin-bu\") of the top third (\"monouchi\") of the \"shinai\".\n, or continuation of awareness, must be present and shown throughout the execution of the strike and the \"kend\u014dka\" must be mentally and physically ready to attack again.\nIn competition, there are usually three . Each referee holds a red flag and a white flag in opposing hands. To award a point, a referee raises the flag corresponding to the color of the ribbon worn by the scoring competitor. Usually, at least two referees must agree for a point to be awarded. Play is stopped after each point is awarded.\nKendo competitions are usually a three-point match. The first competitor to score two points, therefore, wins the match. If the time limit is reached and only one competitor has a point, that competitor wins.\nIn the case of a tie, there are several options:\nImportant kendo competitions.\nThe All Japan Kendo Championship is regarded as the most prestigious kendo championship. Despite it being the national championship for only Japanese \"kend\u014dka\", kendo practitioners all over the world consider the All Japan Kendo Championship as the championship with the highest level of competitive kendo. The World Kendo Championships have been held every three years since 1970. They are organised by the International Kendo Federation (FIK) with the support of the host nation's kendo federation. The European championship is held every year, except in those years in which there is a world championship. Kendo is also one of the martial arts in the World Combat Games.\nAdvancement.\nGrades.\nTechnical achievement in kendo is measured by advancement in grade, rank or level. The and grading system, created in 1883, is used to indicate one's proficiency in kendo. The \"dan\" levels are from to . There are usually six grades below first-dan, known as \"kyu\". The \"kyu\" numbering is in reverse order, with being the grade immediately below first dan, and being the lowest grade. There are no visible differences in dress between kendo grades; those below dan-level may dress the same as those above dan-level.\nIn Japan, kyu ranks are generally held by children. The exam for 1st kyu (ikky\u016b) is often their first exam and grade. Adults generally will do their 1st dan (shodan) as their first exam. In most other countries outside of Japan, kendoka go through every kyu rank before being eligible for dan ranks.\n is the highest \"dan\" grade attainable through a test of physical kendo skills. In the AJKF, the grades of and tenth \"dan\" () are no longer awarded, but ninth-\"dan\" \"kend\u014dka\" are still active in Japanese kendo. International Kendo Federation (FIK) grading rules allow national kendo organisations to establish a special committee to consider awarding these grades. Only five now-deceased \"kend\u014dka\" were ever admitted to the rank of 10th-\"dan\" following the establishment in 1952 of the All Japan Kendo Federation. These five \"kend\u014dka\", all of whom were students of Nait\u014d Takaharu at the Budo Senmon Gakko, are:\nAll examination candidates face a panel of examiners. A larger, more qualified panel is usually assembled to assess the higher \"dan\" grades. Kendo examinations typically consist of \"jitsugi\", a demonstration of the skill of the applicants, \"Nihon Kendo Kata,\" and a written exam. The eighth-\"dan\" kendo exam is extremely difficult, with a reported pass rate of less than 1 percent.\nTitles.\n can be earned in addition to the above \"dan\" grades by \"kend\u014dka\" of a defined \"dan\" grade. These are , , and . The title is affixed to the front of the \"dan\" grade when said, for example . The qualifications for each title are below.\nKata.\n\"Kata\" are fixed patterns that teach \"kend\u014dka\" the basic elements of swordsmanship. The \"kata\" include fundamental techniques of attacking and counter-attacking, and have useful practical application in general kendo. There are ten . These are generally practiced with . Occasionally, real swords or swords with a blunt edge, called or , may be used for display of \"kata\".\nAll are performed by two people: the , the teacher, and , the student. The \"uchidachi\" makes the first move or attack in each \"kata\". As this is a teaching role, the \"uchidachi\" is always the losing side, thus allowing the \"shidachi\" to learn and to gain confidence.\n\"Kata\" one to seven are performed with both partners using a normal length wooden sword. \"Kata\" eight to ten are performed with \"uchidachi\" using a normal length weapon and \"shidachi\" using a shorter one (\"kodachi\").\nThe forms of the were finalized in 1933 based on the \"Dai nihon Teikoku Kendo Kata\", composed in 1912. It is impossible to link the individual forms of \"Dai nihon Teikoku Kendo Kata\" to their original influences, although the genealogical reference diagram does indicate the masters of the various committees involved, and it is possible from this to determine the influences and origins of Kendo and the Kata.\nIn 2003, the All Japan Kendo Federation introduced , a set of basic exercises using a \"bokuto\". This form of practice is intended primarily for \"kend\u014dka\" up to , but is very useful for all kendo students who are organized under FIK.\n\"Kata\" can also be treated as competitions where players are judged upon their performance and technique.\nNational and international organizations.\nMany national and regional organizations manage and promote kendo activities outside Japan. The major organizing body is the International Kendo Federation (FIK). The FIK is a non-governmental international federation of national and regional kendo organisations. An aim of the FIK is to provide a link between Japan and the international kendo community and to promote and popularize kendo, iaido and jodo. The FIK was established in 1970 with 17 national federations. The number of affiliated and recognized organizations has increased over the years to 57 (as of May 2015). The FIK is recognized by SportAccord as a 'Full Member', and is also recognized by the World Anti-Doping Agency.\nOther organizations that promote the study of Japanese martial arts, including kendo, are the Dai Nippon Butoku Kai (DNBK) and the International Martial Arts Federation (IMAF). The current DNBK has no connection to the pre-war organization, although it shares the same goals. The International Martial Arts Federation (IMAF) was established in Kyoto in 1952 and is dedicated to the promotion and development of the martial arts worldwide, including kendo.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17099", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17099", "title": "Kim-1", "text": ""}
{"id": "17100", "revid": "274535", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17100", "title": "Kingfisher", "text": "Family of birds\nKingfishers are a family, the Alcedinidae, of small to medium-sized, brightly coloured birds in the order Coraciiformes. They have a cosmopolitan distribution: most species live in the tropical regions of Africa, Asia, and Oceania, but they can also be found in Europe and the Americas. They can be found in deep forests near calm ponds and small rivers. The family contains 118\u00a0species and is divided into three subfamilies and 19\u00a0genera. All kingfishers have large heads, long, sharp, pointed bills, short legs, and stubby tails. Most species have bright plumage with only small differences between the sexes. Most species are tropical in distribution, and a slight majority are found only in forests.\nThey consume a wide range of prey, usually caught by swooping down from a perch. While kingfishers are usually thought to live near rivers and eat fish, many species live away from water and eat small invertebrates. Like other members of their order, they nest in cavities, usually tunnels dug into the natural or artificial banks in the ground. Some kingfishers nest in arboreal termite nests. A few species, principally insular forms, are threatened with extinction. In Britain, the word \"kingfisher\" normally refers to the common kingfisher.\nTaxonomy, systematics and evolution.\nThe kingfisher family Alcedinidae is in the order Coraciiformes, which also includes the motmots, bee-eaters, todies, rollers, and ground-rollers. The name of the family was introduced (as Alcedia) by the French polymath Constantine Samuel Rafinesque in 1815. It is divided into three subfamilies, the tree kingfishers (Halcyoninae), the river kingfishers (Alcedininae), and the water kingfishers (Cerylinae). The name Daceloninae is sometimes used for the tree kingfisher subfamily but it was introduced by Charles Lucien Bonaparte in 1841 while Halcyoninae introduced by Nicholas Aylward Vigors in 1825 is earlier and has priority. A few taxonomists elevate the three subfamilies to family status. In spite of the word \"kingfisher\" in their English vernacular names, many of these birds are not specialist fish-eaters; none of the species in Halcyoninae are.\nThe scientific name is derived from Greek mythology and the ancient belief that the birds nested in the open sea: the Greeks called them halkyons (Latin halcyon) from hals (sea) and kyon (born). In Greek mythology the gods gave the halkyons the ability to calm the waters when nesting. In Greek mythology, one of the Pleiades named Alcyone (Alcedo in Latin) married Ceyx who was killed in a shipwreck. Alcyone drowned herself in grief and the gods revived them both as kingfishers.\nThe phylogenetic relationship between the kingfishers and the other five families that make up the order Coraciiformes is shown in the cladogram below. The number of species in each family is taken from the list maintained by Frank Gill, Pamela C. Rasmussen and David Donsker on behalf of the International Ornithological Committee (IOC).\nThe centre of kingfisher diversity is the Australasian realm, but the group originated in the Indomalayan region around 27 million years ago (Mya) and invaded the Australasian realm a number of times. Fossil kingfishers have been described from Lower Eocene rocks in Wyoming and Middle Eocene rocks in Germany, around 30\u201340\u00a0Mya. More recent fossil kingfishers have been described in the Miocene rocks of Australia (5\u201325\u00a0Mya). Several fossil birds have been erroneously ascribed to the kingfishers, including \"Halcyornis\", from the Lower Eocene rocks in Kent, which has also been considered a gull, but is now thought to have been a member of an extinct family.\nAmongst the three subfamilies, the Alcedininae are basal to the other two subfamilies. The few species found in the Americas, all from the subfamily Cerylinae, suggest that the sparse representation in the Western Hemisphere resulted from just two original colonising events. The subfamily is a comparatively recent split from the Halcyoninae, diversifying in the Old World as recently as the Miocene or Pliocene.\nThe following cladogram is based on a molecular phylogenetic study published in 2017.\nDescription.\nThe smallest species of kingfisher is the African dwarf kingfisher (\"Ispidina lecontei\"), which averages in length and between in weight. The largest kingfisher in Africa is the giant kingfisher (\"Megaceryle maxima\"), which is in length and in weight. The common Australian kingfisher, known as the laughing kookaburra (\"Dacelo novaeguineae\"), is the heaviest species, with females reaching nearly in weight.\nThe plumage of most kingfishers is bright, with green and blue being the most common colours. The brightness of the colours is neither the product of iridescence (except in the American kingfishers) or pigments but is instead caused by the structure of the feathers, which causes scattering of blue light (the Tyndall effect). In most species, no overt differences between the sexes exist; when differences occur, they are quite small (less than 10%).\nThe kingfishers have long, dagger-like bills. The bill is usually longer and more compressed in species that hunt fish, and shorter and more broad in species that hunt prey off the ground. The largest and most atypical bill is that of the shovel-billed kookaburra, which is used to dig through the forest floor in search of prey. They generally have short legs, although species that feed on the ground have longer tarsi. Most species have four toes, three of which are forward-pointing and fused towards the base (\"syndactyl\") to some extent.\nThe irises of most species are dark brown. The kingfishers have excellent vision; they are capable of binocular vision and are thought in particular to have good colour vision. They have restricted movement of their eyes within the eye sockets, instead using head movements to track prey. In addition, they are capable of compensating for the refraction of water and reflection when hunting prey underwater, and are able to judge depth under water accurately. They also have nictitating membranes that cover the eyes to protect them when they hit the water; the pied kingfisher has a bony plate, which slides across the eye when it hits the water.\nDistribution and habitat.\nThe kingfishers have a cosmopolitan distribution, occurring throughout the world's tropical and temperate regions. They are absent from the polar regions and some of the world's driest deserts. Several species have reached islands groups, particularly those in the south and east Pacific Ocean. The Old World tropics and Australasia are the core areas for this group. Europe and North America north of Mexico are very poorly represented, with only one common kingfisher (common kingfisher and belted kingfisher, respectively), and two uncommon or very local species each: (ringed kingfisher and green kingfisher in the southwestern United States, pied kingfisher and white-throated kingfisher in southeastern Europe). The six species occurring in the Americas are four closely related green kingfishers in the genus \"Chloroceryle\" and two large crested kingfishers in the genus \"Megaceryle\". Even tropical South America has only five species plus the wintering belted kingfisher. In comparison, the African country of the Gambia has eight resident species in its area.\nIndividual species may have massive ranges, like the common kingfisher, which ranges from Ireland across Europe, North Africa, and Asia as far as the Solomon Islands in Australasia, or the pied kingfisher, which has a widespread distribution across Africa and Asia. Other species have much smaller ranges, particularly insular species which are endemic to single small islands. The Kofiau paradise kingfisher is restricted to the island of Kofiau off New Guinea.\nKingfishers occupy a wide range of habitats. While they are often associated with rivers and lakes, over half the world's species are found in forests and forested streams. They also occupy a wide range of other habitats. The red-backed kingfisher of Australia lives in the driest deserts, although kingfishers are absent from other dry deserts like the Sahara. Other species live high in mountains, or in open woodland, and a number of species live on tropical coral atolls. Numerous species have adapted to human-modified habitats, particularly those adapted to woodlands, and may be found in cultivated and agricultural areas, as well as parks and gardens in towns and cities.\nBehaviour and ecology.\nDiet and feeding.\nKingfishers feed on a wide variety of prey. They are most famous for hunting and eating fish, and some species do specialise in catching fish, but other species take crustaceans, frogs and other amphibians, annelid worms, molluscs, insects, spiders, centipedes, reptiles (including snakes), and even birds and mammals. Individual species may specialise in a few items or take a wide variety of prey, and for species with large global distributions, different populations may have different diets. Woodland and forest kingfishers take mainly insects, particularly grasshoppers, whereas the water kingfishers are more specialised in taking fish. The red-backed kingfisher has been observed hammering into the mud nests of fairy martins to feed on their nestlings. Kingfishers usually hunt from an exposed perch; when a prey item is observed, the kingfisher swoops down to snatch it, then returns to the perch. Kingfishers of all three families beat larger prey against a perch to kill the prey and to dislodge or break protective spines and bones. Having beaten the prey, it is manipulated and then swallowed. Sometimes, a pellet of bones, scales, and other indigestible debris is coughed up. The shovel-billed kookaburra uses its massive, wide bill as a shovel to dig for worms in soft mud.\nBreeding.\nKingfishers are territorial, some species defending their territories vigorously. They are generally monogamous, although cooperative breeding has been observed in some species and is quite common in others, for example the laughing kookaburra, where helpers aid the dominant breeding pair in raising the young.\nLike all Coraciiformes, the kingfishers are cavity nesters, as well as tree nesters, with most species nesting in holes dug in the ground. These holes are usually in earth banks on the sides of rivers, lakes or man-made ditches. Some species may nest in holes in trees, the earth clinging to the roots of an uprooted tree, or arboreal nests of termites (termitarium). The use of termite nests is common in forest species. The nests take the form of a small chamber at the end of a tunnel. Nest-digging duties are shared between the sexes. During the initial excavations, the bird may fly at the chosen site with considerable force, and birds have injured themselves fatally while doing this. The length of the tunnels varies by species and location; nests in termitaria are necessarily much shorter than those dug into the earth, and nests in harder substrates are shorter than those in soft soil or sand. The longest tunnels recorded are those of the giant kingfisher, which have been found to be long.\nThe eggs of kingfishers are invariably white. The typical clutch size varies by species; some of the very large and very small species lay as few as two eggs per clutch, whereas others may lay 10 eggs, the typical is around three to six eggs. Both sexes incubate the eggs. The offspring of the kingfisher usually stay with the parents for 3\u20134 months.\nStatus and conservation.\nA number of species are considered threatened by human activities and are in danger of extinction. Most of these are forest species with limited distribution, particularly insular species. They are threatened by habitat loss caused by forest clearance or degradation and in some cases by introduced species. The Marquesan kingfisher of French Polynesia is listed as critically endangered due to a combination of habitat loss and degradation caused by introduced cattle, and possibly due to predation by introduced species.\nRelationship with humans.\nKingfishers are generally shy birds, but in spite of this, they feature heavily in human culture, generally due to the large head supporting its powerful mouth, their bright plumage, or some species' interesting behavior.\nFor the Dusun people of Borneo, the oriental dwarf kingfisher is considered a bad omen, and warriors who see one on the way to battle should return home. Another Bornean tribe considers the banded kingfisher an omen bird, albeit generally a good omen.\nThe sacred kingfisher, along with other Pacific kingfishers, was venerated by the Polynesians, who believed it had control over the seas and waves. As a symbol of dexterity and wisdom, kingfishers also inspire literary works from the Southeast Asian region, such as \"Wild Wise Weird: The Kingfisher Story Collection\".\nModern taxonomy also refers to the winds and sea in naming kingfishers after a classical Greek myth. The first pair of the mythical-bird Halcyon (kingfishers) were created from a marriage of Alcyone and Ceyx. As gods, they lived the sacrilege of referring to themselves as Zeus and Hera. They died for this, but the other gods, in an act of compassion, made them into birds, thus restoring them to their original seaside habitat. In addition, special \"halcyon days\" were granted. These are the seven days on either side of the winter solstice when storms shall never again occur for them. The Halcyon birds' \"days\" were for caring for the winter-hatched clutch (or brood), but the phrase \"Halcyon days\" also refers specifically to an idyllic time in the past, or in general to a peaceful time. In another version, a woman named Alcyone was cast into the waves by her father for her promiscuity and was turned into a kingfisher.\nVarious kinds of kingfishers and human cultural artifacts are named after the couple, in reference to this metamorphosis myth:\nNot all the kingfishers are named in this way. The etymology of kingfisher (\"Alcedo atthis\") is obscure; the term comes from \"king's fisher\", but why that name was applied is not known.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17102", "revid": "1314062392", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17102", "title": "Kesgrave", "text": "Town in Suffolk, England\nKesgrave is a town and civil parish in the East Suffolk district of Suffolk, England. The town is close to both Ipswich and Woodbridge. Kesgrave forms part of the wider Ipswich Built-up area.\nHistory.\nThe name Kesgrave is thought to derive from the Old English \"c\u00e6rsegr\u00e6f\" or \"c\u00e6rsegr\u01e3fe\" meaning 'cress pit' or 'cress grove'.\nThe area was recorded as \"Gressgrava\" in the Domesday Book, by the late 15th century its name had become Kesgrave. Kesgrave remained a small agricultural settlement with just a church, inn and a few farmsteads for over 700 years.\nIn 1921 the population was only 103 housed in 20 dwellings. Since then great changes have taken place.\nBy 1988 Kesgrave covered an area of more than . \nKesgrave parish council officially adopted the title of a town in January 2000.\nSchools.\nKesgrave High School is a large 11-18 comprehensive co-educational school with nearly 2000 pupils. A study for Sustrans noted that 61% of the pupils cycled to the school. This is largely due to the installation of a large cycle lane through the local housing development and along the main road. The school actively encourages walking or cycling and provides bicycle storage facilities.\nThe five primary schools in the immediate vicinity of Kesgrave are Beacon Hill Primary School, Birchwood Primary School, Cedarwood Primary School the building of which was awarded a Civic Trust Award in 2003, Gorseland Primary School and Heath Primary School.\nKesgrave was home to a number of private day and boarding schools based at Kesgrave Hall\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17103", "revid": "45738846", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17103", "title": "Kurt Waldheim", "text": "Austrian diplomat and politician (1918\u20132007)\nKurt Josef Waldheim (; 21 December 1918 \u2013 14 June 2007) was an Austrian politician and diplomat. Waldheim was the secretary-general of the United Nations from 1972 to 1981 and the president of Austria from 1986 to 1992. While he was running for the latter office in the 1986 election, the revelation of his service in Greece and Yugoslavia during World War II, and of his knowledge of Nazi atrocities as an intelligence officer in Nazi Germany's Wehrmacht, raised international controversy.\nEarly life and education.\nWaldheim was born in Sankt Andr\u00e4-W\u00f6rdern, near Vienna, on 21 December 1918. He was the eldest child of Walter Watzlawik, a schoolmaster of Czech origin, and his wife Josefine Petrasch. Watzlawik (original Czech spelling V\u00e1clav\u00edk) changed his name to \"Waldheim\" that year as the Habsburg monarchy collapsed and eventually rose to become superintendent of schools for the Tulln District, attaining the rank of \"Regierungsrat\" (government councillor). Active in the Christian Social Party, he was well regarded as a devoutly Catholic family man. Waldheim and his two younger siblings, a brother, Walther, and a sister, Gerlinde, enjoyed a comfortable middle-class upbringing. From his youth, Waldheim was distinguished by his unusual height of . As a \"gymnasium\" student in Klosterneuburg, he excelled at languages and was a competent violinist in the school orchestra, also enjoying swimming, boating and tennis.\nAlthough his father wanted him to study medicine, Waldheim had an aversion to the sight of blood, and had already decided to enter the foreign service. In March 1936, the Schuschnigg government passed a law mandating a period of military service for prospective civil servants. Consequently, following his graduation Waldheim volunteered for a 12-month term of enlistment in the Austrian Army, and was posted to the 1st Dragoon Regiment on his 18th birthday. In the autumn of 1937, now an army reservist, Waldheim entered the prestigious Consular Academy in Vienna on a scholarship, where he began his studies in law and diplomacy. Along with his family, Waldheim opposed the German annexation of Austria in 1938, and while actively campaigning against it in Vienna was attacked and injured by Austrian Nazis. Following the annexation, Waldheim's father was briefly arrested by the Gestapo and dismissed from his post, while Waldheim's scholarship was cancelled. He managed to continue his studies by working as a Latin and Greek tutor and borrowing funds from relatives.\nWaldheim applied for membership in the National Socialist German Students' League (NSDStB), a division of the Nazi Party. Shortly thereafter he became a member of the \"Sturmabteilung\" (SA), the Nazi Party's original paramilitary wing.\nOn 19 August 1944, he married Elisabeth Ritschel in Vienna; their first daughter, Lieselotte, was born the following year. A son, Gerhard, and another daughter, Christa, followed.\nMilitary service in World War II.\nIn early 1941, Waldheim was conscripted into the Wehrmacht, the armed forces of Nazi Germany, specifically to the Heer (Army), and posted to the Eastern Front where he served as a squad leader. In December, he was wounded but returned to service in 1942. His service from 1942 to 1945 was the subject of international review in 1985 and 1986. In his 1985 autobiography, he claimed that he was discharged from further service at the front and, for the remainder of the war, finished his law degree at the University of Vienna, in addition to marrying in 1944. After publication, documents and witnesses came to light that revealed Waldheim's military service continued until 1945, during which time he rose to the rank of .\nService in Yugoslavia and Greece.\nWaldheim's functions within the staff of the German Army's Group E from 1942 until 1945, as determined by the International Commission of Historians, were:\nBy 1943, Waldheim was serving in the capacity of an aide-de-camp in Army Group E which was headed by General Alexander L\u00f6hr, who would be executed as a war criminal in 1947. In 1986, Waldheim said that he had served only as an interpreter and a clerk and had no knowledge either of reprisals against local Serb civilians or of massacres in neighboring provinces of Yugoslavia. He said that he had known some things and was horrified but felt powerless.\nMuch historical interest has centred on Waldheim's role in Operation Kozara in 1942. According to one post-war investigator, prisoners were routinely shot within only a few hundred metres (yards) of Waldheim's office, and away at the Jasenovac concentration camp. Waldheim later stated that \"he did not know about the murder of civilians there\".\nWaldheim's name appears on the \"Wehrmacht\"'s \"honour list\" of those responsible for the militarily successful operation. The Nazi puppet state, the Independent State of Croatia, awarded Waldheim the Medal of the Crown of King Zvonimir in silver with an oak branches cluster. Decades later, during the lobbying for his election as U.N. Secretary General, Yugoslav President Josip Broz Tito, who had led the Yugoslav Partisans during the war, awarded Waldheim one of the highest Yugoslav orders, not knowing the details of his prior military service.\nWaldheim denied that he knew war crimes were taking place in Bosnia at the height of the battles between the Nazis and Tito's partisans in 1943. According to Eli Rosenbaum, in 1944, Waldheim reviewed and approved a packet of antisemitic propaganda leaflets to be dropped behind Soviet lines, one of which ended: \"Enough of the Jewish war, kill the Jews, come over.\"\nIn 1945, Waldheim surrendered to British forces in Carinthia, at which point he said he had fled his command post within Army Group E, where he was serving with General Alexander L\u00f6hr.\nDiplomatic career.\nAfter finishing his studies in law at the University of Vienna Waldheim joined the Austrian diplomatic service in 1945. Waldheim escaped denazification proceedings, as Austrian governmental forces quashed it, though it would have been required because of Waldheim's memberships in the SA's equestrian unit and in the NSDSB \u2014 Nazi Student Association. Thereafter, his diplomatic career could commence.\nWaldheim served as First Secretary of the Legation in Paris from 1948, and in the Ministry for Foreign Affairs in Vienna from 1951 to 1956. In 1956 he was made Ambassador to Canada, returning to the Ministry in 1960, after which he became the Permanent Representative of Austria to the United Nations in 1964. For two years beginning in 1968, he was the Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs for the Austrian People's Party, before going back in 1970 as Permanent Representative to the UN. Shortly afterward he ran in the 1971 Austrian presidential election, and was defeated.\nUnited Nations Secretary-General.\nAfter losing the presidential election, Waldheim ran for Secretary-General of the United Nations in the 1971 selection. Waldheim was supported by 11 votes, including the Soviet Union, and led the first two rounds of voting. The United States and United Kingdom initially supported him in the second round of voting. However, he was vetoed by China in the second round. Waldheim won an accidental victory in the third round of voting when those three permanent members failed to coordinate their vetoes and all abstained. According to Finnish diplomat Risto Hyv\u00e4rinen, Waldheim's former Nazi connections were already known to the Finnish officials who supported Max Jakobson for Secretary-General in the election. However, this knowledge was not used against Waldheim, because the Finns believed he would not be chosen anyway due to China having promised to veto him.\nAs secretary-general from 1972 onward, Waldheim opened and addressed a number of major international conferences convened under United Nations auspices. These included the third session of the U.N. Conference on Trade and Development (Santiago, April 1972), the U.N. Conference on the Human Environment (Stockholm, June 1972), the third UN Conference on the Law of the Sea (Caracas, June 1974), the Third World Population Conference (Bucharest, August 1974) and the World Food Conference (Rome, November 1974), and the World Conference on Women, 1975 (Mexico City, June 1975). During the later, UN Resolution 3379, which considered Zionism as a form of racism and equated it with South African Apartheid, was approved by impulse of Arab countries, the Soviet bloc, and Non-Aligned Movement countries. His diplomatic efforts particularly in the Middle East were overshadowed by the diplomacy of then U.S. Secretary of State, Henry Kissinger.\nOn 11 September 1972, Ugandan dictator Idi Amin sent a telegram to Waldheim, copies of which went to Yasser Arafat and Golda Meir. In the telegram, Amin \"applauded the massacre of the Israeli Olympic athletes in Munich and said Germany was the most appropriate locale for this because it was where Hitler burned more than six million Jews\". Amin also called \"to expel Israel from the United Nations and to send all the Israelis to Britain, which bore the guilt for creating the Jewish state\". Amidst international protest, \"the UN spokesman said [in his daily press conference] it was not the secretary-general's practice to comment on telegrams sent him by heads of government. He added that the secretary-general condemned any form of racial discrimination and genocide.\"\nAfter Operation Entebbe on 7 July 1976 \u2013 in which Israeli commandos freed more than 100 Israeli and Jewish passengers held captive in Entebbe Airport (Uganda's main airport) by Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine and German Revolutionary Cells fighters protected by forces of dictator Idi Amin, and where all the hijackers, three hostages, and 45 Ugandan soldiers were killed \u2013 Waldheim described the raid as a \"serious violation of the national sovereignty of a United Nations member state\".\nWaldheim ran for a second term in the 1976 UN Secretary-General selection. However, China was still opposed to him, and approached several Third World countries seeking challengers. Outgoing Mexican President Luis Echeverr\u00eda finally entered the race in October 1976, making Waldheim the only Secretary-General to face a contested re-selection campaign. Waldheim resoundingly defeated Echeverr\u00eda in the first round of voting. China cast a single symbolic veto against Waldheim in the first round and voted for him in the second round, handing him an easy victory with 14 of 15 votes on the Security Council.\nIn 1977, Waldheim recorded a greeting for the Voyager Golden Records, a pair of discs containing sounds and images representing the diversity of life and culture on Earth, which were launched into deep space on the Voyager spacecraft. The craft were also inscribed with a written message from then-U.S. President Jimmy Carter.\nWaldheim was the first Secretary-General to visit North Korea, in 1979. In 1980, Waldheim flew to Iran in an attempt to negotiate the release of the American hostages held in Tehran, but Ayatollah Khomeini refused to see him. While in Tehran, it was announced that an attempt on Waldheim's life had been foiled. Near the end of his tenure as secretary-general, Waldheim and British popular musician Paul McCartney organized a series of concerts for the People of Kampuchea to help Cambodia recover from the damage done by Pol Pot.\nWaldheim ran for an unprecedented third full term as Secretary-General in the 1981 selection. China was determined to unseat him this time and lined up a strong candidate in Salim Ahmed Salim of Tanzania. In the first round of voting, Waldheim lost to Salim by one vote. However, Salim was vetoed by the United States, while Waldheim was vetoed by China. The veto duel between China and the United States lasted a record 16 rounds. After six weeks of deadlock, Waldheim and Salim both withdrew from the race. Javier P\u00e9rez de Cu\u00e9llar of Peru won the selection and succeeded Waldheim as Secretary-General of the United Nations. The events of 1981 established a customary two-term limit on the office, and no Secretary-General since Waldheim has run for a third term.\nPresidency of Austria.\nElection and Waldheim Affair.\nWaldheim had unsuccessfully sought election as President of Austria in 1971, but his second attempt on 8 June 1986 proved successful. During his campaign for the presidency in 1985, what became known internationally as the \"Waldheim affair\" began. Before the presidential elections, investigative journalist Alfred Worm revealed in the Austrian weekly news magazine \"Profil\" that Waldheim's recently published autobiography had several omissions about his life between 1938 and 1945.\nWaldheim had previously claimed to have received a medical discharge after being wounded in winter 1942. His aides at the United Nations even accused the Israeli mission of spreading rumors that he supported the Nazis. Israeli ambassador Yehuda Zvi Blum denied the charges, saying, \"We don't believe Waldheim ever supported the Nazis and we never said he did. We have many differences with him, but that isn't one of them.\"\nA short time later, beginning on 4 March 1986, the World Jewish Congress alleged that Waldheim had lied about his service in the mounted corps of the SA and had concealed his service as a special missions staff officer (Ordonnanzoffizier) for Germany's Army Group E in Yugoslavia and Greece, from 1942 to 1944, based primarily on captured German wartime records held at the United States National Archives in Washington, DC, and in other archives. The 23 March 1986 public disclosure by the World Jewish Congress that the organization had unearthed the fact that the United Nations War Crimes Commission concluded after the war that Waldheim was implicated in Nazi mass murder and should be arrested arguably transformed the Waldheim affair into the most sensational of all post-war Nazi scandals.\nWaldheim called the allegations, which grew in magnitude in the ensuing months, \"pure lies and malicious acts\". Nevertheless, he admitted that he had known about German reprisals: \"Yes, I knew. I was horrified. But what could I do? I had either to continue to serve or be executed.\" He said that he had never fired a shot or even seen a partisan. His former immediate superior at the time stated that Waldheim had \"remained confined to a desk\". Former Austrian chancellor Bruno Kreisky, who was Jewish, denounced the actions of the World Jewish Congress as an \"extraordinary infamy\", adding that Austrians would not \"allow the Jews abroad to ... tell us who should be our President\".\nPart of the reason for the controversy was Austria's refusal to address its national role in the Holocaust (many leading Nazis, including Adolf Hitler, had been born Austrians, and Austria became part of the Third Reich). Austria refused to pay compensation to victims of Nazism, and from 1970 onwards refused to investigate Austrian citizens who were senior Nazis. Stolen Jewish art remained public property a generation after the Waldheim affair.\nBecause the revelations leading to the Waldheim affair came shortly before the presidential election, there has been speculation about the background of the affair. Declassified documents from the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency show that the CIA had been aware of some details of his wartime past since 1945. Information about Waldheim's wartime past was also previously published by a pro-German Austrian newspaper, \"Salzburger Volksblatt\", during the 1971 presidential election campaign, including the claim of an SS membership, but the matter was supposedly regarded as unimportant or even advantageous for the candidate at that time.\nIn view of the ongoing international controversy, the Austrian government decided to appoint an international committee of historians to examine Waldheim's life between 1938 and 1945. Their report found no evidence of any personal involvement in those crimes. Although Waldheim had stated that he was unaware of any crimes taking place, the committee cited evidence that Waldheim must have known about war crimes. The International Committee in February 1988 concluded that Waldheim had been \"in close proximity to some Nazi atrocities, knew they were going on and made no attempt to stop them\". The committee also noted that \"he only had very minor possibilities to act against the injustices happening\".\nAllegations of war crimes.\nOn 27 April 1987, the United States Departments of Justice and of State announced that evidence amassed in an investigation conducted by the Justice Department's Office of Special Investigations (OSI) had established a \"prima facie\" case that Waldheim participated in Nazi-sponsored persecution during World War II and therefore that his entry into the United States was prohibited by federal statute. This marked the first time that a head of state had been put on an immigration watchlist. The 232-page internal Department of Justice 9 April 1987 investigative report was released in 1994 by that agency, and it is available at the agency's website. The report catalogues evidence that, the U.S. government concluded, proved that Waldheim had taken part in, among other actions: the transfer of civilian prisoners to the SS for exploitation as slave labor; the mass deportation of civilians\u2014including Jews from Greek islands and the town of Banja Luka, Yugoslavia\u2014to concentration and death camps; the utilization of antisemitic propaganda; the mistreatment and execution of Allied prisoners; and reprisal executions of hostages and other civilians.\nAdditional allegations of participation in Nazi crimes, with citations to captured Nazi documents and other records, were leveled in a 1993 book by Eli Rosenbaum, the former U.S. federal prosecutor who had directed the World Jewish Congress investigation that led to the \"New York Times\"' initial exposure of Waldheim's hidden Nazi-era past in 1986. The book also alleged that the Soviet Union was aware of Waldheim's alleged involvement in Nazi crimes and that, after vetoing other candidates in order to get Waldheim installed as U.N. Secretary General in 1972, used that information to extract concessions at the United Nations that facilitated KGB espionage in the United States, and that the CIA's failure to anticipate this possibility was a major failure for the intelligence agency. In a letter to the editor published in \"Foreign Affairs\" magazine two years after Rosenbaum's book was released, former Finnish ambassador to the U.N. Max Jakobson (one of the candidates whom the USSR had vetoed) wrote, \"The Soviets knew everything about Waldheim. That is why they preferred him.\"\nThroughout his term as President (1986\u20131992), Waldheim was officially deemed \"persona non grata\" by the United States and, officially or informally, by nearly every other nation in the world outside the Arab world.\nNot all evidence was weighted against Waldheim. Royal Air Force Squadron Leader Bruce Ogilvie was captured in civilian clothing, carrying a stolen German pistol, on Leros, Greece, in 1943, and was taken to Athens along with other prisoners captured under circumstances that might have led to their executions had not Waldheim exchanged their identity tags for those of Allied soldiers killed in action.\nLater years and death.\nAfter his term ended in 1992, Waldheim did not seek re-election. In the same year, he was made an honorary member of \"K.H.V. Welfia Klosterneuburg\", a Roman Catholic student fraternity, part of the Austrian \"Cartellverband\". In 1994, Pope John Paul II awarded Waldheim a knighthood in the Order of Pius IX and his wife a papal honor. He died on 14 June 2007, at the age of 88 from heart failure. On 23 June, his funeral was held at St. Stephen's Cathedral, Vienna, and he was buried at the Presidential Vault in the \"Zentralfriedhof\" (\"central cemetery\").\nIn his speech at the cathedral, Federal President Heinz Fischer called Waldheim \"a great Austrian\" who had been wrongfully accused of having committed war crimes. Fischer also praised Waldheim for his efforts to solve international crises and for his contributions to world peace. At Waldheim's own request, no foreign heads of states or governments were invited to attend his funeral except Hans-Adam II, the Prince of Liechtenstein. Also present was Luis Durnwalder, governor of the Italian province of South Tyrol. Japan and Syria were the only two countries that laid wreaths on his grave. Ban Ki-moon, the secretary-general of the United Nations, issued a message \"voicing sadness\". In a two-page letter, published posthumously by the Austrian Press Agency the day after he died, Waldheim admitted to making \"mistakes\" (\"but these were certainly not those of a follower let alone an accomplice of a criminal regime\") and asked his critics for forgiveness.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17104", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17104", "title": "AMD K6", "text": "Computer microprocessor\nThe K6 microprocessor was launched by AMD in 1997. The main advantage of this particular microprocessor is that it was designed to fit into existing desktop designs for Pentium-branded CPUs. It was marketed as a product that could perform as well as its Intel Pentium II equivalent but at a significantly lower price. The K6 had a considerable impact on the PC market and presented Intel with serious competition.\nBackground.\nThe AMD K6 is a superscalar P5 Pentium-class microprocessor, manufactured by AMD, which superseded the K5.\nThe AMD K6 is based on the Nx686 microprocessor that NexGen was designing when it was acquired by AMD. Despite the name implying a design evolving from the K5, it is in fact a totally different design that was created by the NexGen team, including chief processor architect Greg Favor, and adapted after the AMD purchase. The K6 processor included a feedback dynamic instruction reordering mechanism, MMX instructions, and a floating-point unit (FPU). It was also made pin-compatible with Intel's Pentium, enabling it to be used in the widely available \"Socket 7\"-based motherboards. Like the AMD K5, Nx586, and Nx686 before it, the K6 translated x86 instructions on the fly into dynamic buffered sequences of micro-operations. A later variation of the K6 CPU, K6-2, added floating-point-based SIMD instructions, called 3DNow!.\nThe K6 was originally launched in April 1997, running at speeds of 166 and 200\u00a0MHz. It was followed by a 233\u00a0MHz version later in 1997. Initially, the AMD K6 processors used a Pentium II-based performance rating (PR2) to designate their speed. The PR2 rating was dropped because the rated frequency of the processor was the same as the real frequency. The release of the 266\u00a0MHz version of this chip was not until the second quarter of 1998, when AMD was able to move to the 0.25-micrometre manufacturing process. The lower voltage and higher multiplier of the K6-266 meant that it was not fully compatible with some Socket 7 motherboards, similar to the later K6-2 processors. The final iteration of the K6 design was released in May 1998, running at 300\u00a0MHz.\nSuccessor.\nThe K6 line was updated with SIMD instructions (Branded as AMD 3DNow!) to create the K6-2 line of microprocessors.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17105", "revid": "1262827602", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17105", "title": "K7", "text": "K7, K07 or K-7 may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles associated with the same title formed as a letter\u2013number combination."}
{"id": "17106", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17106", "title": "KA9Q", "text": "KA9Q, also called KA9Q NOS or simply NOS, was a popular early implementation of TCP/IP and associated protocols for amateur packet radio systems and smaller personal computers connected via serial lines. It was named after the amateur radio callsign of Phil Karn, who first wrote the software for a CP/M system and then ported it to DOS on the IBM PC. As the KA9Q package included source code, many radio amateurs modified it, so many different versions were available at the same time.\nKA9Q was later maintained by Anthony Frost (callsign G8UDV) and Adam Goodfellow. It was ported to the Acorn Archimedes by Jonathan Naylor (G4KLX). Until 1995 it was the standard access software provided by British dial-up internet service provider Demon Internet.\nMost modern operating systems provide a built-in implementation of TCP/IP protocol; Linux especially includes all the necessary kernel functions and support utilities for TCP/IP over amateur radio systems, as well as basic AX.25 and NET/ROM functionality. Therefore, NOS is regarded as obsolete by its original developer. It still may have its uses for embedded systems that are too small for Linux.\nKA9Q is also a name for the IP-over-IP Tunneling protocol.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17110", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17110", "title": "Keyboard plaque", "text": ""}
{"id": "17111", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17111", "title": "Keyboard send receive", "text": ""}
{"id": "17112", "revid": "8373762", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17112", "title": "HMAC", "text": "Computer communications authentication algorithm\nIn cryptography, an HMAC (sometimes expanded as either keyed-hash message authentication code or hash-based message authentication code) is a specific type of message authentication code (MAC) involving a cryptographic hash function and a secret cryptographic key. As with any MAC, it may be used to simultaneously verify both the data integrity and authenticity of a message. An HMAC is a type of keyed hash function that can also be used in a key derivation scheme or a key stretching scheme.\nHMAC can provide authentication using a shared secret instead of using digital signatures with asymmetric cryptography. It trades off the need for a complex public key infrastructure by delegating the key exchange to the communicating parties, who are responsible for establishing and using a trusted channel to agree on the key prior to communication.\nDetails.\nAny cryptographic hash function, such as SHA-2 or SHA-3, may be used in the calculation of an HMAC; the resulting MAC algorithm is termed HMAC-\"x\", where \"x\" is the hash function used (e.g. HMAC-SHA256 or HMAC-SHA3-512). The cryptographic strength of the HMAC depends upon the cryptographic strength of the underlying hash function, the size of its hash output, and the size and quality of the key.\nHMAC uses two passes of hash computation. Before either pass, the secret key is used to derive two keys \u2013 inner and outer. Next, the first pass of the hash algorithm produces an internal hash derived from the message and the inner key. The second pass produces the final HMAC code derived from the inner hash result and the outer key. Thus the algorithm provides better immunity against length extension attacks.\nAn iterative hash function (one that uses the Merkle\u2013Damg\u00e5rd construction) breaks up a message into blocks of a fixed size and iterates over them with a compression function. For example, SHA-256 operates on 512-bit blocks. The size of the output of HMAC is the same as that of the underlying hash function (e.g., 256 and 512 bits in the case of SHA-256 and SHA3-512, respectively), although it can be truncated if desired.\nHMAC does not encrypt the message. Instead, the message (encrypted or not) must be sent alongside the HMAC hash. Parties with the secret key will hash the message again themselves, and if it is authentic, the received and computed hashes will match.\nThe definition and analysis of the HMAC construction was first published in 1996 in a paper by Mihir Bellare, Ran Canetti, and Hugo Krawczyk, and they also wrote RFC 2104 in 1997. The 1996 paper also defined a nested variant called NMAC (Nested MAC). FIPS PUB 198 generalizes and standardizes the use of HMACs. HMAC is used within the IPsec, SSH and TLS protocols and for JSON Web Tokens.\nDefinition.\nThis definition is taken from RFC 2104:\nformula_1\nwhere\n formula_2 is a cryptographic hash function.\n formula_3 is the message to be authenticated.\n formula_4 is the secret key.\n formula_5 is a block-sized key derived from the secret key, \"K\"; either by padding to the right with 0s up to the block size, or by hashing down to less than or equal to the block size first and then padding to the right with zeros.\n formula_6 denotes concatenation.\n formula_7 denotes bitwise exclusive or (XOR).\n formula_8 is the block-sized outer padding, consisting of repeated bytes valued 0x5c.\n formula_9 is the block-sized inner padding, consisting of repeated bytes valued 0x36.\nImplementation.\nThe following pseudocode demonstrates how HMAC may be implemented. The block size is 512 bits (64 bytes) when using one of the following hash functions: SHA-1, MD5, RIPEMD-128.\n function hmac is\n input:\n key: Bytes // Array of bytes\n message: Bytes // Array of bytes to be hashed\n hash: Function // The hash function to use (e.g. SHA-1)\n blockSize: Integer // The block size of the hash function (e.g. 64 bytes for SHA-1)\n // Compute the block sized key\n block_sized_key = computeBlockSizedKey(key, hash, blockSize)\n o_key_pad \u2190 block_sized_key xor [0x5c blockSize] // Outer padded key\n i_key_pad \u2190 block_sized_key xor [0x36 blockSize] // Inner padded key\n return hash(o_key_pad \u2225 hash(i_key_pad \u2225 message))\n function computeBlockSizedKey is\n input:\n key: Bytes // Array of bytes\n hash: Function // The hash function to use (e.g. SHA-1)\n blockSize: Integer // The block size of the hash function (e.g. 64 bytes for SHA-1)\n // Keys longer than \"blockSize\" are shortened by hashing them\n if (length(key) &gt; blockSize) then\n key = hash(key)\n // Keys shorter than \"blockSize\" are padded to \"blockSize\" by padding with zeros on the right\n if (length(key) &lt; blockSize) then\n return Pad(key, blockSize) // Pad key with zeros to make it \"blockSize\" bytes long\n return key\nDesign principles.\nThe design of the HMAC specification was motivated by the existence of attacks on more trivial mechanisms for combining a key with a hash function. For example, one might assume the same security that HMAC provides could be achieved with MAC = H(\"key\" \u2225 \"message\"). However, this method suffers from a serious flaw: with most hash functions, it is easy to append data to the message without knowing the key and obtain another valid MAC (\"length-extension attack\"). The alternative, appending the key using MAC = H(\"message\" \u2225 \"key\"), suffers from the problem that an attacker who can find a collision in the (unkeyed) hash function has a collision in the MAC (as two messages m1 and m2 yielding the same hash will provide the same start condition to the hash function before the appended key is hashed, hence the final hash will be the same). Using MAC = H(\"key\" \u2225 \"message\" \u2225 \"key\") is better, but various security papers have suggested vulnerabilities with this approach, even when two different keys are used.\nNo known extension attacks have been found against the current HMAC specification which is defined as H(\"key\" \u2225 H(\"key\" \u2225 \"message\")) because the outer application of the hash function masks the intermediate result of the internal hash. The values of \"ipad\" and \"opad\" are not critical to the security of the algorithm, but were defined in such a way to have a large Hamming distance from each other and so the inner and outer keys will have fewer bits in common. The security reduction of HMAC does require them to be different in at least one bit.\nThe Keccak hash function, that was selected by NIST as the SHA-3 competition winner, doesn't need this nested approach and can be used to generate a MAC by simply prepending the key to the message, as it is not susceptible to length-extension attacks.\nSecurity.\nThe cryptographic strength of the HMAC depends upon the size of the secret key that is used and the security of the underlying hash function used. It has been proven that the security of an HMAC construction is directly related to security properties of the hash function used. The most common attack against HMACs is brute force to uncover the secret key. HMACs are substantially less affected by collisions than their underlying hashing algorithms alone.\nIn particular, Mihir Bellare proved that HMAC is a pseudo-random function (PRF) under the sole assumption that the compression function is a PRF. Therefore, HMAC-MD5 does not suffer from the same weaknesses that have been found in MD5.\nRFC 2104 requires that \"keys longer than \"B\" bytes are first hashed using \"H\"\" which leads to a confusing pseudo-collision: if the key is longer than the hash block size (e.g. 64 bytes for SHA-1), then codice_1 is computed as codice_2. This property is sometimes raised as a possible weakness of HMAC in password-hashing scenarios: it has been demonstrated that it's possible to find a long ASCII string and a random value whose hash will be also an ASCII string, and both values will produce the same HMAC output.\nIn 2006, Jongsung Kim, Alex Biryukov, Bart Preneel, and Seokhie Hong showed how to distinguish HMAC with reduced versions of MD5 and SHA-1 or full versions of HAVAL, MD4, and SHA-0 from a random function or HMAC with a random function. Differential distinguishers allow an attacker to devise a forgery attack on HMAC. Furthermore, differential and rectangle distinguishers can lead to second-preimage attacks. HMAC with the full version of MD4 can be forged with this knowledge. These attacks do not contradict the security proof of HMAC, but provide insight into HMAC based on existing cryptographic hash functions.\nIn 2009, Xiaoyun Wang \"et al.\" presented a distinguishing attack on HMAC-MD5 without using related keys. It can distinguish an instantiation of HMAC with MD5 from an instantiation with a random function with 297 queries with probability 0.87.\nIn 2011 an informational RFC 6151 was published to summarize security considerations in MD5 and HMAC-MD5. For HMAC-MD5 the RFC summarizes that \u2013 although the security of the MD5 hash function itself is severely compromised \u2013 the currently known \"attacks on HMAC-MD5 do not seem to indicate a practical vulnerability when used as a message authentication code\", but it also adds that \"for a new protocol design, a ciphersuite with HMAC-MD5 should not be included\".\nIn May 2011, RFC 6234 was published detailing the abstract theory and source code for SHA-based HMACs.\nExamples.\nHere are some HMAC values, assuming 8-bit ASCII for the input and hexadecimal encoding for the output:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17113", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17113", "title": "Keyed sequential data set", "text": ""}
{"id": "17114", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17114", "title": "Key escrow", "text": "Cryptographic arrangement\nKey escrow (also known as a \"fair\" cryptosystem) is an arrangement in which the keys needed to decrypt encrypted data are held in escrow so that, under certain circumstances, an authorized third party may gain access to those keys. These third parties may include businesses, who may want access to employees' secure business-related communications, or governments, who may wish to be able to view the contents of encrypted communications (also known as \"exceptional access\").\nThe technical problem is a largely structural one. Access to protected information must be provided \"only\" to the intended recipient and at least one third party. The third party should be permitted access only under carefully controlled conditions, for instance, a court order. Thus far, no system design has been shown to meet this requirement fully on a technical basis alone. All proposed systems also require correct functioning of some social linkage, for instance the process of request for access, examination of request for 'legitimacy' (as by a court), and granting of access by technical personnel charged with access control. All such linkages / controls have serious problems from a system design security perspective. Systems in which the key may not be changed easily are rendered especially vulnerable as the accidental release of the key will result in many devices becoming totally compromised, necessitating an immediate key change or replacement of the system.\nOn a national level, key escrow is controversial in many countries for at least two reasons. One involves mistrust of the security of the structural escrow arrangement. Many countries have a long history of less than adequate protection of others' information by assorted organizations, public and private, even when the information is held only under an affirmative legal obligation to protect it from unauthorized access. Another is technical concerns for the additional vulnerabilities likely to be introduced by supporting key escrow operations. Thus far, no key escrow system has been designed which meets both objections and nearly all have failed to meet even one. \nKey escrow is proactive, anticipating the need for access to keys; a retroactive alternative is key disclosure law, where users are required to surrender keys upon demand by law enforcement, or else face legal penalties. Key disclosure law avoids some of the technical issues and risks of key escrow systems, but also introduces new risks like loss of keys and legal issues such as involuntary self-incrimination. The ambiguous term \"key recovery\" is applied to both types of systems.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17115", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17115", "title": "Key field", "text": ""}
{"id": "17116", "revid": "49836368", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17116", "title": "Key frame", "text": "Drawing that defines the starting and ending points of any smooth transition\nIn animation and filmmaking, a key frame (or keyframe) is a drawing or shot that defines the starting and ending points of a smooth transition. These are called \"frames\" because their position in time is measured in frames on a strip of film or on a digital video editing timeline. A sequence of key frames defines which movement the viewer will see, whereas the position of the key frames on the film, video, or animation defines the timing of the movement. Because only two or three key frames over the span of a second do not create the illusion of movement, the remaining frames are filled with \"inbetweens\".\nUse of key frames as a means to change parameters.\nIn software packages that support animation, especially 3D graphics, there are many parameters that can be changed for any one object. One example of such an object is a light. In 3D graphics, lights function similarly to real-world lights. They cause illumination, cast shadows, and create specular highlights. Lights have many parameters, including light intensity, beam size, light color, and the texture cast by the light. Supposing that an animator wants the beam size to change smoothly from one value to another within a predefined period of time, that could be achieved by using key frames. At the start of the animation, a beam size value is set. Another value is set for the end of the animation. Thus, the software program automatically interpolates the two values, creating a smooth transition.\nVideo editing.\nIn non-linear digital video editing, as well as in video compositing software, a key frame is a frame used to indicate the beginning or end of a change made to a parameter. For example, a key frame could be set to indicate the point at which audio will have faded up or down to a certain level.\nVideo compression.\nIn video compression, a key frame, also known as an intra-frame, is a frame in which a complete image is stored in the data stream. In video compression, only changes that occur from one frame to the next are stored in the data stream, in order to greatly reduce the amount of information that must be stored. This technique capitalizes on the fact that most video sources (such as a typical movie) have only small changes in the image from one frame to the next. Whenever a drastic change to the image occurs, such as when switching from one camera shot to another or at a scene change, a key frame must be created. The entire image for the frame must be output when the visual difference between the two frames is so great that representing the new image incrementally from the previous frame would require more data than recreating the whole image.\nBecause video compression only stores incremental changes between frames (except for key frames), it is not possible to fast-forward or rewind to any arbitrary spot in the video stream. That is because the data for a given frame only represents how that frame was different from the preceding one. For that reason, it is beneficial to include key frames at arbitrary intervals while encoding video. For example, a key frame may be output once for each 10 seconds of video, even though the video image does not change enough visually to warrant the automatic creation of the key frame. That would allow seeking within the video stream at a minimum of 10-second intervals. The downside is that the resulting video stream will be larger in disk size because many key frames are added when they are not necessary for the frame's visual representation. This drawback, however, does not produce significant compression loss when the bitrate is already set at a high value for better quality (as in the DVD MPEG-2 format).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17117", "revid": "20178", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17117", "title": "Kurfuersten", "text": ""}
{"id": "17118", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17118", "title": "Kurfuersten/Electors", "text": ""}
{"id": "17120", "revid": "1320250424", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17120", "title": "Kurf\u00fcrstendamm", "text": "Street avenue in Berlin, Germany\nThe Kurf\u00fcrstendamm (; colloquially , ; ) is one of the most famous avenues in Berlin. The street takes its name from the former (prince-electors) of Brandenburg. The broad, long boulevard can be considered the of Berlin and is lined with shops, houses, hotels and restaurants. In particular, many fashion designers have their shops there, as well as several car manufacturers' show rooms.\nDescription.\nThe avenue includes four lines of plane trees and runs for through the city. It branches off from the Breitscheidplatz, where the ruins of the Kaiser Wilhelm Memorial Church stand, and leads southwestward up to the district of Grunewald.\nAt the junction with it passes the Caf\u00e9 Kranzler, successor of the , a famous venue for artists and boh\u00e9miens of the pre\u2013World War I era. The Kurf\u00fcrstendamm U-Bahn station and the Swiss\u00f4tel Berlin can be found at the same junction. One block farther, near Uhlandstra\u00dfe U-Bahn station, is the Hotel Bristol Berlin (formerly Kempinski) hotel as well as the , at the site of a former exhibition hall of the Berlin Secession art association.\nAt Adenauerplatz the boulevard reaches the district of Wilmersdorf, where it passes the theatre on . The more sober western or \"upper\" end of the Kurf\u00fcrstendamm is marked by the Berlin-Halensee railway station on the Ringbahn line and the junction with the () at the Rathenauplatz roundabout, featuring the long-disputed 1987 \"Beton Cadillacs\" sculpture by Wolf Vostell.\nHistory.\nUnlike the adjacent streets, the Kurf\u00fcrstendamm developed out of a historic corduroy road () laid out by the Brandenburg margraves to reach the Grunewald hunting lodge, which was erected about 1542 at the behest of the Hohenzollern elector Joachim II Hector. Although the exact date of the building is unknown, an unnamed causeway leading from the Stadtschloss through the swampy area between the settlements of Charlottenburg (then called \"Lietzow\") and Wilmersdorf to Grunewald is already depicted in a 1685 map. The name \"Churf\u00fcrsten Damm\" was first mentioned between 1767 and 1787.\nFrom 1875 the former bridlepath was embellished as a boulevard with a breadth of on the personal initiative of chancellor Otto von Bismarck, who also proposed the building of the Grunewald mansions colony at its western end. In 1882, Ernst Werner von Siemens presented his Elektromote trolley bus concept at an experimental track near Halensee station. The nearby Lunapark opened in 1909, then Europe's largest amusement park, modelled on Coney Island, where boxer Max Schmeling won his first title of a German Lightheavyweight Champion in 1926. After a long period of decline the park was finally closed in 1933. Large parts are today covered by the Stadtautobahn.\nIn 1913 the new Marmorhaus cinema opened. A number of major film premieres were held here during the silent era.\nEspecially during the \"Golden Twenties\" the Kurf\u00fcrstendamm area of the \"New West\" was a centre of leisure and nightlife in Berlin, an era that ended with the Great Depression and the Nazi \"Machtergreifung\" in 1933. On Sep 12, 1931, radical antisemite, Nazi Wolf-Heinrich Graf von Helldorff organized a riot, about a thousand men appeared from within the crowd on the streets and started attacking people whom they believed to be Jewish.\nOn July 15, 1935, about 200 Nazi Storm Troopers went on a sadistic attack, in \"the most brutal anti-Jewish manifestation since Hitler's rise to power,\" with Hitler's instigation, and Nazi-managed press blaming the victims. Varian Fry, an American journalist and future Righteous Among the Nations, witnessed the brutality and was inspired to become an \"ardent anti-Nazi.\" The shops and businesses owned by Jewish tradespeople became the target of several pogroms, culminating in the \"Reichskristallnacht\" of 9 November 1938. In World War II the boulevard suffered severe damage from air raids and the Battle of Berlin.\nNevertheless, after the war rebuilding started quickly, and when Berlin was separated into East and West Berlin, the Kurf\u00fcrstendamm became the leading commercial street of West Berlin in its Wirtschaftswunder days. For that reason, too, John F. Kennedy's tour of West Berlin on June 26, 1963, included a portion of it. A few years later, the Kurf\u00fcrstendamm became the site of protests and major demonstrations by the German student movement. On 11 April 1968, spokesman Rudi Dutschke was shot in the head while leaving the office of the Sozialistischer Deutscher Studentenbund on Kurf\u00fcrstendamm No. 140.\nAfter German reunification the Kurf\u00fcrstendamm had to compete with central places like Potsdamer Platz, Friedrichstra\u00dfe, and Alexanderplatz, which led to the closing of numerous caf\u00e9s and cinemas. It retained the character of a fl\u00e2neur and upscale shopping street as the western continuation of the Tauentzienstra\u00dfe with its large department stores.\nThe globally unique international art project United Buddy Bears was presented in Berlin on the Kurf\u00fcrstendamm during the summer of 2011.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17121", "revid": "48547666", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17121", "title": "Kurt Schwitters", "text": "German artist (1887\u20131948)\nKurt Hermann Eduard Karl Julius Schwitters (20 June 1887 \u2013 8 January 1948) was a German artist. He was born in Hanover, Germany, but lived in exile from 1937.\nSchwitters worked in several genres and media, including Dadaism, constructivism, surrealism, poetry, sound, painting, sculpture, graphic design, typography, and what came to be known as installation art. He is most famous for his collages, called \"Merz Pictures\".\nEarly influences and the beginnings of Merz, 1887\u20131922.\nHanover.\nKurt Schwitters was born on 20 June 1887 in Hanover, at Rumannstra\u00dfe No.2, now No.8, the only child of Eduard Schwitters and his wife Henriette (n\u00e9e Beckemeyer). His father was (co-)proprietor of a ladies' clothes shop. The business was sold in 1898, and the family used the money to buy some properties in Hanover, which they rented out, allowing the family to live off the income for the rest of Schwitters' life in Germany. In 1893, the family moved to Waldstra\u00dfe (later renamed to Waldhausenstra\u00dfe), future site of the \"Merzbau\". In 1901, Schwitters suffered his first epileptic seizure, a condition that would exempt him from military service in World War I until late in the war, when conscription was loosened.\nAfter studying art at the Dresden Academy alongside Otto Dix and George Grosz, (although Schwitters seems to have been unaware of their work, or indeed of contemporary Dresden artists Die Br\u00fccke), 1909\u20131915, Schwitters returned to Hanover and started his artistic career as a Post-Impressionist. In 1911 he took part in his first exhibition, in Hanover. As the First World War progressed his work became darker, gradually developing a distinctive expressionist tone.\nSchwitters spent the last one-and-a-half years of the war working as a drafter in a factory just outside Hanover. He was conscripted into the 73rd Hanoverian Regiment in March 1917, but exempted on medical grounds in June of the same year. By his own account, his time as a draftsman influenced his later work, and inspired him to depict machines as metaphors of human activity.\n\"In the war [at the machine factory at W\u00fclfen] I discovered my love for the wheel and realized that machines are abstractions of the human spirit.\"\nHe married his cousin Helma Fischer on 5 October 1915. Their first son, Gerd, died within a week of birth, 9 September 1916; their second, Ernst, was born on 16 November 1918, and was to remain close to his father for the rest of his life, up to and including a shared exile in Britain together.\nIn 1918, his art was to change dramatically as a direct consequence of Germany's economic, political, and military collapse at the end of the First World War.\n\"In the war, things were in terrible turmoil. What I had learned at the academy was of no use to me and the useful new ideas were still unready\u00a0... Everything had broken down and new things had to be made out of the fragments; and this is Merz. It was like a revolution within me, not as it was, but as it should have been.\"\nDer Sturm.\nSchwitters was to come into contact with Herwarth Walden after exhibiting expressionist paintings at the Hanover Secession in February 1918. He showed two \"Abstraktionen\" (semi-abstract expressionist landscapes) at Walden's gallery Der Sturm, in Berlin, in June 1918. This resulted in meetings with members of the Berlin avant-garde, including Raoul Hausmann, Hannah H\u00f6ch, and Jean Arp in the autumn of 1918.\n\"[I remember] the night he introduced himself in the Caf\u00e9 des Westens. \"I'm a painter,\" he said, \"and I nail my pictures together.\" \n\u2014 Raoul Hausmann\nWhilst Schwitters still created work in an expressionist style into 1919 (and would continue to paint realist pictures up to his death in 1948), his first abstract collages, influenced in particular by recent works by Jean Arp, would appear in late 1918, which Schwitters dubbed \"Merz\" after a fragment of found text from the phrase \"Commerz Und Privatbank\" (commerce and private bank) in his work \"Das Merzbild\", completed in the winter of 1918\u201319. By the end of 1919 he had become a well-known artist, after his first one-man exhibition at Der Sturm gallery, in June 1919, and the publication, that August, of the poem \"An Anna Blume\" (translated as 'To Anna Flower', or 'To Eve Blossom'), a dadaist, non-sensical love poem.\nAs Schwitters's first overtures to Zurich and Berlin Dada made explicit mention of Merz pictures, there are no grounds for the widespread claim that he invented Merz because he was rejected by Berlin Dada.\nDada and Merz.\nSchwitters asked to join Berlin Dada either in late 1918 or early 1919, according to the memoirs of Raoul Hausmann. Hausmann claimed that Richard Huelsenbeck rejected the application because of Schwitters's links to Der Sturm and to Expressionism in general, which were seen by the Dadaists as hopelessly romantic and obsessed with aesthetics. Ridiculed by Huelsenbeck as 'the Caspar David Friedrich of the Dadaist Revolution', he would reply with an absurdist short story, \"Franz Mullers Drahtfr\u00fchling, Ersters Kapitel: Ursachen und Beginn der grossen glorreichen Revolution in Revon\", published in the magazine \"Der Sturm\" (xiii/11, 1922), which featured an innocent bystander who started a revolution \"merely by being there\".\nHausmann's anecdote about Schwitters asking to join Berlin Dada is, however, somewhat dubious, for there is well-documented evidence that Schwitters and Huelsenbeck were on amicable terms at first. When they first met in 1919, Huelsenbeck was enthusiastic about Schwitters's work and promised his assistance, while Schwitters reciprocated by finding an outlet for Huelsenbeck's Dada publications. When Huelsenbeck visited him at the end of the year, Schwitters gave him a lithograph (which he kept all his life) and though their friendship was by now strained, Huelsenbeck wrote him a conciliatory note. \"You know I am well-disposed towards you. I think too that certain disagreements we have both noticed in our respective opinions should not be an impediment to our attack on the common enemy, the bourgeoisie and philistinism.\" It was not until mid-1920 that the two men fell out, either because of the success of Schwitters's poem \"An Anna Blume\" (which Huelsenbeck considered unDadaistic) or because of quarrels about Schwitters's contribution to Dadaco, a projected Dada atlas edited by Huelsenbeck. It is unlikely that Schwitters ever considered joining Berlin Dada, however, for he was under contract to Der Sturm, which offered far better long-term opportunities than Dada's quarrelsome and erratic venture. If Schwitters contacted Dadaists at this time, it was generally because he was searching for opportunities to exhibit his work.\nThough not a direct participant in Berlin Dada's activities, Schwitters employed Dadaist ideas in his work, used the word itself on the cover of \"An Anna Blume\", and would later give Dada recitals throughout Europe on the subject with Theo van Doesburg, Tristan Tzara, Jean Arp, and Raoul Hausmann. In many ways his work was more in tune with Z\u00fcrich Dada's championing of performance and abstract art than Berlin Dada's agit-prop approach, and indeed examples of his work were published in the last Z\u00fcrich Dada publication, \"Der Zeltweg\", November 1919, alongside the work of Arp and Sophie Taeuber. While his work was far less political than key figures in Berlin Dada, such as George Grosz and John Heartfield, he would remain close friends with various members, including Hannah H\u00f6ch and Raoul Hausmann, for the rest of his career.\nIn 1922 Theo van Doesburg organised a series of Dada performances in the Netherlands. Various members of Dada were invited to join, but declined. Eventually the programme comprised acts and performances by Theo van Doesburg, Nelly van Doesburg as Petr\u00f2 Van Doesburg, Kurt Schwitters, and sometimes Vilmos Husz\u00e0r. The Dada performances took place in various cities, amongst which Amsterdam, Leiden, Utrecht, and The Hague. Schwitters also performed on solo evenings, one of which took place on 13 April 1923 in Drachten, Friesland. Schwitters later on visited Drachten quite frequently, staying with a local painter, Thijs Rinsema. Schwitters created several collages there, probably together with Thijs Rinsema. Their collages can sometimes hardly be distinguished from each other. From 1921 onwards there are signs of correspondence between Schwitters and an intarsia worker. From this co-operation several new works originated, where the collage technique was applied to woodwork, by incorporating several kinds of wood as a means to delineate images and letters. Thijs Rinsema also used this technique.\nMerz has been called 'Psychological Collage'. Most of the works attempt to make coherent aesthetic sense of the world around Schwitters, using fragments of found objects. These fragments often make witty allusions to current events. (\"Merzpicture 29a, Picture with Turning Wheel\", 1920 for instance, combines a series of wheels that only turn clockwise, alluding to the general drift Rightwards across Germany after the Spartacist Uprising in January that year, whilst \"Mai 191(9)\", alludes to the strikes organized by the Bavarian Workers' and Soldiers' Council.) Autobiographical elements also abound; test prints of graphic designs; bus tickets; ephemera given by friends. Later collages would feature proto-pop mass media images. (\"En Morn\", 1947, for instance, has a print of a blonde young girl included, prefiguring the early work of Eduardo Paolozzi, whilst many works seem to have directly influenced Robert Rauschenberg, who said after seeing an exhibition of Schwitters's work at the Sidney Janis Gallery, 1959, that \"I felt like he made it all just for me.\")\nWhilst these works were usually collages incorporating found objects, such as bus tickets, old wire. and fragments of newsprint, Merz also included artists' periodicals, sculptures, sound poems, and what would later be called \"installations\". Schwitters was to use the term Merz for the rest of the decade, but, as Isabel Schulz has noted, 'though the fundamental compositional principles of Merz remained the basis and centre of [Schwitters's] creative work [...] the term Merz disappears almost entirely from the titles of his work after 1931'.\nInternationalism, 1922\u20131937.\n\"Merz\" (periodical).\nAs the political climate in Germany became more liberal and stable, Schwitters's work became less influenced by Cubism and Expressionism. He started to organize and participate in lecture tours with other members of the international avant-garde, such as Jean Arp, Raoul Hausmann and Tristan Tzara, touring Czechoslovakia, the Netherlands, and Germany with provocative evening recitals and lectures.\nSchwitters published a periodical, also titled \"Merz\", between 1923 and 1932, in which each issue was devoted to a central theme. \"Merz 5\" 1923, for instance, was a portfolio of prints by Jean Arp, \"Merz 8/9\", 1924, was edited and typeset by El Lissitzky, \"Merz 14/15\", 1925, was a typographical children's story entitled \"The Scarecrow\" by Schwitters, K\u00e4tte Steinitz and Theo van Doesburg. The last edition, \"Merz 24\", 1932, was a complete transcription of the final draft of the \"Ursonate\", with typography by Jan Tschichold.\nHis work in this period became increasingly Modernist in spirit, with far less overtly political context and a cleaner style, in keeping with contemporary work by Jean Arp and Piet Mondrian. His friendship around this time with El Lissitzky proved particularly influential, and \"Merz\" pictures in this period show the direct influence of Constructivism.\nThanks to Schwitters's lifelong patron and friend Katherine Dreier, his work was exhibited regularly in the US from 1920 onwards. In the late 1920s he became a well-known typographer; his best-known work was the catalogue for the Dammerstocksiedlung in Karlsruhe. After the demise of the Der Sturm gallery in 1924 he ran an advertising agency named Merzwerbe, which held the accounts for Pelikan inks and Bahlsen biscuits, amongst others, and became the official typographer for Hanover town council between 1929 and 1934. Many of these designs, as well as test prints and proof sheets, were to crop up in contemporary Merz pictures. In a manner similar to the typographic experimentation by Herbert Bayer at the Bauhaus, and Jan Tschichold's \"Die neue Typographie\", Schwitters experimented with the creation of a new more phonetic alphabet in 1927. Some of his types were cast and used in his work. In the late 1920s Schwitters joined the Deutscher Werkbund (German Work Federation).\n\"Merzbau\".\nAlongside his collages, Schwitters also dramatically altered the interiors of a number of spaces throughout his life. The most famous was the \"Merzbau\", the transformation of six (or possibly more) rooms of the family house in Hanover, Waldhausenstrasse 5. This took place very gradually; work started in about 1923, the first room was finished in 1933, and Schwitters subsequently extended the Merzbau to other areas of the house until he fled to Norway in early 1937. Most of the house was let to tenants, so that the final extent of the Merzbau was less than is normally assumed. On the evidence of Schwitters's correspondence, by 1937 it had spread to two rooms of his parents' apartment on the ground floor, the adjoining balcony, the space below the balcony, one or two rooms of the attic and possibly part of the cellar. In 1943, it was destroyed in an Allied bombing raid.\nEarly photos show the \"Merzbau\" with a grotto-like surface and various columns and sculptures, possibly referring to similar pieces by Dadaists, including the \"Great Plasto-Dio-Dada-Drama\" by Johannes Baader, shown at the first International Dada Fair, Berlin, 1920. Works by Hannah H\u00f6ch, Raoul Hausmann and Sophie Taeuber, amongst others, were incorporated into the fabric of the installation. By 1933, it had been transformed into a sculptural environment, and three photos from this year show a series of angled surfaces aggressively protruding into a room painted largely in white, with a series of tableaux spread across the surfaces. In his essay \"Ich und meine Ziele\" in Merz 21, Schwitters referred to the first column of his work as the \"Cathedral of Erotic Misery\". There is no evidence that he used this title after 1930. The first use of the word 'Merzbau' occurs in 1933.\nPhotos of the \"Merzbau\" were reproduced in the journal of the Paris-based group abstraction-cr\u00e9ation in 1933-34, and were exhibited in MoMA in New York in late 1936.\nThe Sprengel Museum in Hanover has a reconstruction of the first room of the \"Merzbau\".\nSchwitters later created a similar environment in the garden of his house in Lysaker, near Oslo, known as the Haus am Bakken (the house on the slope). This was almost complete when Schwitters left Norway for the United Kingdom in 1940. It burnt down in 1951 and no photos survive. The last Merzbau, in Elterwater, Cumbria, England, remained incomplete on Schwitters's death in January 1948. A further environment that also served as a living space can still be seen on the island of Hjert\u00f8ya near Molde, Norway. It is sometimes described as a fourth Merzbau, although Schwitters himself only ever referred to three. The interior has now been removed and will eventually be exhibited in the Romsdal Museum in Molde, Norway.\n\"Ursonate\".\nSchwitters composed and performed an early example of sound poetry, \"Ursonate\" (1922\u20131932; a translation of the title is \"Original Sonata\" or \"Primeval Sonata\"). The poem was influenced by Raoul Hausmann's poem \"fmsbw\" which Schwitters heard recited by Hausmann in Prague, 1921. Schwitters first performed the piece on 14 February 1925 at the home of Irmgard Kiepenheuer in Potsdam. He subsequently performed it regularly, both developing and extending it. He published his notations for the recital in the last Merz periodical in 1932, although he would continue to develop the piece for at least the next ten years.\nExile, 1937\u20131948.\nNorway.\nAs the political situation in Germany under the Nazis continued to deteriorate throughout the 1930s, Schwitters's work began to be included in the \"Entartete Kunst\" (Degenerate Art) touring exhibition organised by the Nazi party from 1933. He lost his contract with Hanover City Council in 1934, and examples of his work in German museums were confiscated and publicly ridiculed in 1935. By the time his close friends Christof and Luise Spengemann and their son Walter were arrested by the Gestapo in August 1936 the situation had clearly become perilous.\nOn 2 January 1937 Schwitters, wanted for an \"interview\" with the Gestapo, fled to Norway to join his son Ernst, who had already left Germany on 26 December 1936. His wife Helma decided to remain in Hanover, to manage their four properties. In the same year, his Merz pictures were included in the \"Entartete Kunst\" exhibition in Munich, making his return impossible.\nHelma visited Schwitters in Norway for a few months each year up to the outbreak of World War II. The joint celebrations for his mother Henriette's 80th birthday and his son Ernst's engagement, held in Oslo on 2 June 1939, would be the last time the two met.\nSchwitters started a second Merzbau while in exile in Lysaker, near Oslo, in 1937, but abandoned it in 1940 when the Nazis invaded; this Merzbau was subsequently destroyed in a fire in 1951. His hut on the Norwegian island of Hjert\u00f8ya, near Molde, is also frequently regarded as a Merzbau. For decades this building was more or less left to rot, but measures have now been taken to preserve the interior.\nThe Isle of Man.\nFollowing Nazi Germany's invasion of Norway, Schwitters was amongst a number of German citizens who were interned by the Norwegian authorities at V\u00e5gan Folk High School in Kabelv\u00e5g on the Lofoten Islands, Following his release, Schwitters fled to Leith in Scotland with his son and daughter-in-law on the Norwegian patrol vessel between 8 and 18 June 1940. \nOfficially an enemy alien, he was moved between various internment camps in Scotland and England before arriving on 17 July 1940 in Hutchinson Camp in the Isle of Man. The camp was situated in a collection of terraced houses around Hutchinson Square in Douglas. The camp soon comprised some 1,205 internees by the end of July 1940, almost all of whom were German or Austrian. The camp was soon known as \"the artists' camp\", comprising as it did many artists, writers, university professors and other intellectuals. In this environment Schwitters was popular as a character, a raconteur and as an artist.\nHe was soon provided studio space and took on students, many of whom would later become significant artists in their own right. He produced over 200 works during his internment, including more portraits than at any other time in his career, many of which he charged for. He contributed at least two portraits to the second art exhibition within the camp in November 1940, and in December he contributed (in English) to the camp newsletter, \"The Camp\".\nThere was a shortage of art supplies there \u2013 at least during the early days of the camp's existence \u2013 which meant that the internees had to be resourceful to obtain the materials they needed: they would mix brick dust with sardine oil for paint, dig up clay for sculpture whilst out on walks, and rip up the linoleum floors to make cuttings which they then pressed through the clothes mangle to make linocut prints. Schwitters's Merz extension of this included making sculptures in porridge:\n\"The room stank. A musty, sour, indescribable stink which came from three Dada sculptures which he had created from porridge, no plaster of Paris being available. The porridge had developed mildew and the statues were covered with greenish hair and bluish excrements of an unknown type of bacteria.\" Fred Uhlman in his memoir.\nSchwitters was well-liked in the camp, and was a welcome distraction from the internment they were suffering. Fellow internees would later recall fondly his curious habits of sleeping under his bed and barking like a dog, as well as his regular Dadaist readings and performances. However, the epileptic condition which had not surfaced since his childhood began to recur whilst in the camp. His son attributed this to Schwitters's depression at being interned, which he kept hidden from others in the camp.\nFor the outside world he always tried to put up a good show, but in the quietness of the room I shared with him [...], his painful disillusion was clearly revealed to me. [...] Kurt Schwitters worked with more concentration than ever during internment to stave off bitterness and hopelessness.\nSchwitters applied as early as October 1940 for release (with the appeal written in English: \"As artist, I can not be interned for a long time without danger for my art\"), but he was refused even after his fellow internees began to be released.\n\"I am now the last artist here \u2013 all the others are free. But all things are equal. If I stay here, then I have plenty to occupy myself. If I am released, then I will enjoy freedom. If I manage to leave for the U.S., then I will be over there. You carry your own joy with you wherever you go.\" Letter to Helma Schwitters, April 1941.\nSchwitters was finally released on 21 November 1941, with the help of an intervention from Alexander Dorner, Rhode Island School of Design.\nLondon.\nAfter obtaining his freedom Schwitters moved to London, hoping to make good on the contacts that he had built up over his period of internment. He first moved to an attic flat at 3 St Stephen's Crescent, Paddington. It was here that he met his future companion, Edith Thomas:\n\u201cHe knocked on her door to ask how the boiler worked, and that was that. [...] She was 27 \u2013 half his age. He called her Wantee, because she was always offering tea.\" Gretel Hinrichsen quoted in \"The Telegraph\"\nIn London he made contact with and mixed with a range of artists, including Naum Gabo, L\u00e1szl\u00f3 Moholy-Nagy and Ben Nicholson. He exhibited in a number of galleries in the city but with little success; at his first solo exhibition at The Modern Art Gallery in December 1944, forty works were displayed, priced between 15 and 40 guineas, but only one was bought.\nDuring his years in London, the shift in Schwitters's work continued towards an organic element that augmented the mass-produced ephemera of previous years with natural forms and muted colours. Pictures such as \"Small Merzpicture With Many Parts\" 1945\u20136, for example, used objects found on a beach, including pebbles and smooth shards of porcelain.\nIn August 1942 he moved with his son to 39 Westmoreland Road, Barnes, London. In October 1943 he learnt that his Merzbau in Hanover had been destroyed in Allied bombing. In April 1944 he suffered his first stroke, at the age of 56, which left him temporarily paralyzed on one side of his body. His wife Helma died of cancer on 29 October 1944, although Schwitters only heard of her death in December.\nThe Lake District.\nSchwitters first visited the Lake District on holiday with Edith Thomas in September 1942. He moved there permanently on 26 June 1945, to 2 Gale Crescent Ambleside. However, after another stroke in February of the following year and further illness, he and Edith moved to a more easily accessible house at 4 Millans Park.\nDuring his time in Ambleside Schwitters created a sequence of proto-pop art pictures, such as \"For K\u00e4te\", 1947, after the encouragement from his friend, K\u00e4te Steinitz. Having emigrated to the United States in 1936, Steinitz sent Schwitters letters describing life in the emerging consumer society, and wrapped the letters in pages of comics to give a flavour of the new world, which she encouraged Schwitters to 'Merz'.\nIn March 1947, Schwitters decided to recreate the Merzbau and found a suitable location in a barn at Cylinders Farm, Elterwater, which was owned by Harry Pierce, whose portrait Schwitters had been commissioned to paint. Having been forced by a lack of other income to paint portraits and popularist landscape pictures suitable for sale to the local residents and tourists, Schwitters received notification shortly before his 60th birthday that he had been awarded a \u00a31,000 fellowship to be transferred to him via the Museum of Modern Art in New York City in order to enable him to repair or re-create his previous Merz constructions in Germany or Norway. Instead he used it for the \"Merzbarn\" in Elterwater. Schwitters worked on the Merzbarn daily, travelling the five miles between his home and the barn, except for when illness kept him away. On 7 January 1948 he received the news that he had been granted British citizenship. The following day, on 8 January, Schwitters died from acute pulmonary edema and myocarditis, in Kendal Hospital.\nHe was buried on 10 January at St Mary's Church, Ambleside. His grave was unmarked until 1966 when a stone was erected with the inscription \"Kurt Schwitters \u2013 Creator of Merz\". The stone remains as a memorial even though his body was disinterred and reburied in the Stadtfriedhof Engesohde in Hanover in 1970, the grave being marked with a marble copy of his 1929 sculpture \"Die Herbstzeitlose\".\nPosthumous reputation.\nMerzbarn.\nOne entire wall of the Merzbarn was removed to the Hatton Gallery in Newcastle for safe keeping. The shell of the barn remains in Elterwater, near Ambleside.\n In 2011 the barn, but not the artwork inside it, was reconstructed in the front courtyard of the Royal Academy in London as part of its exhibition \"Modern British Sculpture\".\nInfluences.\nMany artists have cited Schwitters as a major influence, including Ed Ruscha, Robert Rauschenberg, Damien Hirst, Al Hansen, Anne Ryan, and Arman.\n\"The language of Merz now finds common acceptance and today there is scarcely an artist working with materials other than paint who does not refer to Schwitters in some way. In his bold and wide-ranging experiments he can be seen as the grandfather of Pop Art, Happenings, Concept Art, Fluxus, multimedia art and post-modernism.\" Gwendolyn Webster\nArt market.\nSchwitters's \"Ja-Was?-Bild\" (1920), an abstract work made of oil, paper, cardboard, fabric, wood and nails, was sold \u00a313.9\u00a0million at Christie's London in 2014.\nMarlborough Gallery controversy.\nSchwitters's son, Ernst, largely entrusted the artistic estate of his father to Gilbert Lloyd, director of the Marlborough Gallery. However, Ernst fell victim to a crippling stroke in 1995, moving control of the estate as a whole to Kurt's grandson, Bengt Schwitters. Controversy erupted when Bengt, who has said he has \"no interest in art and his grandfather's works\", terminated the standing agreement between the family and the Marlborough Gallery. The Marlborough Gallery filed suit against the Schwitters estate in 1996, after confirming Ernst Schwitters's desire to have Lloyd continue to administer the estate in his will.\nProfessor Henrick Hanstein, an auctioneer and art expert, provided key testimony in the case, stating that Schwitters was virtually forgotten after his death in exile in England in 1948, and that the Marlborough Gallery had been vital in ensuring the artist's place in art history. The verdict, which was eventually upheld by Norway's highest court, awarded the gallery USD 2.6\u00a0million in damages.\nArchival and forgeries.\nSchwitters's visual work has now been completely catalogued in the Catalogue Raisonn\u00e9. The Kurt Schwitters Archive at the Sprengel Museum in Hanover, Germany keeps a catalogue of forgeries. A collage called \"Bluebird\" chosen for the cover of the catalogue for the Tate Gallery's 1985 Schwitters exhibition was withdrawn from the show after Ernst Schwitters told the gallery that it was a fake.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17122", "revid": "40906635", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17122", "title": "Kenneth Noland", "text": "American abstract painter (1924\u20132010)\nKenneth Noland (April 10, 1924 \u2013 January 5, 2010) was an American painter. He was one of the best-known American color field painters, although in the 1950s he was thought of as an abstract expressionist and in the early 1960s as a minimalist painter. Noland helped establish the Washington Color School movement. In 1977, he was honored with a major retrospective at the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum in New York that then traveled to the Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden in Washington, D.C., and Ohio's Toledo Museum of Art in 1978. In 2006, Noland's \"Stripe Paintings\" were exhibited at the Tate in London.\nEarly life and education.\nA son of Harry Caswell Noland (1896\u20131975), a pathologist, and his wife, Bessie (1897\u20131980), Kenneth Clifton Noland was born in Asheville, North Carolina. He had four siblings: David, Bill, Neil, and Harry Jr.\nNoland enlisted in the U.S. Air Force in 1942 after completing high school. As a veteran of World War II, he took advantage of the G.I. Bill to study art at Black Mountain College in his home state of North Carolina. At Black Mountain, where two of his brothers also studied art, Noland studied with Ilya Bolotowsky, a professor who introduced him to neoplasticism and the work of Piet Mondrian. Noland also studied Bauhaus theory and color there under Josef Albers and became interested in Paul Klee\u2014specifically Klee's sensitivity to color.\nCareer.\nIn 1948 and 1949 Noland worked with Ossip Zadkine in Paris, and had his first exhibition of his paintings there in 1949. After returning to the U.S., he taught in Washington, D.C., at Catholic University (1951\u20131960) and the Institute of Contemporary Arts. \nIn the early 1950s, Noland met Morris Louis in D.C. while teaching night classes at the Washington Workshop Center for the Arts. He became friends with Louis, and after being introduced by Clement Greenberg to Helen Frankenthaler and seeing her new paintings at her studio in New York City in 1953, he and Louis adopted her \"soak-stain\" technique of allowing thinned paint to soak into unprimed canvases.\nMost of Noland's paintings fall into one of four groups: circles (or targets), chevrons, stripes, and shaped canvases. His preoccupation with the relationship of the image to the containing edge of the picture led him to a series of studies of concentric rings or bullseyes, commonly called targets, which, like the one reproduced here\u2014\"Beginning\" (1958)\u2014used unlikely color combinations. This also led Noland away from Louis in 1958. \nIn 1964, he was included in the exhibition \"Post-Painterly Abstraction\" curated by Clement Greenberg, which traveled the country and helped to firmly establish color field painting as an important new movement in contemporary art of the 1960s. Noland pioneered the shaped canvas, initially with a series of symmetrical and asymmetrical diamonds or chevrons. In these paintings, the edges of the canvas become as structurally important as the center. \nDuring the 1970s and 1980s his shaped canvases were highly irregular and asymmetrical. These resulted in increasingly complex structures of highly sophisticated and controlled color and surface integrity.\nTechnique.\nInstead of painting the canvas with a brush, Noland's style was to stain the canvas with color. This idea sought to remove the artist through brushstrokes. This made the piece about the art, not the artist. He emphasized spatial relationships in his work by leaving unstained, bare canvas as a contrast against the colors used throughout his paintings. Noland used simplified abstraction so the design would not detract from the use of color.\nNoland's students included the sculptor Jennie Lea Knight and painter Alice Mavrogordato.\nPersonal life.\nNoland was married to:\nNoland had an affair in the 1960s with artist and socialite Mary Pinchot Meyer.\nDeath.\nNoland died of kidney cancer at his home in Port Clyde, Maine, on January 5, 2010, at the age of 85.\nExhibitions.\nNoland had his first solo exhibition at Galerie Raymond Creuze in Paris in 1948. In 1957, he had his first New York solo exhibition at the Tibor de Nagy Gallery. In 1964, Noland occupied half the American pavilion at the Venice Biennale. In 1965, his work was exhibited at the Washington Gallery of Modern Art and the Jewish Museum (New York). Noland's final solo exhibition, \"Kenneth Noland Shaped Paintings 1981\u201382\", opened on October 29, 2009, at the Leslie Feely Fine Art Gallery on East 68th Street in New York City and was scheduled to close on January 9, 2010 (though the closing date was later extended to January 16). In 2010, Noland was honored with a solo presentation of his work at the Guggenheim Museum, entitled \"Kenneth Noland, 1924\u20132010: A Tribute\". In addition, his work has been the subject of solo exhibitions at a range of international institutions, including the Museo de Arte Moderno, Mexico City (1983); Museo de Bellas Artes de Bilbao, Bilbao, Spain (1985); Museum of Fine Arts, Houston (2004); Tate, Liverpool (2006); and Butler Institute of American Art, Youngstown, Ohio (1986 and 2007).\nInfluence.\nIn 1984, US menswear designer Alexander Julian incorporated Noland's designs and coloring in his knitwear.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17123", "revid": "50128757", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17123", "title": "Karachi", "text": "Largest city in Pakistan and the capital of Sindh province\nKarachi is the capital city of the province of Sindh, Pakistan. It is the largest city in Pakistan and 12th largest in the world, with a population of over 20 million. It is situated at the southern tip of the country along the Arabian Sea coast and formerly served as the country's capital from 1947 to 1959. Ranked as a beta-global city, it is Pakistan's premier industrial and financial centre, with an estimated GDP of over $200\u00a0billion (PPP) as of 2021[ [update]]. Karachi is a major metropolitan area and is considered Pakistan's most cosmopolitan city, and among the country's most linguistically, ethnically, and religiously diverse regions, as well as one of the country's most progressive and socially liberal cities.\nThe region has been inhabited for millennia, but the city was formally founded as the fortified village of \"Kolachi\" as recently as 1729. The settlement greatly increased in importance with the arrival of the East India Company in the mid-19th century. British administrators embarked on substantial projects to transform the city into a major seaport, and connect it with the extensive railway network of the Indian subcontinent. At the time of Pakistan's independence in 1947, the city was the largest in Sindh with an estimated population of 400,000 people, and a slim Hindu majority. Following the partition of India, the city experienced a dramatic shift in population and demography with the arrival of hundreds of thousands of Muslim immigrants from India, coupled with an exodus of nearly all of its Hindu residents. The city experienced rapid economic growth following Pakistan's independence, attracting migrants from throughout the country and other regions in South Asia. According to the 2023 Census of Pakistan, Karachi's total population was 20.3\u00a0million. Karachi is one of the world's fastest-growing cities, and has significant communities representing almost every ethnic group in Pakistan. Karachi holds more than two million Bengali immigrants, a million Afghan refugees, and up to 400,000 Rohingyas from Myanmar.\nKarachi is now Pakistan's premier industrial and financial centre. The city has a formal economy estimated to be worth $190\u00a0billion as of 2021[ [update]], which is the largest in the country. Karachi collects 35% of Pakistan's tax revenue, and generates approximately 25% of Pakistan's entire GDP. Approximately 30% of Pakistani industrial output is from Karachi, while Karachi's ports handle approximately 95% of Pakistan's foreign trade. Approximately 90% of the multinational corporations and 100% of the banks operating in Pakistan are headquartered in Karachi. It also serves as a transport hub, and contains Pakistan's two largest seaports, the Port of Karachi and Port Qasim, as well as Pakistan's busiest airport, Jinnah International Airport. Karachi is also considered to be Pakistan's fashion capital, and has hosted the annual Karachi Fashion Week since 2009.\nKnown as the \"City of Lights\" in the 1960s and 1970s for its vibrant nightlife, Karachi was beset by sharp ethnic, sectarian, and political conflict in the 1980s with the large-scale arrival of weaponry during the Soviet\u2013Afghan War. The city had become well known for its high rates of violent crime, but recorded crimes sharply decreased following a crackdown operation against criminals, the MQM political party, and Islamist militants, initiated in 2013 by the Pakistan Rangers. As a result of the operation, Karachi dropped from being ranked the world's 6th-most dangerous city for crime in 2014, to 128th by 2022.\nEtymology.\nModern Karachi was reputedly founded in 1729 as the settlement of \"Kolachi-jo-Goth\" during the rule of Kalhora dynasty. The new settlement is said to have been named in honour of Mai Kolachi, whose son is said to have slain a man-eating crocodile in the village after his elder brothers had already been killed by it. The name \"Karachee,\" a shortened and corrupted version of the original name \"Kolachi-jo-Goth\", was used for the first time in a Dutch report from 1742 about a shipwreck near the settlement.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThe region around Karachi has been the site of human habitation for millennia. Upper Paleolithic and Mesolithic sites have been excavated in the Mulri Hills along Karachi's northern outskirts. These earliest inhabitants are believed to have been hunter-gatherers, with ancient flint tools discovered at several sites.\nThe expansive Karachi region is believed to have been known to the ancient Greeks, and may have been the site of Barbarikon, an ancient seaport which was located at the nearby mouth of the Indus River. Karachi may also have been referred to as \"Ramya\" in ancient Greek texts.\nThe ancient site of Krokola, a natural harbour west of the Indus where Alexander the Great sailed his fleet for Achaemenid Assyria, may have been located near the mouth of Karachi's Malir River, though some believe it was located near Gizri. No other natural harbour exists near the mouth of the Indus that could accommodate a large fleet. Nearchus, who commanded Alexander's naval fleet, also mentioned a hilly island by the name of Morontobara and an adjacent flat island named \"Bibakta\", which colonial historians identified as Karachi's Manora Point and Kiamari (or Clifton), respectively, based on Greek descriptions. Both areas were island until well into the colonial era, when silting in led to them being connected to the mainland.\nIn 711 CE, Muhammad bin Qasim conquered the Sindh and Indus Valley and the port of Debal, from where he launched his forces further into the Indus Valley in 712. Some have identified the port with Karachi, though some argue the location was somewhere between Karachi and the nearby city of Thatta.\nUnder Mirza Ghazi Beg, the Mughal administrator of Sindh, the development of coastal Sindh and the Indus River Delta was encouraged. Under his rule, fortifications in the region acted as a bulwark against Portuguese incursions into Sindh. In 1553\u201354, Ottoman admiral Seydi Ali Reis, mentioned a small port along the Sindh coast by the name of \"Kaurashi\" which may have been Karachi. The Chaukhandi tombs in Karachi's modern suburbs were built around this time between the 15th and 18th centuries.\nKolachi settlement and the first port.\nThe first port was established by the Kalhoras near Karachi in the mid-18th century, known as Kharak Bander.\n19th century Karachi historian Seth Naomal Hotchand recorded that a small settlement of 20\u201325 huts existed along the Karachi Harbour that was known as \"Dibro\", which was situated along a pool of water known as \"Kolachi-jo-Kun.\" In 1725, a band of Baloch settlers from Makran and Kalat had settled in the hamlet after fleeing droughts and tribal feuds.\nA new settlement was built in 1729 at the site of \"Dibro\", which came to be known as \"Kolachi-jo-Goth\" (\"The village of \"Kolachi\").\" The new settlement is said to have been named in honour of Mai Kolachi, a resident of the old settlement whose son is said to have slain a man-eating crocodile. Kolachi was about 40 hectares in size, with some smaller fishing villages scattered in its vicinity. The founders of the new fortified settlement were Sindhi Baniyas, and are said to have arrived from the nearby town of Kharak Bandar after the harbour there silted in 1728 after heavy rains. Kolachi was fortified, and defended with cannons imported from Muscat, Oman. Under the Talpurs, the \"Rah-i-Bandar\" road was built to connect the city's port to the caravan terminals. This road would eventually be further developed by the British into Bandar Road, which was renamed Muhammad Ali Jinnah Road.\nThe name \"Karachee\" was used for the first time in a Dutch document from 1742, in which a merchant ship \"de Ridderkerk\" is shipwrecked near the settlement. In 1770s, Karachi came under the control of the Khan of Kalat, which attracted a second wave of Balochi settlers. In 1795, Karachi was annexed by the Talpurs, triggering a third wave of Balochi settlers who arrived from central Sindh and southern Punjab. The Talpurs built the Manora Fort in 1797, which was used to protect Karachi's Harbour from al-Qasimi pirates.\nIn 1799 or 1800, the founder of the Talpur dynasty, Mir Fateh Ali Khan, allowed the East India Company under Nathan Crow to establish a trading post in Karachi. He was allowed to build a house for himself in Karachi at that time, but by 1802 was ordered to leave the city. The city continued to be ruled by the Talpurs until it was occupied by forces under the command of John Keane in February 1839.\nBritish control.\nThe British East India Company captured Karachi on 3February 1839 after opened fire and quickly destroyed Manora Fort, which guarded Karachi Harbour at Manora Point. Karachi's population at the time was an estimated 8,000 to 14,000, and was confined to the walled city in Mithadar, with suburbs in what is now the Serai Quarter. British troops, known as the \"Company Bahadur\" established a camp to the east of the captured city, which became the precursor to the modern Karachi Cantonment. The British further developed the Karachi Cantonment as a military garrison to aid the British war effort in the First Anglo-Afghan War.\nThe Portuguese Goan community started migrating to Karachi in the 1820s as traders. The majority of the estimated 100,000 who came to Pakistan are primarily concentrated in Karachi.\nSindh's capital was shifted from Hyderabad to Karachi in 1840 when Karachi was annexed to the British Empire after Major General Charles James Napier captured the rest of Sindh following his victory against the Talpurs at the Battle of Hyderabad. Following the 1843 annexation, the entire province was amalgamated into the Bombay Presidency for the next 93 years, and Karachi remain the divisional headquarter. A few years later in 1846, Karachi suffered a large cholera outbreak, which led to the establishment of the Karachi Cholera Board (predecessor to the city's civic government).\nThe city grew under the administration of its new Commissioner, Henry Bartle Edward Frere, who was appointed in the 1850s. Karachi was recognized for its strategic importance, prompting the British to establish the Port of Karachi in 1854. Karachi rapidly became a transportation hub for British India owing to newly built port and rail infrastructure, as well as the increase in agricultural exports from the opening of productive tracts of newly irrigated land in Punjab and Sindh. By 1856, the value of goods traded through Karachi reached \u00a3855,103, leading to the establishment of merchant offices and warehouses. The population in 1856 is estimated to have been 57,000. During the Sepoy Mutiny of 1857, the 21st Native Infantry, then stationed in Karachi, mutinied and declared allegiance to rebel forces in September 1857, though the British were able to quickly defeat the rebels and reassert control over the city.\nFollowing the Rebellion, British colonial administrators continued to develop the city's infrastructure, but continued to neglect localities like Lyari, which was home to the city's original population of Sindhi fishermen and Balochi nomads. At the outbreak of the American Civil War, Karachi's port became an important cotton-exporting port, with \"Indus Steam Flotilla\" and \"Orient Inland Steam Navigation Company\" established to transport cotton from rest of Sindh to Karachi's port, and onwards to textile mills in England. With increased economic opportunities, economic migrants from several ethnicities and religions, including Anglo-British, Parsis, Marathis, and Goan Christians, among others, established themselves in Karachi, with many setting-up businesses in the new commercial district of Saddar. Muhammad Ali Jinnah, the founder of Pakistan, was born in Karachi's Wazir Mansion in 1876 to such migrants from Gujarat. Public building works were undertaken at this time in Gothic and Indo-Saracenic styles, including the construction of Frere Hall in 1865 and the later Empress Market in 1889.\nWith the completion of the Suez Canal in 1869, Karachi's position as a major port increased even further. In 1878, the British Raj connected Karachi with the network of British India's vast railway system. In 1887, Karachi Port underwent radical improvements with connection to the railways, along with expansion and dredging of the port, and construction of a breakwater. Karachi's first synagogue was established in 1893. By 1899, Karachi had become the largest wheat-exporting port in the East. In 1901, Karachi's population was 117,000 with a further 109,000 included in the Municipal area.\nUnder the British, the city's municipal government was established. Known as the \"Father of Modern Karachi\", mayor Seth Harchandrai Vishandas led the municipal government to improve sanitary conditions in the Old City, as well as major infrastructure works in the New Town after his election in 1911. In 1914, Karachi had become the largest wheat-exporting port of the entire British Empire, after large irrigation works in Sindh were initiated to increase wheat and cotton yields. By 1924, the \"Drigh Road Aerodrome\" was established, now the Faisal Air Force Base.\nKarachi's increasing importance as a cosmopolitan transportation hub leads to the influence of non-Sindhis in Sindh's administration. Half the city was born outside of Karachi by as early as 1921. Native Sindhis were upset by this influence, and so on 1 April 1936, Sindh was established as a province separate from the Bombay Presidency with Karachi was once again made capital of Sindh. In 1941, the population of the city had risen to 387,000.\nPost-independence.\nAt the dawn of independence following the success of the Pakistan Movement in 1947, On 15 August 1947 Capital of Sindh shifted from Karachi to Hyderabad and Karachi was made the national capital of Pakistan.\nKarachi was Sindh's largest city with a population of over 400,000. The city had a slight Hindu majority, with around 51% of the population being Hindu. Partition resulted in the exodus of much of the city's Hindu population, though Karachi, like most of Sindh, remained relatively peaceful compared to cities in Punjab. Riots erupted on 6January 1948, after which most of Sindh's Hindu population fled to India, with assistance of the Indian government.\nKarachi became the focus for the resettlement of middle-class Muslim \"Muhajir\" refugees who fled India, with 470,000 refugees in Karachi by May 1948, leading to a drastic alteration of the city's demography. In 1941, Muslims were 42% of Karachi's population, but by 1951 made up 96% of the city's population. The city's population had tripled between 1941 and 1951. Urdu replaced Sindhi as Karachi's most widely spoken language; Sindhi was the mother tongue of 51% of Karachi in 1941, but only 8.5% in 1951, while Urdu grew to become the mother tongue of 51% of Karachi's population. 100,000 Muhajir refugees arrived annually in Karachi until 1952. Muhajirs kept arriving from different parts of India until 2000.\nKarachi was selected as the first capital of Pakistan, and was administered as a federal district separate from Sindh beginning in 1948, the capital of Sindh shifted again from Hyderabad to Karachi until the national capital was shifted to Rawalpindi in 1958. While foreign embassies shifted away from Karachi, the city is host to numerous consulates and honorary consulates. Between 1958 and 1970, Karachi's role as capital of Sindh was ceased due to the One Unit programme enacted by President Iskander Mirza.\nKarachi of the 1960s was regarded as an economic role model around the world, with Seoul, South Korea, borrowing from the city's second \"Five-Year Plan\". Several examples of Modernist architect were built in Karachi during this period, including the Mazar-e-Quaid mausoleum, the distinct Masjid-e-Tooba, and the Habib Bank Plaza (the tallest building in all of South Asia at the time). The city's population by 1961 had grown 369% compared to 1941. By the mid-1960s, Karachi began to attract large numbers of Pashtun, Punjabis and Kashmiris from northern Pakistan.\nThe 1970s saw a construction boom funded by remittances and investments from the Gulf States, and the appearance of apartment buildings in the city. Real-estate prices soared during this period, leading to a worsening housing crisis. The period also saw labour unrest in Karachi's industrial estates beginning in 1970 that were violently repressed by the government of President Zulfikar Ali Bhutto from 1972 onwards. To appease conservative forces, Bhutto banned alcohol in Pakistan, and cracked-down of Karachi's discotheques and cabarets - leading to the closure of Karachi's once-lively nightlife. The city's art scene was further repressed during the rule of dictator General Zia-ul-Haq. Zia's Islamization policies lead the Westernized upper-middle classes of Karachi to largely withdraw from the public sphere, and instead form their own social venues that became inaccessible to the poor. This decade also saw an influx of more than one million Bihari immigrants into Karachi from the newly made country Bangladesh which separated from Pakistan in 1971.\nIn 1972, the Karachi district divided into three districts, East, West and South districts.\nThe 1980s and 1990s saw an influx of almost one million Afghan refugees into Karachi fleeing the Soviet\u2013Afghan War. This was followed by refugees escaping from post-revolution Iran. At this time, Karachi was also rocked by political conflict, while crime rates drastically increased with the arrival of weaponry from the War in Afghanistan. Conflict between the MQM party, and ethnic Sindhis, Pashtuns, Punjabis and Balochis was sharp. The party and its vast network of supporters were targeted by Pakistani security forces as part of the controversial Operation Clean-up in 1992\u00a0\u2013 an effort to restore peace in the city that lasted until 1994. Anti-Hindu riots also broke out in Karachi in 1992 in retaliation for the demolition of the Babri Mosque in India by a group of Hindu nationalists earlier that year.\nIn 1996, two (02) more districts created in the Karachi Division named Central and Malir districts.\nThe 2010s saw another influx of hundreds of thousands of Pashtun refugees fleeing conflict in North-West Pakistan and the 2010 Pakistan floods. By this point Karachi had become widely known for its high rates of violent crime, usually in relation to criminal activity, gang-warfare, sectarian violence, and extrajudicial killings. Recorded crimes sharply decreased following a controversial crackdown operation against criminals, the MQM party, and Islamist militants initiated in 2013 by the Pakistan Rangers. As a result of the operation, Karachi went from being ranked the world's 6th most dangerous city for crime in 2014, to 128th by 2022.\nIn 2022 at least one million flood affectees from Sindh and Balochistan took refuge in Karachi.\nGeography.\nKarachi is located on the coastline of Sindh province in southern Pakistan, along the Karachi Harbour, a natural harbour on the Arabian Sea. Karachi is built on a coastal plain with scattered rocky outcroppings, hills and marshlands. Mangrove forests grow in the brackish waters around the Karachi Harbour (see: Chinna Creek), and farther southeast towards the expansive Indus River Delta. West of Karachi city is the Cape Monze, locally known as Ras Muari, which is an area characterised by sea cliffs, rocky sandstone promontories and beaches.\nKarachi lies very close to a major fault line, where the Indian tectonic plate meets the Arabian tectonic plate. However, Karachi lies near the western edge of the Indian Plate, on the Indo Gangetic Plain. Within the city of Karachi are two small ranges: the Khasa Hills and Mulri Hills, which lie in the northwest and act as a barrier between North Nazimabad and Orangi. Karachi's hills are barren and are part of the larger Kirthar Range, and have a maximum elevation of .\nBetween the hills are wide coastal plains interspersed with dry river beds and water channels. Karachi has developed around the Malir River and Lyari Rivers, with the Lyari shore being the site of the settlement for \"Kolachi\". To the east of Karachi lies the Indus River flood plains.\nClimate.\nKarachi has a tropical semi arid climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"BSh\"), formerly a desert climate, dominated by a long \"Summer Season\" while moderated by oceanic influence from the Arabian Sea. The city has annual average precipitation levels (approx. per annum), the bulk of which occurs during the late June\u2013September monsoon season. Summers are hot and humid, and Karachi is prone to deadly heatwaves. Over the past 20 years, rainfall has become more abundant. Tropical storms and thunderstorms, as well as flooding are becoming more common, especially during the summer monsoon. On the other hand, cool sea breezes typically provide relief during hot summer months. A text message-based early warning system alerts people to take precautionary measures and helps prevent fatalities during an unusually strong heatwave or thunderstorm. The winter climate is dry and lasts between December and February. It is dry and pleasant in winter relative to the warm hot season that follows, which starts in March and lasts until October. Proximity to the sea maintains humidity levels at near-constant levels year-round. Thus, the climate is similar to a humid tropical climate, except for the low precipitation and occasional temperatures well over 100 F (38 C) due to the influence of the Thar Desert nearby, close to the border with India.\nThe city's highest annual rainfall was about 750\u2013850\u00a0mm, recorded in the late 1970s. The city's highest monthly rainfall, , occurred in July 1967. The city's highest rainfall in 24 hours occurred on 7August 1953, when about of rain lashed the city, resulting in major flooding.\nKarachi's highest recorded temperature is which was recorded on 22 and 23 April 2017, and the lowest is recorded on 21 January 1934.\nCityscape.\nThe city first developed around the Karachi Harbour, and owes much of its growth to its role as a seaport at the end of the 18th century, contrasted with Pakistan's millennia-old cities such as Lahore, Multan, and Peshawar. Karachi's Mithadar neighbourhood represents the extent of \"Kolachi\" prior to British rule.\nBritish Karachi was divided between the \"New Town\" and the \"Old Town\", with British investments focused primarily on the New Town. The Old Town was a largely unplanned neighbourhood which housed most of the city's indigenous residents and had no access to sewerage systems, electricity, and water. The New Town was subdivided into residential, commercial, and military areas. Given the strategic value of the city, the British developed the Karachi Cantonment as a military garrison in the New Town to aid the British war effort in the First Anglo-Afghan War.\nThe city's development was largely confined to the area north of the Chinna Creek prior to independence, although the seaside area of Clifton was also developed as a posh locale under the British, and its large bungalows and estates remain some of the city's most desirable properties. The aforementioned historic areas form the oldest portions of Karachi, and contain its most important monuments and government buildings, with the I. I. Chundrigar Road being home to most of Pakistan's banks, including the Habib Bank Plaza which was Pakistan's tallest building from 1963 until the early 2000s.\nSituated on a coastal plain northwest of Karachi's historic core lies the sprawling district of Orangi. North of the historic core is the largely middle-class district of Nazimabad, and upper-middle-class North Nazimabad, which were developed in the 1950s. To the east of the historic core is the area known as Defence, an expansive upscale suburb developed and administered by the Pakistan Army. Karachi's coastal plains along the Arabian Sea south of Clifton were also developed much later as part of the greater Defence Housing Authority project.\nKarachi's city limits also include several islands, including Baba and Bhit Islands, Oyster Rocks, and Manora, a former island which is now connected to the mainland by a thin 12-kilometre long shoal known as Sandspit. Gulistan-e-Johar, Gulshan-e-Iqbal, Federal B. Area, Malir, Landhi and Korangi areas were all developed after 1970. The city has been described as one divided into sections for those able to afford to live in planned localities with access to urban amenities, and those who live in unplanned communities with inadequate access to such services. 35% of Karachi's residents live in unplanned communities.\nEconomy.\nBeing the largest city, Karachi is also Pakistan's financial and commercial capital. Since Pakistan's independence, Karachi has been the centre of the nation's economy, and remain's Pakistan's largest urban economy despite the economic stagnation caused by sociopolitical unrest during the late 1980s and 1990s. The city forms the centre of an economic corridor stretching from Karachi to nearby Hyderabad, and Thatta.\nAs of 2021[ [update]], Karachi had an estimated GDP (PPP) of $190\u00a0billion with a yearly growth rate of 5.5%. Karachi contributes 90% of Sindh's GDP and accounts for approximately 25% of the total GDP of Pakistan. The city has a large informal economy which is not typically reflected in GDP estimates. The informal economy may constitute up to 36% of Pakistan's total economy, versus 22% of India's economy, and 13% of the Chinese economy. The informal sector employs up to 70% of the city's workforce. In 2018 The Global Metro Monitor Report ranked Karachi's economy as the best performing metropolitan economy in Pakistan.\nToday along with Pakistan's continued economic expansion Karachi is now ranked third in the world for consumer expenditure growth with its market anticipated to increase by 6.6% in real terms in 2018 It is also ranked among the top cities in the world by an anticipated increase of a number of households (1.3\u00a0million households) with annual income above $20,000 measured at PPP exchange rates by 2025. The Global FDI Intelligence Report 2017/2018 published by Financial Times ranks Karachi amongst the top 10 Asia pacific cities of the future for FDI strategy. According to Anatol Lieven the economic growth of Karachi is a result of the influx of Muhajirs to Karachi during late 1940s and early 50s.\nFinance and banking.\nMost of Pakistan's public and private banks are headquartered on Karachi's I. I. Chundrigar Road, which is known as \"Pakistan's Wall Street\", with a large percentage of the cash flow in the Pakistani economy taking place on I. I. Chundrigar Road. Most major foreign multinational corporations operating in Pakistan have their headquarters in Karachi. Karachi is also home to the Pakistan Stock Exchange, which was rated as Asia's best-performing stock market in 2015 on the heels of Pakistan's upgrade to emerging-market status by MSCI.\nMedia and technology.\nKarachi has been the pioneer in cable networking in Pakistan with the most sophisticated of the cable networks of any city of Pakistan,\nand has seen an expansion of information and communications technology and electronic media. The city has become a software outsourcing hub for Pakistan. Several independent television and radio stations are based in Karachi, including Business Plus, , Geo TV, KTN, Sindh TV, CNBC Pakistan, TV ONE, Express TV, ARY Digital, Indus Television Network, Samaa TV, Abb Takk News, Bol TV, and Dawn News, as well as several local stations.\nIndustry.\nIndustry contributes a large portion of Karachi's economy, with the city home to several of Pakistan's largest companies dealing in textiles, cement, steel, heavy machinery, chemicals, and food products. The city is home to approximately 30 percent of Pakistan's manufacturing sector, and produces approximately 42 percent of Pakistan's value added in large scale manufacturing. At least 4500 industrial units form Karachi's formal industrial economy. Karachi's informal manufacturing sector employs far more people than the formal sector, though proxy data suggest that the capital employed and value-added from such informal enterprises is far smaller than that of formal sector enterprises. An estimated 63% of the Karachi's workforce is employed in trade and manufacturing.\nKarachi Export Processing Zone, SITE, Korangi, Northern Bypass Industrial Zone, Bin Qasim and North Karachi serve as large industrial estates in Karachi. The Karachi Expo Centre also complements Karachi's industrial economy by hosting regional and international exhibitions.\nRevenue collection.\nAs home to Pakistan's largest ports and a large portion of its manufacturing base, Karachi contributes a large share of Pakistan's collected tax revenue. As most of Pakistan's large multinational corporations are based in Karachi, income taxes are paid in the city even though income may be generated from other parts of the country. As home to the country's two largest ports, Pakistani customs officials collect the bulk of federal duty and tariffs at Karachi's ports, even if those imports are destined for one of Pakistan's other provinces. Approximately 25% of Pakistan's national revenue is \"generated\" in Karachi.\nAccording to the Federal Board of Revenue's 2006\u20132007 year book, tax and customs units in Karachi were responsible for 46.75% of direct taxes, 33.65% of federal excise tax, and 23.38% of domestic sales tax. Karachi accounts for 75.14% of customs duty and 79% of sales tax on imports, and collects 53.38% of the total collections of the Federal Board of Revenue, of which 53.33% are customs duty and sales tax on imports.\nDemographics.\nKarachi is dominated by the Urdu-speaking Muhajirs. It is the most linguistically, ethnically, and religiously diverse city in Pakistan. The city is a melting pot of ethnolinguistic groups from throughout Pakistan, as well as migrants from other parts of Asia. The 2017 census numerated Karachi's population to be 14,910,352, having grown 2.49% per year since the 1998 census, which had listed Karachi's population at approximately 9.3\u00a0million. According to the 2023 Census of Pakistan, Karachi's total population was 20.3\u00a0million. Karachi is one of the world's fastest-growing cities,\nThe city's inhabitants are referred to by the demonym \"Karachiite\" in English, and \"Kar\u0101ch\u012bw\u0101l\u0101\" in Urdu.\nLanguage.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nKarachi has the largest number of Urdu speakers in Pakistan. As per the 2023 census, the linguistic breakdown of Karachi Division is:\nThe category of \"others\" includes 653,727 Hindko speakers, 75,993 Brahui speakers, 50,982 Kashmiri speakers, 30,375 Mewati speakers, 26,906 Balti speakers, 14,073 Kohistani speakers, 21,860 Shina speakers, 614 Kalasha speakers, and 943,165 speakers of other languages such as Kutchi,Gujarati, Memoni, Burushaski, Marwari, Dari, Makrani, Khowar, Hazaragi, Bengali, Konkani and others.\nPopulation.\nAt the end of the 19th century, Karachi had an estimated population of 105,000. By the dawn of Pakistan's independence in 1947, the city had an estimated population of 400,000. The city's population grew dramatically with the arrival of hundreds of thousands of Muslim refugees from the newly independent Republic of India. Rapid economic growth following independence attracted further migrants from throughout Pakistan and South Asia. The 2017 census numerated Karachi's population to be 14,910,352, having grown 2.49% per year since the 1998 census, which had listed Karachi's population at approximately 9.3\u00a0million.\nLower than expected population figures from the census suggest that Karachi's poor infrastructure, law and order situation, and weakened economy relative to other parts of Pakistan made the city less attractive to in-migration than previously thought. The figure is disputed by all the major political parties in Sindh. Karachi's population grew by 59.8% since the 1998 census to 14.9\u00a0million, while Lahore city grew 75.3%\u00a0\u2013 though Karachi's census district had not been altered by the provincial government since 1998, while Lahore's had been expanded by Punjab's government, leading to some of Karachi's growth to have occurred outside the city's census boundaries. Karachi's population had grown at a rate of 3.49% between the 1981 and 1998 census, leading many analysts to estimate Karachi's 2017 population to be approximately 18\u00a0million by extrapolating a continued annual growth rate of 3.49%. Some had expected that the city's population to be between 22 and 30\u00a0million, which would require an annual growth rate accelerating to between 4.6% and 6.33%.\nPolitical parties in the province have suggested the city's population has been underestimated in a deliberate attempt to undermine the political power of the city and province. Senator Taj Haider from the PPP claimed he had official documents revealing the city's population to be 25.6\u00a0million in 2013, while the Sindh Bureau of Statistics, part of by the PPP-led provincial administration, estimated Karachi's 2016 population to be 19.1\u00a0million.\nDistrict population density per km2.\nAccording to 2023 Census, with 55,396.01 residents per square kilometre Karachi Central is the most densely populated district of the seven districts of Karachi as well as the entirety of Pakistan.\nEthnicity.\nThe oldest portions of modern Karachi reflect the ethnic composition of the first settlement, with Sindhis and Balochis continuing to make up a large portion of the Lyari neighbourhood, though many of the residents are relatively recent migrants. Following Partition, large numbers of Hindus left Pakistan for the newly independent Dominion of India (later the Republic of India), while a larger percentage of Muslim migrant and refugees from India settled in Karachi. The city grew 150% during the ten-year period between 1941 and 1951 with the new arrivals from India, who made up 57% of Karachi's population in 1951. The city is now considered a melting pot of Pakistan and is the country's most diverse city.\nIn 2011, an estimated 2.5\u00a0million foreign migrants lived in the city, mostly from Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Myanmar, and Sri Lanka.\nMuch of Karachi's citizenry descend from Urdu-speaking migrants and refugees from North India who became known by the Arabic term for \"Migrant\": Muhajir. The first Muhajirs of Karachi arrived in 1946 in the aftermath of the Direct Action Day and subsequent 1946 Bihar riots. The city's wealthy Hindus opposed the resettlement of refugees near their homes, and so many refugees were accommodated in the older and more congested parts of Karachi. The city witnessed a large influx of Muhajirs following partition, who were drawn to the port city and newly designated federal capital for its white-collar job opportunities. Muhajirs continued to migrate to Pakistan throughout the 1950s and early 1960s, with Karachi remaining the primary destination of Indian Muslim migrants throughout those decades. The Muhajir Urdu-speaking community in the 2017 census forms slightly less than 45% of the city's population.\nKarachi is home to a wide array of non-Urdu speaking Muslim peoples from what is now the Republic of India. The city has a sizable community of Gujarati, Marathi, Konkani-speaking refugees. Karachi is also home to a several-thousand member strong community of Malabari Muslims from Kerala in South India. These ethno-linguistic groups are being assimilated in the Urdu-speaking community.\nDuring the period of rapid economic growth in the 1960s, large numbers Pashtuns from the NWFP migrated to Karachi with Afghan Pashtun refugees settling in Karachi during the 80's., Pashtuns from Afghanistan are regarded as the most conservative community. The Pashtun community forms the bulk of manual labourers and transporters.\nThe Sindhis makeup around 11-12 percent of Karachi's population, Sindhis form much of the municipal and provincial bureaucracy., Being the Provincial capital of Sindh Province, Karachi attracts many Sindhis from other parts of Sindh. In recent years Karachi has seen massive Sindhi migration to the city due to being economic and commercial hub as well as Capital of the province. Karachi also have a sizeable population of Hindus of about 1.12% most of the Hindus are Sindhi while other communities of hindus such as Gujarati, Marwari and Rajasthani Hindus also co-exist.\nMigrants from Punjab began settling in Karachi in large numbers in the 1960s, and now make up an estimated 8% of Karachi's population. The bulk of Karachi's Christian community, which makes up 2.5% of the city's population, is Punjabi.\n4% of Karachi's population speaks Balochi as its mother tongue, though most Baloch speakers are of Sheedi heritage\u00a0\u2013 a community that traces its roots to Africa.\nFollowing the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971 and independence of Bangladesh, thousands of Urdu-speaking Biharis arrived in the city, preferring to remain Pakistani rather than live in the newly independent country. Large numbers of Bengalis also migrated from Bangladesh to Karachi during periods of economic growth in the 1980s and 1990s. Karachi is now home to an estimated 2.5 to 3million ethnic Bengalis living in Pakistan. Rohingya refugees from Myanmar, who speak a dialect of Bengali and are sometimes regarded as Bengalis, also live in the city. Karachi is home to an estimated 400,000 Rohingya residents. Large scale Rohingya migration to Karachi made Karachi one of the largest population centres of Rohingyas in the world outside of Myanmar.\nCentral Asian migrants from Uzbekistan and Kyrgyzstan have also settled in the city. Domestic workers from the Philippines are employed in Karachi's posh locales, while many of the city's teachers hail from Sri Lanka. Many Sri Lankans moved to Karachi due to the 2022 Economic Crisis in Sri Lanka. Expatriates from China began migrating to Karachi in the 1940s, to work as dentists, chefs and shoemakers, while many of their descendants continue to live in Pakistan. Chinese also reached Karachi after 2015 in large number due to the CPEC project. The city is also home to a small number of British and American expatriates.\nDuring World War II, about 3,000 Polish refugees from the Soviet Union, with some Polish families who chose to remain in the city after Partition. Post-Partition Karachi also once had a sizable refugee community from post-revolutionary Iran.\nReligion.\nKarachi is a religiously homogeneous city with more than 96 per cent of its population adhering to Islam. \"Karachiites\" adhere to numerous sects and sub-sects of Islam, as well as Protestant Christianity, and community of Goan Catholics. The city also is home to large numbers of Hindus, and a small community of Zoroastrians and Parsi's. According to Nichola Khan Karachi is also the world's largest Muslim city. Prior to Pakistan's independence in 1947, the religious demographics of the city was estimated to be 51.1% Hindu, 42.3% Muslim, with the remaining 7% primarily Christians (both British and native), Sikhs, Jains, with a small number of Jews. Following the independence of Pakistan, the vast majority of Karachi's Sindhi Hindu population left for India while Muslim refugees from India, in turn, settled in the city. This mass migration dramatically changed the religious demographics of the city.\nIslam.\nKarachi is overwhelmingly Muslim, though the city is one of Pakistan's most secular cities. Approximately 85% of Karachi's Muslims are Sunnis, while 15% are Shi'ites. Sunnis primarily follow the Hanafi school of jurisprudence, with Sufism influencing religious practices by encouraging reverence for Sufi saints such as Abdullah Shah Ghazi and Mewa Shah. Shi'ites are predominantly Twelver, with a significant Ismaili minority which is further subdivided into Nizaris, Mustaalis, Dawoodi Bohras, and Sulaymanis. There are over 3000 mosques in Karachi, most famous of which include Grand Jamia Mosque, Baitul Mukarram Mosque, Masjid-e-Tooba and Memon Masjid.\nChristianity.\nApproximately 2.2% of Karachi's population is Christian. The city's Christian community is primarily composed of Punjabi Christians and a community of Goan Catholics who are typically better-educated and more affluent than their Punjabi co-religionists. They established the posh Cincinnatus Town in Garden East as a Goan enclave. The Goan community dates from 1820 and has a population estimated to be 12,000\u201315,000 strong. Karachi is served by its own archdiocese, the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Karachi.\nHinduism.\nWhile most of the city's Hindu population left \"en masse\" for India following Pakistan's independence, Karachi still has a large Hindu community with a population of 211,138 as per 2023 Census. The Hindu community is split into a more affluent Sindhi Hindu and small Punjabi Hindu group that forms part of Karachi's educated middle class, while poorer Hindus of Rajasthani and Marwari descent form the other part and typically serve as menial and day laborers. Wealthier Hindus live primarily in Clifton and Saddar, while poorer ones live and have temples in Narayanpura and Lyari. There is a small community of Tamil Hindus in Karachi, with about 100 families in Madrasi Para. Many streets in central Karachi still retain Hindu names, especially in Mithadar, Aram Bagh (formerly Ram Bagh), and Ramswami. Many Mandirs exist in Saddar which are over 100 years old.\nZoroastrianism.\nKarachi's affluent and influential Parsis have lived in the region in the 12th century, though the modern community dates from the mid 19th century when they served as military contractors and commissariat agents to the British. Further waves of Parsi immigrants from Persia settled in the city in the late 19th century. The population of Parsis in Karachi and throughout South Asia is in continuous decline due to low birth-rates and migration to Western countries.\nIn 2023, according to the 2023 census, approximately 1,435 Parsis are left in Karachi.\nTransportation.\nRoad.\nKarachi is served by a road network estimated to be approximately in length, serving approximately 5\u00a0million vehicles per day.\nKarachi is served by 6 Signal-Free Corridors which are designed as urban express roads to permit traffic to transverse large distances without the need to stop at intersections and stoplights. The Karsaz Road connects PAF Museum in central Karachi to SITE Industrial Area. The Rashid Minhas Road connects Surjani Town with Shah Faisal Town over a 20\u00a0km span. The University Road connects Karachi's urban centre to the Gulistan-e-Johar suburb. The Shahrah-e-Faisal connects Karachi's Sadar area to the Jinnah International Airport. The Shahrah-e-Pakistan connects city centre to Federal B. Area. The Sher Shah Suri Road connects the city centre to Nazimabad.\nThe Lyari Expressway is a 16\u00a0km controlled-access highway along the Lyari River. This toll highway is designed to relieve congestion within the city. To the north of Karachi lies the 39\u00a0km Karachi Northern Bypass (M10), which bypasses the city to connect the M-9 Motorway to the N25 National Highway. A Malir Expressway is under construction along the Malir River. It will link Karachi's DHA to Karachi's Malir Town and terminate at Kathore on the M-9 motorway.\nKarachi is the terminus of the M-9 motorway, which connects Karachi to Hyderabad. The M-9 motorway is part of a larger countrywide motorways network, many of which were built through the China Pakistan Economic Corridor Project. From Hyderabad, motorways provide high-speed road access to all major Pakistani cities, including Peshawar, Islamabad, Lahore, Multan and Faisalabad.\nKarachi is also the terminus of the N-5 National Highway which connects the city to the historic medieval capital of Sindh, Thatta. It offers further connections to northern Pakistan and the Afghan border near Torkham. The N-25 National Highway connects Karachi to Quetta, the capital of Balochistan. The N-10 National Highway connects Karachi to the emerging port city of Gwadar.\nRail.\nKarachi is linked by rail to the rest of the country by Pakistan Railways. The Karachi City Station and Karachi Cantonment Railway Station are the city's two major railway stations. The city has an international rail link, the Thar Express which links Karachi Cantonment Station with Bhagat Ki Kothi station in Jodhpur, India.\nThe railway system also handles freight linking Karachi port to destinations up-country in northern Pakistan. The city is the terminus for the Main Line-1 Railway which connects Karachi to Peshawar. Pakistan's rail network, including the Main Line-1 Railway is being upgraded as part of the China Pakistan Economic Corridor, allowing trains to depart Karachi and travel on Pakistani railways at an average speed of versus the current average speed of .\nPublic transport.\nMetrobus.\nThe Pakistani Government is developing the Karachi Metrobus project, which is a 6-line bus rapid transit system. The Metrobus project was inaugurated by then-Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif on 25 February 2016. Sharif said the \"project will be more beautiful than Lahore Metro Bus\". Orange and Green Lines are operational while Red-Line is underconstruction.\nPeople's Bus Service.\nIn 2022, the provincial government launched Peoples Bus Service with a fleet of 100+ buses running on 12 different routes on nominal fare. The buses are air-conditioned, have Wi-Fi, have priority seating for the disabled and elderly, and are wheelchair accessible.\nRed buses are for the general public. Pink buses are for women only. White buses are environment friendly electric buses having designated charging points.\nKarachi Circular Railway.\nKarachi Circular Railway is a partially active regional public transit system in Karachi, which serves the Karachi metropolitan area. KCR was fully operational between 1969 and 1999. Since 2001, restoration of the railway and restarting the system had been sought. In November 2020, the KCR partially revived operations.\nKCR was included in CPEC by Shehbaz Sharif and construction started in 2022. Existing 43\u00a0km KCR track and stations would be completely rebuilt into automated rapid transit system with electric trains. The route would not be changed however many underpasses and bridges would be built along the route to eliminate 22-level crossings. New KCR would be similar to Lahore's Orange Train. New KCR would have joint stations with Karachi Metrobus at points of intersection. Project would be operational by 2025.\nWith its hub at Karachi City station on I. I. Chundrigar Road, KCR will connect the city centre with several industrial, commercial and residential districts within the city.\nTramway service.\nA tramway service was started in 1884 in Karachi but was closed in 1975. However, the revival of tramway service is proposed by Karachi Administrator Iftikhar Ali. Turkey has offered assistance in the revival and launching modern tramway service in Karachi.\nAir.\nKarachi's Jinnah International Airport is the busiest airport of Pakistan with a total of 7.2\u00a0million passengers in 2018. The current terminal structure was built in 1992, and is divided into international and domestic sections. Karachi's airport serves as a hub for the flag carrier, Pakistan International Airlines (PIA), as well as for Air Indus, Serene Air and airblue. The airport offers non-stop flights to destinations throughout East Asia, South Asia, Southeast Asia, Central Asia, the Gulf States, Europe and North America.\nSea.\nThe largest shipping ports in Pakistan are the Port of Karachi and the nearby Port Qasim, the former being the oldest port of Pakistan. Port Qasim is located east of the Port of Karachi on the Indus River estuary. These ports handle 95% of Pakistan's trade cargo to and from foreign ports. These seaports have modern facilities which include bulk handling, containers and oil terminals. The ports are part of the Maritime Silk Road.\nCivic administration.\nCity government.\nKarachi has a fragmented system of civic government. The urban area is divided into six District Municipal Corporations: Karachi East, Karachi West, Karachi Central, Karachi South, Malir, Korangi. Each district is further divided into between 22 and 42 Union Committees. Each Union Committee is represented by seven elected representatives, four of whom can be general candidates of any background; the other three seats are reserved for women, religious minorities, and a union representative or peasant farmer.\nKarachi's urban area also includes six cantonments, which are administered directly by the Pakistani military, and include some of Karachi's most desirable real-estate.\nKey civic bodies, such as the Karachi Water and Sewerage Board and KBCA (Karachi Building Control Authority), among others, are under the direct control of the Government of Sindh. Additionally, Karachi's city-planning authority for undeveloped land, the Karachi Development Authority, is under control of the government, while two new city-planning authorities, the Lyari Development Authority and Malir Development Authority were revived by the Pakistan Peoples Party government in 2011\u00a0\u2013 allegedly to patronize their electoral allies and voting banks.\nHistorical background.\nIn response to a cholera epidemic in 1846, the Karachi Conservancy Board was organized by British administrators to control its spread. The board became the Karachi Municipal Commission in 1852, and the Karachi Municipal Committee the following year. The City of Karachi Municipal Act of 1933 transformed the city administration into the Karachi Municipal Corporation with a mayor, a deputy mayor and 57 councillors. In 1976, the body became the Karachi Metropolitan Corporation.\nDuring the 1900s, Karachi saw its major beautification project under the mayoralty of Harchandrai Vishandas. New roads, parks, residential, and recreational areas were developed as part of this project. In 1948, the Federal Capital Territory of Pakistan was created, comprising approximately of Karachi and surrounding areas, but this was merged into the province of West Pakistan in 1959. In 1960, Karachi and Lasbela District merged to create Karachi-Bela Division. In 1972, Lasbela District transferred to Kalat Division and Karachi metropolitan area was divided into three (03) districts East, West and South. In 1996, again the Karachi metropolitan area was divided into More two (02) districts Central and Malir, each with its own municipal corporation.\nUnion councils (2001\u201311).\nIn 2001, during the rule of General Pervez Musharraf, five districts of Karachi were merged to form the city district of Karachi, with a three-tier structure. The two most local tiers are composed of 18 towns, and 178 union councils. Each tier focused on elected councils with some common members to provide \"vertical linkage\" within the federation.\nNaimatullah Khan was the first Nazim of Karachi during the Union Council period, while Shafiq-Ur-Rehman Paracha was the first district coordination officer of Karachi. Syed Mustafa Kamal was elected City Nazim of Karachi to succeed Naimatullah Khan in 2005 elections, and Nasreen Jalil was elected as the City Naib Nazim.\nEach Union Council had thirteen members elected from specified electorates: four men and two women elected directly by the general population; two men and two women elected by peasants and workers; one member for minority communities; two members are elected jointly as the Union Mayor (\"Nazim\") and Deputy Union Mayor (\"Naib Nazim\"). Each council included up to three council secretaries and a number of other civil servants. The Union Council system was dismantled in 2011.\nDistrict Municipal Corporations (2011\u2013present).\nIn July 2011, city district government of Karachi was reverted its original constituent units known as District Municipal Corporations (DMC). The five original DMCs are: Karachi East, Karachi West, Karachi Central, Karachi South and Malir. In November 2013, a sixth DMC, Korangi District was carved out from District East. In August 2020, Sindh cabinet approves formation of the seventh district in Karachi (Keamari District), Keamari District was formed by splitting District West.\nThe committees for each district devise and enforce land-use and zoning regulations within their district. Each committee also manages water supply, sewage, and roads (except for 28 main arteries, which are managed by the Karachi Metropolitan Corporation). Street lighting, traffic planning, markets regulations, and signage are also under the control of the DMCs. Each DMC also maintains its own municipal record archive, and devises its own local budget.\nMunicipal Administration of Karachi is also run by the Karachi Metropolitan Corporation (KMC), which is responsible for the development and maintenance of main arteries, bridges, drains, several hospitals, beaches, solid waste management, as well as some parks, and the city's firefighting services. Between 2016 and 2020 the mayor of Karachi was Waseem Akhtar (2016-2020), with Arshad Hassan serving as Deputy Mayor; both served as part of the KMC. The Administrator of Karachi is Syed Saif-ur-Rehman as of 2022. In 2023, Murtaza Wahab of PPP was elected the mayor of Karachi.\nThe position of Commissioner of Karachi was created, with Iftikhar Ali Shallwani serving this role. There are six military cantonments, which are administered by the Pakistani Army, and are some of Karachi's most upscale neighbourhoods.\nCity planning.\nThe Karachi Development Authority (KDA), along with the Lyari Development Authority (LDA) and Malir Development Authority (MDA), is responsible for the development of most undeveloped land around Karachi. KDA came into existence in 1957 with the task of managing land around Karachi, while the LDA and MDA were formed in 1993 and 1994, respectively. KDA under the control of Karachi's local government and mayor in 2001, while the LDA and MDA were abolished. KDA was later placed under the direct control of the Government of Sindh in 2011. The LDA and MDA were also revived by the Pakistan Peoples Party government at the time, allegedly to patronize their electoral allies and voting banks. City-planning in Karachi, therefore, is not locally directed but is instead controlled at the provincial level.\nEach District Municipal Corporation regulate land-use in developed areas, while the Sindh Building Control Authority ensures that building construction is in accordance with building &amp; town planning regulations. Cantonment areas, and the Defence Housing Authority are administered and planned by the military.\nMunicipal services.\nWater.\nMunicipal water supplies are managed by the Karachi Water and Sewerage Board (KW&amp;SB), which supplies 640\u00a0million gallons daily (MGD) to the city (excluding the city's steel mills and Port Qasim), of which 440 MGD are filtered/treated. Most of the supply comes from the Indus River, and 90 MGD from the Hub Dam. Karachi's water supply is transported to the city through a complex network of canals, conduits, and siphons, with the aid of pumping and filtration stations. 80% of Karachi households have access to piped water as of 2022[ [update]], with private water tankers supplying much of the water required in informal settlements. 15% of residents in a 2022 survey rated their water supply as \"bad\" or \"very bad\", while 40% expressed concern at the stability of water supply. By 2022, an estimated 35,000 people were dying due to water-borne diseases annually.\nThe K-IV water project is under development at a cost of $876\u00a0million. It would connect Keenjhar Lake to Karachi hence eradicating water scarcity in eastern and northern parts of the city. It is expected to supply 650\u00a0million gallons daily of potable water to the city, the first phase 260\u00a0million gallons upon completion.\nDesalination plants are also planned to be built on Arabian Sea coast on western side of Karachi in near future. These would resolve water scarcity issues in western parts of the city including SITE Area, Shershah and Orangi Town.\nSanitation.\n98% of Karachi's households are connected to the city's underground public sewerage system, largely operated by the Karachi Water and Sewerage Board (KW&amp;SB). The KW&amp;SB operates 150 pumping stations, 25 bulk reservoirs, over 10,000 kilometres of pipes, and 250,000 manholes. The city generates approximately 472\u00a0million gallons daily (MGD) of sewage, of which 417 MGD are discharged without treatment. KW&amp;SB has the optimum capacity to treat up to 150 MGD of sewage, but uses only about 50 MGD of this capacity. Three treatment plants are available, in SITE Town (Gutter Baghicha), Mehmoodabad, and Mauripur. 75% reported in 2022 that Karachi's drainage system overflows or backs up, the highest percentage of all major Pakistani cities. Parts of the city's drainage system overflow on average 2\u20137 times per month, flooding some city streets.\nHouseholds in Orangi self-organized to set-up their own sewerage system under the Orangi Pilot Project, a community service organization founded in 1980. 90% of Orangi streets are now connected to a sewer system built by local residents under the Orangi Pilot Project. Residents of individual streets bear the cost of sewerage pipes, and provide volunteer labour to lay the pipe. Residents also maintain the sewer pipes, while the city municipal administration has built several primary and secondary pipes for the network. As a result of OPP, 96% of Orangi residents have access to a latrine.\nThe Sindh Solid Waste Management Board (SSWMB) is responsible for the collection and disposal of solid waste, not only in Karachi but throughout the whole province. Karachi has the highest percentage of residents in Pakistan who report that their streets are never cleaned\u00a0\u2013 42% of residents in Karachi report their streets are never cleaned, compared to 10% of residents in Lahore. Only 17% of Karachi residents reporting daily street cleaning, compared to 45%\nin Lahore. 69% of Karachi residents rely on private garbage collection services, with only 15% relying on municipal garbage collection services. 53% of Karachi residents in a 2022 survey reported that the state of their neighbourhood's cleanliness was either \"bad\" or \"very bad\". compared to 35% in Lahore, and 16% in Multan.\nElectricity.\nThe one and only electricity providing company in Karachi is K-Electric. It was government owned but was privatised in 2019. Government still has some shares. However HUBCO is an Independent Power Producer (IPP) that owns few major powerplants.\nKarachi mostly gets electricity from oil, gas and coal powerplants established either on western coastline or Port Qasim Industrial Zone. Most recently built coal powerplants were the 1320MW Port Qasim Powerplant and the 1320MW Hub Coal Powerplant. 3 Nuclear Powerplants on western coastline namely KANUPP (K-1, K-2, K-3) also feed Karachi. Jhimpir, a nearby town has Wind Powerplants of more than 1000MW. This capacity is going to increase in future expansions. Solar Parks are envisioned to be established on western coastline having a starting generation of 1000MW.\n75% of Karachi receives uninterrupted power supply almost throughout the year. 25% areas including industrial areas suffer with up to 6 hours of power outages everyday due to energy generation deficit. Power outages increase further in Peak-summer and Monsoon season (May to August). Many slums and unregulated areas are not yet electrified hence they indulge in electricity theft which is locally called Kunda-System.\nPolice, Ambulance, Firefighting.\nPolice is under the control of provincial government and city government has no authority over it. Ambulance is run by private hospitals or NGOs, the most famous of which are Edhi, Chhipa and JDC. Firefighting is under control of local government and has enough firefighters and vehicles to work quickly during fire. Less than 1% of all firefighters in Pakistan are women.\nEducation.\nDistricts literacy rate (10 years and above).\nAccording to 2023 Census of Pakistan, Central is the most literate district among all the districts of Karachi and Sindh. Following is the literacy rate of 10 years and above population of the seven districts of Karachi:\nPrimary and secondary.\nKarachi's primary education system is divided into five levels: primary (grades one through five); middle (grades six through eight); high (grades nine and ten, leading to the Secondary School Certificate); intermediate (grades eleven and twelve, leading to a Higher Secondary School Certificate); and university programs leading to graduate and advanced degrees. Karachi has both public and private educational institutions. Most educational institutions are gender-based from primary to intermediate. Universities are mostly co-education.\nSeveral of Karachi's schools, such as St Patrick's High School, St Joseph's Convent School and St Paul's English High School, are operated by Christian churches, and are among Pakistan's most prestigious schools.\nHigher.\nKarachi is home to several major public universities. Karachi's first public university's date from the British colonial era. The Sindh Madressatul Islam founded in 1885, was granted university status in 2012. Establishment of the Sindh Madressatul Islam was followed by the establishment of the D. J. Sindh Government Science College in 1887, and the institution was granted university status in 2014. The Nadirshaw Edulji Dinshaw University of Engineering and Technology (NED), was founded in 1921, and is Pakistan's oldest institution of higher learning. The Dow University of Health Sciences was established in 1945, and is now one of Pakistan's top medical research institutions.\nThe University of Karachi, founded in 1951, is Pakistan's largest university with a student population of 24,000. The Institute of Business Administration (IBA), founded in 1955, is the oldest business school outside of North America and Europe, and was set up with technical support from the Wharton School and the University of Southern California. The Dawood University of Engineering and Technology, which opened in 1962, offers degree programmes in petroleum, gas, chemical, and industrial engineering. The Pakistan Navy Engineering College (PNEC), operated by the Pakistan Navy, is associated with the National University of Sciences and Technology (NUST) in Islamabad.\nKarachi is also home to numerous private universities. The Aga Khan University, founded in 1983, is Karachi's oldest private educational institution, and is one of Pakistan's most prestigious medical schools. The Indus Valley School of Art and Architecture was founded in 1989, and offers degree programmes in arts and architectural fields. Hamdard University is the largest private university in Pakistan with faculties including Eastern Medicine, Medical, Engineering, Pharmacy, and Law. The National University of Computer and Emerging Sciences (NUCES-FAST), one of Pakistan's top universities in computer education, operates two campuses in Karachi. Bahria University (BU) founded in 2000, is one of the major general institutions of Pakistan with their campuses in Karachi, Islamabad and Lahore offers degree programs in Management Sciences, Electrical Engineering, Computer Science and Psychology. Sir Syed University of Engineering and Technology (SSUET) offers degree programmes in biomedical, electronics, telecom and computer engineering. Karachi Institute of Economics &amp; Technology (KIET) has two campuses in Karachi. The Shaheed Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto Institute of Science and Technology (SZABIST), founded in 1995 by former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto, operates a campus in Karachi. Other names include:\nHealthcare.\nKarachi is a centre of research in biomedicine with at least 30 public hospitals, 80 registered private hospitals and 12 recognized medical colleges, including the Indus Hospital, Lady Dufferin Hospital, Karachi Institute of Heart Diseases, National Institute of Cardiovascular Diseases, Civil Hospital, Combined Military Hospital, PNS Rahat, PNS Shifa, Aga Khan University Hospital, Liaquat National Hospital, Jinnah Postgraduate Medical Centre, Holy Family Hospital and Ziauddin Hospital. In 1995, Ziauddin Hospital was the site of Pakistan's first bone marrow transplant.\nKarachi municipal authorities in 2017 launched a new early warning system that alerted city residents to a forecasted heatwave. Previous heatwaves had routinely claimed lives in the city, but implementation of the warning system was credited for no reported heat-related fatalities. During the 2020-2021 COVID-19 pandemic, vaccines were available in all major hospitals.\nEntertainment, tourism and culture.\nShopping malls.\nKarachi is home to Pakistan and South Asia's largest shopping mall, Lucky One Mall which hosts more than two hundred stores. According to TripAdvisor the city is also home to Pakistan's favorite shopping mall, Dolmen Mall, Clifton which was also featured on CNN. In 2023, another mega mall/entertainment complex named 'Mall of Karachi' situated at the bottom of Pakistan's tallest skyscraper Bahria Icon Tower will be opened.\nMuseums and galleries.\nMajor landmarks in Karachi include several important museums. The National Museum of Pakistan and Mohatta Palace exhibit a rich collection of artwork, while the city boasts several private art galleries. Additionally, Karachi features the Pakistan Airforce Museum, the Pakistan Maritime Museum and the country's first interactive science centre, the MagnifiScience Centre. Wazir Mansion, the birthplace of Pakistan's founder Muhammad Ali Jinnah has also been preserved as a museum open to the public. Quaid-e-Azam House, the residence of Muhammad Ali Jinnah's residence, also serves as a museum showcasing his furniture and other belongings. Other museums include TDF Ghar and the State Bank of Pakistan Museum &amp; Art Gallery.\nTheatre and cinema.\nKarachi is home to some of Pakistan's important cultural institutions. The National Academy of Performing Arts, located in the former Hindu Gymkhana, offers diploma courses in performing arts including classical music and contemporary theatre. Karachi is home to groups such as Thespianz Theater, a professional youth-based, non-profit performing arts group, which works on theatre and arts activities in Pakistan.\nThough Lahore was considered to be home of Pakistan's film industry, Karachi is home to Urdu cinema and Kara Film Festival annually showcases independent Pakistani and international films and documentaries.\nBambino Cinema, Capri Cinema, Cinepax Cinema, Cinegold Plex Cinema (Bahria Town), Mega Multiplex Cinema (Millennium Mall), Nueplex Cinema (Askari-4), Atrium Mall Cinema (Sadar) are some of the most popular cinemas in Karachi.\nMusic.\nThe All Pakistan Music Conference, linked to the 45-year-old similar institution in Lahore, has been holding its annual music festival since its inception in 2004. The National Arts Council (\"Koocha-e-Saqafat\") has musical performances and mushaira.\nSocial issues.\nCrime and Lawlessness.\nSometimes stated to be amongst the world's most dangerous cities, the extent of violent crime in Karachi is not as significant in magnitude as compared to other cities. According to the Numbeo Crime Index 2014, Karachi was the 6th most dangerous city in the world. By the middle of 2016, Karachi's rank had dropped to 31 following the launch of anti-crime operations. By 2018, Karachi's ranking has dropped to 50. In 2021, Karachi's ranking fell to 115. In 2022, the ranking fell further to 128th place, ranking Karachi safer than regional cities such as Dhaka (56th place), Delhi (90th place), and Bangalore (122nd place).\nThe city's large population results in high numbers of homicides with a moderate homicide rate. Karachi's homicide rates are lower than many Latin American cities, and in 2015 was 12.5 per 100,000\u00a0\u2013 lower than the homicide rate of several American cities such as New Orleans and St. Louis. The homicide rates in some Latin American cities such as Caracas, Venezuela and Acapulco, Mexico are in excess of 100 per 100,000 residents, many times greater than Karachi's homicide rate. In 2016, the number of murders in Karachi had dropped to 471, which had dropped further to 381 in 2017.\nIn the late 1980s and early 1990s, Karachi was rocked by political conflict while crime rates drastically increased with the arrival of weaponry from the War in Afghanistan. Several of Karachi's criminal mafias became powerful during a period in the 1990s described as \"the rule of the mafias.\" Major mafias active in the city included land mafia, water tanker mafia, transport mafia and a sand and gravel mafia. Karachi's highest death rates occurred in the mid-1990s. In 1995, 1,742 killings were recorded, with a maximum of 15 killings in a single day.\nKarachi Operation by Pakistan Rangers.\nKarachi had become widely known for its high rates of violent crime, but rates sharply decreased following a controversial crackdown operation against criminals, the MQM political party, and Islamist militants initiated in 2013 by the Pakistan Rangers. In 2015, 1,040 Karachiites were killed in either acts of terror or other crime\u00a0\u2013 an almost 50% decrease from the 2,023 killed in 2014, and an almost 70% decrease from the 3,251 recorded killed in 2013\u00a0\u2013 the highest ever recorded number in Karachi history. Violent crime like target killings, kidnappings for ransom or extortion, burning or torturing to death, drugs and weapons smuggling decreased sharply after 2015. Street crime still remains high like snatching of cash, phones, motorcycles and cars on gunpoint.\nWith 650 homicides in 2015, Karachi's homicide rate decreased by 75% compared to 2013. In 2017, the number of homicides had dropped further to 381. Extortion crimes decreased by 80% between 2013 and 2015, while kidnappings decreased by 90% during the same period. By 2016, the city registered a total of 21 cases of kidnap for ransom. Terrorist incidents dropped by 98% between 2012 and 2017, according to Pakistan's Interior Ministry. As a result of the Karachi's improved security environment, real-estate prices in Karachi rose sharply after 2015, with a rise in business for upmarket restaurants and caf\u00e9s.\nEthnic and Linguistic conflict.\nInsufficient affordable housing infrastructure to absorb growth has resulted in the city's diverse migrant populations being largely confined to ethnically homogeneous neighbourhoods. The 1970s saw major labour struggles in Karachi's industrial estates. Violence originated in the city's university campuses, and spread into the city. Conflict was especially sharp between MQM party and ethnic Sindhis, Pashtuns, and Punjabis. The party and its vast network of supporters were targeted by Pakistani security forces as part of the controversial Operation Clean-up in 1992, as part of an effort to restore peace in the city that lasted until 1994. The ethnic conflicts kept going between linguistic groups until the late 2010s and are no more extreme.\nPoor infrastructure.\nUrban planning and service delivery have not kept pace with Karachi's growth, resulting in the city's low ranking on livability rankings. The city has no cohesive transportation policy and inadequate transport, though up to 1,000 new vehicles are added daily to the city's congested streets. Roads and streets are broken at many places but are not repaired in timely manner.\nPollution.\nAs a large metropolitan area, Karachi has many sources of pollution. Alongside air, water and noise pollution, waste management is a challenge due to solid trash not disposed to dedicated dumping sites.\nWater pollution.\nLastly there is water pollution in Lyari and Malir rivers as gutters directly open into these rivers. These rivers than directly go into Arabian sea untreated. So sewerage and industrial wastewater is directly being thrown into Indian Ocean hence polluting it and destroying marine life under the sea. 3 waste water treatment plants exist but are all dysfunctional.\nKarachi's sewage system is overwhelmed and in disrepair, and sewage commonly gets into the city's water lines. Thousands of hospitalisations each year are attributed to sewage contamination in Karachi's drinking water, and there are annual cholera outbreaks in the city. As of 2011, half of all middle-class children in Karachi have intestinal parasites attributed to poor water quality.\nUrban flooding in monsoon season.\nSize of Drainage system and storm water drains (locally known as Naalahs) in the city is not enough to handle the heavy rainfalls of monsoon. The drainage system and storm water drains are also filled with solid trash. When water finds no path, it enters streets, roads, underpasses and even houses during rainfall in July and August of every year. Major Naalahs like Orangi Naalah, Gujjar Naalah, Mehmoodabad Naalah are cleaned every year by government but are polluted by people the next day.\nFlooding hinders connectivity of different areas of the city specially Landhi and Korangi. Floods have caused drown or electric shocks related deaths as well.\nArchitecture.\nKarachi has a collection of buildings and structures of varied architectural styles. The downtown districts of Saddar and Clifton contain early 20th-century architecture, ranging in style from the neo-classical KPT building to the Sindh High Court Building. Karachi acquired its first neo-Gothic or Indo-Gothic buildings when Frere Hall, Empress Market and St. Patrick's Cathedral were completed. The Mock Tudor architectural style was introduced in the Karachi Gymkhana and the Boat Club. Neo-Renaissance architecture was popular in the 19th century and was the architectural style for St. Joseph's Convent (1870) and the Sind Club (1883). The classical style made a comeback in the late 19th century, as seen in Lady Dufferin Hospital (1898) and the Cantt. Railway Station. While Italianate buildings remained popular, an eclectic blend termed Indo-Saracenic or Anglo-Mughal began to emerge in some locations.\nThe local mercantile community began acquiring impressive structures. Zaibunnisa Street in the Saddar area (known as Elphinstone Street in British days) is an example where the mercantile groups adopted the Italianate and Indo-Saracenic style to demonstrate their familiarity with Western culture and their own. The Hindu Gymkhana (1925) and Mohatta Palace are examples of Mughal revival buildings. The Sindh Wildlife Conservation Building, located in Saddar, served as a Freemasonic Lodge until it was taken over by the government. There are talks of it being taken away from this custody and being renovated and the Lodge being preserved with its original woodwork and ornate wooden staircase.\nIndus Valley School of Art and Architecture is one of the prime examples of Architectural conservation and restoration where an entire Nusserwanjee building from Kharadar area of Karachi has been relocated to Clifton for adaptive reuse in an art school. The procedure involved the careful removal of each piece of timber and stone, stacked temporarily, loaded on the trucks for transportation to the Clifton site, unloaded and re-arranged according to a given layout, stone by stone, piece by piece, and completed within three months.\nArchitecturally distinctive, even eccentric, buildings have sprung up throughout Karachi. Notable example of contemporary architecture include the Pakistan State Oil Headquarters building. The city has examples of modern Islamic architecture, including the Aga Khan University hospital, Grand Jamia Mosque, Masjid e Tooba, Faran Mosque, Baitul Mukarram Mosque, Quaid's Mausoleum, and the Textile Institute of Pakistan. One of the unique cultural elements of Karachi is that the residences, which are two- or three-story townhouses, are built with the front yard protected by a high brick wall. I. I. Chundrigar Road features a range of tall buildings. The most prominent examples include the Habib Bank Plaza, UBL Tower, PRC Towers, PNSC Building and MCB Tower. Newer skyscrapers are being built in Clifton. At least 50 150m+ buildings were underconstruction in 2022.\nSports.\nCricket.\nCricket's history in Pakistan predates the creation of the country in 1947. The first ever international cricket match in Karachi was held on 22 November 1935 between Sindh and Australian cricket teams. The match was seen by 5,000 Karachiites. Karachi is also the place that innovated tape ball, a safer and more affordable alternative to cricket.\nThe inaugural first-class match at the National Stadium was played between Pakistan and India on 26 February 1955 and since then Pakistani national cricket team has won 20 of the 41 Test matches played at the National Stadium. The first One Day International at the National Stadium was against the West Indies on 21 November 1980, with the match going to the last ball.\nThe national team has been less successful in such limited-overs matches at the ground, including a five-year stint between 1996 and 2001, when they failed to win any matches. The city has been host to a number of domestic cricket teams including Karachi, Karachi Blues, Karachi Greens, and Karachi Whites. The National Stadium hosted two group matches (Pakistan v. South Africa on 29 February and Pakistan v. England on 3March), and a quarter-final match (South Africa v. West Indies on 11 March) during the 1996 Cricket World Cup.\nRafi Cricket Stadium under construction in Bahria Town would soon become the largest cricket stadium in Pakistan with a capacity of 50,000+ spectators.\nFootball.\nLyari, a neighbourhood in Karachi, holds an important place in Pakistan's football landscape due to its historical and cultural ties to the sport. Dating back several decades, Lyari has been a consistent source of football talent, contributing significantly to the national sports scene. One notable aspect is the nickname \"Little Brazil\" often associated with Lyari.\nIn its early years, football in Pakistan was mainly concentrated to Balochistan and the locality of Lyari, from where majority of players of the Pakistan national football team were recruited mainly in the 1960s, which is often regarded as the early Golden Age of Pakistani football. Notable players during this period include Abdul Ghafoor, nicknamed the \"Pakistani Pel\u00e9\" and \"Black Pearl of Pakistan\", Muhammad Umer, Moosa Ghazi, Abid Ghazi, Turab Ali, Ali Nawaz Baloch, among others. The Kakri Ground and People's Football Stadium, which is one of the major football stadiums in the country are located in the city. In 2005, the city hosted the 2005 SAFF Championship at the Peoples Football Stadium, as well as the Geo Super Football League in 2007, which attracted capacity crowds during the games.\nOther sports.\nWhen it comes to sports Karachi has a distinction, because some sources cite that it was in 1877 at Karachi in (British) India, where the first attempt was made to form a set of rules of badminton and likely place is said to be Frere Hall.\nKarachi has hosted seven editions of the National Games of Pakistan, most recently in 2007.\nThe popularity of golf is increasing, with clubs in Karachi like Dreamworld Resort, Bahria Town Golf Club, Hotel &amp; Golf Club, Arabian Sea Country Club, DA Country &amp; Golf Club. The city has facilities for field hockey (Hockey Club of Pakistan, UBL Hockey Ground), boxing (KPT Sports Complex), squash (Jahangir Khan Squash Complex), and polo. There are marinas and boating clubs. National Bank of Pakistan Sports Complex is First-class cricket venue and Multi-purpose sports facility in Karachi.\nTwin towns and sister cities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17124", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17124", "title": "Katharine of Aragon", "text": ""}
{"id": "17125", "revid": "23228310", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17125", "title": "Kerguelen Islands", "text": "French-administered sub-Antarctic archipelago\nThe Kerguelen Islands ( or ; in French commonly ' but officially ', ), also known as the Desolation Islands (\"\" in French), are a group of islands in the sub-Antarctic region. They are among the most isolated places on Earth, with the closest territory being the Heard Island and McDonald Islands territory of Australia located at roughly , and the nearest inhabited territory being Madagascar at more than in distance. The islands, along with Ad\u00e9lie Land, the Crozet Islands, Amsterdam and Saint Paul islands, and France's Scattered Islands in the Indian Ocean, are part of the French Southern and Antarctic Lands and are administered as a separate district.\nThe islands constitute one of the two exposed parts of the Kerguelen Plateau (the other being Heard Island and the McDonald islands), a large igneous province mostly submerged in the southern Indian Ocean. The main island, Grande Terre, is in area, about three-quarters of the size of Corsica, and is surrounded by a further 300 smaller islands and islets, forming an archipelago of . The climate is harsh and chilly with frequent high winds throughout the year. The surrounding seas are generally rough and they remain ice-free year-round. There are no indigenous inhabitants, but France maintains a permanent presence of 45 to 100 soldiers, scientists, engineers, and researchers. There are no airports on the islands, so all travel to and from the outside world is by ship.\nHistory.\nDiscovery.\nBefore being officially catalogued in 1772, the Kerguelen Islands appear as the \"Ile de Nachtegal\" on Philippe Buache's 1754 map of the islands of the Southern Ocean. It is possible this early name was after Abel Tasman's ship \"De Zeeuwsche Nachtegaal\". On the Buache map, \"Ile de Nachtegal\" is located at 43\u00b0S, 72\u00b0E, about 6\u00b0 north and 2\u00b0 east of the actual location of Grande Terre.\nThe islands were officially discovered by the French navigator Yves-Joseph de Kerguelen-Tr\u00e9marec on 12 February 1772. The next day, Charles de Boisguehenneuc landed and claimed the island for the French crown. Yves de Kerguelen organised a second expedition in 1773 and arrived at the \"baie de l'Oiseau\" by December\u00a01773. On 6\u00a0January 1774 he commanded his lieutenant, Henri Pascal de Rochegude, to leave a message notifying any passers-by of the two passages and of the French claim to the islands.\nThereafter, a number of expeditions briefly visited the islands, including the third voyage of Captain James Cook in December\u00a01776. Cook verified and confirmed the passage of de Kerguelen by discovering and annotating the message left by the French navigator, calling it \"Kerguelen Land\" in his honor. Cook nonetheless claimed the islands for the British Empire.\nSealing era and further exploration.\nSoon after its discovery, the archipelago was regularly visited by whalers and sealers (mostly British, American, and Norwegian) who hunted the resident populations of whales and seals to the point of near extinction, including fur seals in the 18th century and elephant seals in the 19th\u00a0century. The sealing era lasted from 1781 to 1922 during which time 284 sealing visits are recorded, nine of which ended when the vessel was wrecked.167 Modern industrial sealing, associated with whaling stations, occurred intermittently between 1908 and 1956. Since the end of the whaling and sealing era, most of the islands' species have been able to increase their population again. Relics of the sealing period include try pots, hut ruins, graves and inscriptions.167\nIn 1800, the spent eight months sealing and whaling around the islands. During this time Captain Robert Rhodes, her master, prepared a chart of the islands. That vessel returned to London in April 1801 with 450\u00a0tons of sea elephant oil.\nIn 1825, the British sealer John Nunn and three crew members from \"Favourite\" were shipwrecked on Kerguelen until they were rescued in 1827 by Captain Alexander Distant during his hunting campaign.\nThe islands were not completely surveyed until the Ross expedition of 1840.\nThe Australian James Kerguelen Robinson (1859\u20131914) was the first human born south of the Antarctic Convergence, on board the sealing ship \"Offley\" in Gulf of Morbihan (Royal Sound then), Kerguelen Island on 11 March 1859.\nIn 1874\u20131875, British, German, and U.S. expeditions visited Kerguelen to observe the transit of Venus. For the 1874 transit, George Biddell Airy of the U.K. Royal Observatory organised and equipped five expeditions to different parts of the world. Three of these were sent to the Kerguelen Islands and led by Stephen Joseph Perry, who set up his main observation station at Observatory Bay and two auxiliary stations, one at Thumb Peak led by Sommerville Goodridge, and the second at Supply Bay, led by Cyril Corbet. Observatory Bay was also used by the German Antarctic Expedition, led by Erich Dagobert von Drygalski in 1902\u20131903. In January\u00a02007, an archaeological excavation was carried out at this site.\nIn 1877 the French started a coal mining operation, but soon abandoned it.\nReoccupation.\nIn the early 1890s, French brothers Ren\u00e9-\u00c9mile and Henri Bossi\u00e8re lobbied the French government to re-assert its original claim to Kerguelen, believing it would make it a suitable area for sheep farming similar to their previous operations in Patagonia. France sent the aviso \"Eure\", under Commander Louis \u00c9douard Paul Lieutard, to the area and on 1 January 1893 formally claimed the island for a second time, which received international recognition and was not contested by the British Empire. The French government granted the Bossi\u00e8re brothers a 50-year lease over the island for the purposes of establishing a sheep-farming colony, although no settlement was attempted until 1908.\nIn 1901, following the federation of the British colonies in Australia, the new Australian federal government unsuccessfully lobbied the British government to acquire the Kerguelen Islands from France for strategic purposes. The Australian government viewed the islands' natural harbours as suitable for naval operations and believed that the islands could support a colony based around farming, fishing and mining. The British government ultimately rejected the proposal in August 1901, as it did not believe negotiations with France would be successful and did not consider that the islands posed a strategic threat.\nIn 1908, the French explorer Raymond Rallier du Baty made a privately funded expedition to the island. His autobiographical account of the adventure (\"15,000 Miles in a Ketch\". Thomas Nelson and Sons: London, 1917) describes the months that he spent surveying the island and hunting seals to finance his expedition.\nIn 1924, it was decided to administer the Kerguelen Islands, the islands of Amsterdam and St. Paul, and the Crozet Archipelago (in addition to that portion of Antarctica claimed by France and known as Ad\u00e9lie Land) from Madagascar; as with all Antarctic territorial claims, France's possession on the continent is held in abeyance until a new international treaty is ratified that defines each claimant's rights and obligations.\nThe German auxiliary cruiser called at Kerguelen during December\u00a01940. During their stay the crew performed maintenance and replenished their water supplies. This ship's first fatality of the war occurred when a sailor, Bernhard Herrmann, fell while painting the funnel. He is buried in what is sometimes referred to as \"the southernmost German war grave\" of World War II.\nKerguelen has been continually occupied since 1950 by scientific research teams, with a population of 50 to 100 personnel frequently present. There is also a French satellite tracking station.\nUntil 1955, the Kerguelen Islands were administratively part of the French Colony of Madagascar and Dependencies. That same year, they collectively became known as ' (French Southern and Antarctic Lands) and were administratively part of the French '. In 2004 they were permanently transformed into their own entity (keeping the same name) but having inherited another group of five very remote tropical islands, \"\", which are also ruled by France and are dispersed around the island of Madagascar.\nGrande Terre.\nThe main island of the archipelago is called \"\". It measures east to west and north to south.\nPort-aux-Fran\u00e7ais, a scientific base, is along the eastern shore of the Gulf of Morbihan on La Grande Terre. Facilities there include scientific-research buildings, a satellite tracking station, dormitories, a hospital, a library, a gymnasium, a pub, and the chapel of Notre-Dame des Vents.\nThe highest point is Mont Ross in the Gallieni Massif, which rises along the southern coast of the island and has an elevation of . The Cook Ice Cap (), France's largest glacier with an area of about , lies on the west-central part of the island. Overall, the glaciers of the Kerguelen Islands cover just over . Grande Terre has also numerous bays, inlets, fjords, and coves, as well as several peninsulas and promontories. The most important ones are listed below:\nNotable localities.\nThere are also a number of notable localities, all on La Grande Terre (see also the main map):\nFrom 1968 to 1981, a site just east of Port-aux-Fran\u00e7ais was a launching site for sounding rockets, some for French (Dragon rockets), American (Arcas) or French-Soviet (Eridans) surveys, but at the end mainly for a Soviet program (M-100).\nIslands.\nThe following is a list of the most important adjacent islands:\nEconomy.\nPrincipal activities on the Kerguelen Islands focus on scientific research, mostly earth sciences and biology.\nThe former sounding rocket range to the east of Port-aux-Fran\u00e7ais is currently the site of a SuperDARN radar.\nSince 1992, the French Centre National d'\u00c9tudes Spatiales (CNES) has operated a satellite and rocket tracking station, located east of Port-aux-Fran\u00e7ais. CNES needed a tracking station in the Southern Hemisphere, and the French government required that it be located on French territory, rather than in a populated, but foreign, place like Australia or New Zealand.\nAgricultural activities were limited until 2007 to raising sheep (about 3,500\u00a0Bizet sheep, a breed that is rare in mainland France) on Longue Island for consumption by the occupants of the base, as well as small quantities of vegetables in a greenhouse within the immediate vicinity of the main French base. There are also feral rabbits and sheep that can be hunted, as well as wild birds.\nThere are also five fishing boats and vessels, owned by fishermen on R\u00e9union Island (a \"department\" of France about north) who are licensed to fish within the archipelago's exclusive economic zone.\nGeology.\nThe Kerguelen Islands form an emerged part of the submerged Kerguelen Plateau, which has a total area nearing . The plateau was built by volcanic eruptions associated with the Kerguelen hotspot, and now lies on the Antarctic Plate.\nThe major part of the volcanic formations visible on the islands is characteristic of an effusive volcanism, which caused a trap rock formation to start emerging above the level of the ocean 35 million years ago. The accumulation is of a considerable amount; basalt flows, each with a thickness of three to ten metres, stacked on top of each other, sometimes up to a depth of . This form of volcanism creates a monumental relief shaped as stairs of pyramids.\nOther forms of volcanism are present locally, such as the strombolian volcano Mont Ross, and the volcano-plutonic complex on the Rallier du Baty Peninsula. Various veins and extrusions of lava such as trachytes, trachyphonolites, and phonolites are common all over the islands.\nNo eruptive activity has been recorded in historic times, but some fumaroles are still active in the south-west of Grande-Terre island.\nFossilized wood found in the islands has been identified as Araucarians and Cypresses, showing that the islands were once forested with conifers. While an exact date for these wood fragments is unknown, they have been tentatively described as being from the early Cenozoic. The presence of these species may suggest that Kerguelen's prehistoric flora may have been similar to the Antarctic flora found across the southern hemisphere. \nGlaciation caused the depression and tipping phenomena which created the gulfs at the north and east of the archipelago. Erosion caused by the glacial and fluvial activity carved out the valleys and fjords; erosion also created conglomerate detrital complexes, and the plain of the Courbet Peninsula.\nThe islands are part of a submerged microcontinent called the Kerguelen Subcontinent. The microcontinent emerged substantially above sea level for three periods between 100 million years ago and 20 million years ago. The Kerguelen Subcontinent may have had tropical flora and fauna about 50 million years ago. It finally sank 20 million years ago and is now below sea level. Kerguelen's sedimentary rocks are similar to ones found in Australia and India, indicating they were all once connected. Scientists hope that studying the Kerguelen Subcontinent will help them discover how Australia, India, and Antarctica broke apart.\nClimate.\nKerguelen Islands from space, 2016\nKerguelen's climate is oceanic, cold, and extremely windswept. Under the K\u00f6ppen climate classification, Kerguelen's climate is considered to be an \"ET\" or tundra climate, which is technically a form of polar climate, as the average temperature in the warmest month is below . Comparable climates include the Aleutian Islands, Campbell Island (New Zealand), Iceland, northern Kamchatka Peninsula (Russia), Labrador (Canada), and Wollaston Islands (Chile).\nAll climate readings come from the Port-aux-Fran\u00e7ais base, which has one of the more favourable climates in Kerguelen because of its proximity to the coast and its location in a gulf sheltered from the wind.\nThe average annual temperature is with an annual range of around . The warmest months of the year include January and February, with average temperatures between . The coldest month of the year is August with an average temperature of . Annual high temperatures rarely surpass , while temperatures in winter have never been recorded below at sea level.\nKerguelen receives frequent precipitation, with snow throughout the year as well as rain. Port-aux-Fran\u00e7ais receives a modest amount of precipitation ( per annum) compared to the west coast which receives an estimated three times as much precipitation per year.\nThe mountains are frequently covered in snow but can thaw very quickly in rain. Over the course of several decades, many permanent glaciers have shown signs of retreat, with some smaller ones having disappeared completely.\nThe west coast receives almost continuous wind at an average speed of because the islands are between the Roaring Forties and the Furious Fifties. Wind speeds of are common and can even reach .\nWaves up to high are common, but there are many sheltered places where ships can anchor.\nFlora and fauna.\nThe islands are part of the Southern Indian Ocean Islands tundra ecoregion that includes several subantarctic islands. Plant life is mainly limited to grasses, mosses, and lichens, although the islands are also known for the indigenous, edible Kerguelen cabbage, a good source of vitamin C to mariners. The main indigenous animals are insects along with large populations of ocean-going seabirds, seals, and penguins.\nThe wildlife is particularly vulnerable to introduced species; one particular problem has been cats. The main island is the home of a well-established feral cat population, descended from ships' cats. They survive on sea birds and the feral rabbits that were introduced to the islands. There are also populations of wild sheep (\"Ovis orientalis orientalis\") and reindeer.\nIn the 1950s and 1960s, French geologist Edgar Albert de la Rue began to introduce several species of salmonids. Of the seven species introduced, only brook trout \"Salvelinus fontinalis\" and brown trout \"Salmo trutta\" survived to establish wild populations.\nIn popular culture.\nThe islands appear in a number of fictional works:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17127", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17127", "title": "Koresponda Servo", "text": ""}
{"id": "17128", "revid": "14596827", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17128", "title": "Koenigsberg", "text": ""}
{"id": "17129", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17129", "title": "Kahl\u00faa", "text": "Coffee-flavoured liqueur\nKahl\u00faa () is a brand of coffee liqueur owned by the Pernod Ricard company and produced in Veracruz, Mexico. The drink contains rum, sugar, and arabica coffee.\nHistory.\nPedro Domecq began producing Kahl\u00faa in 1936. It was named Kahl\u00faa, meaning 'House of the Acolhua people' in the Veracruz Nahuatl language. Jules Berman was the first importer of the liqueur to the United States, earning him the nickname \"Mr. Kahlua\".\nThe company merged in 1994 with Allied Lyons to become Allied Domecq. In turn, that company was partially acquired in 2005 by Pernod Ricard, the largest spirits distributor in the world since its merger with the Swedish Vin &amp; Sprit in March 2008.\nSince 2004, the alcohol content of Kahl\u00faa is 20.0%; earlier versions had 26.5%. In 2002, a more expensive, high-end product called \"Kahl\u00faa Especial\" became available in the United States, Canada and Australia after previously being offered only in duty-free markets. Made with arabica coffee beans grown in Veracruz, Mexico, Kahl\u00faa Especial has an alcohol content of 36%, has a lower viscosity, and is less sweet than the regular version.\nIn 2021, Kahl\u00faa introduced a new bottle design for the United Kingdom and Canada markets. It also reduced the alcohol content to 16% \"to address 'evolving' consumer trends towards conscious drinking and lower-alcohol options\". For the United States market, Kahl\u00faa retains the more traditional bottle design and alcohol content.\nUses.\nKahl\u00faa is used to make cocktails or drink neat or on ice. Some people use it when baking desserts, and/or as a topping for ice cream, cakes, and cheesecakes.\nIt is mixed in several ways, often with different combinations of milk, cream, coffee and cocoa.\nBecause Kahl\u00faa is made from coffee beans, it contains caffeine. According to the company, \"Kahl\u00faa contains about 100ppm caffeine, which means about 100mg/litre of product. So, for a standard 1.5oz [45ml] drink of Kahl\u00faa there would be about 5mg of caffeine. Just to put it in perspective, an 8oz [240ml] brewed coffee can contain up to about 200mg of caffeine.\"\nKahl\u00faa is a key ingredient in several notable cocktails:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAwards.\nKahl\u00faa and Kahl\u00faa Especial have received accolades from international spirit ratings organizations. The San Francisco World Spirits Competition awarded the Kahl\u00faa Especial three silver medals between 2005 and 2007 and a bronze in 2009. The Beverage Testing Institute gave the Especial a score of 85 in 2007.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17130", "revid": "82432", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17130", "title": "Kelsey Grammer", "text": "American actor (born 1955)\nAllen Kelsey Grammer (born February 21, 1955) is an American actor. He gained fame for his role as the psychiatrist Dr. Frasier Crane on the NBC sitcom \"Cheers\" (1984\u20131993) and its spin-off \"Frasier\" (1993\u20132004, and again from 2023 to 2024). With more than 20 years on air, this is one of the longest-running roles played by a single live-action actor in primetime television history. He has received numerous accolades including a total of six Emmy Awards, three Golden Globe Awards, a Screen Actors Guild Award and a Tony Award.\nGrammer, having trained as an actor at Juilliard and the Old Globe Theatre, made his professional acting debut as Lennox in the 1981 Broadway revival of \"Macbeth\". The following year, he portrayed Cassio acting opposite Christopher Plummer and James Earl Jones in \"Othello\". In mid-1983, he acted alongside Mandy Patinkin in the original off-Broadway production of Stephen Sondheim's musical \"Sunday in the Park with George\". He has since starred in the leading roles in productions of \"\", \"My Fair Lady\", \"Big Fish\", and \"Finding Neverland\".\nIn film, he is known for his role as Dr. Hank McCoy / Beast in the superhero films ' (2006), ' (2014) and \"The Marvels\" (2023). His other roles include \"Down Periscope\" (1996), \"The Pentagon Wars\" (1998), and \"Swing Vote\" (2008). He is also known for his voice roles in \"Anastasia\" (1997), \"Toy Story 2\" (1999), and as Sideshow Bob in \"The Simpsons\" (1990\u2013present). He took guest roles in the sitcoms \"30 Rock\" (2010\u20132012), \"Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt\" (2016), and \"Modern Family\" (2017). For his performance as the corrupt mayor in the Starz political series \"Boss\" (2011\u20132012), he received a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor \u2013 Television Series Drama.\nIn early 2010, Grammer returned to Broadway in the musical revival of \"La Cage aux Folles\", where he received a nomination for the Tony Award for Best Leading Actor in a Musical. In mid-2016, Grammer won a Tony Award for Best Musical as producer of a musical revival of \"The Color Purple\". In early 2019, he starred as Don Quixote in a production of \"Man of La Mancha\" at the London Coliseum. In late 2023, \"The Telegraph\" described Grammer as one of \"the finest actors\" of his generation. He was awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame on May 22, 2001.\nEarly life, family and education.\nAllen Kelsey Grammer was born on February 21, 1955 in Saint Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands. Grammer's mother, Sally Cranmer (1928\u20132008), was a dancer who performed under the name of Sally Sullivan. His father, Frank Allen Grammer Jr. was a musician who owned a coffee shop, Greer's Place; and owned and edited a magazine, \"Virgin Islands View\". Kelsey had a younger sister, Karen, and four half-siblings from his father's second marriage.\nGrammer's personal life has been shaped by many family tragedies. Following his parents' divorce, Grammer was raised in New Jersey by his mother and maternal grandparents, Gordon and Evangeline Cranmer. The family later relocated to Pompano Beach, Florida. When Grammer was twelve years old, his grandfather died of cancer. In 1968, his father was murdered in Saint Thomas during a wave of racial violence following the assassination of Martin Luther King Jr. In 1975, his sister was kidnapped, raped, and murdered in Colorado Springs, Colorado, by spree killer Freddie Glenn. In 1980, his two teenage half-brothers died in a scuba diving accident.\nGrammer attended Pine Crest School, a private preparatory school in Fort Lauderdale, Florida. It was there that he first began to sing and perform on stage. Grammer later won a scholarship to study drama at the Juilliard School, where he was a member of Group 6 from 1973 to 1975. However, after his sister's murder, Grammer failed to attend classes and was eventually expelled.\nGrammer described himself as \"a Caribbean kid\", and he enjoys vacationing in the Bahamas, the US Virgin Islands, and British Virgin Islands.\nCareer.\n1977\u20131983: Theatre work and early roles.\nAfter leaving Juilliard, Grammer had a three-year internship with the Old Globe Theatre in San Diego in the late 1970s before a stint in 1980 at the Guthrie Theater in Minneapolis. Grammer acted as the Burglar in the LA production of the George Bernard Shaw play \"Too True to Be Good\" in 1977. In 1980, he starred in the Roundabout Theatre Company's production of \"A Month in the Country\". He made his Broadway debut in 1981 as \"Lennox\" in \"Macbeth\", taking the lead role when Philip Anglim withdrew after receiving negative reviews. Grammer then played Michael Cassio in the 1982 Broadway revival of \"Othello\", alongside Christopher Plummer and James Earl Jones. That same year he portrayed Codename Lazar in the Public Theatre production of the David Hare play \"Plenty\". In 1983, he performed in the demo of the Stephen Sondheim\u2013James Lapine production \"Sunday in the Park with George\", starring Mandy Patinkin.\n1984\u20131993: Breakthrough with \"Cheers\".\nIn 1984, Grammer first appeared as Dr. Frasier Crane in the NBC sitcom \"Cheers\". Grammer's Broadway co-star and former Juilliard classmate, Mandy Patinkin, suggested Grammer to the New York casting director. He was supposed to appear for only six episodes, but ended up as a regular cast member. The character of Frasier first appears in the third season and continues to appear until the final season of the series in May 1993. Frasier Crane also had a crossover appearance in the 1992 \"Wings\" episode \"Planes, Trains, &amp; Visiting Cranes\".\nGrammer has provided the voice of Sideshow Bob on \"The Simpsons\", starting in the 1990 episode \"Krusty Gets Busted\". He won a fifth Emmy Award for his work in the episode \"The Italian Bob\". Bob has appeared in twenty-three episodes of the show, the most recent being 2024's \"The Yellow Lotus\".\nFrom April to June 1992, he played the title role in \"Richard II\", staged at the Mark Taper Forum at the Los Angeles Music Center.\n1993\u20132004: Stardom and acclaim with \"Frasier\".\nIn September 1993, the character became the protagonist of spin-off \"Frasier.\" In the show, Frasier has moved from Boston to Seattle and works as a radio psychiatrist alongside his producer Roz (Peri Gilpin). In addition to starring, Grammer also directed more than 30 episodes, and sang the closing theme \"Tossed Salads and Scrambled Eggs\". In 2001, he negotiated a $700,000-per-episode salary for \"Frasier\". The show was nominated for, and won, numerous awards during its 11-year run, concluding in May 2004. The show met instant success, and received five Primetime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Comedy Series. This record has never been broken, with \"Modern Family\" tying the record. Grammer himself received 10 Primetime Emmy Award nominations for his role in \"Frasier\", winning four times, tying him with Carroll O'Connor, Michael J. Fox and Jim Parsons for the most wins for Primetime Emmy Award for Best Actor in a Comedy Series. His 20-year run playing Dr. Frasier Crane (in both \"Cheers\" and \"Frasier\") ties a length set by James Arness in playing Marshal Matt Dillon on \"Gunsmoke\" from 1955 to 1975, but it was surpassed by Richard Belzer in playing Det. John Munch on ' and ' since 1993. Then, in February 2021, it was announced that Grammer would reprise the character in a revival set to air on the streaming service Paramount+.\nIn 1995, Grammer voiced Dr. Frankenollie in the Mickey Mouse short \"Runaway Brain\", and it was nominated for Academy Award for Best Animated Short Film. He later starred in the lead role as Lt. Commander Thomas \"Tom\" Dodge in the film \"Down Periscope\" (1996), and voiced Vladimir \"Vlad\" Vasilovich in the 20th Century Fox's critically acclaimed animated movie \"Anastasia\" (1997). In 1999, Grammer voiced the main antagonist Stinky Pete in Pixar's Golden Globe Award-winning \"Toy Story 2\" (1999). He also provided voice work for several other animated television series and direct-to-video films, such as \"Barbie of Swan Lake\", \"Bartok the Magnificent\", the title character in the short-lived animated series \"Gary the Rat,\" and the narrator of \"Mickey's Once Upon a Christmas\". He also voiced Dr. Ivan Krank in Disney's \"Teacher's Pet\" (2004). In 2004, he played Ebenezer Scrooge in the musical television film \"A Christmas Carol\".\nGrammer's voice has been featured in many commercials. In 1998, he appeared in a commercial for Honey Nut Cheerios, where he voices the wolf in Little Red Riding Hood. Since 2006, Grammer has provided the voice for television commercials advertising Hyundai. In 2008, Grammer reprised his role of Dr. Frasier Crane in a commercial for Dr Pepper (\"Frasier\" and \"Cheers\" co-star Bebe Neuwirth also reprised her role as Lilith Sternin in the same commercial, albeit in voice only). In 2000, Grammer again played \"Macbeth\" on Broadway, in a production that closed after only 10 days.\n2005\u2013present: Continued acclaim.\nIn 2005, Grammer produced an American adaptation of the British show \"The Sketch Show\", which aired on Fox. The main cast consisted of Malcolm Barrett, Kaitlin Olson, Mary Lynn Rajskub and Paul F. Tompkins, as well as Lee Mack from the British version of the show. Grammer appeared in only short opening and closing segments in each episode. Many of the sketches from the British version were re-created. Only six episodes of the show were made, and it was cancelled after just four of them had aired. In 2007, Grammer starred with Patricia Heaton in the American sitcom \"Back to You\", which Fox cancelled after its first season. His next lead role, ABC's \"Hank\", was cancelled after only five episodes had aired. Grammer later commented, \"Honestly, it just wasn't very funny.\"\nOn April 18, 2010, Grammer made his Broadway musical debut playing the role of Georges in a revival of the Jerry Herman/Harvey Fierstein musical \"La Cage aux Folles\" at the Longacre Theatre. Grammer starred alongside Douglas Hodge for which they both were nominated for Tony Awards for Best Performance by a Leading Actor in a Musical. Grammer was said to have been \"delivering an assured and charming leading turn.\" In 2011 and 2012, Grammer found temporary success in the Starz drama series \"Boss\" as a fictional mayor of Chicago, based on former mayor Richard J. Daley. It premiered in October 2011. It was his first dramatic TV series. At the 2012 Golden Globe Awards Grammer won the award for Best Actor in a Television Series Drama for his role. The show ran for 18 episodes over two seasons. From 2010 to 2012, Grammer guest starred as a comical version of himself in three episodes of the NBC show \"30 Rock\" alongside Jane Krakowski and Jack McBrayer.\nIn 2011, he was originally announced to provide the voice of Henry J. Waternoose III in the prequel to \"Monsters, Inc.\", \"Monsters University\", and he was meant to replace James Coburn, following Coburn's death in 2002. The character, however, got cut from the film.\nIn 2014, Grammer came back to sitcom television when he appeared in \"Partners\" with comedian Martin Lawrence. The Lionsgate-produced show was written and executive produced by Robert L. Boyett and Robert Horn, known for writing hit shows like \"Family Matters\", \"Living Single\", \"Full House\", \"Designing Women\", and \"Perfect Strangers\". Despite this, the show was cancelled after its first season. Later that same year, Grammer starred in several films such as Bonaparte in \"The Expendables 3\" (2014) and as Harold Attinger in \"\" (2014). He appeared as both the narrator and Herod the Great, in the National Geographic TV film \"Killing Jesus.\" In 2015, Grammer and John Lithgow lent their voices to the critically acclaimed documentary \"Best of Enemies\" as William F. Buckley Jr. and Gore Vidal, respectively. The documentary surrounds the events around the televised debates between intellectuals Vidal and Buckley during the 1968 United States presidential election. The film premiered at the 2015 Sundance Film Festival and was shortlisted for the Academy Award for Best Documentary but did not make the final cut.\nIn March 2015, Grammer originated the roles of Charles Frohman and Captain Hook in the Broadway premiere of the musical \"Finding Neverland,\" continuing with the roles through June. In February 2016 he made an appearance in the West End production of \"Big Fish\". In 2016, Grammer won a Tony Award as a producer of \"The Color Purple\". In 2019, Grammer starred as Don Quixote in a production of \"Man of La Mancha\" at the London Coliseum. That same year he starred as Harry Hamilton in the Netflix film \"Like Father\" (2018), alongside Kristen Bell, and as a detective opposite Nicolas Cage in \"Grand Isle\" (2019).\nGrammer reprised his role as Frasier Crane in the 2023 revival of \"Frasier\" on Paramount+. The show was renewed for a second season with Peri Gilpin from the original series returning for a recurring role. Grammer reprised his role as Dr. Hank McCoy / Beast in the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU) film \"The Marvels\" (2023) during an post-credits scene. It was announced in 2025 that Grammer would also reprise the role in the upcoming MCU film \"\" (2026).\nPersonal life.\nGrammer has been married four times, and has eight children and one grandchild, Emmett. His first marriage, to a dance instructor, Doreen Alderman, lasted from 1982 to 1990, although they were separated for the last six years of that period. They have one daughter, the actress Spencer Grammer (born October 9, 1983). Through Spencer, Grammer has one grandson, born on October 10, 2011.\nAfter his divorce from Alderman, Grammer had a daughter, Kandace Greer Grammer (born February 15, 1992), with a hair and makeup stylist, Barrie Buckner. Greer was later a cast member on MTV's show \"Awkward.\"\nHis second marriage, to Leigh-Anne Csuhany in September 1992, lasted one year. When Csuhany was three months pregnant, Grammer filed for an annulment and evicted her from their home; Grammer claimed she was abusive and fired a gun at him. The pregnancy ended in a miscarriage.\nIn 1994, he met 28-year-old Tammi Baliszewski at a bar in Manhattan Beach, California. In December 1994, they appeared together on the cover of \"People\" magazine, announcing their engagement and Grammer's substance abuse problems.\nIn August 1997, Grammer married the dancer and model Camille Donatacci. They met on a blind date in 1996. They have a daughter, Mason, born October 2001, and a son, Jude, born August 2004, both born to a gestational carrier. During their marriage, several of Grammer and Donatacci's homes were featured in magazines, including ones in Malibu (February 2001, \"InStyle\"), Maui (May 2004, \"InStyle\"), Long Island (April 2008, \"InStyle\"), Bachelor Gulch (\"Architectural Digest)\", and Bel Air, Los Angeles (\"Architectural Digest\"). In New York City, they lived at 15 Central Park West. On July 1, 2010, it was announced that Camille had filed for divorce. The pair's divorce was finalized on February 10, 2011.\nOn August 12, 2010, Grammer announced that he was going to be a father to a fifth child, this time with his girlfriend, Kayte Walsh, an English flight attendant 25 years his junior and daughter of the former soccer player Alan Walsh. In October, Grammer announced that Walsh had miscarried six weeks earlier. The couple announced their engagement in December 2010 and married at the Plaza Hotel in New York City on February 25, 2011, two weeks after the dissolution of Grammer's third marriage. Grammer and Walsh have a daughter, born July 2012, and two sons, born July 2014 and November 2016. On January 18, 2023, it was reported that Grammer had purchased a house in his wife's hometown of Portishead, Somerset, England. In June 2025, it was revealed that Walsh is expecting their fourth child together, which will be Grammer\u2019s eighth overall.\nIn 2001, Grammer described himself as religious and believed in God, but he said he does not adhere to any particular religion.\nMurder of Karen Grammer.\nOn July 1, 1975, Grammer's younger sister, 18-year-old Karen Grammer, was raped and murdered by spree killers Freddie Glenn and three other men. Grammer identified his sister's body and informed their mother shortly after. According to Grammer, his bouts of alcoholism and drug abuse were driven, in part, by guilt and depression over his sister's death, as the pair had been close in childhood.\nIn a 2012 interview with Oprah Winfrey, Grammer said he would be willing to forgive the perpetrators if they would take responsibility for the crime, though they all claimed innocence. In the same interview, Grammer expressed his loss of faith for several years after Karen's death. He subsequently forgave Glenn in a 2014 parole hearing after being convinced of Glenn's contrition, but refused to support his release, saying that it would \"be a betrayal of my sister's life\". He named his daughter Spencer Karen Grammer in part for his sister.\nKaren Grammer's murder and the investigation by the Colorado Springs Police Department was the subject of the episode \"Animal Nature\" of the Investigation Discovery series \"Homicide Hunter\".\nGrammer's 2025 book \"Karen: A Brother Remembers\" is about his sister's life and murder, and its effect on his life.\nPolitics.\nGrammer has been a longtime supporter of the Republican Party, and he endorsed the Tea Party movement on economic issues such as small government and lower taxes; \"City A.M.\" described him as \"one of Hollywood's best-known Republicans, a rare spark of red in a blue sea of Democrats\".\nA \"New York\" magazine profile published in 2010 described Grammer as \"pro-choice\". In 2015, however, his wife posted an Instagram photo of Grammer wearing a T-shirt from the anti-abortion group Abort73.\nGrammer has expressed disbelief on the scientific consensus on climate change, comparing the California wildfires to alleged global cooling from his youth and criticized the 2011 and 2018 climate meetings. Additionally, he stated in a 2016 interview with \"The Guardian\" that the person he admired most was Vladimir Putin \"because he is so comfortably who he is\". In 2019, he issued a statement in support of Brexit.\nGrammer has criticized Washington politicians, stating: \"I don't think Washington did us any favors for the last 50, 60 years, I think they've all been sort of the same party, the same bunch of clowns\". He has expressed an interest in some day running for the United States Congress, Mayor of New York City, and the presidency. In an interview with radio talk show host Frank Morano in August 2021, he indicated that he was no longer interested in running for office. Grammer was a guest at President George W. Bush's first inauguration. Grammer endorsed Rudy Giuliani in the 2008 presidential primary and later campaigned for John McCain in the general election. Grammer also promoted RightNetwork, a conservative start-up American television network. He endorsed Michele Bachmann for the Republican nomination for president in 2012. Grammer later endorsed Mitt Romney after he had won the Republican nomination. He initially supported Ben Carson's candidacy for the Republican presidential nomination in 2016, although later stating he would gladly vote for Republican candidate Donald Trump in the upcoming election.\nIn a December 2023 interview with BBC's \"Today\" to promote the new series of \"Frasier\", Grammer confirmed he still supports Trump. Grammer expressed support for Trump again in a May 2025 interview with \"The Times\".\nHealth problems.\nGrammer has a history of substance abuse. In 1988, he was charged with drunk driving and cocaine possession and sentenced to 30 days in jail. In August 1990, Grammer was charged again with cocaine possession and was sentenced to three years' probation, fined $500, and required to perform 300 hours of community service. In January 1991, Grammer was given an additional two years' probation for violating his original probation through additional cocaine use. In September 1996, he crashed his Dodge Viper sports car while intoxicated, and subsequently checked into the Betty Ford Center for 30 days. Grammer's personal problems affected his work. The cast and producers of both \"Frasier\" and \"Cheers\" held interventions to help him; co-star Bebe Neuwirth and writer Ken Levine cited delays with rehearsals and filming due to his erratic behavior. The writer Dan O'Shannon recalled:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He would ooze into the studio, his life all out of sorts. Jimmy would say \"Action,\" and he would snap into Frasier and expound in this very erudite dialogue and be pitch-perfect. And Jimmy would yell \"Cut!\" and he would ooze back into Kelsey\u2014glazed-over eyes, half asleep, going through whatever he was going through. It was the most amazing transformation I'd ever seen.\nGrammer credits his religious faith for helping him confront his personal problems.\nOn May 31, 2008, while paddleboarding with his then-wife Camille in Hawai\u02bbi, Grammer had a heart attack. Their personal assistant, Scott MacLean, was essential in saving his life. Grammer was discharged on June 4, 2008, and was said to be \"resting comfortably\" at his Hawaii residence. Seven weeks after the attack, Grammer told \"Entertainment Tonight\" that, although his spokesman described the attack as mild, it was more severe as his heart had stopped. Grammer thought Fox's decision to cancel his television sitcom \"Back to You\" contributed to his health problems, saying: \"It was a very stressful time for me, and a surprise that it was cancelled. But you know, everything that doesn't kill us\u2014which it almost did\u2014makes us stronger!\"\nLegal issues.\nIn 1988, Grammer was arrested for possession of one-quarter gram of cocaine, after being pulled over in a traffic stop for driving with expired plates in North Hollywood, California. A year earlier, he had been arrested for a DUI in Van Nuys, California, and would go on to serve 14 days of a 30-day sentence. Grammer later served 10 days of community service after failing to comply with the requirements of his parole in 1990. Later in the same year, Grammer was sentenced to 90 days of house arrest, ordered to pay a $500 fine, underwent drug and alcohol abuse counseling, and performed 300 hours of community service for his 1988 cocaine possession case.\nIn 1995, Grammer was accused of having sex with his child's underage babysitter. A grand jury chose not to indict the actor, stating: \"The young woman's delay of more than a year in pressing charges against Mr. Grammer made it difficult to support her claim.\" Grammer released a statement shortly afterward, saying: \"I have said from the outset that there was no basis for the allegations.\" In 1996, Grammer's ex-girlfriend, Cerlette Lamme, sued him for defamation of character and invasion of privacy over content he included in his autobiography \"So Far...\".\nIn 1998, Grammer filed a lawsuit against Internet Entertainment Group (IEG), which Grammer claimed had stolen from his home a videotape of him in bed with a woman. IEG counter-sued Grammer, denying it was in possession of such a tape, and Grammer's suit was dropped. IEG President Seth Warshavsky later said, \"We have been presented with another Kelsey Grammer tape. But we have no plans to air it. We are still evaluating it at this time.\"\nAwards and nominations.\nGrammer has won many awards and accolades, particularly for \"Frasier\". He was the first American actor to be nominated for multiple Emmy awards for portraying the same character on three different television shows: \"Cheers\", \"Frasier\", and \"Wings\". In 2010, Grammer received his first Tony Award nomination for Best Actor in a Musical for his performance in \"La Cage Aux Folles\" opposite Douglas Hodge. He later won the Best Revival of a Musical, as a producer for \"The Color Purple,\" in 2016. In 2001, he was presented with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for television. He received a nomination from the Directors Guild of America Award in 1999, for directing the \"Frasier\" episode \"Merry Christmas, Mrs. Moskowitz\". At the Golden Globes, he has received nine nominations and won three, two for \"Frasier\" and one for \"Boss\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17131", "revid": "25046916", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17131", "title": "Kemerovo", "text": "City in Kemerovo Oblast, Russia\nKemerovo (Russian: , ) is an industrial city and the administrative center of Kemerovo Oblast, Russia, located at the confluence of the Iskitimka and Tom Rivers, in the major coal mining region of the Kuznetsk Basin. Population: \u2009(2021 census); \u2009(2010 census); \u2009(2002 census); \u2009(1989 Soviet census)&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe city was known as \"Shcheglovsk\" until 27 March 1932.\nHistory.\nKemerovo is an amalgamation of, and successor to, several older Russian settlements. A waypoint named Verkhotomsky \"ostrog\" was established nearby in 1657 on a road from Tomsk to Kuznetsk fortress. In 1701, the settlement of Shcheglovsk was founded on the left bank of the Tom. Soon it became a village. By 1859, seven villages existed where modern Kemerovo is now: Shcheglovka (or Ust-Iskitimskoye), Kemerovo (named in 1734), Yevseyevo, Krasny Yar, Kur-Iskitim (Pleshki), Davydovo (Ishanovo), and Borovaya. In 1721, coal was discovered in the area. The first coal mines were established in 1907, later a chemical plant was established in 1916. By 1917, the population of Shcheglovo had grown to around 4,000\u00a0people.\nThe area's further development was boosted by the construction of a railway between Yurga and Kolchugino (now Leninsk-Kuznetsky) with a connection between Topki and Shcheglovo. Shcheglovo was granted town status on 9 May 1918, which is now considered to be the date of Kemerovo's founding; and was later known as Shcheglovsk. The town became the central location for the Kuzbass Autonomous Industrial Colony which was established there in 1921. 650 workers from 20 countries settled there and set up what became the Kemerovo Coke Chemical Plant. Some of their descendants visited the modern factory in 2011.\nOn 27 May 1932, Shcheglovsk was renamed Kemerovo and became the administrative center of Kemerovo Oblast in 1943.\nIn 1997, a memorial stone to those executed during the Great Terror was set up on the wasteland of the closed Yagunovskaya mine by the Memory (Pamyat) history club of School No 50.\nIn 2018, 60 people were killed by a fire in a shopping mall. In 2022, at least 20 people were killed by a fire in a nursing home.\nEtymology.\nThe city was named after the village of Kemerovo, named after the surname of the first settlers of the Kemerovs. The ending \"ovo\" suggests a toponymic transition through a personal name. The village gave its name to the Kemerovo mine that arose under it. In 1925, the city of Scheglovsk was formed from two neighboring villages Kemerovo and Scheglovo, which in 1932 was renamed to Kemerovo after the name of the mine. According to others, the name is based on the Turkic word \"kemer\", meaning \"cliff, coast\". The inhabitants of the city are called: Kemerovochanin, Kemerovochanka, Kemerovochane.\nAdministrative and municipal status.\nThe Administrative divisions of Kemerovo is consisted of five districts;\nKemerovo is the administrative center of the oblast and, within the framework of administrative divisions, it also serves as the administrative center of Kemerovsky District, even though it is not a part of it. As an administrative division, it is incorporated separately as Kemerovo City Under Oblast Jurisdiction\u2014an administrative unit with a status equal to that of the districts. As a municipal division, Kemerovo City Under Oblast Jurisdiction is incorporated as Kemerovsky Urban Okrug.\nPolitics.\nCouncil of People's Deputies.\nThe Kemerovo City Council of People's Deputies is a representative body of power comprising 36 deputies. The term of office of deputies is five years.\nOn 13 March 2011, elections to the Council of People's Deputies were held, following which the seats in the council were distributed as follows: 31 - United Russia, 2 - A Just Russia, and 2 - Patriots of Russia. Grigory Verzhitsky, a representative of United Russia and a deputy from the 16th constituency of Kemerovo, was elected chairman. At the sixty-eighth meeting of the Kemerovo City Council, Verzhitsky's resignation as chairman was accepted at his own request. Since 2017, the city council has been headed by Nikolai Senchurov. Since 2021, the council has been headed by Yuri Andreyev.\nEconomy.\nThe industrialization of Kemerovo was driven and underpinned by coal mining and by the heavy industry based on the availability of coal. It remains an important industrial city, built up during the Soviet period, with important steel, aluminum and machinery based manufacturing plants along with chemical, fertilizer, and other manufacturing industries. Since the disintegration of the Soviet Union, the city's industries have experienced a severe decline, creating high levels of unemployment. Major companies based in the city include Siberian Business Union.\nTransportation.\nPublic transport.\nThe public transport network of Kemerovo consists of 70 city bus routes (including 6 seasonal), 63 suburban (including 35 seasonal), 53 public taxi routes (including 2 seasonal), 5 tram, and 9 trolleybus routes.\n686 transport units enter the streets of the city every day, including:\nThe fare in public transport is 20 rubles, in express buses - 21 rubles, in fixed-route taxis - 22 rubles (as of 24 March 2019). Free Wi-Fi was used in all Kemerovo trams to attract passenger traffic.\nOn 6 June 2024, one person was killed and over 140 injured when a tram ran away after apparently suffering a brake failure. Two people were arrested and accused of allowing a disabled tram to operate.\nAir transportation.\nThe city is served by Kemerovo International Airport that reside to the south-east of the city. It has one runway with artificial turf of class B that is long. The airport is named after the Russian cosmonaut Alexei Leonov, a native of Kuzbass. There are two bus routes to the airport - 101 and 126.\nRailway transportation.\nKemerovo is linked to western Russia by a branch of the Trans-Siberian Railway and has the Kemerovo Railway station.\nEducation.\nSix higher education institutions are located in Kemerovo: Kemerovo State University, Kuzbass State Technical University, Kemerovo Institute of Food Industry (University), Kemerovo State Medical Academy, Kemerovo State Institute of Culture and Kemerovo Agricultural Institute.\nSport.\nThe public interest for bandy is widespread in Russia. 26,000 watched the opening game of the 2011\u201312 Russian Bandy League when local club Kuzbass played against Dynamo Moscow and Kuzbass is among the very best in the Russian Bandy League. The 2007 Bandy World Championship was held in the city. Female bandy only exists in a few places in Russia. Now Kemerovo is about to start it up. Moscow already had two multi-use indoor arenas where bandy can be played. Kemerovo got the first one in Russia specifically built for bandy (today also Khabarovsk and Ulyanovsk have it). Kuzbass plays the matches in the league at Khimik Stadium because of the big public interest. That arena has a capacity of 32000. As it also is equipped with artificial ice, Kemerovo has the best infrastructure for developing bandy in Russia.\nSince 2013 there has been a \"bandy on boots\" tournament for national diasporas living in Kuzbass.\nThe Kuzbass Kemerovo motorcycle speedway team regularly participated in the Soviet Union Championship from 1968 through to 1992. After the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the team disbanded. However, the team won the silver medal in 1988 and the bronze medal in 1986 and 1987. Occasional ice speedway is held on the Mototrack Rosto DOSAAF at ().\nClimate.\nKemerovo's position gives it a humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Dfb\") with warm summers and long, severely cold winters. Its average temperatures vary from in January to in July. It has fairly low precipitation of around annually.\nCity symbols.\nCoat of arms.\nThe heraldic description of the coat of arms of the city of Kemerovo is the following: in the crossed scarlet and black field, there is a narrow golden belt in the form of two diverging heads of grain ears, behind them there is a golden cogwheel that goes down; there is a silver retort in the middle, its neck tilted to the right.\nThe figures of the coat of arms of the city of Kemerovo symbolize the historically established main directions of the industrial development of the city:\nThe colors used in the coat of arms symbolize:\nFlag.\nThe flag of the city of Kemerovo is based on the city's coat of arms and repeats its symbolism. It is a rectangular double-sided panel with a width to length ratio of 2:3. It displays figures from the coat of arms of the city of Kemerovo. The colors used are red, black, yellow, and white.\nEmblem.\nThe emblem of Kemerovo displays the monument of Mikhailo Volkov, the discoverer of coal in the area. The sculpture of Mikhailo Volkov displayed on the pedestal fragment styled like a rock. Behind the monument, there is a black triangle that symbolizes a spoil tip. The inscription of the city's name (\"\u041a\u0435\u043c\u0435\u0440\u043e\u0432\u043e\" in Russian) resides on the diagonal from the left bottom side of the triangle. In the black part of the triangle, the year of the foundation of the city is displayed - \"1918\".\nNumismatics.\nIn 2018 Bank of Russia issued into circulation the commemorative silver coin in denomination of 3 rubles \"Centenary of the Foundation of Kemerovo\" which displays the statue of Mikhailo Volkov.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nKemerovo is twinned with:\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "17132", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17132", "title": "Kiswahili versus Swahili", "text": ""}
{"id": "17133", "revid": "96751", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17133", "title": "Channels of the Hawaiian Islands", "text": "Names of the channels of water between the Hawaiian Islands\nIn an archipelago like the Hawaiian Islands the water between islands is typically called a \"channel\" or \"passage\". Described here are the channels between the islands of Hawai\u02bbi, arranged from northwest to southeast.\nKaulakahi Channel.\nThe Kaulakahi Channel separates the islands of Ni\u02bbihau and Kaua\u02bbi. It is wide. Kaulakahi translates to \"the single flame (streak of color).\"\nKa\u02bbie\u02bbie Waho Channel.\nThe Ka\u02bbie\u02bbie Waho Channel, also called the Kaua\u02bbi Channel, separates the islands of Kaua\u02bbi and O\u02bbahu, at a distance of . Ka\u02bbie\u02bbie Waho means \"Outer Ka\u02bbie\u02bbie,\" named after the \u02bbie\u02bbie vine (\"Freycinetia arborea\"). The maximum depth of the channel is over .\nKaiwi Channel.\nThe Kaiwi Channel (also known as the Molokai Channel) separates the islands of O\u02bbahu and Moloka\u02bbi, and is wide. Maximum depth is . \"Ka Iwi\" means \"the bone.\" There are annual paddleboarding and outrigger canoe paddling contests which traverse this channel; swimming the channel is one of the seven challenges in the Oceans Seven open water swimming series.\nKalohi Channel.\nThe Kalohi Channel is the stretch of water separating L\u0101na\u02bbi and Moloka\u02bbi. Depth of water in this channel is about and width is . This is one of the less treacherous channels between islands in the archipelago, although strong winds and choppy sea conditions are frequent. Kaiolohia Beach on the L\u0101na\u02bbi coast is also known as \"Shipwreck Beach\" because of a wreck on the reef there. Kalohi means \"the slowness.\"\nPailolo Channel.\nThe Pailolo Channel separates the islands of Moloka\u02bbi and Maui. Some at its narrowest, it is one of the windiest and roughest in the Hawaiian Islands.\n\u02bbAu\u02bbau Channel.\nThe \u02bbAu\u02bbau Channel is one of the most protected areas of ocean in the Hawaiian Islands, lying between L\u0101na\u02bbi and Maui. The channel is also protected by Moloka\u02bbi to the north, and Kaho\u02bbolawe to the south. The depth of the channel reaches , and its width is . \u02bbAu\u02bbau channel is a whale-watching center in the Hawaiian Islands. Humpback whales migrate approximately from Alaskan waters each autumn and spend the northern hemisphere winter months in the protected waters of the channel.\n\u02bbAu\u02bbau translates to \"to take a bath,\" referring to its calm bath-like conditions.\nKealaikahiki Channel.\nThe Kealaikahiki Channel is the channel between L\u0101na\u02bbi and Kaho\u02bbolawe. It literally means \"the road to Tahiti\", both figuratively and literally, as Tahiti lies generally southward of its orientation. Known informally as the \"Tahiti Express\" for its strength in that direction.\n\u02bbAlal\u0101keiki Channel.\nThe \u02bbAlal\u0101keiki Channel separates the islands of Kaho\u02bbolawe and Maui, at a distance of . \u02bbAlal\u0101keiki means \"crying baby.\"\n\u02bbAlenuih\u0101h\u0101 Channel.\nThe \u02bbAlenuih\u0101h\u0101 separates the island of Hawai\u02bbi and the island of Maui. The maximum depth of this channel is , and the channel is wide. There is a significant wind funnel effect in the channel, which is subject to scientific investigations. \u02bbAlenuih\u0101h\u0101 means \"great billows smashing.\"`Alenuih\u0101h\u0101 is more correctly literally translated to `Ale = cresting, rippling, to form waves; nui = big, large; h\u0101h\u0101 = to breathe or blow hard\nMinor channels and alternate names.\nLahaina Roads.\nThe middle of the \u02bbAu\u02bbau channel off Lahaina is known as the Lahaina Roads. Once filled with whalers when Lahaina was a capital for that industry, Lahaina Roads were later adopted as an alternate anchorage for the main U.S. Pacific Fleet based at Pearl Harbor. However, Lahaina was not used, and the bulk of the fleet remained moored in Pearl Harbor. The Roads are still a common moorage for oceangoing cruise ships and naval vessels of many flags, including the U.S., whose passengers and crews add to the tourists visiting the island.\nKumukahi Channel.\nThe Kumukahi Channel separates the islands of Ni\u02bbihau and Lehua. Kumukahi means \"first beginning\".\nHo\u02bbomo\u02bba Channel.\nThe Ho\u02bbomo\u02bba Channel separates the islands of Lehua and N\u012bhoa. Ho\u02bbomo\u02bba means \"to cook\".\nHawai\u02bbiloa Channel.\nThe Hawai\u02bbiloa Channel to the northwest of the islands of N\u012bhoa. Named after Hawai\u02bbiloa, hero of an ancient Hawaiian legend about the settling of the Hawaiian Islands.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17134", "revid": "29725077", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17134", "title": "Kemp Town", "text": "19th-century residential estate in Brighton\nKemp Town Estate, also known as Kemp Town, is a 19th-century Regency architecture residential estate in the east of Brighton in East Sussex, England. It consists of Arundel Terrace, Lewes Crescent, Sussex Square, Chichester Terrace, and the Kemp Town Enclosures (the gardens). The estate was conceived and financed by Thomas Read Kemp, designed by Charles Busby and Amon Henry Wilds, and constructed by Thomas Cubitt. Work began in 1823 and it was completed in 1855. It has given its name to the larger Kemptown region of Brighton.\nHistory.\nKemp Town Estate was designed by Charles Busby and Amon Henry Wilds and constructed by Thomas Cubitt. Building work started in 1823 on Arundel Terrace, Chichester Terrace, Lewes Crescent and Sussex Square. Chichester Terrace incorporated the earlier Chichester House. In 1837 Thomas Kemp fled the country to escape his creditors. The project continued under Cubitt with the support of the Fifth Earl of Bristol. It was completed in 1855, with Sussex Square larger than London's Grosvenor Square and at the time the biggest housing crescent in Britain. The original estate is a good example of Regency architecture.\nThe gardens which form Sussex Square and Lewes Crescent, separated by Eastern Road, are known formally as the Kemp Town Enclosures. Work began on the Enclosures in 1823. Early works led by Henry Philips included the landscaping of the gardens and the addition of a tunnel to the esplanade.\nAt around the same time, Brighton's neighbour Hove was expanding on the western boundary of Brighton, with the development of the Brunswick Estate which featured similar though smaller Regency-style properties, and its own market, police station, riding school and (as in Kemp Town) small mews streets for staff housing.\nModern times.\nIt has given its name to the larger Kemptown region of Brighton. The majority of the original estate is now demarcated by the modern Kemp Town Conservation Area as defined by the local authority, Brighton and Hove City Council.\nThe Enclosures are owned communally by the freeholders of the 105 houses which make up the Kemp Town Estate.\nBelow and to the east of Kemp Town, at beach level, is now Brighton Marina, and Black Rock the site of a former lido.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17135", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17135", "title": "Kentucky Derby", "text": "American stakes race for Thoroughbreds, part of the Triple Crown\nThe Kentucky Derby () is an American Grade I stakes race run at Churchill Downs in Louisville, Kentucky. The race is run by three-year-old Thoroughbreds at a distance of . Colts and geldings carry and fillies .\nHeld annually on the first Saturday in May, the Derby is the first leg of the Triple Crown. It is preceded by the two-week-long Kentucky Derby Festival. The race is known as \"The Run for the Roses\", as the winning horse is draped in a blanket of roses. Lasting approximately two minutes, the Derby has been alternately called \"The Most Exciting Two Minutes in Sports\", \"The Fastest Two Minutes in Sports\", or \"The Greatest Two Minutes in Sports\", coined by Churchill Downs president Matt Winn. At least two of these descriptions are thought to be derived from the words of sportswriter Grantland Rice, when in 1935 he said \"Those two minutes and a second or so of derby running carry more emotional thrills, per second, than anything sport can show.\"\nThe race was first run in 1875. Unlike the other, older races of the Triple Crown\u2014the Preakness Stakes and the Belmont Stakes\u2014along with the Travers Stakes (the oldest comparable stakes race in the US), the Kentucky Derby and its sibling race, the Kentucky Oaks, have been run every year since inception. They were twice rescheduled within the same year, the first time due to World War II in 1945, and the second time due to the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020. The Derby and the Oaks are the oldest major sporting events in the US held annually since their beginning. Among thoroughbred stakes races, they are the oldest that have been held annually on the same track every year.\nThe Derby is the most-watched and most-attended horse race in the United States. The 151st running took place on Saturday, May 3, 2025.\nHistory.\nIn 1872, Col. Meriwether Lewis Clark Jr., grandson of William Clark of the Lewis and Clark Expedition, traveled to England, visiting Epsom in Surrey where The Derby had been running annually since 1780. From there, Clark went on to Paris where a group of racing enthusiasts had formed the French Jockey Club in 1863. They had organized the Grand Prix de Paris at Longchamp, which at the time was the greatest race in France. Returning home to Kentucky, Clark organized the Louisville Jockey Club and Driving Park Association to raise money for building quality racing facilities just outside the city. First known as the Louisville Jockey Club grounds, seven years later the track was commonly referred to as Churchill Downs, named for John and Henry Churchill, who provided the land for the racetrack. The naming went official in 1937.\nThe Kentucky Derby was first run at &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1+1\u20442 miles (12 furlongs; 2.4\u00a0km) the same distance as the Epsom Derby, before changing lengths in 1896 to its current &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1+1\u20444 miles (10 furlongs; 2\u00a0km). On May 17, 1875, in front of an estimated crowd of 10,000 people, a field of 15 three-year-old horses contested the first Derby. Under jockey Oliver Lewis, a colt named Aristides, who was trained by future Hall of Famer Ansel Williamson, won the inaugural Derby. Later that year, Lewis rode Aristides to a second-place finish in the Belmont Stakes.\nIn these early decades, Black jockeys were very influential at the Derby. Horses, including race horses, had been cared for, trained and exercised by Blacks in the ante-bellum slave-holding states and this expertise laid the groundwork for future racing standards. Jockeying was seen as activity unsuitable for Whites during that era and in the decades after the Civil War when it was becoming lucrative. Black jockeys dominated the Derby in all the years before 1894, except for one. In 1886 the track, which had been successful, ran into financial difficulties when a protracted, gambling-related horseman boycott removed it from the upper echelons of racing until just after the turn of the 20th century. In 1894 the New Louisville Jockey Club was incorporated with new capital and improved facilities. The rise of on-track betting and increasing audience sizes brought larger purse sizes, and this began to attract White jockeys to the profession. White jockeys on tracks everywhere began to use violence to attack and intimidate Black jockeys and the horses they rode. This caused horse owners to stop hiring Black jockeys. Though they were consistent Derby winners, Black jockeys began to disappear from the Derby after 1894. Jimmy Winkfield was the last Black jockey to win the derby and Black jockeys were gone by 1911. But they had instituted innovations now universal in the sport. Willie Simms won the Derby in 1896 and 1898 on the shortened stirrups he evolved from those used by Black jockeys before him. After his racing career, Oliver Lewis began collecting and analyzing racing data, developing a system very much like the ones used today.\nInitially a successful venue, the track ran into financial difficulties due to a protracted, gambling-related horseman boycott removing it from the upper echelons of racing that would last until just after the turn of the 20th century. In 1894 the New Louisville Jockey Club was incorporated with the new capital and improved facilities. Despite this, the business floundered until 1902, when a syndicate led by Col. Matt Winn of Louisville acquired the facility. Under Winn, Churchill Downs prospered, and the Kentucky Derby then became the preeminent stakes race for three-year-old thoroughbred horses in North America.\nThoroughbred owners began sending their successful Derby horses to compete in two other races. These two are the Preakness Stakes at the Pimlico Race Course, in Baltimore, and the Belmont Stakes in Elmont, New York. The three races offered large purses, and in 1919, Sir Barton became the first horse to win all three races. However, the term \"Triple Crown\" did not come into use for another eleven years. In 1930, when Gallant Fox became the second horse to win all three races, sportswriter Charles Hatton brought the phrase into American usage. Fueled by the media, public interest in the possibility of a \"superhorse\" that could win the Triple Crown began in the weeks leading up to the Derby. Two years after the term went in use, the race (until that time ran in mid-May since inception) changed the date to the first Saturday in May. This change allows for a specific schedule for the Triple Crown races. Since 1931, the order of Triple Crown races has been the Kentucky Derby first, followed by the Preakness Stakes and then the Belmont Stakes. Before 1931, eleven times the Preakness was run before the Derby. On May 12, 1917, and again on May 13, 1922, the Preakness and the Derby took place on the same day. On eleven occasions the Belmont Stakes was run before the Preakness Stakes, and in 2020, the Belmont was run first, then the Kentucky Derby, and the Preakness Stakes last.\nOn May 16, 1925, the first live radio broadcast of the Kentucky Derby aired on WHAS as well as on WGN in Chicago. On May 7, 1949, the first television coverage of the Kentucky Derby took place, produced by WAVE-TV, the NBC affiliate in Louisville. This coverage was aired live in the Louisville market and sent to NBC as a kinescope newsreel recording for national broadcast. On May 3, 1952, the first national television coverage of the Kentucky Derby took place, aired from then-CBS affiliate WHAS-TV. In 1954, the purse exceeded US$100,000 for the first time. In 1968, Dancer's Image became the first horse to win the race and then face disqualification. A urine test revealed traces of phenylbutazone (an anti-inflammatory painkiller drug) inside Dancer's Image. Forward Pass won after a protracted legal battle by the owners of Dancer's Image (which they lost). Forward Pass thus became the eighth winner for Calumet Farm. Unexpectedly, the regulations at Kentucky thoroughbred race tracks were changed some years later, allowing horses to run on phenylbutazone. In 1970, Diane Crump became the first female jockey to ride in the Derby, finishing 15th aboard Fathom.\nThe fastest time ever run in the Derby was in 1973 at 1:59.4 minutes, when Secretariat broke the record set by Northern Dancer in 1964. Also during that race, Secretariat did something unique in Triple Crown races: for each successive quarter run, his times were faster. Although the races do not record times for non-winners, in 1973 Sham finished second, two and a half lengths behind Secretariat in the same race. Using the thoroughbred racing convention of one length equaling one-fifth of a second to calculate Sham's time, he also finished in under two minutes. Another sub-two-minute finish, only the third, was set in 2001 by Monarchos at 1:59.97, the first year the race used hundredths of seconds instead of fifths in timing.\nIn 2005, the purse distribution for the Derby changed, so that horses finishing fifth would henceforth receive a share of the purse; previously only the first four finishers did so.\nThe Kentucky Derby began offering $3 million in purse money in 2019. Churchill Downs officials have cited the success of historical race wagering terminals at their Derby City Gaming facility in Louisville as a factor behind the purse increase. The Derby first offered a $1 million purse in 1996; it was doubled to $2 million in 2005.\nIn 2020, the Derby was postponed from May 2 to September 5 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. This was the second time in history the race had been postponed, the other being in 1945. Churchill Downs used a new singular 20-stall starting gate for the 2020 Kentucky Derby, replacing the previous arrangement that used a standard 14-stall gate and an auxiliary six-stall gate. The old setup contributed to congestion at the start of the race, especially in the gap between the two gates.\nRich Strike, a reserve who only made it into the final field after a late scratching, won the race in 2022 at final odds of 80:1 and parimutuel betting payouts were even larger.\nIn January 2024, the purse for the Kentucky Derby was increased to $5 million.\nAttendance.\nMillions of people from around the world bet at various live tracks and online sportsbooks. In 2017, a crowd of 158,070 watched Always Dreaming win the Derby, making it the seventh biggest attendance in the history of the racetrack. The track reported a wagering total of $209.2 million from all the sources on all the races on the Kentucky Derby Day program. It was a 9% increase compared to the total of $192.6 million in 2016 and an increase of 8% over the previous record set in 2015 of $194.3 million. TwinSpires, a platform for betting online and a partner of the Kentucky Derby and the Breeders' Cup, recorded $32.8 million in handle on the Churchill Down races for the Kentucky Derby Day program. This record was a 22% increase over the preceding year. On the Kentucky Derby race alone, the handle of TwinSpires was $20.1 million, which is a 22% rise compared to the prior year.\nThe race often draws celebrities. HM Queen Elizabeth II, on a visit to the United States, joined the racegoers at Churchill Downs in 2007.\nSponsorship.\nThe 2004 Kentucky Derby marked the first time that jockeys\u2014as a result of a court order\u2014were allowed to wear corporate advertising logos on their clothing.\nNorman Adams has been the designer of the Kentucky Derby Logo since 2002. On February 1, 2006, the Louisville-based fast-food company Yum! Brands, Inc. announced a corporate sponsorship deal to call the race \"The Kentucky Derby presented by Yum! Brands.\" In 2018, Woodford Reserve replaced Yum! Brands as the presenting sponsor.\nThe Swiss watchmaker Longines is the official sponsor timekeeper of the Kentucky Derby.\nTraditions.\nIn addition to the race itself, several traditions play a significant role in the Derby atmosphere. The mint julep\u2014an iced drink consisting of bourbon, mint, and sugar syrup\u2014is the traditional beverage of the race. The historic beverage comes served in an ice-frosted silver julep cup. However, most Churchill Downs patrons sip theirs from souvenir glasses (first offered in 1939 and available in revised form each year since) printed with all previous Derby winners. Also, burgoo, a thick stew of beef, chicken, pork, and vegetables, is a popular Kentucky dish served at the Derby.\nThe infield\u2014a spectator area inside the track\u2014offers general admission prices but little chance of seeing much of the race, particularly before the jumbotron installation in 2014. Instead, revelers show up in the infield to party with abandon. By contrast, \"Millionaire's Row\" refers to the expensive box seats that attract the rich, the famous and the well-connected. Women appear in elegant outfits lavishly accessorized with large, elaborate hats. Following the Call to the Post played on bugle by Steve Buttleman, as the horses start to parade before the grandstands, the University of Louisville Cardinal Marching Band plays Stephen Foster's \"My Old Kentucky Home\" sung by the University of Louisville Cardinal Singers, except 2020 when the song is played on bugle by Steve Buttleman. This song is a tradition which began in 1921. The event attracts spectators from a large area, flying in hundreds of private aircraft to Louisville International Airport.\nThe Derby is frequently referred to as \"The Run for the Roses\", because a lush blanket of 554 red roses is awarded to the Kentucky Derby winner each year. New York sports columnist and future Churchill Downs president Bill Corum in 1925 began describing the race thusly, but the tradition originated in 1883 when New York City socialite E. Berry Wall presented roses to ladies at a post-Derby party. The Churchill Downs founder and president, Col. Meriwether Lewis Clark Jr., attended that event. This gesture is believed to have led Clark to the idea of making the rose the race's official flower. However, it was not until 1896 that any recorded account referred to draping roses on the Derby winner. The Governor of Kentucky and the Chairman of Churchill Downs Incorporated present the garland and the Kentucky Derby Trophy to the winner. Pop vocalist Dan Fogelberg composed the song \"Run for the Roses\", released in time for the 1980 running of the race.\nRiders Up!\n\"Riders Up!\" is the traditional command from the Paddock Judge for jockeys to mount their horses in advance of the upcoming race. Since 2012, the grand marshal recites this phrase.\nGrand marshals\nFestival.\nIn the weeks preceding the race, numerous activities took place for the Kentucky Derby Festival. Thunder Over Louisville\u2014an airshow and fireworks display\u2014generally begins the festivities in earnest two weeks before the Derby.\nRecords.\nHorse records.\nSecretariat set the record for speed in 1973 with a time of 1:59.4. During its first two decades when the Derby was run at &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1+1\u20442 miles, the record was 2:34.5, set by Spokane in 1889.\nThe largest margin of victory is 8 lengths, a feat tied by four different horses: Old Rosebud in 1914, Johnstown in 1939, Whirlaway in 1941, and Assault in 1946.\nThe highest odds of a winning horse were 91 to 1 for Donerail in 1913. The second-highest odds occurred in 2022, when Rich Strike went off at 80 to 1 and won the race.\nThree horses have won the Kentucky Derby without competing as a two-year-old: Apollo (1882), Justify (2018), and Mage (2023).\nJockey records.\n107 jockeys have won the Kentucky Derby, with 27 doing so multiple times. Isaac Murphy (1890\u201391), Jimmy Winkfield (1901\u201302), Ron Turcotte (1972\u201373), Eddie Delahoussaye (1982\u201383), Calvin Borel (2009\u201310), and Victor Espinoza (2014\u201315) are the only jockeys to win the Derby in back-to-back years. Borel is the only jockey with three wins in a four-year span (2007, '09, '10).\nTrainer records.\n116 trainers have won the Kentucky Derby, with 19 doing so multiple times. Six trainers have won the Derby in back-to-back years: Herbert J. Thompson (1932\u201333), Ben Jones (1948\u201349), Jimmy Jones (1957\u201358), Lucien Laurin (1972\u201373), D. Wayne Lukas (1995\u201396), and Bob Baffert (1997\u201398).\nOwner records.\nSeventeen owners have won the Kentucky Derby multiple times with horses they fully or partially owned.\n\"Oaks/Derby Double\".\nJockeys, trainers, and owners competing in the Kentucky Derby often will compete in the Kentucky Oaks, a race for fillies held the day before the Derby. Winning both these races in the same year is referred to as an \"Oaks/Derby Double;\" 8 jockeys, 3 trainers, and 5 owners have accomplished this feat:\nWinners.\nTriple Crown winners are in bold and highlighted with gold.\n&amp;num; Designates a filly.\n\u2020 Designates a horse that won American Horse of the Year in the same year they won the Derby.\n\u2021 Designates a horse that was inducted in subsequent years into the National Racing Hall of Fame.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSire lines.\nWinners of the Kentucky Derby can be connected to each other due to the practice of arranging horse breeding based on their previous success. All of the horses can be traced back to the three foundational sires, with Godolphin Arabian the ancestor of 7 winners, Byerley Turk the ancestor of 11 winners, and Darley Arabian the ancestor of 133 winners, including all winners since 1938.\nThe Into Mischief direct sire line has produced 4 of the last 6 Kentucky Derby winners.\nDarley Arabian line.\n\"See Kentucky Derby winners descended from the Darley Arabian for an illustration.\"\nThe Darley Arabian (1700c) sire line (all branched through the Eclipse (1764) line) produced 133 Derby winners (125 colts, 5 geldings, 3 fillies), including all winners from 1938 to present. The main branches of this sire line are:\nByerley Turk line.\nThe Byerley Turk (1680c) sire line produced 11 winners (8 colts, 3 geldings). The main branches of this sire (all branched through the Herod (1758) line) are:\nGodolphin Arabian line.\n\"See Kentucky Derby winners descended from the Godolphin Arabian for an illustration.\"\nThe Godolphin Arabian (1724c) sire line produced 7 winners (6 colts, 1 gelding). The main branches of this sire (all branched through the West Australian (1850) line) are:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17136", "revid": "639298", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17136", "title": "Keypal", "text": ""}
{"id": "17138", "revid": "635492", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17138", "title": "Keyword", "text": "Keyword may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "17139", "revid": "39166520", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17139", "title": "FX-87", "text": "FX-87 is a polymorphic typed functional language based on a system for static program analysis in which every expression has two static properties: a type and an effect. In a study done by MIT, FX-87 yields similar performance results as functional languages on programs that do not contain side effects (Fibonacci, Factorial). FX-87 did yield a great performance increase when matching DNA sequences.\nKFX is the kernel language of FX-87. It was described in 'Polymorphic Effect Systems', J.M. Lucassen et al., \"Proceedings of the 15th Annual ACM Conference POPL\", ACM 1988, pp.\u00a047\u201357.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17140", "revid": "43744280", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17140", "title": "Katal", "text": "SI derived unit of catalytic activity\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nThe katal (symbol: kat) is a unit of the International System of Units (SI) used for quantifying the catalytic activity of enzymes (that is, measuring the enzymatic activity level in enzyme catalysis) and other catalysts. One katal is that catalytic activity that will raise the rate of conversion by one mole per second in a specified assay system.\nThe unit \"katal\" is not attached to a specified measurement procedure or assay condition, but any given catalytic activity is: the value measured depends on experimental conditions that must be specified. Therefore, to define the quantity of a catalyst in katals, the \"catalysed rate of conversion\" (the rate of conversion in presence of the catalyst minus the rate of spontaneous conversion) of a defined chemical reaction is measured in moles per second. One katal of trypsin, for example, is that amount of trypsin which breaks one mole of peptide bonds in one second under the associated specified conditions.\nDefinition.\nOne katal refers to an amount of enzyme that gives a catalysed rate of conversion of one mole per second. Because this is such a large unit for most enzymatic reactions, the nanokatal (nkat) is used in practice.\nformula_1\nThe katal is not used to express the rate of a reaction; that is expressed in units of concentration per second, as moles per liter per second. Rather, the katal is used to express catalytic activity, which is a property of the catalyst.\nHistory.\nThe General Conference on Weights and Measures and other international organizations recommend use of the katal. It replaces the non-SI enzyme unit of catalytic activity. The enzyme unit is still more commonly used than the katal, especially in biochemistry. The adoption of the katal has been slow.\nOrigin.\nThe name \"katal\" has been used for decades. The first proposal to make it an SI unit came in 1978, and it became an official SI unit in 1999. The name comes from the Ancient Greek \u03ba\u03b1\u03c4\u03ac\u03bb\u03c5\u03c3\u03b9\u03c2 (\"katalysis\"), meaning \"dissolution\"; the word \"catalysis\" itself is a Latinized form of the Greek word.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17141", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17141", "title": "Kgbvax", "text": ""}
{"id": "17142", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17142", "title": "Kh", "text": ""}
{"id": "17143", "revid": "13518729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17143", "title": "Koala", "text": "Arboreal herbivorous marsupial native to Australia\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe koala (Phascolarctos cinereus), sometimes inaccurately called the koala bear, is an arboreal herbivorous marsupial native to Australia. It is the only extant representative of the family \"Phascolarctidae\". Its closest living relatives are the wombats. The koala is found in coastal areas of the continent's eastern and southern regions, inhabiting Queensland, New South Wales, Victoria, and South Australia. It is easily recognisable by its stout, tailless body and large head with round, fluffy ears and large, dark nose. The koala has a body length of and weighs . Its fur colour ranges from silver grey to chocolate brown. Koalas from the northern populations are typically smaller and lighter in colour than their counterparts further south. These populations are possibly separate subspecies, but not all researchers accept this.\nKoalas typically inhabit open \"Eucalyptus\" woodland, as the leaves of these trees make up most of their diet. This eucalypt diet has low nutritional and caloric content and contains toxic compounds that deter most other mammals from feeding on them. Koalas are largely sedentary and sleep up to twenty hours a day. They are asocial; only mothers bond to dependent offspring. Adult males communicate with bellows that intimidate rivals and attract mates. Males mark their presence with secretions from scent glands located on their chests. Like other marsupials, koalas give birth to young known as joeys at a very early stage of development. They crawl into their mothers' pouches, where they live for their first six to seven months. They are fully weaned around a year old. Koalas have few natural predators and parasites, but are threatened by pathogens such as \"Chlamydiaceae\" bacteria and \"koala retrovirus\".\nBecause of their distinctive appearance, koalas, along with kangaroos, are recognised worldwide as symbols of Australia. They were hunted by Indigenous Australians and depicted in myths and cave art for millennia. The first recorded encounter between a European and a koala was in 1798, and an image of the animal was published in 1810 by naturalist George Perry. Botanist Robert Brown wrote the first detailed scientific description in 1814 although his work remained unpublished for 180 years. Artist John Gould illustrated and described the koala, thereby introducing the species to the British public. Further details about the animal's biology were revealed in the 19th century by English scientists. Koalas are listed as a vulnerable species by the International Union for Conservation of Nature. Among the many threats to their existence are habitat destruction caused by agriculture, urbanisation, droughts, and associated bushfires, some related to climate change. In February 2022, the koala was officially listed as endangered in the Australian Capital Territory, New South Wales, and Queensland.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"koala\" comes from the Dharug , meaning 'no water'. Although the vowel \"u\" was originally written in the English orthography as \"oo\" (in spellings such as \"coola\" or \"koolah\"\u2014two syllables), the spelling for that sound later became \"oa\"; the word is now pronounced in three syllables (\"ko-a-la\") possibly in error based on that new spelling. Another hypothesis is that \"koala\" was an aboriginal name from the Hawkesbury River district near Sydney.\nAdopted by white settlers, the word \"koala\" became one of hundreds of Aboriginal loan words in Australian English, where it was also commonly referred to as \"native bear\", later \"koala bear\", for its resemblance to a bear. It is one of several Aboriginal words that made it into International English alongside words like \"didgeridoo\" and \"kangaroo\".\nThe koala's generic name, \"Phascolarctos\", is derived from the Greek words () 'pouch' and () 'bear'. The specific name, , is Latin for 'ash coloured'.\nTaxonomy.\nThe generic name \"Phascolarctos\" was given in 1816 by French zoologist Henri Marie Ducrotay de\u00a0Blainville, who did not give it a specific name until further review. In 1819, German zoologist Georg August Goldfuss gave it the binomial \"Lipurus cinereus\". Because \"Phascolarctos\" was published first, according to the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature, it has priority as the official genus name. French naturalist Anselme Ga\u00ebtan Desmarest coined the name \"Phascolarctos fuscus\" in 1820, suggesting that the brown-coloured versions were a different species than the grey ones. Other names suggested by European authors included \"Marodactylus cinereus\" by Goldfuss in 1820, \"P.\u00a0flindersii\" by Ren\u00e9 Primev\u00e8re Lesson in 1827, and \"P.\u00a0koala\" by John Edward Gray in 1827.\nEvolution.\nThe koala is classified with wombats (family \"Vombatidae\") and several extinct families (including marsupial tapirs, marsupial lions and giant wombats) in the suborder Vombatiformes within the order Diprotodontia. The Vombatiformes are a sister group to a clade that includes macropods (kangaroos and wallabies) and possums. The koala's lineage possibly branched off around 40\u00a0million years ago during the Eocene.\nThe modern koala is the only extant member of \"Phascolarctidae\", a family that includes several extinct genera and species. During the Oligocene and Miocene, koalas lived in rainforests and had broader diets. Some species, such as \"Nimiokoala greystanesi\" and some species of \"Perikoala\", were around the same size as the modern koala, while others, such as species of \"Litokoala\", were one-half to two-thirds its size. Like the modern species, prehistoric koalas had well developed ear structures, which suggests that they also made long-distance vocalisations and had a relatively inactive lifestyle. During the Miocene, the Australian continent began drying out, leading to the decline of rainforests and the spread of open \"Eucalyptus\" woodlands. The genus \"Phascolarctos\" split from \"Litokoala\" in the late Miocene, and had several adaptations that allowed it to live on a eucalyptus diet: the palate shifted towards the front of the skull; the upper teeth were lined by thicker bone, molars became relatively low compared to the jaw joint and with more chewing surface; the pterygoid fossa shrank; and a larger gap separated the incisor teeth and the molars.\n\"P. cinereus\" may have emerged as a dwarf form of the giant koala (\"P.\u00a0stirtoni\"), following the disappearance of several giant animals in the late Pleistocene. A 2008 study questioned this hypothesis, noting that \"P.\u00a0cinereus\" and \"P.\u00a0stirtoni\" were sympatric during the mid-late Pleistocene, and that their teeth morphology displayed the major differences. The fossil record of the modern koala extends back at least to the middle Pleistocene.\nGenetics and variations.\nThree subspecies have been described: the Queensland koala (\"Phascolarctos cinereus adustus\", Thomas 1923), the New South Wales koala (\"Phascolarctos cinereus cinereus\", Goldfuss 1817), and the Victorian koala (\"Phascolarctos cinereus victor\", Troughton 1935). These forms are distinguished by pelage colour and thickness, body size, and skull shape. The Queensland koala is the smallest, with silver or grey short hairs and a shorter skull. The Victorian koala is the largest, with shaggier, brown fur and a wider skull. The geographic limits of these variations are based on state borders, and their status as subspecies is disputed. A 1999 genetic study suggests koalas exist as a cline within a single evolutionarily significant unit with limited gene flow between local populations. In 2016, a comprehensive phylogenetic study did not support the recognition of any subspecies.\nOther studies have found that koala populations are highly inbred with low genetic variation. Such low genetic diversity may have been caused by population declines during the late Pleistocene. Rivers and roads limit gene flow and contribute to the isolation of southeast Queensland populations. In April 2013, scientists from the Australian Museum and Queensland University of Technology announced they had fully sequenced the koala genome.\nCharacteristics.\nThe koala is a robust animal with a large head and vestigial or non-existent tail. It has a body length of and a weight of , making it among the largest arboreal marsupials. Koalas from Victoria are twice as heavy as those from Queensland. The species is sexually dimorphic: males are 50% larger than females. Males' noses are more curved and sport chest glands, which are visible as bald patches. The female's pouch opening is secured by a sphincter which holds the young in.\nThe pelage of the koala is denser on the back. Back fur colour varies from light grey to chocolate brown. The belly fur is whitish; on the rump it is mottled whitish and dark. The koala has the most effective insulating back fur of any marsupial and is resilient to wind and rain, while the belly fur can reflect solar radiation. The koala has curved, sharp claws well adapted for climbing trees. The large forepaws have two opposable digits (the first and second, which are opposable to the other three) that allow them to grip small branches. On the hind paws, the second and third digits are fused, a typical condition for members of the \"Diprotodontia\", and the attached claws (which are still separate) function like a comb. The animal has a robust skeleton and a short, muscular upper body with relatively long upper limbs that contribute to its ability to climb. The thigh muscles are anchored further down the shinbone, increasing its climbing power.\nFor a mammal, the koala has a disproportionately small brain, 60% smaller than that of a typical diprotodont, weighing only on average. The brain's surface is fairly smooth and \"primitive\". It does not entirely fill the cranial cavity, unlike most mammals, and is lightened by large amounts of cerebrospinal fluid. It is possible that the fluid protects the brain should the animal fall from a tree. The koala's small brain may be an adaptation to the energy restrictions imposed by its diet, which is insufficient to sustain a larger brain. Its small brain limits its ability to perform complex behaviours. For example, it will not eat plucked eucalyptus leaves on a flat surface, which does not match its feeding routine.\nThe koala has a broad, dark nose with a good sense of smell, and it is known to sniff the oils of individual branchlets to assess their edibility. Its relatively small eyes are unusual among marsupials in that the pupils have vertical slits, an adaptation to living on a more vertical plane. Its round ears provide it with good hearing, and it has a well-developed middle ear. The koala larynx is located relatively low in the vocal tract and can be pulled further down. They possess unique folds in the velum (soft palate), known as velar vocal folds, in addition to the typical vocal folds of the larynx. These features allow the koala to produce deeper sounds than would otherwise be possible for their size.\nThe koala has several adaptations for its low nutrient, toxic, and fibrous diet. The animal's dentition consists of incisors and cheek teeth (a single premolar and four molars on each jaw) that are separated by a large gap (a characteristic feature of herbivorous mammals). The koala bites a leaf with the incisors and clips it with the premolars at the petiole, before chewing it to pieces with the cusped molars. Koalas may store food in their cheek pouches before it is ready to be chewed. The partially worn molars of koalas in their prime are optimal for breaking leaves into small particles, resulting in more efficient stomach digestion and nutrient absorption in the small intestine, which digests the eucalyptus leaves to provide most of the animal's energy. A koala sometimes regurgitates the food into the mouth to be chewed a second time.\nKoalas are hindgut fermenters, and their digestive retention can last 100 hours in the wild or 200 hours in captivity. This is made possible by their caecum\u2014 long and in diameter\u2014possibly the largest for an animal of its size. Koalas can retain food particles for longer fermentation if needed. They are more likely keep smaller particles as larger ones take longer to digest. While the hindgut is relatively large, only 10% of the animal's energy is obtained from digestion in this chamber. The koala's metabolic rate is only 50% of the typical mammalian rate, owing to its low energy intake, although this can vary across seasons and sexes. They can digest the toxic plant secondary metabolites, phenolic compounds and terpenes due to their production of cytochrome P450, which neutralises these poisons in the liver. The koala replaces lost water at a lower rate than species such as some possums. It maintains water by absorbing it in the caecum, resulting in drier faecal pellets packed with undigested fibre.\nDistribution and habitat.\nThe koala's range covers roughly , and 30 ecoregions. It ranges throughout mainland eastern and southeastern Australia, including the states of Queensland, New South Wales, Victoria, and South Australia. The koala was introduced to several nearby islands. The population on Magnetic Island represents the northern limit of its range.\nFossil evidence shows that the koala's range stretched as far west as southwestern Western Australia during the late Pleistocene. They were likely driven to extinction in these areas by environmental changes and hunting by Indigenous Australians. Koalas were introduced to Western Australia at Yanchep in 1938 but that population was reduced to 4 individuals by 2022. Koalas can be found in both tropical and temperate habitats ranging from dense woodlands to more spaced-out forests. In semi-arid climates, they prefer riparian habitats, where nearby streams and creeks provide refuge during times of drought and extreme heat.\nBehaviour and ecology.\nForaging and activities.\nKoalas are herbivorous, and while most of their diet consists of eucalypt leaves, they can be found in trees of other genera, such as \"Acacia\", \"Allocasuarina\", \"Callitris\", \"Leptospermum\", and \"Melaleuca\". Though the foliage of over 600 species of \"Eucalyptus\" is available, the koala shows a strong preference for around 30. They prefer plant matter with higher protein than fibre and lignin. The most favoured species are \"Eucalyptus microcorys\", \"E.\u00a0tereticornis\", and \"E.\u00a0camaldulensis\", which, on average, make up more than 20% of their diet. Despite its reputation as a picky eater, the koala is more generalist than some other marsupial species, such as the greater glider. The koala does not need to drink often as it can get enough water from the leaves, though larger males may additionally drink water found on the ground or in tree hollows. When feeding, a koala reaches out to grab leaves with one forepaw while the other paws hang on to the branch. Depending on the size of the individual, a koala can walk to the end of a branch or must stay near the base. Each day, koalas eat up to of leaves, spread over four to six feeding periods. Despite their adaptations to a low-energy lifestyle, they have meagre fat reserves.\nTheir low-energy diet limits their activity and they sleep 20 hours a day. They are predominantly active at night and spend most of their waking hours foraging. They typically eat and sleep in the same tree, possibly for as long as a day. On warm days, a koala may rest with its back against a branch or lie down with its limbs dangling. When it gets hot, the koala rests lower in the canopy and near the trunk, where the surface is cooler than the surrounding air. It curls up when it gets cold and wet. It resorts to a lower, thicker, branch during high winds. While it spends most of the time in the tree, the animal descends to the ground to move to another tree, with either a walking or leaping gait. Research has shown that their use of the ground is minimal, typically occurring only 2\u20133 times per night for a total of around 10 minutes \u2014 less than 1% of their day. The koala usually grooms itself with its hind paws, with their double claws, but it sometimes uses its forepaws or mouth.\nSocial life.\nKoalas are asocial and spend just 15 minutes a day on social behaviours. In areas of higher density and fewer trees, home ranges are smaller and more clumped. Koala society appears to consist of \"residents\" and \"transients\": the former are mostly adult females and the latter are males. Resident males appear to be territorial and dominant. The territories of dominant males are found near breeding females, while younger males must wait until they reach full size to challenge for breeding rights. Adult males occasionally venture outside their home ranges; when they do, dominant ones retain their status. As a male climbs a new tree, he rubs his chest against it and sometimes dribbles urine. This scent-marking behaviour probably serves as communication, and individuals are known to sniff the bottom of a newly found tree. Chest gland secretions are complex chemical mixtures\u2014about 40 compounds were identified in one analysis\u2014that vary in composition and concentration across season and age.\nAdult males communicate with loud bellows\u2014\"a long series of deep, snoring inhalations and belching exhalations\". Because of their low frequency, these bellows can travel far through the forest. Koalas may bellow at any time, particularly during the breeding season, when it serves to attract females and possibly intimidate other males. They also bellow to advertise their presence when they change trees. These sounds signal and exaggerate the male's body size; females pay more attention to bellows by larger males. Female koalas bellow, though more softly, in addition to making snarls, wails, and screams. These calls are produced when in distress and when making defensive threats. Younger animals squeak and older ones squawk when distraught. When another individual climbs over it, a koala makes a low closed-mouth grunt. Koalas also communicate with facial expressions. When snarling, wailing, or squawking, the animal curls the upper lip and points its ears forward. Screaming koalas pull their lips and ears back. Females form an oval shape with their lips when annoyed.\nAgonistic behaviour typically consists of quarrels between individuals who are trying to pass each other on a tree. This occasionally involves biting. Strangers may wrestle, chase, and bite. In extreme situations, a larger male may try to displace a smaller rival from a tree, chasing, cornering, and biting it. Once the individual is driven away, the victor bellows and marks the tree. Pregnant and lactating females are particularly aggressive and attack individuals who come too close. In general, however, koalas tend to avoid fighting due to energy costs.\nReproduction and development.\nKoalas are seasonal breeders, and they give birth from October to May. Females in oestrus lean their heads back and shake their bodies. Despite these obvious signals, males try to copulate with any female during this period, mounting them from behind. Because of his much larger size, a male can overpower a female. A female may scream and vigorously fight off her suitors but will accede to one that is dominant or familiar. The commotion can attract other males to the scene, obliging the incumbent to delay mating and fight off the intruders. A female may learn who is more dominant during these fights. Older males typically accumulate scratches, scars, and cuts on the exposed parts of their noses and their eyelids.\nKoalas are induced ovulators. The gestation period lasts 33\u201335 days, and a female gives birth to one joey or occasionally, twins. The young are born tiny and barely formed, weighing no more than . However, their lips, forelimbs, and shoulders are relatively advanced, and they can breathe, defecate, and urinate. The joey crawls into its mother's pouch to continue its development. Female koalas do not clean their pouches, which is an unusual trait among marsupials.\nThe joey latches on to one of the female's two teats and suckles it. The female lactates for as long as a year to make up for her low energy production. Unlike in other marsupials, koala milk becomes less fatty as the joey grows. After seven weeks, the joey has a proportionally large head, clear edges around its face, more colouration, and a visible pouch (if female) or scrotum (male). At 13 weeks, the joey weighs around , and its head doubles in size. The eyes begin to open and hair begins to appear. At 26 weeks, the fully furred animal resembles an adult and can look outside the pouch.\nAt six or seven months, the joey weighs and fully emerges from the pouch for the first time. It explores its new surroundings cautiously, clutching its mother for support. Around this time, the mother prepares it for a eucalyptus diet by producing a faecal pap that the joey eats from her cloaca. This pap comes from the cecum, is more liquid than regular faeces, and is filled with bacteria. A nine month old joey has its adult coat colour and weighs . Having permanently left the pouch, it rides on its mother's back for transportation, learning to climb by grasping branches. Gradually, it becomes more independent. The mother becomes pregnant again after a year after the offspring reaches around . She permanently severs her bond with her previous offspring and no longer allows it to suckle, but it remains nearby until it is one-and-a-half to two years old.\nFemales become sexually mature at about three years of age; in comparison, males reach sexual maturity at about age four although they can experience spermatogenesis as early as two years. Males do not start marking their scent until they reach sexual maturity though their chest glands become functional much earlier. Koalas can breed every year if environmental conditions are good, though the long dependence of the young usually leads to year-long gaps in births.\nHealth and mortality.\nKoalas live from 13 to 18 years in the wild although males may die sooner because of their more risky lives. Koalas usually survive falls from trees, yet they can get hurt and even die, particularly inexperienced young and fighting males. Around age six, the koala's chewing teeth begin to wear down and their chewing efficiency decreases. Eventually, the cusps disappear completely and the animal dies of starvation. Koalas have few predators. Dingos and large pythons and some birds of prey may take them. Koalas are generally not subject to external parasites other than ticks around the coast. The mite \"Sarcoptes scabiei\" gives koalas mange, while the bacterium \"Mycobacterium ulcerans\" skin ulcers, but these are uncommon. Internal parasites are few and have little effect. These include the \"Bertiella obesa\" tapeworm, commonly found in the intestine, and the \"Marsupostrongylus longilarvatus\" and \"Durikainema phascolarcti nematodes\", which are infrequently found in the lungs. In a three-year study of almost 600 koalas taken to the Australia Zoo Wildlife Hospital in Queensland, 73.8% of the animals were infected with parasitic protozoal genus \"Trypanosoma\", the most frequent of which was \"T.\u00a0irwini\".\nKoalas can be subject to pathogens such as \"Chlamydiaceae\" bacteria, which can cause keratoconjunctivitis, urinary tract infection, and reproductive tract infection. Such infections are common on the mainland, but absent in some island populations. As of 2024[ [update]], efforts are underway to use vaccination to try to stem the koala chlamydia epidemic. The koala retrovirus (KoRV) may cause koala immune deficiency syndrome (KIDS) which is similar to AIDS in humans. Prevalence of KoRV in koala populations suggests it spread from north to south, for only southern populations have virus-free individuals.\nThe animals are vulnerable to bushfires due to their slow speed and the flammability of eucalypt trees. The koala instinctively seeks refuge in the higher branches where it is vulnerable to heat and fire. Bushfires divide the animal's habitat, which isolates them, decreases their numbers, and creates genetic bottlenecks. Dehydration and overheating can prove fatal. Consequently, the koala is vulnerable to the effects of climate change. Models of climate change predict warmer and drier climates, suggesting that the koala's range will shrink in the east and south to more mesic habitats.\nRelation to humans.\nHistory.\nThe first written reference to the koala was recorded by John Price, servant of John Hunter, the Governor of New South Wales. Price encountered the \"cullawine\" on 26 January 1798, during an expedition to the Blue Mountains, but his remarks would first be published in \"Historical Records of Australia\", nearly a century later. In 1802, French-born explorer Francis Louis Barrallier encountered the animal when his two Aboriginal guides, returning from a hunt, brought back two koala feet they were intending to eat. Barrallier preserved the appendages and sent them and his notes to Hunter's successor, Philip Gidley King, who forwarded them to Joseph Banks. Similar to Price, Barrallier's notes were not published until 1897. Reports of the \"Koolah\" appeared in the Sydney Gazette in late 1803, and helped provide the impetus for King to send artist John Lewin to create watercolours of the animal. Lewin painted three pictures, one of which was printed in Georges Cuvier's \"Le R\u00e8gne Animal (The Animal Kingdom)\" (1827).\nBotanist Robert Brown was the first to write a formal scientific description in 1803, based on a female specimen captured near what is now Mount Kembla in the Illawarra region of New South Wales. Austrian botanical illustrator Ferdinand Bauer drew the animal's skull, throat, feet, and paws. Brown's work remained unpublished and largely unnoticed, however; his field books and notes remained in his possession until his death, when they were bequeathed to the British Museum in London. They were not identified until 1994, while Bauer's koala watercolours were not published until 1989. William Paterson, who had befriended Brown and Bauer during their stay in New South Wales, wrote an eyewitness report of his encounters with the animals and this would be the basis for British surgeon Everard Home's anatomical writings on them. Home, who in 1808 published his report, coined the scientific name \"Didelphis coola\".\nGeorge Perry officially published the first image of the koala in his 1810 natural history work \"Arcana\". Perry called it the \"New Holland Sloth\", and his dislike for the koala, evident in his description of the animal, was reflected in the contemporary British attitudes towards Australian animals as strange and primitive:\n...\u00a0the eye is placed like that of the Sloth, very close to the mouth and nose, which gives it a clumsy awkward appearance, and void of elegance in the combination\u00a0... they have little either in their character or appearance to interest the Naturalist or Philosopher. As Nature however provides nothing in vain, we may suppose that even these torpid, senseless creatures are wisely intended to fill up one of the great links of the chain of animated nature\u00a0...\nNaturalist and popular artist John Gould illustrated and described the koala in his three-volume work \"The Mammals of Australia\" (1845\u20131863) and introduced the species, as well as other members of Australia's little-known faunal community, to the public. Comparative anatomist Richard Owen, in a series of publications on the physiology and anatomy of Australian mammals, presented a paper on the anatomy of the koala to the Zoological Society of London. In this widely cited publication, he provided an early description of its internal anatomy, and noted its general structural similarity to the wombat. English naturalist George Robert Waterhouse, curator of the Zoological Society of London, was the first to correctly classify the koala as a marsupial in the 1840s, and compared it to fossil species \"Diprotodon\" and \"Nototherium\", which had been discovered just recently. Similarly, Gerard Krefft, curator of the Australian Museum in Sydney, noted evolutionary mechanisms at work when comparing the koala to fossil marsupials in his 1871 \"The Mammals of Australia\".\nBritain received its first living koala in 1881, which was obtained by the Zoological Society of London. As related by prosecutor to the society, William Alexander Forbes, the animal suffered an accidental demise when the heavy lid of a washstand fell on it and it was unable to free itself. Forbes dissected the specimen and wrote about the female reproductive system, the brain, and the liver\u2014parts not previously described by Owen, who had access only to preserved specimens. Scottish embryologist William Caldwell\u2014well known in scientific circles for determining the reproductive mechanism of the platypus\u2014described the uterine development of the koala in 1884, and used this new information to convincingly map out the evolutionary timeline of the koala and the monotremes.\nCultural significance.\nThe koala is known worldwide and is a major draw for Australian zoos and wildlife parks. It has been featured in popular culture and as soft toys. It benefited the Australian tourism industry by over $1\"\u00a0\"billion in 1998, and subsequently grown. Its international popularly rose after World War II, when tourism increased and the animals were exported to zoos overseas. In 1997, about 75% of European and Japanese tourists placed the koala at the top of their list of animals to see. According to biologist Stephen Jackson: \"If you were to take a straw poll of the animal most closely associated with Australia, it's a fair bet that the koala would come out marginally in front of the kangaroo\". Factors that contribute to the koala's enduring popularity include its teddy bear-like appearance with childlike body proportions.\nThe koala features in the Dreamtime stories and mythology of Indigenous Australians. The Tharawal people believed that the animal helped them get to Australia by rowing the boat. Another myth tells of a tribe that killed a koala and used its long intestines to create a bridge for people from other parts of the world. How the koala lost its tail is the subject of many tales. In one, a kangaroo cuts it off to punish the koala for uncouth behaviour. Tribes in Queensland and Victoria regarded the koala as a wise animal that gave valuable guidance. Bidjara-speaking people credited the koala for making trees grow in their arid lands. The animal is depicted in rock carvings, though less so than some other species.\nEarly European settlers in Australia considered the koala to be a creeping sloth-like animal with a \"fierce and menacing look\". At the turn of the 20th century, the koala's reputation took a positive turn. It appears in Ethel Pedley's 1899 book \"Dot and the Kangaroo\", as the \"funny native bear\". Artist Norman Lindsay depicted a more anthropomorphic koala in \"The Bulletin\" cartoons, starting in 1904. This character also appeared as Bunyip Bluegum in Lindsay's 1918 book \"The Magic Pudding\". The most well known fictional koala is Blinky Bill. Created by Dorothy Wall in 1933, the character appeared in books, films, TV series, merchandise, and a 1986 environmental song by John Williamson. The koala first appeared on an Australian stamp in 1930. \nThe song \"Ode to a Koala Bear\" appears on the B-side of the 1983 Paul McCartney/Michael Jackson duet single \"Say Say Say\". A koala is the main character in animated cartoons in the early 1980s: Hanna-Barbera's \"The Kwicky Koala Show\" and Nippon Animation's \"Noozles\". Food products shaped like the koala include the Caramello Koala chocolate bar and the bite-sized cookie snack Koala's March. Dadswells Bridge in Victoria features a tourist complex shaped like a giant koala and the Queensland Reds rugby team has a koala as its icon.\nKoala diplomacy.\nPolitical leaders and members of royal families had their pictures taken with koalas, including Queen Elizabeth II, Prince Harry, Crown Prince Naruhito, Crown Princess Masako, Pope John Paul II, US President Bill Clinton, Soviet premier Mikhail Gorbachev and South African President Nelson Mandela At the 2014 G20 Brisbane summit, hosted by Prime Minister Tony Abbott, many world leaders, including Russian President Vladimir Putin and US President Barack Obama, were photographed holding koalas. The event gave rise to the term \"koala diplomacy\", which became the Oxford Word of the Month for December 2016. The term also includes the loan of koalas by the Australian government to overseas zoos in countries such as Singapore and Japan, as a form of \"soft power diplomacy\", like the \"panda diplomacy\" practised by China.\nConservation.\nThe koala was originally classified as Least Concern on the Red List, and reassessed as Vulnerable in 2014. In the Australian Capital Territory, New South Wales and Queensland, the species was listed under the EPBC Act in February 2022 as endangered by extinction. The described population was determined in 2012 to be \"a species for the purposes of the EPBC Act 1999\" in Federal legislation.\nAustralian policymakers declined a 2009 proposal to include the koala in the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999. A 2017 WWF report found a 53% decline per generation in Queensland, and a 26% decline in New South Wales. The koala population in South Australia and Victoria appear to be abundant; however, the Australian Koala Foundation (AKF) argued that the exclusion of Victorian populations from protective measures was based on a misconception that the total population was 200,000, whereas they believed in 2012 that it was probably less than 100,000. AKF estimated in 2022 that there could be 43,000\u2013100,000. This compares with 8 to 10\"\u00a0\"million at the start of the 20th century. The Australian Government's Threatened Species Scientific Committee estimated that the 2021 koala population was 92,000, down from 185,000 two decades prior.\nThe koala was heavily hunted by European settlers in the early 20th century, largely for its fur. Australia exported as many as two million pelts by 1924. Koala furs were used to make rugs, coat linings, muffs, and on women's garment trimmings. The first successful efforts at conserving the species were initiated by the establishment of Brisbane's Lone Pine Koala Sanctuary and Sydney's Koala Park Sanctuary in the 1920s and 1930s. Its owner Noel Burnet created the first successful breeding program.\nOne of the biggest anthropogenic threats to the koala is habitat destruction and fragmentation. Near the coast, the main cause of this is urbanisation, while in rural areas, habitat is cleared for agriculture. Its favoured trees are harvested for wood products. In 2000, Australia had the fifth highest rate of land clearance globally, stripping of native plants. The koalas' distribution has shrunk by more than 50% since European arrival, largely due to habitat fragmentation in Queensland. Nevertheless, koalas live in many protected areas.\nWhile urbanisation can pose a threat to koala populations, the animals can survive in urban areas given enough trees. Urban populations have distinct vulnerabilities: collisions with vehicles and attacks by domestic dogs. Cars and dogs kill about 4,000 animals every year; together they account for two thirds of all koala deaths. To reduce road deaths, government agencies have been exploring various wildlife crossing options, such as the use of fencing to channel animals toward an underpass, in some cases adding a walkway to an existing culvert. Injured koalas are often taken to wildlife hospitals and rehabilitation centres. In a 30-year retrospective study performed at a New South Wales koala rehabilitation centre, trauma was found to be the most frequent cause of admission, followed by symptoms of \"Chlamydia\" infection.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17144", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17144", "title": "KIBO", "text": ""}
{"id": "17145", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17145", "title": "Kiboze", "text": ""}
{"id": "17147", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17147", "title": "Killer micro", "text": "A killer micro is a microprocessor-based machine that infringes on mini, mainframe, or supercomputer performance turf. It originally referred to the replacement of vector supercomputers built with bipolar technology by Massively Parallel Processors (MPP) assembled from a larger number of lower performing microprocessors. These systems faced initial skepticism, based on the assumption that applications do not have significant parallelism, because of Amdahl's law, but the success of early systems such as nCUBE and the fast progress in microprocessor performance following Moore's law led to a fast replacement.\nTaken from the title of Eugene Brooks' (of Lawrence Livermore Lab) talk \"Attack of the Killer Micros\" at Supercomputing 1990. This title was probably chosen after the \"Attack of the Killer Tomatoes\" cult film.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17148", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17148", "title": "Killer poke", "text": "Software means of causing computer hardware damage\nIn computer jargon, a killer poke is a method of inducing physical hardware damage on a machine or its peripherals by the insertion of invalid values, via, for example, BASIC's POKE command, into a memory-mapped control register. The term is typically used to describe a family of fairly well known tricks that can overload the analog electronics in the CRT monitors of computers lacking hardware sanity checking (notable examples being the IBM Portable and Commodore PET.)\nSpecific examples.\nZuse Z1/Z3.\nThe Z1 (1938) and Z3 (1941) computers built by Konrad Zuse contained illegal sequences of instructions which damaged the hardware if executed by accident.\nCommodore PET.\nThe PET-specific killer poke is connected to the architecture of that machine's video rasterizer circuits. In early PETs, writing a certain value to the memory address of a certain I/O register (codice_1) made the machine able to display text and graphics on the screen 106% faster. This was accomplished by disabling a \"wait to print to screen\" safeguard designed to reduce static/noise by preventing the shared VRAM from being read by the display at the same time as it was being written to by the CPU. With this safeguard disabled, graphics could appear on the screen twice as fast, but small bits of static would also appear. Despite the static, some games designed for early PETs included this POKE in their source code in order to benefit from the faster graphics.\nWhen the PET range was revamped with updated hardware, the video rasterizer circuits were redesigned to run at a faster speed and without the need for a \"wait to print\" safeguard. Thus, the old POKE trick no longer resulted in faster graphics. Instead, performing the old trick on the new hardware led to strange behavior by the new video chip, which could cause signal contention and possibly damage the PET's integrated CRT monitor. This is because the exact pin targeted by the POKE command used to control display timing, but in the upgraded video chip, that pin controlled the vertical sync. Thus, running the POKE on the newer hardware caused graphics to compress vertically, sometimes down to an extremely bright horizontal line. Fears that this anomaly might burn in to the display led to the nickname \"killer poke\"; however, it is not known to have ever caused any permanent damage to the monitor.\nCommodore 1541 Disk Drive.\nThe Commodore 64 had an optional external 5-1/4\" floppy drive. The Commodore 1541 contained a 6502 microprocessor which was used to run Commodore DOS and also to manage the drive mechanism. The drives stored data on 35 tracks (#0\u201334), and the stepper motor could be manually controlled through BASIC by PRINT#-ing \"MEMORY-WRITE\" commands to the drive (which correspond to the POKE command of BASIC, but write to the drive's internal memory and I/O registers, not those of the computer itself). If the drive was at either end of its range (track 0 or track 39) and it was commanded to continue moving, there was no software or firmware method to prevent drive damage. Continued \"knocking\" of the drive head against the stop would throw the mechanism out of alignment. The problem was exacerbated by copy protection techniques that used non-standard disk formats with unusual track counts. The Commodore 1571 had an optical head stop instead of a mechanical one.\nTRS-80 Model I &amp; III.\nThe original TRS-80 and TRS-80 Model III had the ability to switch between a 32-character-wide display and a 64-character display. Doing so actuated a relay in the video hardware, accomplished by writing to a specific memory-mapped control register. Programs that repeatedly switched between 32- and 64-character modes at high speed (either on purpose or accidentally) could permanently damage the video hardware. While this is not a single \"killer poke\", it demonstrates a software failure mode that could permanently damage the hardware.\nThe TRS-80 Model I also has a similar cassette motor relay accessible via a memory poke command and could result in damaging the relay.\nLG CD-ROM drives.\nCertain models of LG CD-ROM drives with specific firmware used an abnormal command for \"update firmware\": the \"clear buffer\" command usually used on CD-RW drives. Linux uses this command to tell the difference between CD-ROM and CD-RW drives. Most CD-ROM drives dependably return an error for the unsupported CD-RW command, but the faulty drives interpreted it as \"update firmware\", causing them to stop working (or, in casual parlance, to be \"bricked\").\nFlash memory.\nThe resource of flash memory is large, but limited. Since writing to storage is an essential operation, most applications have enough privileges to exhaust the resource of flash chips within 24 hours by filling the storage enough to cause write amplification and continuously rewriting a small file.\nMSi Laptops UEFI.\nSystemd mounts variables used by Unified Extensible Firmware Interface on Linux system's sysfs as writable by the root user of a system. As a result, it is possible for the root user of a system to completely brick a system with a non-conforming UEFI implementation (specifically some MSi laptops) by using the codice_2 command to delete the codice_3 directory, or recursively delete the root directory.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17149", "revid": "38516105", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17149", "title": "Kill file", "text": "File used in Usenet groups to hide people or subjects\nA kill file (also killfile, bozo bin or twit list) is a file that stores text matching patterns that are used in some Usenet reading programs to filter out (ignore) articles by subject, author, or other header information. Adding a pattern to a kill file results in matching articles being ignored by the person using the newsreader. By extension, the term may describe a decision to ignore an author or topic. A kill file feature was first implemented in Larry Wall's rn.\nVariations.\nSome newsreaders allow the user to specify a time period to keep an author in the kill file.\nAn ignore list is a similar yet simpler feature found in some web-based forums, including some web-based Usenet portals, which filters out posts by author only.\nScoring is a more advanced feature found in some newsreaders, including Gnus. The newsreader uses fuzzy logic to apply arbitrarily complex overlapping rules, stored in score files, to score articles. An article is ignored when its score is below a user-defined threshold. For example, articles might score as ignored (killed) if it violates too many low-weighted stylistic rules (e.g. containing too many capital letters or too little punctuation, implying an annoying reading experience), or only one or two highly-weighted rules (such as the body containing objectionable keywords or the origin being a known source of spam).\nHistory.\nJerry Pournelle wrote in 1986 of his wish for improvements to an offline reader for the Byte Information Exchange online service: \"What I really need, though, is a program that will\u00a0... sort through the messages, assigning some to a priority file and others to the bit bucket depending on subject matter and origin\".\nMedia.\nIn William Gibson's novel \"Idoru\", the virtual community Hak Nam is built around an \"inverted killfile\" and is modeled on Kowloon Walled City.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17151", "revid": "11969601", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17151", "title": "Kilobaud", "text": "Kilobaud may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "17152", "revid": "12331483", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17152", "title": "Kilobit", "text": ""}
{"id": "17154", "revid": "43393", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17154", "title": "Kit Carson", "text": "American frontiersman and guide (1809\u20131868)\nChristopher Houston Carson (December 24, 1809\u00a0\u2013 May 23, 1868) was an American frontiersman, fur trapper, wilderness guide, Indian agent and U.S. Army officer. He became an American frontier legend in his own lifetime through biographies and news articles; exaggerated versions of his exploits were the subject of dime novels. His understated nature belied confirmed reports of his fearlessness, combat skills, tenacity, as well as profound effect on the westward expansion of the United States. Although he was famous for much of his life, historians in later years have written that Kit Carson did not like, want, or even fully understand the fame that he experienced during his life.\nCarson left home in rural Missouri at 16 to become a mountain man and trapper in the West. In the 1830s, he accompanied Ewing Young on an expedition to Mexican California and joined fur-trapping expeditions into the Rocky Mountains. He lived among and married into the Arapaho and Cheyenne tribes.\nIn the 1840s, Carson was hired as a guide by John C. Fr\u00e9mont, whose expeditions covered much of California, Oregon, and the Great Basin area. Fr\u00e9mont mapped and wrote reports and commentaries on the Oregon Trail to assist and encourage westward-bound pioneers, and Carson achieved national fame through those accounts. Under Fr\u00e9mont's command, Carson participated in the U.S. conquest of California from Mexico, and the Sacramento River massacre and Klamath Lake massacre against the Indians. Later in the war, Carson was a scout and courier, celebrated for his rescue mission after the Battle of San Pasqual and for his coast-to-coast journey to Washington, D.C., to deliver news of the conflict in California. In the 1850s, he was appointed as the Indian agent to the Ute Indians and the Jicarilla Apaches.\nDuring the American Civil War, Carson led a regiment of mostly Hispanic volunteers from New Mexico on the side of the Union at the Battle of Valverde in 1862. When the Confederate threat was eliminated in New Mexico, Carson led forces to suppress the Navajo, Mescalero Apache, Kiowa, and Comanche tribes by destroying their food sources. He was breveted a brigadier general and took command of Fort Garland, Colorado but poor health soon forced him to retire from military life.\nCarson was married three times and had ten children. He died at Fort Lyon of an aortic aneurysm on May 23, 1868. He is buried in Taos, New Mexico, next to his third wife, Josefa Carson. \nDuring the late nineteenth century, Kit Carson became a legendary symbol of America's frontier experience, which influenced twentieth century erection of statues and monuments, public events and celebrations, imagery by Hollywood, and the naming of geographical places. In the 21st century, Carson's legacy has been contested, particularly due to his brutal treatment of indigenous people, such as the Klamath Lake massacre.\nEarly life (1809-1829).\nChristopher Houston Carson was born on December 24, 1809, near Richmond, Madison County, Kentucky. His parents were Lindsay Carson and his second wife, Rebecca Robinson. Lindsay had five children by his first wife, Lucy Bradley, and ten more children by Rebecca. Lindsay Carson had a Scots-Irish Presbyterian background. He was a farmer, a cabin builder, and a veteran of the Mexican\u2013American War, American Indian Wars, and American Civil War. He fought Natives on the American frontier and lost two fingers on his left hand in a battle with the Fox and Sauk Indians.\nThe Carson family moved to Boone's Lick, Howard County, Missouri, when Kit was about a year old. The family settled on a tract of land owned by the sons of Daniel Boone, who had purchased the land from the Spanish. The Boone and Carson families became good friends and worked and socialized together and intermarried. Lindsay's oldest son, William, married Boone's grand-niece, Millie Boone, in 1810. Their daughter Adaline became Kit's favorite playmate.\nMissouri was then the frontier of American westward expansionism; cabins were \"forted\" with tall stockade fences to defend against Native attacks. As men worked in the fields, sentries were posted with weapons to protect the farmers. Carson wrote in his \"Memoirs\", \"For two or three years after our arrival, we had to remain forted and it was necessary to have men stationed at the extremities of the fields for the protection of those that were laboring.\"\nIn 1818, Lindsay Carson died instantly when a tree limb fell on him while he was clearing a field. Kit was about eight years old. Despite being penniless, his mother took care of her children alone for four years. She then married Joseph Martin, a widower with several children. Kit was a young teenager and did not get along with his stepfather. The decision was made to apprentice him to David Workman, a saddler in Franklin, Missouri. Kit wrote in his \"Memoirs\" that Workman was \"a good man, and I often recall the kind treatment I received\".\nFranklin was situated at the eastern end of the Santa Fe Trail, which had opened two years earlier. Many of the customers at the saddle shop were trappers and traders from whom Carson heard stirring tales of the West. Carson found work in the saddlery not to his taste: he once stated that \"the business did not suit me, and I concluded to leave.\"\nSanta Fe Trail.\nIn August 1826, against his mother's wishes, Kit ran away from his apprenticeship. He went west with a caravan of fur trappers and tended their livestock. They made their trek over the Santa Fe Trail to Santa Fe, the capital of Santa Fe de Nuevo M\u00e9xico, reaching their destination in November 1826. He settled in Taos.\nCarson lived with Mathew Kinkead, a trapper and explorer who had served with Carson's older brothers during the War of 1812. Carson was mentored by Kinkead in learning the skills of a trapper and learning the necessary languages for trade. Eventually, he became fluent in Spanish and several Native American languages.\nWorkman put an advertisement in a local newspaper back in Missouri. He wrote that he would give a one-cent reward to anyone who brought the boy back to Franklin. No one claimed the reward. It was a bit of a joke, but Carson was free. The advertisement featured the first printed description of Carson: \"Christopher Carson, a boy about 16 years old, small of his age, but thick set; light hair, ran away from the subscriber, living in Franklin, Howard county, Missouri, to whom he had been bound to learn the saddler's trade.\"\nBetween 1827 and 1829, Carson worked as cook, translator, and wagon driver in the southwest. He also worked at a copper mine near the Gila River, in southwestern New Mexico. In later life, Carson never mentioned any women from his youth. Only three specific women were mentioned in his writing: Josefa Jaramillo, his third and last wife; a comrade's mother in Washington, DC; and Mrs. Ann White, killed by Natives after the White massacre.\nMountain man (1829\u20131841).\nAt the age of 19, Carson began his career as a mountain man. He traveled through many parts of the American West with famous mountain men like Jim Bridger and Old Bill Williams. He spent the winter of 1828\u20131829 as a cook for Ewing Young in Taos. He joined Young's trapping expedition of 1829. The leadership of Young and the experience of the venture are credited with shaping Carson's early life in the mountains. In addition to furs and the company of other mountain men, Carson sought action and adventure. Carson probably killed and scalped a Native for the first time when he was 19, during Young's expedition.\nIn August 1829, the party went into Apache territory along the Gila River. The expedition was attacked, giving Carson his first experience of combat. Young's party continued on to Alta California; trapped and traded in California from Sacramento in the north to Los Angeles in the south; and returned to Taos, New Mexico, in April 1830 after it had trapped along the Colorado River.\nCarson joined a rescue party in Taos searching for the perpetrators of an attack on a wagon train, although the perpetrators managed to escape. Carson joined another expedition, led by Thomas Fitzpatrick and William Levin, in 1831. Fitzpatrick, Levin, and his trappers went north to the central Rocky Mountains. Carson hunted and trapped in the West for about ten years. He was known as a reliable man and a good fighter.\nLife for Carson as a mountain man was not easy. After collecting beavers from traps, he had to hold onto them for months at a time until the annual Rocky Mountain Rendezvous, held in remote areas of the West like the banks of the Green River in Wyoming. With the money received for the pelts, the necessities of an independent life, including fish hooks, flour and tobacco, were bought. As there was little or no medical access in the regions in which he worked, Carson had to dress his wounds and nurse himself. There was also sometimes conflict with Indians. Carson's primary clothing then was made of deer skins that had stiffened from being left outdoors for a long period of time. This clothing offered some protection against weapons used by hostile Indians.\nGrizzly bears were one of the mountain man's greatest enemies. In 1834, when Carson was hunting an elk alone, two bears crossed paths with him and quickly chased him up a tree. One of the bears tried, unsuccessfully, to make him fall by shaking the tree, but eventually went away. Carson then returned to his camp as fast as possible. He wrote in his \"Memoirs\", \"[The bear] finally concluded to leave, of which I was heartily pleased, never having been so scared in my life.\"\nCarson's Memoirs are full of stories about hostile Indian encounters. In January 1833, for example, warriors of the Crow tribe stole nine horses from Carson's camp. Carson and two other men sprayed the Crow camp with gunfire, killing most of the Crow. Carson wrote in his \"Memoirs\", \"During our pursuit for the lost animals, we suffered considerably but, the success of having recovered our horses and sending many a redskin to his long home, our sufferings were soon forgotten.\"\nCarson viewed the Blackfoot Nation as a hostile tribe and the greatest threat to his livelihood and safety. He hated them and killed them at every opportunity. The historian David Roberts wrote: \"It was taken for granted that the Blackfeet were bad Indians; to shoot them whenever he could was a mountain man's instinct and duty.\" Carson had several encounters with the Blackfoot. His last battle with the Blackfoot took place in spring 1838. He was traveling with about one hundred mountain men led by Jim Bridger. In Montana Territory, the group found a teepee with the corpses of three Indians who had died of smallpox inside. Bridger wanted to move on, but Carson and the other young men wanted to kill Blackfoot, so they found the Blackfoot village and killed ten Blackfoot warriors. The Blackfoot found some safety in a pile of rocks but were driven away. It is not known how many Blackfoot died in this incident. The historian David Roberts wrote that \"if anything like pity filled Carson's breast as, in his twenty-ninth year, he beheld the ravaged camp of the Blackfoot, he did not bother to remember it.\" Carson wrote in his \"Memoirs\" that the battle was \"the prettiest fight I ever saw\".\nHis last rendezvous with trappers was held in 1840. At that time, the fur trade began to drop off as beaver hats went out of fashion and beaver populations across North America were declining rapidly from overexploitation. Carson knew that it was time to find other work. He wrote in his \"Memoirs\", \"Beaver was getting scarce, it became necessary to try our hand at something else.\" In 1841, he was hired at Bent's Fort, in Colorado, at the largest building on the Santa Fe Trail. Hundreds of people worked or lived there. Carson hunted buffalo, antelope, deer, and other animals to feed the people, paid one dollar a day. He returned to Bent's Fort several times during his life to provide meat for the fort's residents.\nCarson's views about Indians softened over the years. He found himself more and more in their company as he grew older, and his attitude towards them became more respectful and humane. He urged the government to set aside lands called reservations for their use. As an Indian agent in his later life, he saw to it that those under his watch were treated with honesty and fairness and clothed and fed properly. The historian David Roberts believes his first marriage, to an Arapaho woman named Singing Grass, \"softened the stern and pragmatic mountaineer's opportunism\".\nExpeditions with Fr\u00e9mont (1842\u20131848).\nIn April 1842, Carson went back to his childhood home in Missouri to put his daughter Adaline in the care of relatives. On the return trip, Carson met John C. Fr\u00e9mont aboard a steamboat on the Missouri River. Fr\u00e9mont was a US Army officer in the Corps of Topographical Engineers who was about to lead an expedition into the West. After a brief conversation, Fr\u00e9mont hired Carson as a guide at $100 a month, the best-paying job of Carson's life. Fr\u00e9mont wrote, \"I was pleased with him and his manner of address at this first meeting. He was a man of medium height, broad-shouldered, and deep-chested, with a clear steady blue eye and frank speech and address; quiet and unassuming.\"\nFirst expedition, 1842.\nIn 1842, Carson guided Fr\u00e9mont across the Oregon Trail to South Pass, Wyoming. It was their first expedition into the West together. The purpose of this expedition was to map and describe the Oregon Trail as far as South Pass. A guidebook, maps, and other paraphernalia would be printed for westward-bound migrants and settlers. After the five-month trouble-free mission was accomplished, Fr\u00e9mont wrote his government reports, which made Carson's name known across the United States, and spurred a migration of settlers westward to Oregon via the Oregon Trail.\nSecond expedition, 1843.\nIn 1843, Carson agreed to join Fr\u00e9mont's second expedition. Carson guided Fr\u00e9mont across part of the Oregon Trail to the Columbia River in Oregon. The purpose of the expedition was to map and describe the Oregon Trail from South Pass, Wyoming, to the Columbia River. They also made a side-trip to Great Salt Lake in Utah, using a rubber raft to navigate the waters. On the way to California, the party suffered from bad weather in the Sierra Nevada Mountains but was saved by Carson's good judgment and his skills as a guide; they found Native American (Northern Paiutes) who fed them. The expedition then headed to California, which was illegal and dangerous because California was Mexican territory. The Mexican government ordered Fr\u00e9mont to leave. Fr\u00e9mont finally went back to Washington, D.C. The government liked his reports but ignored his illegal trip into Mexico. Fr\u00e9mont was made a captain. The newspapers nicknamed him \"The Pathfinder\".\nDuring the expedition, Fr\u00e9mont trekked into the Mojave Desert. His party met a Mexican man and boy, who both told Carson that Native Americans had ambushed their party of travelers. The male travelers were killed; the women travelers were staked to the ground, sexually mutilated, and killed. The murderers then stole the Mexican's 30 horses. Carson and a mountain man friend, Alexis Godey, went after the murderers. After two days they found them, rushed into their camp, and killed and scalped two of the murderers. The stolen horses were recovered and returned to the Mexican man and boy. That deed brought Carson even greater fame and confirmed his status as a western hero in the eyes of the American people.\nThird expedition, 1845.\nIn 1845, Carson guided Fr\u00e9mont on their third expedition (Fr\u00e9mont made a fourth, but without Carson). From Westport Landing, Missouri, they crossed the Rockies, passed the Great Salt Lake, and down the Humboldt River to the Sierra Nevada of California and Oregon. Fr\u00e9mont made scientific plans and included artist Edward Kern in his corps, but from the outset the expedition appeared to be political in nature. Fr\u00e9mont may have been working under secret government orders, since US President Polk wanted Alta California for the United States. Once in California, Fr\u00e9mont started to rouse the American settlers into a patriotic fervor. The Mexican general Jos\u00e9 Castro at Monterey ordered him to leave. On Gavil\u00e1n Mountain, Fr\u00e9mont erected a makeshift fort and raised the US flag in defiance, before departing north. The party moved into the Sacramento River Valley past Mount Shasta, surveying into Oregon, fighting Indians along the way, and camped near Klamath Lake. Near here, a messenger from Washington, D.C., caught up with Fr\u00e9mont and made it clear that Polk wanted California.\nOn March 30, 1846, while traveling north along the Sacramento Valley, Fr\u00e9mont's party met Americans who said that a group of Native Americans was planning to attack settlers. Fr\u00e9mont's party set about searching for Native Americans. On April 5, 1846, Fr\u00e9mont's party spotted a Wintu village and launched an unprovoked attack, killing 120 to 300 men, women, and children, and displacing many more in what is known as the Sacramento River massacre.\n Carson, later stated that \"It was a perfect butchery.\"\nAt Klamath Lake, in southern Oregon, Fr\u00e9mont's party was hit in a revenge attack by 15 to 20 Indians on the night of May 9, 1846. Two or three men in camp were killed. The attackers fled after a brief struggle. Carson, angry that his friends had been killed, took an ax to a dead Indian and, according to Fr\u00e9mont, \"knocked his head to pieces\". In retaliation for the attack, a few days later, Fr\u00e9mont's party massacred a village of Klamath people along the Williamson River in what was called the Klamath Lake massacre. The entire village was razed and at least 14 people were killed. There was no evidence that the village in question had anything to do with the previous attack.\nBear Flag Revolt.\nIn June 1846, Fr\u00e9mont and Carson participated in a California uprising against Mexico, the Bear Flag Revolt. Mexico ordered all Americans to leave California. American settlers in California wanted to be free of the Mexican government and declared California an independent republic. The American rebels found the courage to oppose Mexico because they had Fr\u00e9mont, who had written an oath of allegiance, and his troops behind them. Fr\u00e9mont and his men were able to give some protection to the Americans. He ordered Carson to kill an old Mexican man, Jos\u00e9 de los Reyes Berreyesa, and his two adult nephews, who had been captured when they stepped ashore at San Francisco Bay to prevent them from notifying Mexico about the uprising.\nFr\u00e9mont worked hard to win California for the United States, for a time fashioning himself as its military governor until he was replaced by General Stephen W. Kearny, who outranked him.\nFrom 1846 to 1848, Carson served as courier traveling three times from California to the East and back. Fr\u00e9mont wrote, \"This was a service of great trust and honor... and great danger also.\" In 1846, dispatched with military records for the Secretary of War in Washington, D.C., Carson took the Gila Trail, but was met on the trail by General Kearny, who ordered him to hand his dispatches to others bound east, and return to California as his much-needed guide. In early 1847, Carson was ordered east from California again with more dispatches for Washington, D.C., where he arrived by June. Returning to California via a short visit with his family in Taos, he followed the Old Spanish Trail to Los Angeles. He was dispatched a third time as government courier leaving Los Angeles in May 1848 via the Old Spanish Trail and reached Washington, D.C., with important military messages, which included an official report of the discovery of gold in California.\nNewspapers reported on Carson's travels with some exaggeration, including that he had been killed by Plains Indians in July 1848. Lt. George Brewerton accompanied Carson on part of this trip and published in \"Harper's Magazine\" (1853) an account that added to his now-growing celebrity status. In 1848, as his fame grew, a Baltimore hat maker offered a \"Kit Carson Cap\", \"after the unique style of the domestic one worn by that daring pioneer\". A new steamboat, named the \"Kit Carson\", was built for the Mississippi-Ohio river trade, \"with qualities of great speed\". At the St. Louis Jockey Club, one could bet on a horse \"as swift as the wind\", named \"Kit Carson\".\nMexican\u2013American War (1846\u20131848).\nLasting from 1846 to 1848, the Mexican\u2013American War was an armed conflict between the United States and Mexico. After the war, Mexico was forced to sell the territories of Alta California and New Mexico to the United States under the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo.\nOne of Carson's best-known adventures took place during this war. In December 1846, Carson was ordered by General Kearny to guide him and his troops from Socorro, New Mexico, to San Diego, California. Mexican soldiers attacked Kearny and his men near the village of San Pasqual, California.\nKearny was outnumbered. He knew that he could not win and so ordered his men to take cover on a small hill. On the night of December 8, Carson, a naval lieutenant, Edward Fitzgerald Beale, and an Indian scout left Kearny to bring reinforcements from San Diego, away. Carson and the lieutenant removed their shoes because they made too much noise and walked barefoot through the desert. Carson wrote in his \"Memoirs\", \"Finally got through, but had the misfortune to lose our shoes. Had to travel over a country covered with prickly pear and rocks, barefoot.\"\nBy December 10, Kearny believed that reinforcements would not arrive. He planned to break through the Mexican lines the next morning, but 200 mounted American soldiers arrived in San Pasqual late that night. They swept the area driving the Mexicans away. Kearny was in San Diego on December 12.\nRanching, family life, and herding sheep (1848\u20131853).\nAfter the Mexican\u2013American War transferred California and New Mexico to the United States, Carson returned to Taos to attempt to transition into a career as a businessman and rancher. He developed a small rancho at Rayado, east of Taos, and raised beef. He brought his daughter Adaline from Missouri to join Josefa and the family in a period where family life settled the frontiersman. Josefa loved to sew, and he bought her an early sewing machine, one of the first Singer models, a resourceful tool for their expanding family. She managed the household, in the tradition of the Hispanic women of New Mexico, while he continued shorter travels. In the summer of 1850, he sold a herd of horses to the military at Ft. Laramie, Wyoming. The following year, he took wagons on a trading expedition to Missouri and back along the Santa Fe Trail. In 1852, for old times sake, he and a few of the veteran trappers made a loop trapping expedition through Colorado and Wyoming.\nIn mid-1853, Carson left New Mexico with 7,000 thin legged churro sheep for the California Trail across Wyoming, Utah, Nevada and into California. He was taking them to settlers in northern California and southern Oregon. Carson had with him six experienced New Mexicans from the haciendas of the Rio Abajo to herd the sheep. Upon his arrival in Sacramento, he was surprised to learn of his elevation, again, to a hero of the Conquest of California; over the rest of his life he was recognized as a celebrated frontiersman, an image developed by publications of varied accuracy.\nBooks and dime novels (1847\u20131859).\nCarson's fame spread throughout the United States with government reports, dime novels, newspaper accounts, and word of mouth. The first accounts published for popular audiences were extracts from Fr\u00e9mont's explorations reports as reprinted in period newspapers. Fr\u00e9mont's journals, modified by Jesse Benton Fr\u00e9mont into romantic accounts of the uncharted West, appeared in the early 1840s. Newspapers throughout the US and England reprinted excerpts about wild tales of buffalo hunts, vast new landscapes, and indigenous peoples. Carson's heroics enlivened the pages. In June 1847, Jesse Benton Fr\u00e9mont helped Carson prepare a brief autobiography, the first, published as an interview in the Washington, D.C. Union, and reprinted by newspapers across the country.\nCharles E. Averill (1830\u20131852), \"the youthful novelist\", published a magazine article for \"Holden's Dollar Magazine\" in April 1848 that he expanded into a novel advertised as \"Kit Carson, the Prince of the Gold Hunters; or the Adventures of the Sacramento; a Tale of the New Eldorado, Founded on Actual Facts\", an even more fantastic tale exploiting Carson's rising fame. It arrived on bookstore shelves by May 1849, in time for the California Gold Rush demand for narratives (fictional or not) on the trail to California. Averill's pioneers were in awe of Carson: \"Kit Carson!...the famous hunter and adventurer of the Great West, the hardy explorer of the trackless wilderness...the prince of backwoodsmen\" arrives to guide them. When later asked about the book, Carson said \"every statement made [by Averill] is false.\"\nSimilarly, Emerson Bennett (1822\u20131905), a prolific novelist of sensational romances, wrote an overland trail account where a fictional Carson joins a California bound wagon train. Arriving in bookstores in January 1849, his \"The Prairie Flower, or Adventures in the Far West\" exploited the Carson myth, and, like Averill, quickly followed with a sequel. In each novel, the Westering immigrants are in awe of the famous Carson. Both novelists sensationalized the fictional Carson as an \"Indian fighter\", with gruesome trashy accounts as \"red-skins\" \"bite the dust\" (Averill, \"Gold Hunter\"). For example, of one victim, Averill wrote, \"blood gushed in a copious stream from his nostrils\"; while Bennett wrote \"Kit Carson, like an embodied spirit of battle, thundered past me on his powerful charger, and bending forward in his saddle, with a motion quick as lightning itself, seized the scalp lock of my antagonist in one hand, and with the other completely severed his head from his body, which he bore triumphantly away\" (Bennett, \"Prairie Flower\", p.\u00a064). The novelists' gruesome, gory and sensationalized woolly West descriptions would keep readers turning the pages, and buying more buckets-of-blood fictional accounts of Carson, especially during the coming age of dime novels.\nIndian captive Ann White.\nCarson's reaction to his depiction in these first novels is suggested by the account of events around the fate of Ann White. In 1849, as he moved to civilian life at Taos and Rayado, Carson was asked to guide soldiers on the trail of White, her baby daughter, and \"negro servant\", who had been captured by Jicarilla Apaches and Utes. The commanding officer, Captain William Grier of the 1st Cavalry Regiment, ignored Carson's advice about an immediate rescue attempt after catching the Jicarillas unaware, but after a shot was fired the order was given to attack, and the Jicarillas had started to flee. As Carson describes it in his autobiography, \"In about 200 yards, pursuing the Indians, the body of Mrs. White was found, perfectly warm, had not been killed more than five minutes - shot through the heart by an arrow... I am certain that if the Indians had been charged immediately on our arrival she would have been saved.\" Her child and servant were taken away by the fleeing Jicarillas and killed shortly after the attack, according to an 1850 report by James S. Calhoun, the Superintendent of Indian Affairs in New Mexico.\nA soldier in the rescue party wrote: \"Mrs. White was a frail, delicate, and very beautiful woman, but having undergone such usage as she suffered nothing but a wreck remained; it was literally covered with blows and scratches. Her countenance even after death indicated a hopeless creature. Over her corpse, we swore vengeance upon her persecutors.\"\nCarson discovered a fictional book, possibly by Averill, about himself in the Apache camp. He wrote in his \"Memoirs\": \"In camp was found a book, the first of the kind I had ever seen, in which I was made a great hero, slaying Indians by the hundreds, and I have often thought that Mrs. White would read the same, and knowing that I lived near, she would pray for my appearance and that she would be saved.\" The real Carson had met the fictional Carson and was deeply upset at his inability to have saved White, for he had failed to live up to the growing myth around himself. He was sorry for the rest of his life that he had not rescued White; the dime-novel Carson would have saved her.\nMemoirs.\nIn 1854, Lt. Brewerton encouraged Carson to send him a sketch of his life, and offered to polish it into a book. Carson dictated a \"memoir\" of some 33,000 words over the next few years, but moved on to another collaborator. Friend Jesse B. Turley was engaged in late 1856 to help Carson prepare the memoir, and after a year's work sent the rough manuscript to a New York publisher. In 1858, Dr. DeWitte Clinton Peters (1829\u20131876), a U. S. Army surgeon who had met Carson in Taos, acquired the manuscript and with Charles Hatch Smith (1829\u20131882), a Brooklyn lawyer turned music teacher, sometime preacher, and author rewrote it for publication. The biography was titled \"Kit Carson, the Nestor of the Rocky Mountains, from Facts Narrated by Himself\". When the book was read to Carson, he said, \"Peters laid it on a leetle too thick.\" Originally offered by subscription by Smith's publisher, W. R. C. Clark &amp; Co., New York City, it quickly earned rave reviews, not for its prose but its subject matter. The first run, a pricey $2.50 gilt edition or $4 antiqued copy, included a note signed (maybe) by Carson authenticating the story and the authorization given to Dr. Peters for the work. The Peters (with the help of Smith) biography had expanded the slim memoirs by five times (to 534 pages), with much edited-in filler, moralizing, and tedium. A cheaper edition was published in 1859, followed by two imitations that stole the market. In 1860, Charles Burdett, \"a writer of no particular distinction\", wrote a biography based on the Dr. Peters work, published as \"The Life of Kit Carson, the Great Western Hunter\". The great house of inexpensive novels and questionable nonfiction, Beadle's Dime Library, in 1861, brought out \"The Life and Times of Kit Carson, the Rocky Mountain Scout and Guide\" by Edward S. Ellis, one of the stable of writers used by the firm. A popular, shorter work, it also used the Dr. Peters biography, which itself Peters revised in 1874 to bring the biography up to Carson's 1868 death. It is unknown if Carson profited from any of these publications based on his memoirs.\nIn 1905, among the estate of Dr. Peter's son in Paris, was located the original Carson memoir. This was published with little comment in 1926, followed by a revised or \"polished\" version in 1935, and, finally, in 1968, a solidly annotated edition edited by Harvey Lewis Carter, who had cleared up much of the background about the manuscript. Carson's memoir is the most important source about his life, to 1858, but as Carter notes, Carson was too brief, had lapses in memory, and his chronology was fallible. One frustrated author wrote of the Carson memoir that it \"is as skinny as a hairless Chihuahua dog and as bald of details as a white egg\".\nDime novels.\nDuring the last half of the nineteenth century, inexpensive novels and pseudo-nonfiction met the need of readers looking for entertainment. Among the major publishing firms was the house of Beadle, opened in 1860. One study, \"Kit Carson and Dime Novels, the Making of a Legend\" by Darlis Miller, notes some 70 dime novels about Carson were either published, re-published with new titles, or incorporated into new works over the period 1860\u20131901. The usual blood-and-thunder tales exploited Carson's name to sell copies. When competition threatened the house of Beadle, a word-smith said they \"just kill more Indians\" per page to increase sales. Skewed images of the personalities and place are exemplified by the Beadle title: \"Kiowa Charley, The White Mustanger; or, Rocky Mountain Kit's Last Scalp Hunt\" (1879) in which an older Carson is said to have \"ridden into Sioux camps unattended and alone, had ridden out again, but with the scalps of their greatest warriors at his belt\". Edward Ellis, biographer of Carson, wrote under the pseudonym of J. F. C. Adams \"The Fighting Trapper or Kit Carson to the Rescue\" (1879), another lurid work without any hint of reality.\nBy the 1880s, the shoot-em-up gunslinger was replacing the frontiersman tales, but of those in the new generation, one critic notes, \"where Kit Carson had been represented as slaying hundreds of Indians, the [new] dime novel hero slew his thousands, with one hand tied behind him.\" The dime novel's impact was the blurring of the real Carson by creating a mythic character. In fiction, according to historian of literature Richard Etulain, \"the small, wiry Kit Carson becomes a ring-tailed roarer, a gigantic Samson...a strong-armed demigod [who] could be victorious and thus pave the way for western settlement.\"\nIndian Agent (1854\u20131861).\nBetween January 1854 and May 1861, Carson served as one of the first Federal Indian Agents in the Far West. He sold his interest in the Rayado ranch and opened an office in a room of his Taos home, gratis\u2014the office would be perpetually underfunded. He was responsible for the Maoche Ute people, Jicarilla Apache, and Taos Pueblo in a vast expanse of northern New Mexico Territory (which then included southwest Colorado). His duties were broad and insurmountable: \"prevent conflict as far as possible, to persuade the Indians to submit to the government's will, and to solve problems arising from contact between Indians and whites\".\nThe seven years as agent is probably the best documented of his life because of the correspondence, weekly and annual reports, and special filings required by the position (he had a private secretary because he could not write; some believe the secretary took the dictation also for his memoir). He summarized meetings with tribes - almost a daily occurrence when home - such as disputes over who stole whose cow, and the day-to-day effort to help with food, clothes and presents for tribes. He negotiated a halt of Plains tribes killing Taos Pueblo Indians desiring the traditional hunt of buffalo near Raton. Carson had the advantage of knowing at least fourteen Indian dialects as well as being a master of sign language.\nOne complex issue was captives. For example, captives stolen from Navajo by Ute were sold in the New Mexico settlements, or of a white child from central Texas settlements taken captive by Plains tribes then sold in New Mexico. As agent, Carson intervened.\nMuch of Carson's work as agent has been overlooked because of the focus on his mountain-man explorer or blood-and-thunder image. This was a significant period for him as well as the region, which experienced a large folk migration of Hispanos into Indian lands, as well as the Colorado gold rush and its impact on the tribes. Carson's view of the best future for the nomadic Indian evolved. By the late 1850s, he recommended, to make way for the increasing number of white settlers, that they should give up hunting and become herders and farmers, be provided with missionaries to Christianize them, and move onto reserves in their homeland but distant from settlements with their bad influence of ardent spirits, disease, and unscrupulous Hispanos and Anglos. Carson predicted, \"If permitted to remain as they are, before many years they will be utterly extinct.\"\nMilitary career (1861\u20131868).\nIn April 1861, when the American Civil War broke out, many officers from the South in the United States Army resigned their commissions and offered their services to the Confederate States of America or their home states. Some of those officers were then serving in New Mexico Territory and included James Longstreet and Richard S. Ewell, both of whom gained senior rank in the Army of Northern Virginia, and Henry Hopkins Sibley. Arriving in Richmond, Sibley persuaded President Jefferson Davis to appoint him a brigadier general and lead a brigade of mounted cavalry to conquer New Mexico Territory and possibly Colorado Territory, southern California and the northern parts of the Mexican states of Sonora and Chihuahua.\nWhen Confederate forces captured southern New Mexico Territory, the Union military commander, Colonel Edward Canby, ordered the governor to call for volunteers to defend the territory. Carson resigned his position as agent to the Ute Indian Tribe and volunteered to defend the Territory. Mindful that Carson had experienced military discipline as an army scout under Fremont and, later, with General Stephen Kearny during the War with Mexico, the governor appointed Carson the Lieutenant Colonel of the First New Mexico Volunteer Infantry. During the summer of 1861, Carson worked to organize the regiment of approximately one thousand men, most of whom were from prominent Hispanic families, at Fort Union in northeast New Mexico Territory. On September 21, the regiment's colonel resigned, and Carson assumed command.\nAction against the Confederates.\nCanby had reservations about the fighting qualities of the volunteers and believed that his regular infantry were at a disadvantage in the vastness of New Mexico to the mounted Confederate cavalry. He decided to avoid fighting the Texans in the open field and strengthened the stone and adobe walls of his southern bastion, Fort Craig (about one hundred miles north of Mesilla). In January 1862, concluding that the Texans would invade northward up the Rio Grande River Valley, Canby consolidated most of his regular infantry and New Mexico volunteer regiments at Fort Craig. Following orders, Carson marched his First New Mexico regiment south from Albuquerque to form part of the fort's garrison.\nOn February 19, 1862, Carson led his regiment east across the Rio Grande to occupy high ground across from Fort Craig to protect the post from a Confederate-turning move. The next day, Canby joined Carson's regiment with the bulk of the regulars. However, when Texan artillery fire panicked troops from the Second New Mexico Volunteers, Canby withdrew most of his force back to the fort. Carson and his regiment remained on the east bank of the Rio Grande to protect the left flank of the Union line.\nTwo days later, the Confederate force sought to cross the Rio Grande to the west bank at the Valverde ford, about six miles north of Fort Craig. Canby deployed regulars and Colorado volunteer units as his front line. He assigned Carson's regiment to a support position behind the regulars on the left and, later in the fight, the center of the Union line.\nLater in the day, Carson crossed to the east side of the river toward the Confederates. He advanced his regiment four hundred yards along the right flank of the Union line until ordered to withdraw. After the day-long battle, the Union force retreated to Fort Craig where Carson reported one enlisted man killed, one wounded, and eleven missing.\nFollowing the Battle at Valverde, the Confederates moved north up the Rio Grande. In late March, Colorado volunteers destroyed the Confederate supply trains at the Battle of Glorieta Pass, necessitating that the Texans abandon their invasion of New Mexico Territory. Canby took the regulars north from Fort Craig to harass the retreating Confederates and herd them back to Texas. Carson and his regiment remained in Fort Craig. Although the starving Confederates passed a few miles to the west of the fort, Canby, seeing no need to risk a pitched battle with a defeated and retreating foe, did not order Carson to confront the Confederate column. Carson and his regiment remained in Fort Craig through the spring and summer of 1862.\nCanby held Carson's regiment in reserve at the Battle at Valverde and assigned it and other New Mexico volunteer regiments to passively garrison Fort Craig while he used regulars and Colorado volunteer troops to herd the Texans out of the territory. He believed that the Hispanic volunteers would not stand up to the Texans in combat. Canby reported that the \"people of the Territory, with few exceptions, I believe, are loyal, but they are apathetic in disposition,\" which explained their \"tardiness\" in volunteering. He contended that he could \"place no reliance upon any volunteer force that can be raised, unless strongly supported by regular troops.\" Carson concurred. He co-signed a letter stating \"that without the support and protection of the Regular Army of the United States they [New Mexicans] are entirely unable to protect the public property in the Territory or the lives of such officers, civil and military, as may be left among them after the withdrawal of the regular forces...\"\nRounding up the Mescalero Apaches.\nTo confront the Texans, in 1861, Canby had consolidated his available force by pulling in the garrisons from posts built to control the Apache and Navajo Indians. When Canby ordered his troops to abandon Fort Stanton (about eighty miles east of Fort Craig) in August 1861, about two hundred of the approximately five hundred Mescalero Apache Indians were subsisting on rations distributed to them by the army. With those supplies no longer available, some of the nine bands of Mescalero Apache Indians began raiding ranches and communities near their homeland in the Capitan Mountains.\nBrigadier General James Carleton, of the First California Volunteer Cavalry, succeeded Canby as military commander of the territory in the fall of 1862. He then sent Carson and five companies of his regiment to occupy and re-build Fort Stanton. Carleton's confidential orders of October 12, 1862 to Carson, in part, read:\n\"All Indian men of that tribe [Mescalero Apache] are to be killed whenever and wherever you find them: the \nwomen and children will not be harmed, but you will take them prisoners and feed them at Fort Stanton...\"\nCarleton felt that \"this severity in the long run will be the most humane course that could be pursued toward these Indians.\" He intended to re-settle the Mescalero Apache Indians from their traditional lands in the Capitan Mountains to a reservation along the Pecos River at Bosque Redondo, near present-day Fort Sumner. In Carleton's vision, the government would teach the hunting-and-gathering Mescalero bands the arts of agriculture, thereby keeping them from marauding outside the reservation.\nBefore Carson arrived at Fort Stanton, Company H, commanded by Captain James Graydon, encountered a band of about thirty Mescalero Apache Indians under chiefs Manuelito and Jose Largo at Gallinas Springs on October 20, 1862. According to Major Arthur Morrison, Graydon \"deceived\" the Indians by offering them provisions and then shot and killed the two chiefs and nine others and wounded another twenty. Carson's inquiry into the matter came to naught when Graydon, months later, died of a wound received in a duel.\nHowever, the shock of these killings, along with the fight between two companies of the First California Volunteer Cavalry from Fort Fillmore and a band of Apaches in Dog Canyon near Alamogordo, induced most of the surviving Mescalero chiefs to surrender to Carson. By March 1863, the army had settled the few hundred surviving Mescalero Apache Indians on Bosque Redondo near the newly built Fort Sumner. Perhaps a hundred of the Mescalero Apache Indians, such as the band led by Santana, either fled to Mexico or joined other Apache tribes to the west.\nCampaign against the Navajo.\nCarleton had chosen a bleak site on the Pecos River for his reservation, which was called Bosque Redondo (Round Grove). He chose the site for the Apaches and Navajos because it was far from white settlements. He also wanted the Apaches and Navajo to act as a buffer for any aggressive acts committed upon the white settlements from Kiowas and Comanches to the east of Bosque Redondo. He thought also that the remoteness and desolation of the reservation would discourage white settlement.\nThe Mescalero Apaches walked to the reservation. By March 1863, 400 Apaches had settled around nearby Fort Sumner. Others had fled west to join fugitive bands of Apaches. By mid-summer, many of the people were planting crops and doing other farm work.\nOn July 7, Carson, with little heart for the Navajo roundup, started the campaign against the tribe. His orders were almost the same as those for the Apache roundup: he was to shoot all males on sight and to take the women and children captives. No peace treaties were to be made until all Navajo were on the reservation.\nCarson searched far and wide for the Navajo. He found their homes, fields, animals, and orchards, but the Navajo were experts at disappearing quickly and hiding in their vast lands. The roundup proved frustrating for Carson. He was in his fifties and tired and ill. By autumn 1863, Carson started to burn the Navajo homes and fields and remove their animals from the area. The Navajo would starve if the destruction continued, and 188 surrendered and were sent to Bosque Redondo. Life at the Bosque had turned grim, and murders took place. The Apaches and Navajos fought. The water in the Pecos contained minerals that gave people cramps and stomach aches. Residents had to walk to find firewood.\nBattle of Canyon de Chelly.\nCarson wanted to take a winter break from the campaign. Major General Carleton refused and ordered him to invade the Canyon de Chelly, where many Navajos had taken refuge. The historian David Roberts writes, \"Carson's sweep through the Canyon de Chelly in the winter of 1863\u20131864 would prove to be the decisive action in the Campaign.\"\nThe Canyon de Chelly was a sacred place for the Navajo. They believed that it would now be their strongest sanctuary, and 300 Navajo took refuge on the canyon rim, called Fortress Rock. They resisted Carson's invasion by building rope ladders and bridges, lowering water pots into a stream, and keeping quiet and out of sight. The 300 Navajo survived the invasion. In January 1864, Carson swept through the Canyon with his forces, including Captain Albert Pfeiffer. The thousands of peach trees in the canyon were cut down. Few Navajo were killed or captured. Carson's invasion, however, proved to the Navajo that the United States could invade their territory at any time. Many Navajo surrendered at Fort Defiance, Arizona.\nBy March 1864, there were 3,000 refugees at Fort Canby, with 5,000 more joining later. Suffering from the intense cold and hunger, Carson asked for supplies to feed and clothe the Navajo and forced the thousands of them to walk to Bosque Redondo. Many died along the way, and those falling behind were fatally shot. In Navajo history, the horrific trek is known as Long Walk of the Navajo. By 1866, reports indicated that Bosque Redondo was a complete failure, Major General Carleton was fired, and Congress started investigations. In 1868, a treaty was signed, and the Navajo were allowed to return to their homeland. Bosque Redondo was closed.\nFirst Battle of Adobe Walls.\nOn November 25, 1864, Carson led his forces against the southwestern tribes at the First Battle of Adobe Walls in the Texas Panhandle. Adobe Walls was an abandoned trading post that had been blown up by its inhabitants to prevent a takeover by hostile Indians. Combatants at the First Battle were the US Army and Indian scouts against Kiowas, Comanches, and Plains Apaches. It was one of the largest engagements fought on the Great Plains.\nThe battle was the result of General Carleton's belief that Indians were responsible for the continuing attacks on settlers along the Santa Fe Trail. He wanted to punish them and brought in Carson to do the job. With most of the army engaged elsewhere during the American Civil War, the protection that the settlers sought was almost nonexistent. Carson led 260 cavalry, 75 infantry, and 72 Ute and Jicarilla Apache Army scouts. In addition, he had two mountain howitzers which were fired at the cdr\nOn the morning of November 25, Carson discovered and attacked a Kiowa village of 176 lodges. After destroying the village, he moved forward to Adobe Walls. Carson found other Comanche villages in the area and realized he would face a very large force of Native Americans. A Captain Pettis estimated that 1,200 to 1,400 Comanche and Kiowa began to assemble. That number would swell, according to some accounts, to an implausible 3,000. Four to five hours of battle ensued. When Carson ran low on ammunition and howitzer shells, he ordered his men to retreat to a nearby Kiowa village, where they burned the village and many fine buffalo robes. His Indian scouts killed and mutilated four elderly and weak Kiowas.\nFirst Adobe Walls, northeast of Stinnett in Hutchinson County, Texas, was Carson's last military engagement and ended inconclusively. Three of Carson's men died, and twenty-one were wounded. More than 100 warriors lost their lives, and 200 were wounded.\nThe retreat to New Mexico then began with few deaths among Carson's men. General Carleton wrote to Carson: \"This brilliant affair adds another green leaf to the laurel wreath which you have so nobly won in the service of your country.\"\nPersonal life.\nIn 1847, the future General William Tecumseh Sherman met Carson in Monterey, California. Sherman wrote: \"His fame was then at its height... and I was very anxious to see a man who had achieved such feats of daring among the wild animals of the Rocky Mountains, and still wilder Indians of the plains... I cannot express my surprise at beholding such a small, stoop-shouldered man, with reddish hair, freckled face, soft blue eyes, and nothing to indicate extraordinary courage or daring. He spoke but little and answered questions in monosyllables.\"\nColonel Edward W. Wynkoop wrote: \"Kit Carson was five feet five and one half-inches tall [], weighed about , of nervy, iron temperament, squarely built, slightly bow-legged, and those members apparently too short for his body. But, his head and face made up for all the imperfections of the rest of his person. His head was large and well-shaped with yellow straight hair, worn long, falling on his shoulders. His face was fair and smooth as a woman's with high cheekbones, straight nose, a mouth with a firm, somewhat sad expression yet kissable lips, a keen, deep-set but beautiful, mild blue eye, which could become terrible under some circumstances, and like the warning of the rattlesnake, gave notice of attack. Though quick-sighted, he was slow and soft of speech, and posed great natural modesty.\"\nLieutenant George Douglas Brewerton made one coast-to-coast dispatch-carrying trip to Washington, DC, with Carson. Brewerton wrote: \"The Kit Carson of my \"imagination\" was over high\u2014a sort of modern Hercules in his build\u2014with an enormous beard, and a voice like a roused lion... The real Kit Carson I found to be a plain, simple... man; rather below the medium height, with brown, curling hair, little or no beard, and a voice as soft and gentle as a woman's. In fact, the hero of a hundred desperate encounters, whose life had been mostly spent amid wilderness, where the white man is almost unknown, was one of Dame Nature's gentleman...\"\nFreemasonry.\nCarson joined Freemasonry in the Santa Fe Territory of New Mexico, petitioning in Montezuma Lodge No. 101. He was initiated an Entered Apprentice on April 22, 1854, passed to the degree of Fellowcraft June 17, 1854, and raised to the sublime degree of Master Mason December 26, 1854, just two days after his 42nd birthday. Carson, together with several other Freemasons in Taos, petitioned to charter Bent Lodge No. 204 (now Bent Lodge # 42) from the Grand Lodge of Missouri AF&amp;AM, a request that was granted on June 1, 1860, with Carson elected Junior Warden of the lodge. Carson served as Senior Warden the following year and would have served as Worshipful Master, but the lodge went dark due to the Civil War.\nThe Masonic fraternity continued to serve him and his family well after his death. In 1908, the Grand Lodge of New Mexico erected a wrought iron fence around his family burial plot. The following year, the Grand Lodge of New Mexico granted a new charter to Bent Lodge 42 and challenged the Lodge to purchase and preserve Carson's home. More than a century later, the Museum of Kit Carson's House is still managed by Bent Lodge.\nMarriages.\nCarson was married three times. His first two wives were Native American. His third wife was born of an old Hispanic family in Taos, New Mexico, then part of the Republic of Mexico. Carson was the father of ten children. He never wrote about his first two marriages in his \"Memoirs\". He may have thought he would be known as a \"squaw man\", which was not welcomed by polite society.\nIn 1836, Carson met an Arapaho woman, Waanibe (Singing Grass, or Grass Singing), at a mountain man rendezvous held along the Green River in Wyoming. Singing Grass was a lovely young woman, and many mountain men were in love with her. Carson was forced to fight a duel with a French trapper, Chouinard, for Waanibe's hand in marriage. Carson won but had a very narrow escape. The French trapper's bullet singed his hair. The duel was one of the best known stories about Carson in the 19th century.\nCarson married Singing Grass. She tended to his needs and went with him on his trapping trips. They had a daughter, Adaline (or Adeline). Singing Grass died after she had given birth to Carson's second daughter circa 1839. His second child did not live long. In 1843, in Taos, the young child fell into a boiling kettle of soap tallow and subsequently died.\nCarson's life as a mountain man was too hard for a little girl, so he took Adaline to live with his sister Mary Ann Carson Rubey in St. Louis, Missouri. Adaline was taught in a school for girls. Carson brought her West when she was a teenager. She married and divorced a George Stilts of St. Louis. In 1858, she went to the California goldfields. Adaline died in 1860 or after 1862, probably in Mono County, California.\nIn 1841, Carson married a Cheyenne woman, Making-Out-Road. They were together only a short time. Making-Out-Road divorced him in the way of her people by putting Adaline and all of Carson's property outside their tent. Making-Out-Road left Carson to travel with her people through the West.\nAbout 1842, Carson met Josefa Jaramillo, the daughter of a prominent Mexican couple living in Taos. To marry her, Carson left the Presbyterian Church for the Catholic Church. He married the 14-year-old Josefa on February 6, 1843. They had eight children.\nIlliteracy.\nDespite being fluent in multiple European and Indian languages, Carson was illiterate. He was embarrassed by that and tried to hide it. In 1856, he dictated his \"Memoirs\" to another and stated: \"I was a young boy in the school house when the cry came, Injuns! I jumped to my rifle and threw down my spelling book, and thar it lies.\"\nCarson enjoyed having other people read to him and preferred the poetry of Lord Byron. Carson thought that Sir Walter Scott's long poem, \"The Lady of the Lake\" was \"the finest expression of outdoor life\". Carson eventually learned to write \"C. Carson\", but it was very difficult for him. He made his mark on official papers, and it was then witnessed by a clerk or other official.\nFinal days.\nWhen the Civil War ended, and the Indian Wars campaigns were in a lull, Carson was appointed brevet brigadier general (dated March 13, 1865) and appointed commandant of Ft. Garland, Colorado, in the heart of Ute territory. Carson had many Ute friends in the area and assisted in government relations.\nAfter being mustered out of the army, Carson took up ranching, settling at Boggsville in Bent County. In 1868, at the urging of Washington and the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, Carson journeyed to Washington, D.C., where he escorted several Ute Chiefs to meet with the US president to plead for assistance to their tribe. While in Washington, Carson was referred to a doctor by the name of Lewis Albert Sayre who lived in New York City. Carson made the short journey by train and met with Dr. Sayre who confirmed what Carson had already feared, he was suffering from an aneurysm. This wasn't new information for Carson, back in Colorado, Dr. Tilton had previously diagnosed him, and when he returned the doctor was shocked by the declining state of Carson. In fact, Carson was in such poor health that \"...Dr. Tilton thought the trip had all but killed him\" according to Hampton Sides in his book, \"Blood and Thunder\". The trip to Washington, D.C., had taken a toll on Carson and caused the symptoms from his aneurysm to worsen.\nSoon after his return, his wife, Josefa, died from complications after she gave birth to their eighth child. Her death was a crushing blow to Carson. According to Carson's son, Charles, \"he just seemed to pine away after Mother died\". The combination of a long and exhausting journey with the passing of his wife had a devastating effect on Carson. He died a month later, age 58, on May 23, 1868, in the presence of Dr. Tilton and his friend Thomas Boggs in the surgeon's quarters at Fort Lyon, Colorado. His last words were \"Goodbye, friends. \"Adi\u00f3s, compadres.\"\" The cause of his death was abdominal aortic aneurysm. His resting place is Taos, New Mexico.\nMonument and memorials.\nThe first Kit Carson monument, erected in Santa Fe in 1885 at the federal courthouse, was a simple stone obelisk with inscriptions including the words \"pathfinder, pioneer, soldier\", and \"He Led the Way\". Union Civil War veterans, the Grand Army of the Republic, led the fundraising and dedicated it \"to remember the brave deeds of a pioneer and patriot who fought for his country\".\nIn 1907, the Daughters of the American Revolution began placing monuments along the Santa Fe Trail and other sites that Carson had known. For example, the DAR guides noted the monument to Carson at Santa Fe and his and Josefa's home in Taos and the nearby cemetery, where his grave had been marked by the Grand Army of the Republic.\nThe first statues were erected in Colorado. In 1911, the granddaughter of Carson unveiled an equestrian statue at the community park near the state capitol in Denver. It \"honored the great explorer\" and was inscribed as well with \"He Led the Way\". In Trinidad, Colorado, the Daughters of the American Revolution and Boy Scouts of America led fund raising for the bronze statue of Carson in the city's new Kit Carson Park, placed in 1913.\nCalifornians followed with a statue of Carson on Olvera Street in Los Angeles, and a bronze representation of a tree trunk with \"Carson 1844\" inscribed on it, placed at Carson Pass in the Sierra Nevada. Both represented him as the explorer. Other statues or monuments followed in California, Washington, D.C. (sculpted by Isidore Konti), Nevada, and elsewhere.\nIn popular culture.\nEarly movies and television.\nGrand popular culture imagery of Carson, expressed through Hollywood cinema, began with the 1928 silent film \"Kit Carson\" from Paramount, a purported real-life story of Carson and the conquest of California. It was followed with a talking movie series begun in 1933, with 12 chapters, titled \"Fighting with Kit Carson\" with a cast including Johnny Mack Brown (as Kit) and both Noah Beery and Noah Beery Jr., with \"plenty of stunts and action\". Paramount's crew converted the series into a feature-length film, \"Fighting with Kit Carson\", in 1946. These popular matinee westerns strove for entertainment, not for accuracy, and exploited the Kit Carson name and myth.\nThe Kit Carson character played minor roles in other 1930s Westerns like the 1936 \"Sutter's Gold\", loosely about the California gold discovery; and the 1939 \"Mutiny on the Blackhawk\", an odd western with a mutiny on a slave ship that lands in California with Kit Carson and others ready to save the day. The 1940 western titled \"Kit Carson\" stars Jon Hall (as Kit), Dana Andrews (as Fremont), and others. Kit joins Captain John Fremont to guide a wagon train just as Mexican General Castro orders all Americans from California, then the conquest of California begins, a tale enlivened with gratuitous Indian attacks. Filmed in Kayenta, Arizona, and nearby Monument Valley, Navajo were hired as part of the crew.\nFrom 1951 to 1955, the television show \"The Adventures of Kit Carson\" ran for 105 episodes. He was a buckskin-clad heroic character who fights robbers, villains, and other bad guys. Bill Williams, who played Kit, complained that the show lacked the drama of the real Kit because of censors, NAFBRAT, wanting to eliminate violence from children's show. \"Its all in the history books\", Williams told the press, \"the real Kit should be tough\", fighting bears and mountain lions. He was a \"famous Indian fighter\". To him, TV Kit was \"a sissy on horseback\".\n\"Kit Carson Days\" celebrations.\nThe celebration of a community's past was a popular event by early in the twentieth century. A mountain man or \"Kit Carson\" themed history celebration was one of many that began to appear. They were not events to retell the accurate life of Kit Carson, but the mythic Kit. Alamosa, Colorado, Taos, New Mexico, Jackson, California, and elsewhere all had begun hosting \"Kit Carson Days\" celebrations by the 1930s. The event would have a mountain man camp, part of a living history spectacle, and include muzzle loading musket firing.\nBy the 1960s, Escondido, California's \"Kit Carson Days\" celebration included a reenactment of the \"Battle of San Pasqual\" and Indian dances at Kit Carson Park. Some advertised an emphasis on family fun, with children at the end of a parade\u2014the \"Kiddie Carson\" parade\u2014and young women competing to be \"Kittie Carson\". Because of COVID-19, none were scheduled for 2020.\nHistoric preservation.\nThough structures that Carson would have known had been preserved before 1950, full scale historic preservation projects of sites specifically significant for their association with Kit Carson did not begin until 1950s. In 1952, the Masonic Lodge of Taos, which had inherited the Carson home, restored and opened his classic adobe house as the Kit Carson Home and Museum, one representative of the early 19th century architecture and Hispano family setting but significant because of Carson. That same year, the state of New Mexico acquired the grave site and established Kit Carson State Park and Memorial Cemetery. The museum emphasized his early career, from around 1843 (when the Carsons bought the home) into the 1850s. Nearby, the former site of his Rayado home, acquired by the Boy Scouts of America, was reconstructed in spirit if not accuracy (no original architectural documents are extant) during the 1950s.\nReputation.\nIn 1950, professor Henry Nash Smith published his classic \"Virgin Land, the American West as Symbol and Myth\". A new type of study, one that looked at literature to understand the general public's view of the frontier, and its creation myth and symbols. To Smith, Carson represented the symbolic mountain man image created first in the novels of James Fenimore Cooper's \"Leatherstocking Tales\", the pathfinder who went into the wilderness as advance pioneer for civilization. Smith details the creation of mythic Carson as a national hero, as well as \"Indian fighter, the daredevil horseman, the slayer of grizzly bears, the ancestor of the hundreds of two-gun men who came later decades to people the Beadle dime novels\". Other writers defined two distinct Carsons portrayed in nineteenth century literature, of myth vs. reality. During the first half of the twentieth century, the general public put those beliefs in the mythic Carson into popular actions by erecting monuments and statues, holding public celebrations, and supporting early movies and television.\nThe 1970 publication of Dee Brown's best-selling \"Bury My Heart at Wounded Knee\" opened the eyes of the reading public to the tragic history of Native Americans which spurred a revaluation of the role of Carson in the Navajo wars. Over the last fifty years, echoing Brown, other writers, fiction and nonfiction, have split the mythic tale from Henry Nash Smith's Carson as symbol of America's heroic narrative of opening the West to create that of Carson as symbol for how the nation mistreated its indigenous peoples.\nIn 1973, during the annual Taos Fiesta, protesters declared that Carson should be stripped of historical honors, his grave at Taos threatened with exhumation, and the renaming of Kit Carson State Park was demanded. Taos led in reconsideration, in a public forum, as to whether Carson was the hero of old or a \"blood thirsty imperialist\". To one group represented, the American Indian Movement, Carson was responsible for the murder, or genocide of Native Americans. A subsequent history symposium, in 1993 in Taos, tried to enlighten and explain the frontiersman, to air various views. The Navajo were invited, but refused to attend. Voicing one extreme view, an anthropologist remarked, \"It's like trying to rehabilitate Adolf Hitler.\"\nNew Mexico historian Marc Simmons published a piece that was presented at the 1993 conference. He started with the history of vandalizing of Carson related sites, the painting of a black swastika on his grave and the scratching of the word \"killer\" on a nearby marker, of the defacing of the Kit Carson monument in Santa Fe. He related how a young professor at Colorado College was successful in demanding that a period photograph of Carson be removed from the ROTC office; how a tourist told a journalist at the Carson home in Taos, \"I will not go into the home of that racist, genocidal killer.\"; and a Navajo at a trading post said, \"No one here will talk about Kit Carson. He was a butcher.\" Other examples were presented, then Simmons followed with a brief explanation of Carson and his times, a theme expanded by Tom Dunlay in, what Simmons calls a magisterial, balanced treatment of the world of \"Kit Carson &amp; the Indians\" (2000).\nIn the early twenty-first century, best-selling writers Hampton Sides and David Roberts have reappraised the Carson reputation in their works, and have explained the complex image of Carson. While a heroic image or reputation of Carson is expressed in the earlier, 1968, biography by Harvey Carter, the older narrative has been revised by both Sides and Roberts: In 1968, Carter stated, \"In respect to his actual exploits and his actual character, however, Carson was not overrated. If history has to single out one person from among the Mountain Men to receive the admiration of later generations, Carson is the best choice. He had far more of the good qualities and fewer of the bad qualities than anyone else in that varied lot of individuals.\" In 2000, David Roberts wrote, \"Carson's trajectory, over three and a half decades, from thoughtless killer of Apaches and Blackfeet to defender and champion of the Utes, marks him out as one of the few frontiersmen whose change of heart toward the Indians, born not of missionary theory but of first-hand experience, can serve as an exemplar for the more enlightened policies that sporadically gained the day in the twentieth century.\" In 2006, Sides said that Carson believed the Native Americans needed reservations as a way of physically separating and shielding them from white hostility and white culture. He is said to have viewed the raids on white settlements as driven by desperation, \"committed from absolute necessity when in a starving condition\". Indian hunting grounds were disappearing as waves of white settlers filled the region.\nA final statement from biographer Roberts in 2000 was \"the fate in recent years of Kit Carson's reputation makes for a more perverse lesson in the vicissitudes of fame.\"\nLegacy.\nCarson's home in Taos, New Mexico, is the Kit Carson Home and Museum. His tourist attraction grave is nearby in the former Kit Carson State Park, now managed as a city park. A Kit Carson monument obelisk (1885) stands at the Santa Fe, New Mexico federal building park. The Kit Carson marker of bronze, dedicated to his 1844 trip, is in Carson Pass, California. A 1913 statue of Kit Carson stands at Trinidad, Colorado's Kit Carson Park. In Denver, Colorado, an equestrian statue of Kit Carson on horseback that once stood atop the Pioneer Fountain was removed and stored in 2020.\nCarson National Forest in New Mexico was named for him, as were Kit Carson County and the town of Kit Carson, both in Colorado. A river and valley in Nevada are named for Carson as well as the state's capital, Carson City. The Carson Plain in southwest Arizona is named for him.\nKit Carson Peak in the Sangre de Cristo range in Colorado, Kit Carson Mesa in Colfax County, New Mexico, and Carson Pass in Alpine County, California, and the Carson River in Alpine County, California and Douglas, Storey, Lyon, and Churchill Counties in Nevada, are all named in honor for him.\nFort Carson, an army post near the city of Colorado Springs, Colorado, was named after him during World War II by the popular vote of the men training there. Kit Carson Park in Escondido, California, and in Taos, New Mexico are named in honor for him. Innumerable streets, businesses, and lesser geographical features were given his name.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17155", "revid": "8005368", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17155", "title": "Kirin", "text": "Kirin may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "17156", "revid": "38021434", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17156", "title": "Kipper", "text": "Whole cold-smoked herring\nA kipper is a whole herring (a small, oily fish) that has been split in a butterfly fashion from tail to head along the dorsal ridge, gutted, salted or pickled, and cold-smoked over smouldering wood chips (typically oak).\nIn the United Kingdom, Ireland and some regions of North America, kippers are most commonly eaten for breakfast. In the United Kingdom, kippers, along with other preserved smoked or salted fish such as the bloater and buckling, were also once commonly enjoyed as a high tea or supper treat, most popularly with inland and urban working-class populations before World War II.\nTerminology.\nThe word is thought to derive from the Old English \"cypera\", or copper, based on the colour of the fish. The word has various possible parallels, such as Icelandic \"kippa\" which means \"to pull, snatch\" and the Germanic word \"kippen\" which means \"to tilt, to incline\". Similarly, the Middle English \"kipe\" denotes a basket used to catch fish. Another theory traces the word kipper to the \"kip\", or small beak, that male salmon develop during the breeding season.\nAs a verb, \"kippering\" (\"to kipper\") means to preserve by rubbing with salt or other spices before drying in the open air or in smoke. \nOriginally applied to the preservation of surplus fish (particularly those known as \"kips,\" harvested during spawning runs), \"kippering\" has come to mean the preservation of any fish, poultry, beef or other meat in like manner. The process is usually enhanced by cleaning, filleting, butterflying or slicing the food to expose maximum surface area to the drying and preservative agents.\nKippers, bloaters, and bucklings.\nAll three are types of smoked herring. Kippers are split, gutted and then cold-smoked; bloaters are cold-smoked whole; bucklings are hot-smoked whole.\nOrigin.\nAlthough the exact origin of the kipper is unknown, this process of slitting, gutting, and smoke-curing fish is well documented. According to Mark Kurlansky, \"Smoked foods almost always carry with them legends about their having been created by accident\u2014usually the peasant hung the food too close to the fire, and then, imagine his surprise the next morning when \u2026\". For instance Thomas Nashe wrote in 1599 about a fisherman from Lothingland in the Great Yarmouth area who discovered smoking herring by accident. Another story of the accidental invention of kipper is set in 1843, with John Woodger of Seahouses in Northumberland, when fish for processing was left overnight in a room with a smoking stove.\nColouring.\nA kipper is also sometimes referred to as a \"red herring\", although particularly strong curing is required to produce a truly red kipper.\nThe term appears in a mid-13th century poem by the Anglo-Norman poet Walter of Bibbesworth, \"He ete\u00fe no ffyssh But heryng red.\" Samuel Pepys used it in his diary entry of 28 February 1660: \"Up in the morning, and had some red herrings to our breakfast, while my boot-heel was a-mending, by the same token the boy left the hole as big as it was before.\"\nThe dyeing of kippers was introduced as an economy measure in the First World War by avoiding the need for the long smoking processes. This allowed the kippers to be sold quickly, easily and for a substantially greater profit. Kippers were originally dyed using a coal tar dye called brown FK (the FK is an abbreviation of \"for kippers\"), kipper brown or kipper dye. Today, kippers are usually brine-dyed using a natural annatto dye, giving the fish a deeper orange/yellow colour. European Community legislation limits the acceptable daily intake (ADI) of Brown FK to 0.15\u00a0mg/kg. Not all fish caught are suitable for the dyeing process, with mature fish more readily sought, because the density of their flesh improves the absorption of the dye. An \"orange kipper\" is a kipper that has been dyed orange.\nKippers from the Isle of Man and some Scottish producers are not dyed; instead, the smoking time is extended in the traditional manner.\nPreparation.\n\"Cold-smoked\" fish that have not been salted for preservation must be cooked before being eaten safely (they can be boiled, fried, grilled, jugged or roasted, for instance). In general, oily fish are preferred for smoking as the heat is evenly dispersed by the oil, and the flesh resists flaking apart like drier species.\nIn the UK, kippers are usually served at breakfast, although their popularity has declined since the Victorian and Edwardian eras.\nIn the United States, where kippers are much less commonly eaten than in the UK, they are almost always sold as either canned \"kipper snacks\" or in jars found in the refrigerated foods section. These are precooked and may be eaten without further preparation.\nIndustry.\nKippers produced in the Isle of Man are exported around the world. Thousands are produced annually in the town of Peel, where two kipper houses, Moore's Kipper Yard (founded 1882) and Devereau and Son (founded 1884), smoke and export herring.\nMallaig, once the busiest herring port in Europe, is famous for its traditionally smoked kippers, as are Stornoway kippers and Loch Fyne kippers. The harbour village of Craster in Northumberland is famed for Craster kippers, which are prepared in a local smokehouse, sold in the village shop and exported around the world.\nRelated terms.\nThe Manx word for kipper is , literally \"red herring\"; the Irish term is \"scad\u00e1n dearg\" with the same meaning.\n\"Kipper time\" is the season in which fishing for salmon in the River Thames in the United Kingdom is forbidden by an Act of Parliament; this period was originally the period 3 May to 6 January but has changed since. \"Kipper season\" refers (particularly among fairground workers, market workers, taxi drivers and the like) to any lean period in trade, particularly the first three or four months of the year.\nMembers of the Canadian military referred to English people as \"kippers\" because they were believed to frequently eat kippers for breakfast.\nThe English (UK) idiom [to be] \"stitched (or \"done\") up like a kipper\" is commonly used to describe a situation where a person has (depending on context) been \"fitted up\" or \"framed\"; \"used\", unfairly treated or betrayed; or cheated out of something, with no possibility of correcting the \"wrong\" done.\nIn the children's books \"The Railway Series\", and in the television show \"Thomas the Tank Engine and Friends\", The Flying Kipper is a nickname for a fast fish train usually pulled by Henry the Green Engine.\nThe United States Department of Agriculture defines \"Kippered Beef\" as a cured dry product similar to beef jerky but not as dry.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17157", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17157", "title": "Kipsigis people", "text": "Sub-Tribe in Kenya\nThe Kipsigis or Kipsigiis are a contingent of the Kalenjin ethnic group and speak a dialect of Kalenjin which is classified as a Nilotic language. Their dialect is identified by their community eponym, Kipsigis. The Kipsigis and another original group native to Kenya, known as Ogiek, appear to have a merged identity. The Kipsigis are the biggest sub tribe within the Kalenjin community. The latest population census in Kenya put the Kipsigis at 1,972,000 speakers, accounting for 45% of all Kalenjin speaking people. They occupy the highlands of Kericho stretching from Timboroa to the Mara River in the south and the Mau Escarpment in the east to Kebeneti. They also occupy parts of Laikipia, Kitale, Nakuru, Narok, the Trans Mara District, Eldoret and the Nandi Hills.\nApart from the Kalenjin, the other tribe is the Tatonga of Western Tanzania. In their expansion southwards, the Kipsigis and the Tatonga people reached the present-day Shinyanga area in Western Tanzania only for the former group to return to the Kericho area before some went back south, but could only settle at Angata Barigoi in Trans Mara next to the Tanzanian Border.&lt;mapframe latitude=\"-0.631701\" longitude=\"35.230408\" zoom=\"7\" width=\"217\" height=\"177\"&gt;{\n \"type\": \"FeatureCollection\",\n \"features\": [\n \"type\": \"Feature\",\n \"properties\": {},\n \"geometry\": {\n \"type\": \"Polygon\",\n \"coordinates\": [\n [ 35.592785, -0.371987 ],\n [ 35.580597, -0.391383 ],\n [ 35.585403, -0.404945 ],\n [ 35.59227, -0.407861 ],\n [ 35.705395, -0.360498 ],\n [ 35.720158, -0.365464 ],\n [ 35.733376, -0.357398 ],\n [ 35.735092, -0.36856 ],\n [ 35.74419, -0.378515 ],\n [ 35.761185, -0.376966 ],\n [ 35.773201, -0.354993 ],\n [ 35.7938, -0.354993 ],\n [ 35.806503, -0.344694 ],\n [ 35.815773, -0.327871 ],\n [ 35.81131, -0.307616 ],\n [ 35.81646, -0.302123 ],\n [ 35.821609, -0.257148 ],\n [ 35.830879, -0.237922 ],\n [ 35.865898, -0.237579 ],\n [ 35.893364, -0.257148 ],\n [ 35.892677, -0.284957 ],\n [ 35.853882, -0.317572 ],\n [ 35.877228, -0.323065 ],\n [ 35.896797, -0.354993 ],\n [ 35.913277, -0.36392 ],\n [ 35.888901, -0.376968 ],\n [ 35.887527, -0.386235 ],\n [ 35.895424, -0.388982 ],\n [ 35.898857, -0.396535 ],\n [ 35.912933, -0.397908 ],\n [ 35.91259, -0.410094 ],\n [ 35.928469, -0.409494 ],\n [ 35.947609, -0.414387 ],\n [ 35.965891, -0.419538 ],\n [ 35.971298, -0.440135 ],\n [ 35.979195, -0.472921 ],\n [ 35.978594, -0.482878 ],\n [ 35.982542, -0.494636 ],\n [ 35.991983, -0.511544 ],\n [ 35.993614, -0.509742 ],\n [ 35.995674, -0.509227 ],\n [ 35.995417, -0.508025 ],\n [ 35.994387, -0.506995 ],\n [ 35.995073, -0.504592 ],\n [ 35.996618, -0.502618 ],\n [ 36.000223, -0.50485 ],\n [ 36.002197, -0.506652 ],\n [ 36.005459, -0.50751 ],\n [ 36.006575, -0.509227 ],\n [ 36.008463, -0.510085 ],\n [ 36.011639, -0.509227 ],\n [ 36.013269, -0.509055 ],\n [ 36.0149, -0.508883 ],\n [ 36.017904, -0.504163 ],\n [ 36.022968, -0.50279 ],\n [ 36.02623, -0.502446 ],\n [ 36.02932, -0.502446 ],\n [ 36.032066, -0.506394 ],\n [ 36.035328, -0.506738 ],\n [ 36.038418, -0.507081 ],\n [ 36.043053, -0.503991 ],\n [ 36.044769, -0.509484 ],\n [ 36.045113, -0.514462 ],\n [ 36.046658, -0.518925 ],\n [ 36.039963, -0.516522 ],\n [ 36.03241, -0.515835 ],\n [ 36.026402, -0.510343 ],\n [ 36.01799, -0.513261 ],\n [ 36.019363, -0.517895 ],\n [ 36.02211, -0.518925 ],\n [ 36.022797, -0.524247 ],\n [ 36.028633, -0.530169 ],\n [ 36.03447, -0.536091 ],\n [ 36.040306, -0.542013 ],\n [ 36.046143, -0.547935 ],\n [ 36.047173, -0.549136 ],\n [ 36.050262, -0.548106 ],\n [ 36.051464, -0.546819 ],\n [ 36.051636, -0.545746 ],\n [ 36.053138, -0.545274 ],\n [ 36.053953, -0.544459 ],\n [ 36.05567, -0.544845 ],\n [ 36.056743, -0.54463 ],\n [ 36.058717, -0.542571 ],\n [ 36.061506, -0.541498 ],\n [ 36.062751, -0.540339 ],\n [ 36.064253, -0.53961 ],\n [ 36.065025, -0.538322 ],\n [ 36.065154, -0.536734 ],\n [ 36.065712, -0.536048 ],\n [ 36.066871, -0.536391 ],\n [ 36.066699, -0.533945 ],\n [ 36.066055, -0.533258 ],\n [ 36.066914, -0.5324 ],\n [ 36.068201, -0.5321 ],\n [ 36.069703, -0.533173 ],\n [ 36.071506, -0.533773 ],\n [ 36.072364, -0.532658 ],\n [ 36.072793, -0.531842 ],\n [ 36.073866, -0.52828 ],\n [ 36.076398, -0.527379 ],\n [ 36.079574, -0.52592 ],\n [ 36.081033, -0.525191 ],\n [ 36.083393, -0.523732 ],\n [ 36.093693, -0.524247 ],\n [ 36.102448, -0.519097 ],\n [ 36.108284, -0.51841 ],\n [ 36.149654, -0.493349 ],\n [ 36.150341, -0.480131 ],\n [ 36.161156, -0.479788 ],\n [ 36.161842, -0.537292 ],\n [ 36.183901, -0.557976 ],\n [ 36.186047, -0.563555 ],\n [ 36.190338, -0.574713 ],\n [ 36.187592, -0.584154 ],\n [ 36.177635, -0.582952 ],\n [ 36.170168, -0.583295 ],\n [ 36.162701, -0.583639 ],\n [ 36.155963, -0.581622 ],\n [ 36.149225, -0.579605 ],\n [ 36.141758, -0.578832 ],\n [ 36.13575, -0.575571 ],\n [ 36.12957, -0.549308 ],\n [ 36.117554, -0.539867 ],\n [ 36.094723, -0.543815 ],\n [ 36.084938, -0.560122 ],\n [ 36.081676, -0.576601 ],\n [ 36.07687, -0.58484 ],\n [ 36.067944, -0.594453 ],\n [ 36.051807, -0.598229 ],\n [ 36.050777, -0.593594 ],\n [ 36.046486, -0.590333 ],\n [ 36.040306, -0.590505 ],\n [ 36.034126, -0.59205 ],\n [ 36.01387, -0.593938 ],\n [ 36.00666, -0.598744 ],\n [ 35.997219, -0.595998 ],\n [ 35.992928, -0.588445 ],\n [ 35.990181, -0.578661 ],\n [ 35.989838, -0.56716 ],\n [ 35.981083, -0.555144 ],\n [ 35.974216, -0.555152 ],\n [ 35.946579, -0.558578 ],\n [ 35.933189, -0.55034 ],\n [ 35.905724, -0.547592 ],\n [ 35.891304, -0.526652 ],\n [ 35.854225, -0.505026 ],\n [ 35.833626, -0.492308 ],\n [ 35.837746, -0.468623 ],\n [ 35.830193, -0.465878 ],\n [ 35.827103, -0.474459 ],\n [ 35.816803, -0.473773 ],\n [ 35.817146, -0.464854 ],\n [ 35.811653, -0.4573 ],\n [ 35.797234, -0.457645 ],\n [ 35.795174, -0.46777 ],\n [ 35.79586, -0.47344 ],\n [ 35.780411, -0.51326 ],\n [ 35.776291, -0.522872 ],\n [ 35.773544, -0.537975 ],\n [ 35.747108, -0.531796 ],\n [ 35.736809, -0.531455 ],\n [ 35.721016, -0.55205 ],\n [ 35.711746, -0.55514 ],\n [ 35.712433, -0.564409 ],\n [ 35.71312, -0.573678 ],\n [ 35.707283, -0.590841 ],\n [ 35.694237, -0.600454 ],\n [ 35.685997, -0.619334 ],\n [ 35.685654, -0.639244 ],\n [ 35.678444, -0.657093 ],\n [ 35.670891, -0.65984 ],\n [ 35.662994, -0.677004 ],\n [ 35.639648, -0.701713 ],\n [ 35.606689, -0.675642 ],\n [ 35.59845, -0.637179 ],\n [ 35.572357, -0.630325 ],\n [ 35.549011, -0.587759 ],\n [ 35.450478, -0.591708 ],\n [ 35.488586, -0.549288 ],\n [ 35.491333, -0.484752 ],\n [ 35.467987, -0.447675 ],\n [ 35.451508, -0.402362 ],\n [ 35.450134, -0.359794 ],\n [ 35.474854, -0.33508 ],\n [ 35.48996, -0.293885 ],\n [ 35.533905, -0.295257 ],\n [ 35.57785, -0.302114 ],\n [ 35.60257, -0.274661 ],\n [ 35.625916, -0.287017 ],\n [ 35.638275, -0.273285 ],\n [ 35.64497, -0.272769 ],\n [ 35.65012, -0.268992 ],\n [ 35.65321, -0.260409 ],\n [ 35.653553, -0.250283 ],\n [ 35.659561, -0.244103 ],\n [ 35.651665, -0.235521 ],\n [ 35.652866, -0.226595 ],\n [ 35.656643, -0.213719 ],\n [ 35.652351, -0.210801 ],\n [ 35.649433, -0.205993 ],\n [ 35.659561, -0.199813 ],\n [ 35.660248, -0.193977 ],\n [ 35.652008, -0.194325 ],\n [ 35.649261, -0.178534 ],\n [ 35.634155, -0.173722 ],\n [ 35.613556, -0.2005 ],\n [ 35.612869, -0.221783 ],\n [ 35.590897, -0.22247 ],\n [ 35.568237, -0.229335 ],\n [ 35.553818, -0.227278 ],\n [ 35.53442, -0.252169 ],\n [ 35.524979, -0.273283 ],\n [ 35.505409, -0.272254 ],\n [ 35.472965, -0.278607 ],\n [ 35.458202, -0.286502 ],\n [ 35.444813, -0.293883 ],\n [ 35.423012, -0.298861 ],\n [ 35.414257, -0.304182 ],\n [ 35.408421, -0.310876 ],\n [ 35.403271, -0.306243 ],\n [ 35.366192, -0.348477 ],\n [ 35.372028, -0.36203 ],\n [ 35.383701, -0.359456 ],\n [ 35.396061, -0.352762 ],\n [ 35.395718, -0.36306 ],\n [ 35.399666, -0.363576 ],\n [ 35.391941, -0.368039 ],\n [ 35.384731, -0.372845 ],\n [ 35.38353, -0.376106 ],\n [ 35.360012, -0.37027 ],\n [ 35.349197, -0.376107 ],\n [ 35.338898, -0.378683 ],\n [ 35.336151, -0.394129 ],\n [ 35.321388, -0.41164 ],\n [ 35.318298, -0.41885 ],\n [ 35.311432, -0.423313 ],\n [ 35.314178, -0.435502 ],\n [ 35.285854, -0.489223 ],\n [ 35.292549, -0.490603 ],\n [ 35.310059, -0.50124 ],\n [ 35.311604, -0.509999 ],\n [ 35.315552, -0.512402 ],\n [ 35.311604, -0.518238 ],\n [ 35.3092, -0.520813 ],\n [ 35.306969, -0.529396 ],\n [ 35.305767, -0.53815 ],\n [ 35.326366, -0.570073 ],\n [ 35.337353, -0.579174 ],\n [ 35.350399, -0.551196 ],\n [ 35.360184, -0.529912 ],\n [ 35.367393, -0.521844 ],\n [ 35.379925, -0.519798 ],\n [ 35.381813, -0.525791 ],\n [ 35.37838, -0.528537 ],\n [ 35.375805, -0.530598 ],\n [ 35.379581, -0.533002 ],\n [ 35.383358, -0.54124 ],\n [ 35.386276, -0.551025 ],\n [ 35.390396, -0.558062 ],\n [ 35.392456, -0.565959 ],\n [ 35.391941, -0.585698 ],\n [ 35.400867, -0.59514 ],\n [ 35.408421, -0.607156 ],\n [ 35.391769, -0.627581 ],\n [ 35.396233, -0.636679 ],\n [ 35.398464, -0.648179 ],\n [ 35.426788, -0.720961 ],\n [ 35.47863, -0.762152 ],\n [ 35.506096, -0.774169 ],\n [ 35.519142, -0.774856 ],\n [ 35.538025, -0.779429 ],\n [ 35.550041, -0.787557 ],\n [ 35.570297, -0.767993 ],\n [ 35.617676, -0.722684 ],\n [ 35.639305, -0.741559 ],\n [ 35.69149, -0.728517 ],\n [ 35.69767, -0.758035 ],\n [ 35.724792, -0.75735 ],\n [ 35.733032, -0.786871 ],\n [ 35.750885, -0.813649 ],\n [ 35.752945, -0.831498 ],\n [ 35.741272, -0.841797 ],\n [ 35.730286, -0.865823 ],\n [ 35.730972, -0.899462 ],\n [ 35.702133, -0.926931 ],\n [ 35.673981, -0.942732 ],\n [ 35.612869, -0.98185 ],\n [ 35.548325, -0.980478 ],\n [ 35.46524, -0.933798 ],\n [ 35.378723, -0.992835 ],\n [ 35.332031, -1.002447 ],\n [ 35.271606, -1.018211 ],\n [ 35.241851, -1.036551 ],\n [ 35.216675, -1.018211 ],\n [ 35.189552, -1.029219 ],\n [ 35.164833, -1.030595 ],\n [ 35.131187, -1.028869 ],\n [ 35.115051, -1.069716 ],\n [ 35.089302, -1.058057 ],\n [ 35.076942, -1.021676 ],\n [ 35.062866, -0.998677 ],\n [ 35.059776, -0.981858 ],\n [ 35.043297, -0.987519 ],\n [ 35.034027, -0.992325 ],\n [ 35.029135, -0.993526 ],\n [ 35.024242, -0.994728 ],\n [ 35.025272, -0.997731 ],\n [ 35.026302, -1.000735 ],\n [ 35.022526, -1.003138 ],\n [ 35.019436, -1.005541 ],\n [ 35.017033, -1.008973 ],\n [ 35.014458, -1.014637 ],\n [ 35.009136, -1.02013 ],\n [ 35.0033, -1.022361 ],\n [ 35.002785, -1.025794 ],\n [ 34.99918, -1.028368 ],\n [ 34.993858, -1.028196 ],\n [ 34.989052, -1.025107 ],\n [ 34.986649, -1.027853 ],\n [ 34.985275, -1.031972 ],\n [ 34.982357, -1.036263 ],\n [ 34.983215, -1.040554 ],\n [ 34.946136, -1.07797 ],\n [ 34.930344, -1.101998 ],\n [ 34.909058, -1.115042 ],\n [ 34.893265, -1.132205 ],\n [ 34.876785, -1.13701 ],\n [ 34.867859, -1.148681 ],\n [ 34.856873, -1.159665 ],\n [ 34.837646, -1.170649 ],\n [ 34.835587, -1.15074 ],\n [ 34.854126, -1.148681 ],\n [ 34.860992, -1.12328 ],\n [ 34.874725, -1.116415 ],\n [ 34.884338, -1.07797 ],\n [ 34.883652, -1.050509 ],\n [ 34.889832, -1.018242 ],\n [ 34.880905, -1.008287 ],\n [ 34.936523, -0.97293 ],\n [ 34.931374, -0.966064 ],\n [ 34.932404, -0.955766 ],\n [ 34.94339, -0.937573 ],\n [ 34.944763, -0.928647 ],\n [ 34.940643, -0.921095 ],\n [ 34.942703, -0.907021 ],\n [ 35.006905, -0.891576 ],\n [ 35.015792, -0.892985 ],\n [ 35.007935, -0.883726 ],\n [ 35.073853, -0.823344 ],\n [ 35.091705, -0.803349 ],\n [ 35.048532, -0.707742 ],\n [ 35.049906, -0.704995 ],\n [ 35.051279, -0.702249 ],\n [ 35.054541, -0.701048 ],\n [ 35.057201, -0.699331 ],\n [ 35.064325, -0.695212 ],\n [ 35.069196, -0.694782 ],\n [ 35.071042, -0.694031 ],\n [ 35.071836, -0.693452 ],\n [ 35.072608, -0.692937 ],\n [ 35.072393, -0.692315 ],\n [ 35.072072, -0.691693 ],\n [ 35.072072, -0.691242 ],\n [ 35.072222, -0.690405 ],\n [ 35.071063, -0.689397 ],\n [ 35.070956, -0.688968 ],\n [ 35.070848, -0.68738 ],\n [ 35.070827, -0.686972 ],\n [ 35.06984, -0.684462 ],\n [ 35.069089, -0.684183 ],\n [ 35.068102, -0.684119 ],\n [ 35.067501, -0.683711 ],\n [ 35.067308, -0.682939 ],\n [ 35.067222, -0.681801 ],\n [ 35.066814, -0.68075 ],\n [ 35.066471, -0.6803 ],\n [ 35.066128, -0.679849 ],\n [ 35.065506, -0.67927 ],\n [ 35.065055, -0.679098 ],\n [ 35.064454, -0.678733 ],\n [ 35.06366, -0.678218 ],\n [ 35.062866, -0.676673 ],\n [ 35.062759, -0.675987 ],\n [ 35.063274, -0.67485 ],\n [ 35.063853, -0.673798 ],\n [ 35.064025, -0.67279 ],\n [ 35.063918, -0.671781 ],\n [ 35.060678, -0.669228 ],\n [ 35.058961, -0.666975 ],\n [ 35.057952, -0.665709 ],\n [ 35.057373, -0.664164 ],\n [ 35.05718, -0.662062 ],\n [ 35.055807, -0.65747 ],\n [ 35.055935, -0.653951 ],\n [ 35.054626, -0.650425 ],\n [ 35.057373, -0.58455 ],\n [ 35.05188, -0.488481 ],\n [ 35.032654, -0.430838 ],\n [ 34.996948, -0.406134 ],\n [ 35.010681, -0.345746 ],\n [ 35.038147, -0.307318 ],\n [ 35.06012, -0.233204 ],\n [ 35.101318, -0.18654 ],\n [ 35.134277, -0.159091 ],\n [ 35.200195, -0.164581 ],\n [ 35.244141, -0.200265 ],\n [ 35.271606, -0.233204 ],\n [ 35.304565, -0.227715 ],\n [ 35.343018, -0.23046 ],\n [ 35.323792, -0.178306 ],\n [ 35.285339, -0.170071 ],\n [ 35.26886, -0.131641 ],\n [ 35.233154, -0.095957 ],\n [ 35.301819, -0.076742 ],\n [ 35.362244, -0.112427 ],\n [ 35.408936, -0.082232 ],\n [ 35.411682, -0.032823 ],\n [ 35.436401, 0.013841 ],\n [ 35.472107, 0.008352 ],\n [ 35.510559, 0.008528 ],\n [ 35.579224, -0.002372 ],\n [ 35.631409, -0.035312 ],\n [ 35.641708, -0.059739 ],\n [ 35.669518, -0.048413 ],\n [ 35.654411, -0.07553 ],\n [ 35.690117, -0.073816 ],\n [ 35.69046, -0.097503 ],\n [ 35.69355, -0.108145 ],\n [ 35.730972, -0.152436 ],\n [ 35.722046, -0.181274 ],\n [ 35.724106, -0.201873 ],\n [ 35.768051, -0.200529 ],\n [ 35.789337, -0.169614 ],\n [ 35.79277, -0.160683 ],\n [ 35.787277, -0.121532 ],\n [ 35.793457, -0.112613 ],\n [ 35.805817, -0.096127 ],\n [ 35.821609, -0.121551 ],\n [ 35.844269, -0.089198 ],\n [ 35.879974, -0.032251 ],\n [ 35.893707, -0.052879 ],\n [ 35.90126, -0.054935 ],\n [ 35.917053, -0.085163 ],\n [ 35.925293, -0.075536 ],\n [ 35.949326, -0.051461 ],\n [ 35.982285, 0.014479 ],\n [ 36.040649, 0.017862 ],\n [ 36.095581, -0.013054 ],\n [ 36.117554, 0.004103 ],\n [ 36.103821, 0.057685 ],\n [ 36.117554, 0.056297 ],\n [ 36.129227, 0.056984 ],\n [ 36.133347, 0.111945 ],\n [ 36.141586, 0.122922 ],\n [ 36.147079, 0.182689 ],\n [ 36.203384, 0.2012 ],\n [ 36.198578, 0.216311 ],\n [ 36.180038, 0.226612 ],\n [ 36.206818, 0.236227 ],\n [ 36.220551, 0.216288 ],\n [ 36.236343, 0.208057 ],\n [ 36.269989, 0.164237 ],\n [ 36.356506, 0.157934 ],\n [ 36.401825, 0.129786 ],\n [ 36.364746, 0.052169 ],\n [ 36.300888, 0.054915 ],\n [ 36.256256, 0.032273 ],\n [ 36.22879, 0.008216 ],\n [ 36.170425, -0.057714 ],\n [ 36.129227, -0.14561 ],\n [ 36.073608, -0.122934 ],\n [ 36.059189, -0.138019 ],\n [ 36.002197, -0.138734 ],\n [ 35.956192, -0.1449 ],\n [ 35.936279, -0.124968 ],\n [ 35.893707, -0.155182 ],\n [ 35.860748, -0.21289 ],\n [ 35.831223, -0.211515 ],\n [ 35.811996, -0.215637 ],\n [ 35.79071, -0.217008 ],\n [ 35.764618, -0.225942 ],\n [ 35.746078, -0.218383 ],\n [ 35.717239, -0.223164 ],\n [ 35.69252, -0.210122 ],\n [ 35.675354, -0.207377 ],\n [ 35.671234, -0.16343 ],\n [ 35.658102, -0.217408 ],\n [ 35.657501, -0.229681 ],\n [ 35.665226, -0.228737 ],\n [ 35.680761, -0.232342 ],\n [ 35.690975, -0.235347 ],\n [ 35.703678, -0.237064 ],\n [ 35.717239, -0.246075 ],\n [ 35.713806, -0.244275 ],\n [ 35.71166, -0.246162 ],\n [ 35.71106, -0.2429 ],\n [ 35.709085, -0.242043 ],\n [ 35.697069, -0.248565 ],\n [ 35.699301, -0.254229 ],\n [ 35.70179, -0.252942 ],\n [ 35.701962, -0.258092 ],\n [ 35.709257, -0.26693 ],\n [ 35.663509, -0.313959 ],\n [ 35.636902, -0.31791 ],\n [ 35.631409, -0.331988 ],\n [ 35.609093, -0.344684 ],\n [ 35.592785, -0.371987 ]\n ]\n },\n \"type\": \"Feature\",\n \"properties\": {},\n \"geometry\": {\n \"type\": \"Polygon\",\n \"coordinates\": [\n [ 34.850006, -1.283921 ],\n [ 34.869232, -1.299023 ],\n [ 34.896698, -1.336091 ],\n [ 34.848633, -1.367667 ],\n [ 34.779968, -1.41846 ],\n [ 34.723663, -1.385514 ],\n [ 34.723663, -1.363186 ],\n [ 34.72229, -1.353921 ],\n [ 34.720917, -1.345341 ],\n [ 34.716797, -1.333674 ],\n [ 34.713707, -1.321319 ],\n [ 34.712334, -1.310681 ],\n [ 34.709587, -1.302788 ],\n [ 34.695511, -1.244112 ],\n [ 34.755249, -1.271566 ],\n [ 34.790268, -1.268132 ],\n [ 34.823227, -1.273625 ],\n [ 34.850006, -1.283921 ]\n ]\n}&lt;/mapframe&gt;\nThe IBEAC company and the British colonial government referred to the Kipsigis people as Lumbwa and Kwavi. The pre-colonial traditional occupations of the Kipsigis included semi-pastoral herding, military expeditions, and farming sorghum and millet. Post-colonial Kipsigis today still live predominantly in their historical tribal territory on the Western Highlands of Kenya at an altitude of 1500m to 2000m; they mainly grow tea, undertake dairy farming and farm maize. They also grow wheat, pyrethrum and coffee.\nOrigin, establishment and precolonial history.\nOrigin.\nThe Kipsigis trace their ancestry to a fusion of two traditions: the Lumbwa, an iron age Kalenjin speaking population reported in areas of southern Kenya, northern Tanzania, and the Mount Kenya region, and migrating Ateker clans\u2014part of a larger Eastern Nilotic movement that also helped shape neighboring communities such as the Nandi.\nThe \"Lumbwa\" (also known as Lumbua, Umpua, or Ilumbwa) were known for their cattle-keeping lifestyle, braided hairstyles, and perhaps the use of sunken livestock enclosures on the slopes of Mount Kenya. Meru oral traditions recall the Lumbwa as one of the early peoples encountered on the mountain, which the Kalenjin remember as Koilege\u2014meaning \u201cdappled rock\u201d. Fadiman (1994) reported of \" pits located along a line that runs roughly along the zone at 7,000\u20137,500 feet which delineates the lowest edge of the forest from the highest point in the star-grass (populated) zone [which] form an irregular line that can be followed from ridge to ridge, along a region that is largely farmland, but which two hundred years ago must have been thickly forested. The largest pits average 16 to 24 feet across.\" Certain traditions he collected recall that they may have been used to contain Umpua (or Agumba) herds. Most traditions however recall the Agumba, a people who lived in association with the Lumbwa, as hunters.\nDuring the late 18th and early 19th centuries, Ateker-related groups migrated southward from the north-eastern Rift Valley, bringing with them new clan systems, ritual practices, and military organization. The recently formed Ateker, calling themselves Loikop (loosely - owners of the land) swept down from a base east of Lake Turkana and in short order took most of the best grazing plains in East Africa from their previous inhabitants (who included among them the Lumbwa). The Uasin Gishu, Laikipia, Mau, Amboseli and Serengeti plains all came under the sway of this new polity. However, written accounts as well as the oral traditions of the Nandi and Kipsigis record the 'reconquest' of the Uasin Gishu plateau, Narok and Bomet, a process that included the assimilation of the 'Maasai' that had latterly occupied them. This fusion gave rise to new identities\u2014including the Kipsigis and Nandi\u2014who nonetheless retained deep Lumbwa roots. Both communities maintain clan traditions linking them to both Lumbwa heritage and Ateker ancestry. \nIn the 19th century, the term \"Lumbwa\" was used widely by neighboring Maasai and Bantu-speaking communities to refer to both Kalenjin-speaking and Loikop-related pastoralists. As the identity fused, it came to refer especially to the Kipsigis, who had begun to shift from pastoralism toward an agro-pastoral way of life. Among the Maasai, \u201cIlumbwa\u201d (meaning \"well-diggers\") eventually gained pejorative undertones, reflecting cultural differences around land use and livelihood.\nBy the mid-19th century, the term \"Lumbwa\" had become closely associated with the Kipsigis, though it was gradually dropped due to its pejorative connotation in Maa-speaking contexts.\nCulture.\nThe Kipsigis observe a belief system maintained by all other Kalenjin people. The system observes polytheistic theism with the deities Asiis (a solar deity) and Tororot are each considered major deities. Some studies suggest that Tororot was the initial kalenjin deity but interactions in Kerio valley led to assimilation of the priestly Kibasisek clan whose peculiarity is having the Sun as their tortem; they were much sought after to perform marriage rituals and other religious activities. While multiple other deities exist independently to one another. In the Kipsigis' monotheistic belief system, Asis is instead considered the single supreme deity, and the other deities are considered Asis' attributes, rather than independent entities. The Kipsigis allude to cultural values including superstition, spiritualism, and a sacred and cyclical nature of life. They believe all elements of the natural world are connected, that good deeds never go unnoticed, and that bad deeds lead to consequences in various forms. The Kipsigis view \"happiness\" as a lack of negative experiences, indicating a quiet and calm state. This convention under the culture and positive psychology studies when contrasted to other indigenous communities gives researchers an obstacle in obtaining a qualitative or quantitative measure of happiness.\nThe Kipsigis people's oral tradition is observed to have a rich background in songs. Many of their oral traditions feature a creature known as \"'Chemosi',\" usually referred to in western texts and culture as the Nandi bear; a monstrous ape-like basic-intelligence creature which also feature among other communities of Kenya, Uganda and parts of Congo.\nA western adventurer Edgar Beecher Bronson claims to have seen a creature that he notes the Lumbwa people referred to as Dingonek. He describes it as a water creature whose features include an armadillo-like, leopard-patterned, hippo-sized back and a leopard's head with two large protruding fangs. He reports that the Lumbwa and the Wadoko peoples spoke of such a creature in the Maggori River then provides an account of his sighting of the said creature. His is the only account of such a creature.\nFood and drinks\nThe meals mainly consist of a cooked, thick paste of elusine flour, vegetables or meat, a blend of milk and cow blood, or milk. The Kipsigis ferment milk in gourds with powdered popcorn flower tree cinders. The sour milk is known as Mursiik. The tribe also brewed Nubian gin and it was reserved for men and women in and past middle age.\n\"Mushrooms\"\nThe Kipsigis are known to gather \"Termitomyces tylerianus\", \"Termitomyces umkowaan\" and \"Termitomyces microcarpus (puunereek).\"\nAstronomy and calendar.\nThe Milky Way is known as \"Poit'ap kechei\" (literally \"sea of stars\"), the morning star \u2013 Tapoiyot, the midnight star \u2013 Kokeliet, and Orion's Belt \u2013 Kakipsomok. The Milky Way was traditionally perceived as a lake in which children are bathing and playing. Furthermore, the movement of stars was sometimes linked to earthly concerns. For example, the appearance or non-appearance of the Pleiades indicated whether or not to expect a good or a bad harvest. Sometimes superstitions were held regarding certain events. A halo was traditionally said to represent a cattle stockade. At least as of the early 20th century, a break occurring on the east side was considered to be unlucky while one on the west side was seen to be lucky. A comet was at the same time regarded as the precursor of a great misfortune.\nThe Kipsigis call a month 'Arawet', which is also the term for our satellite, the moon. A year is called 'Kenyit' which can be derived from the phrase 'Ki-nyit' meaning 'to accomplish, to fill in'. A year was marked by the order of months and more importantly by ceremonial and religious celebration of the yearly harvest which was held at the various shrines. This event being analogous to a practice observed by most of the other Africans has inspired the Kwanza festivities celebrated by predominantly by people of African descent in the United States. Kenyit started in February. It had two seasons known as \"olto\" (pl. \"oltosiek\") and was divided into twelve months, \"arawet\" (pl. \"arawek\"). In place of a decade is the order of \"Ibinda\" which is usually between 10 and 17 years. In place of a century is the completion of the age set which takes between 100 and 120 years.\nThe first season of the year, olt-ap-iwot (iwotet), was the wet season and ran from March to August. The dry season, olt-ap-keme (kemeut), ran from September to February. The kipsunde and kipsunde oieng harvest ceremonies were held in September and October respectively to mark the change in Seasons.\nGeopolitical and military organisation.\nSocial organization.\nThe Kipsigis tribe is a patriarchal society that was organized in terms of geo-political groupings, clan systems, age sets and military ranks.\nGenealogical Organizations (Ortiinweek).\nThe Kipsigis organize themselves into a series of groupings based on shared kinship analogous to clans. A clan is brought about by a shared ancestor with a context of adoption as a way of naturalization into the clan, usually from Maasai/Gusii/Luo as Kipsigis cannot adopt from within Kalenjin. The patriarchal ancestors, notably the patriarch Kakipoch, immigrated the Nandi-Kipsigis population to Uasin Ngishu plains and Kerio Valley. Formulation of the clan system is thought to have come about due to assimilation of other communities and population growth as a system of preventing pedigree collapse and in-breeding as the main purpose of clans was to prevent marriage within the same clan (marriages being mainly heterosexual but with a lesbian marriage in context). Clans also projected various professionalism and probably adopted identities where for instance, certain clans were exclusively priests, others were exclusively smiths, others exclusively hunters and gathers while others had other particular peculiarities.\nGenerations.\nThe Kipsigis observe a cyclical generation setting system. The system seems to have been arrogated plausibly from the Bantu Kikuyu people. The system completes a full rotation in between about a hundred and a hundred and twenty years. The set is composed of generations that extend between 15 and 20 years. The system was used to account for historical events and demographic management.\nGeopolitical organization.\nEm or emet, was the highest recognized geographic division among the Kipsigis. It spans a geopolitical region demarcated as being a jurisdiction of the tribe and entitled to a decree of sovereignty. This unit was identifiable as a political institution but the main work of civil control and administration was done by the \"kokwotinwek\" (plural of \"kokwet\"). Linguistic evidence indicates that this form of societal organization dates back to their Southern Nilotic heritage. It is believed that the Southern Nilotes of two thousand years ago cooperated in loose supra-clan groupings, called *e:m.\n\"Kokwet\" was the most significant political and judicial unit among the Kipsigis. The governing body of each kokwet was its \"kok\" (village council). Kokwet denotes a geographic cluster of settlement similar in concept to a village. \"Kok\" elders were the local authority for arbitration and conflict resolution.\nThe Office of the King (Oorgoiiyoot).\nThe Kipsigis were initially and traditionally acephalous with decentralized and non-stratified communes whose judicio-political organ known as Kok, consisting of elders of reputation, served as a system of government.\nOperational in Nandi, the Orkoiyot institution was communed to Kipsigis not later than 1850, after the ousting and assassination of Kimnyole Arap Turgat. Kimnyole sent his three sons (Kipchomber arap Koilege, Arap Boisyo and Arap Buigut) to Kipsigis who immediately began to establish a Kipsigis confederation, each of them establishing kingly homesteads with servants, messengers and reception parlors. The office of the \"Oorgoiiyoot\" was dissolved after the Lumbwa Treaty.\nMilitary organisation.\nWhile evidence suggests precolonial Kipsigis as having engaged in conquests of territory, a mistaken impression emerges of an efficient organized military; rather the existence of a Kipsigis army was indicative of a social organization at the tribal level despite evidence of large portions of conquered territory and defeat of strong armies. The precolonial Kipsigis were presented as a markedly acephalous society politically with both military and political organization having to be examined in terms of relatively autonomous territorial groups within the tribe.\nThe Kipsigis armies organized themselves into four regiments (pororiosiek) namely: Kipkaige, Ng'etunyo, Kebeni and Kasanet. Recruitment into the regiments was achieved through the age set and clan system. Each regiment fought independently which often resulted in weak and often conflicting strategies. At a later stage, the four regiments merged into two ,consisting of Kipkaige and Kasanet on the one side and Ng'etunyo and Kebeni on the other; but ultimately, the strength of this army was tested with a resounding defeat at the hands of Gusii in the battle of Ngoina dated to \"circa 1850\". Once again, the Kipsigis army regiments regrouped into one force composed equally of all four regiments and while this development would spur a record of victories, it would also be tested in the battle of Mogori \"circa 1890\" with a defeat that had dire implications on the spirit and identity of the Kipsigis.\nOther studies depict a more elaborate military organization; for instance, there were an extra tire of regiments and ranks including: the generals (Kiptayat/Kiptaiinik), spies (\"Yotiik\", \"Seegeik\" and \"Sogooldaiik\"), and the procession ranks (\"Ng'anymetyeet\", \"Pirtiich\", \"Oldimdo/Lumweet\" and \"Kipeelbany\"). There were yearly mock up practice for warring called \"Kaambageet\".\nThe arms of the fighting men usually consisted of a spear, shield, sword and club. By the late 19th century, up to four kinds of spears, representing various eras and areas were in use. In Nandi, the eren-gatiat, of the Sirkwa era was still in use though only by old men. It had a short and small leaf-shaped blade with a long socketed shank and a long butt. Two types of the Maasai era spear, known as ngotit, were also in use. Those of the eastern, northern and southern counties had long narrow blades with long iron butt, short socket and short shaft. Those of the central county (emgwen) had short broad blades with short iron butts. In the western counties, a spear that had a particularly small head, a long shaft and no butt was in use, it was known as ndirit. The pastoral Pokot carried two Maasai era spears, known as \"ngotwa\" while the agricultural sections armed themselves with a sword, known as \"chok\".\nArchery was also very much a prominent skill practiced among the Kipsigis for purposes ranging from agriculture to defense and security. There were an array of arrows for various specialties such as for shooting a bull for blood, hunting arrows and defensive arrows meant either as a deterrent by causing mortal wounds or others meant to get stuck in the victim while others were poisoned and thus each of the arrow types were used depending on the occasion.\nHistorical Kipsigis war heroes.\nThe military culture of the Kipsigis directly led to adoration of war heroes and successful commanders. Some of them include: Araap Ngulolu, Kipsiongo Araap Terer of Kipkoibon, Araap Taptugen of Belgut, Araap Buiywo, Araap Nyarino, Araap Tamasoon, Araap Kirui of Kapkugoeek clan, Araap Tompo, Araap Mastamet, Araap Cheriro, Kendeiywo Araap Baliach, Arap Moigi and Araap Tengecha (who stood out among all of them and a close friend of Jomo Kenyatta).\nPrecolonial history.\nBreaking away from the former Chemwal ethnicity and becoming Kipsigis in about 1790s and 1800s, the Kipsigis population grew from an estimated population of less than five hundred in what is today's Fort Tenan. From here, they acquired military resilience against the neighbouring Luo who would go on to call them Jalang'o (meaning one who is spirited). They also fought Kisii communities out of today's Kabianga in Kericho West District and also towards the east against the Maasai who occupied parts of Kipkelion, Kericho and Londiani. The expansion of the Kipsigis territory was rapid and violent and by the 1890s as Orkoiyot institution was established, Kipsigis territory extended from the Nandi Hills in the North to Sotik in the South, with a small region in Bureti.\nMenya Arap Kisiara.\nMenya is narrated among the Kipsigis as an excellent diplomat and war hero. He is credited for defeating the Maasai who used to inhabit larger portions of Kericho county. Significant battles are recalled having been fought in Iltianit(Londiani), fought in Kericho, Chemoiben, and then Siriat in Sotik. Initially an outcast and an outlier, Menyua Arap Kisiara was banished off the tribal land for marrying a \"Kapkerichek\" clanswoman which at the time, was also his own clan. He defected with his company of warriors, - Tapkile and Kipketes/Kipkeles into Maasai community. He then started his own clan of Kapkaon. Returning later on as formidable warrior and establishing his army, he challenged the Maasai into a duel estimated from oral traditions to have taken place in the 1770s to where Kaplong town in Sotik is situated today, Menya led an army to war against the Maasai in order to resolve land disputes and territorial privileges. The war ensued for a number of weeks to a couple of months and for the most part, both sides lost many warriors, and many were injured. Towards the end, Menya called in a truce and overnight, amassed aid and reinforcements from Kipsigis warriors across the whole of Kipsigis. On returning to the ultimate and decisive battle, he easily outwitted the Maasai with an army of an estimated 3000 warriors or more. Maasai conceded defeat and resolved to vacate what constitutes today most if not all of Bomet County and Narok West Constituency.\nOrgoik.\n'Orgoik' (plural) or 'Orgoiyoot' (singular) is any clansperson of the Talaai clan spread across Nandi, Kipsigis, Tugen and Marakwet. In Kipsigis, most of the Talaai clansmen can identify a patrilineal genealogy to three sons of Kimnyole Araap Turgat namely: Kipchomber Araap Koilege, Chebochok Kiptonui Araap Boisyo and Araap Buiygut; Koitalel Araap Samoei was their younger sibling. The three brothers were sent by their father, Araap Turgat to Kipsigis nation shortly before his assassination by the Nandi people. Their benefactor was their uncle, Araap Kiroisi of Sotik.\nConsidered special and thought to have out-of-worldly powers, the three were pushed into leadership and for the first time in Kipsigis history, they were able to hold positions that can be equalled to a king or leaders of autonomous regions. Their influence led to expansion of the Kipsigis territory adding to the achievements of Menya Araap Kisiara. They were also considered herbal medicinemen and thus acquired wealth from war reparation and pay for medical services. They went on to have very sedentary lifestyles with their homesteads employing several servants and a primitive equivalent of slaves.\nFollowing the Lumbwa treaty between Kipsigis and The British, the three brothers were arrested and would, in about 1903, be deported to Kikuyu-land while their siblings and immediate families consisting of about 700 individuals were banished to Gwassi in Homa Bay County and stayed there excommunicated between 1934 and 1962. They were later on resettled in Kablilo, Sigowet-Soin, Kiptere, Ainamoi, Belgut and some few in Emgwen.\nAmong the Kipsigis, there is speculative talk that implicates Daniel Arap Moi and Jomo Kenyatta as having relations with the Orgoik.\nKipchomber arap Koilege.\nKipchomber lived in Cheriri in Kiptere before being imprisoned by the British and sent to Rusinga island of Kisumu. He was instrumental in dispersing Luo people from Kiptere to Sondu. Among the Kipsigis, and perhaps among all the other Kalenjin, Arap Koilege is believed to have blessed Jomo Kenyatta and gave him his attire, which included a hide, a belt colloquially called 'Kenyatet', and a headdress; after this Koilege asked Kenyatta to visit a leader of the Maasai who was a Laibon. The attire was worn by Jomo on ceremonial occasions when he was the president of Kenya. Today, Jomo Kenyatta's traditional attire is buried with him in a mausoleum in Kenya's National Assembly building in Nairobi.\nChebochok Kiptonui arap Boisio.\nChebochock was the son to Kimyole Arap Turgat. After Kimnyole was ousted and assassinated by the Nandi, Chebochok and his two brothers found refuge among the Kipsigis people while Koitalel Arap Samoei found refuge among the Tugen people. Chebochock Kiptonui arap Boisio settled in Londiani. He established himself a kingly estate. He empowered and commandeered Kipsigis armies to acquire land towards Laikipia.\nHe is reported or speculated to have fathered a boy to a widow who used to herd cattle, she was known as Wambui. The boy is reported to have been named Johnstone Peter Kamau. She then moved to a farm in Nyeri where she married Muigai but who later divorced her because of issues associated with cuckoldry.\nIn 1913, Chebochok Kiptonui Arap Boiso and his two brothers were banished to Fort Hall and Nyeri. Coincidentally, Wambui was assigned the role to look after the three brothers by the Europeans.\nMugenik Barngetuny Araap Sitonik.\nBarn'getuny Araap Kosgei, alias Mugenik Araap Mondii was a Kipsigis prophet who is still respected by the Kipsigis community. His age set was initiated between 1815 and 1838, and lived in what is now the town of Sotik, located in Bomet county. He was of the \"Kipkendek\" clan, and his maternal uncle was Kimyole Araap Turukat, from Talai clan, the famous Nandi Orgoiyot. It is estimated that he died in 1885 and was buried adjacent to what is today's Sotik Police station in Sotik town. The Kipsigis hold that Mugenik had revelations and visions which he told to the people. These revelations contained instruction on how the Kipsigis people were expected to live a holy life before Asiis, their solar deity. Mugenik's visions also foretold future events that were to take place in the Kipsigis country. Among his prophecies were the arrival of the British, the arrival of trains, the development of towns, modern clothing, and the establishment of colonialism and the eventual independence of African nations. Also significantly, it is narrated how he had visions of the establishment of Sotik Police station, Sotik KCC creameries factory and two of Sotik bridges that were to be operated under colour bar system. There are also accounts from his visions that detail vast expansion of the Kipsigis territory and others that hint a decimation of the Kipsigis population as a handiwork of a boy, or more precisely translated to mean derogatively an uncircumcised boy. Among many other prophecies, perhaps of great intrigue to the Kipsigis was one in which he foretold about a Kipsigis man with a star on his (possibly military) who led what is equivalent to Kenyan jurisdiction today.\nColonial history.\nThe Kipsigis had an initial contact with the British in 1889 and within 17 years, the British had established their rule over the tribe. The British initially started to expropriate the tribal Kipsigis land to create a buffer zone between the mutually antagonistic Gusii and Kipsigis; but it was clear from the beginning that an underlying tenet of the British policy towards the Kipsigis was the ultimate conversion of the tribe from a predominantly semi-pastoral economy to one of peasant cultivation.\nSotik Massacre.\nOriginally not part of the White Highlands, Sotik District was a Y-shaped strip of land about 50 miles and in some places not more than three miles wide, carved out of the Native Reserve. Sotik was Abugusii and Maasai territory before 1800 but, under a treaty promulgated by Menya Araap Kisiara, the Maasai were pushed to Trans-Mara. Following the arrival of the British, the Kipsigis rallied alongside the Nandis to fight against the building of the Kenya-Uganda Railway.\nSeeing the long-drawn-out resistance of the Nandi led by Koitalel Araap Samoei, the intelligence officer Richard Meinertzhagen, vowed to break the impasse. In the middle of 1905, a punitive raid led by Major Richard Pope-Hennessy killed 1,850 men, women, and children who were rounded up and fired upon indiscriminately with a Maxim gun and other weapons. The massacre was ostensibly in retaliation against the refusal by the Sotik people to heed an ultimatum by the British government to return cattle raided from the Maasai. It is noted that medal of honours were awarded to officers who took part in these operations around the same time.\nSome months later on 19 October 1905, Richard Meinertzhagen tricked Koitalel into what was effectively an ambush and shot him at point-blank range, killing him on the spot and the rest of his entourage. With Koitalel dead, the Nandi resistance was neutralized, and the British proceeded to evict the Kipsigis and Nandi from their land and sent them to areas that were largely unfit for human habitation. The Sotik massacre and the assassination of Koitalel were directly linked to the setting aside of Sotik for European settlement and the colonial system of forced labour, punitive taxes for Africans, economic, and racial segregation. It is disingenuous to argue that it was a buffer zone to keep warring African tribes apart.\nIn August 2020, following the murder of George Floyd, Claudia Webbe, Member of Parliament for Leicester East wrote in a letter addressed to UK's Secretary of State for Education, Gavin Williamson, about Sotik Massacre and asked that the massacre should be taught in British schools.\nWorld War I.\nWorld War I is inferred among the Kipsigis as '\"Boriet ap Talianek\"' - literally 'Italian War' and it's an inflection point among the Kipsigis coming out of which, integration into modernity. Some men were drafted or volunteered to fight and it is remarked how the Empire they fought for did not recognize them or keep any records or accounts of African soldiers.\nNandi Protest of 1923.\nA number of factors taking place in the early 1920s led to what has come to be termed the Nandi Protest or Uprisings of 1923. It was the first expression of organized resistance by the Nandi since the wars of 1905\u201306.\nPrimary contributing factors were the land alienation of 1920 and a steep increase in taxation, taxation tripled between 1909 and 1920 and because of a change in collection date, two taxes were collected in 1921. The Kipsigis and Nandi refused to pay and this amount was deferred to 1922. Further, due to fears of a spread of rinderpest following an outbreak, a stock quarantine was imposed on the Nandi Reserve between 1921 and 1923. The Nandi, prevented from selling stock outside the Reserve, had no cash, and taxes had to go unpaid. Normally, grain shortages in Nandi were met by selling stock and buying grain. The quarantine made this impossible. The labour conscription that took place under the Northey Circulars only added to the bitterness against the colonial government.\nAll these things contributed to a buildup of antagonism and unrest toward the government between 1920 and 1923. In 1923, the \"saget ab eito\" (sacrifice of the ox), a historically significant ceremony where leadership of the community was transferred between generations, was to take place. This ceremony had always been followed by an increased rate of cattle raiding as the now formally recognized warrior age-set sought to prove its prowess. The approach to a saget ab eito thus witnessed expressions of military fervor and for the ceremony all Nandi males would gather in one place.\nAlarmed at the prospect and as there was also organized protest among the Kikuyu and Luo at that time, the colonial government came to believe that the Orkoiyot was planning to use the occasion of the \"Saget ab eito\" of 1923 as a cover under which to gather forces for a massive military uprising. On 16 October 1923, several days before the scheduled date for the \"saget ab eito\", the Orkoiyot Barsirian Arap Manyei and four other elders were arrested and deported to Meru. Permission to hold the ceremony was withdrawn and it did not take place, nor has it ever taken place since. The Orkoiyot Barsirian Arap Manyei would spend the next forty years in political detention, becoming Kenya's, and possibly Africa's, longest-serving political prisoner.\n One of the foremost Kipsigis colonial Chiefs was Cheborge Arap Tengecha. Although he was sometimes fondly referred to as \u201cKiprany-tich,\u201d meaning he stood up to colonial excesses, this nom de guerre was countermanded by his alleged heavy-handedness and \u201cunbridled\u201d obsequiousness towards the colonial authorities. Nevertheless, Arap Tengecha can be credited with some positive deeds that helped transform the Kipsigis society in a changed world of colonial domination. First, the man, born about 1892, embraced literacy by accepting to go to school, unlike his peers. His capacity to read and write earned him a place in the colonial law courts and civil service as an interpreter based at the Kericho District Commissioner\u2019s office. He served under District Commissioners, Cecil M. Dobbs, Sydney Hubert La Fontaine, George Henry C. Boulderson, T. H. Hinkinson, among others. \nAs an acknowledgement of his prowess as an interpreter, Arap Tengecha was sent to Kerendei in Maasailand (Narok) in 1921 to continue his work there, having mastered the Maa language and other languages such as Kisii, Luo and Swahili. In 1934, he was appointed to the exalted position of Chief of Bomet Location where he excelled in his new position as an administrator and enforcer of colonial policies. When the district administration was reorganised by District Commissioner Henry G. Gregory-Smith in 1946, Chief Tengecha, now a top favourite of the colonial government, was appointed the Chief of Bureti Location where he served until his retirement in 1961. In recognition of his \u201cillustrious career\u201d at his retirement, Queen Elizabeth II of England conferred on Chief Tengecha the coveted OBE (Order of the British Empire).\nWorld War II.\nWith the German, Italian and Japanese threat at the borders of the British Empire, many people were dragged into military service during World War II. In East Africa, a huge number of Kenyans were recruited to serve in the Burma and Ethiopian Campaigns. Known to the Kipsigis as '\"Boriet ap Jeromaan\"', literally German war, the world event marks a period of time and denotes a generation where some of its youthful men either volunteered or were drafted into the King's African Rifles forces. In August 1914, during the First World War, KAR soldiers were dispatched to fight German forces between what is Kenya-Tanzania border today, moreso in Taita-Tavetta. During the Second World War in 1944, some were deployed to join the fight in Burma Campaign against the Imperial Japanese Army. After the war, African soldiers were forgotten and hardly any records of them and their accounts were kept.\nPost-independence.\nEmerging socio-cultural trends and dynamics.\nThe Kipsigis culture and heritage has transformed and attritioned initially as a result of the contact with British colonialists and a remarkable switch to Christianity, forsaking the belief in Asiis or incorporating some aspects of their traditional religion into Christianity. Later on, a formal colonial government meant the tribe had to comply with government rules and laws which in part vitiated some traditional norms such as warring and raiding neighboring antagonistic tribes. After independence, the declining of adherence to culture and heritage subsisted, significantly, the banning of female genital mutilation led to abandonment of initiation of girls while schooling limited the period of time boys spent in seclusion during initiation; apparently, because of the spread of HIV and the devastating impact associated as some of the first cases were reported in Kenya in the late 1980s, circumcision of boys was promoted and as a result, the custom of initiation of boys persisted.\nMusic, film and written arts.\nContemporary Kalenjin music has long been influenced by Kipsigis producers, artistes, and musicians leading to Kericho's perception as a cultural innovation center in Kenya and effectively in the Great-Lakes Region of Africa. Community introspection reveals how Chepalungu constituency has beaten the odds to carve a niche for itself as the home of Kalenjin secular artistes. One notable Raphael Kipchamba arap Tapotuk was a luminary artiste, songwriter and producer credited as being a forebearer of Kalenjin pop culture often manifesting his works as folk song, country, and jazz. His music records are beloved by the entirety of Kalenjin; Daniel Toroitich Arap Moi, William Samoei Ruto and a host of Kalenjin leaders and celebrities in attending Kipchamba's funeral in his home in Chepalungu, 14 April 2007 remarked the might and their love for the artiste.\nA song \"Chemirocha III\" collected by ethnomusicologist Hugh Tracey in 1950 from the Kipsigis in Kapkatet in Kericho was written in honour of Jimmie Rodgers. The song's title is an approximation of the musician's name. According to legend, tribe members were exposed to Rodgers' music through British soldiers during World War II. Impressed by his yodeling, they envisioned Rodgers as \"a faun, half-man and half-antelope.\" \"Chemirocha III\" is credited to \"Chemutoi Ketienya with Kipsigis girls\", and was described by Tracey as \"humorous\" in his notes. \"Chemirocha III\" is included on Tracey's \"The Music of Africa: Musical Instruments 1: Strings\" LP, from 1972.\nKimursi, an actor in the 1950 adventure film: \"King Solomon's Mines\", is credited as being of Kipsigis ethnicity. In the cast, he took on the role of Khiva.\nThe Kenyan long-distance runner Ezekiel Kemboi danced to a Kalenjin hit single, \"Emily Chepchumba\", during the 2011 IAAF Daegu World championship, after crossing the finish line in the 3000 metres steeplechase and during the London Summer Olympics held in August 2012, after crossing the finish line in the 3000 metre steeple chase finals and winning gold. The song was written, sang and recorded by a Kipsigis artist, Bamwai.\nSports.\nKalenjin are reputable as an ethnic conglomerate endemic with athletic prowess. The Kipsigis, the most populous tribe among the Kalenjin has had a culture of sportsmanship among its population and through the years, there have been excellent sportsmen and sportswomen from the tribe. It is believed that genetic predisposition, altitude and environmental adaptation, diet, poverty and all-inclusive training philosophy contribute to the success of Kalenjin sportspersons.\nScience and academia.\nIt is observed that among the Kipsigis, knowledge is measured binomially where to be thought of as knowledgeable, \"ng\u2019om\", one has to display the application of the corresponding knowledge. In academia, the 'Kipsigis' word or eponym has inspired the nomenclature of an extinct genus of East African antelope from the middle Miocene (Kipsigicerus). Other academic terms associated with the Kipsigis include \"Acraea sotikensis\" and Sotik lion (\"Panthera leo melanochaita\").\nDr. Taaitta Araap Toweett was a Kipsigis elite and political leader. He was awarded scholarship by the Kipsigis County Council in 1955 to the South Devon Technical College, Torquay, to study for a diploma in public and social administration. He obtained a B.A. (1956) and B.A. (Hons) 1959 from the University of South Africa. On his return from Britain in 1957, he was appointed Community Development Officer for Nandi District, the first African CDO to be recruited locally in Kenya. During this period was the editor of the Kipsigis vernacular magazine \"Ngalek Ap Kipsigisiek\", published quarterly. He was one of the eight original Africans elected to the Legislative Council in 1958 as Member for the Southern Area, a constituency comprising mainly Kipsigis and Maasai Districts. He formed Kalenjin Political Alliance Party that later on got into an alliance with KADU. He served on the Dairy Board and played a crucial role in the foundation of the co-operative movement nationally. In 1960, 1962, 1963 he attended the Lancaster House Conferences held in London to draft Kenya's Constitution, paving the way for complete self-rule. Before Kenya's independence, he was appointed Assistant Minister for Agriculture (1960), Minister of Labour and Housing in 1961 and Minister of Lands, Surveys and Town Planning in 1962. After Kenya's Independence, he was appointed Minister for Education in 1969, Minister for Housing and Social Services in 1974, Minister for Education in 1976. He was also elected President of the 19th General Assembly of UNESCO (1976\u20131978). In 1977, he finished his PhD thesis on \"A Study of Kalenjin Linguistics\". In 1980, he was appointed as the chairperson of Kenya Literature Bureau. In 1983\u20131985, he served as the Charperson, Kenya Airways after which he was appointed the chairperson, Kenya Seed Company. He also served as a director of the \"Kenya Times\" newspaper and went on to edit and publish his own newspaper, \"Voice of Rift Valley\", between 1997 and 2000.\nProfessor Jonathan Kimetet Araap Ngeno was a Kipsigis elite who was sponsored by African Inland Church from Litein to study in the United States. He was invited back to Kenya and reintegrated by Daniel arap Moi to achieve political attrition over Dr. Taaitta Toweett. He was appointed to Ministerial positions and was elected the Fourth Speaker of the Parliament of Kenya succeeding coincidentally his \"baghuleita\" (a male agemate who was initiated in the same seclusion home), Moses Kiprono arap Keino.\nIn the 1990s, Professor Davy Kiprotich Koech by then the Director of Kenya Medical Research Institute and Dr. Arthur O. Obel, the Chief Research Officer published in two medical journals the initial results of the newfound drug \"Kemron\" that was perceived from the preliminary study of 10 patients to cure AIDS. The drug was introduced in a public ceremony presided by Kenya's former President, Daniel Toroitch Arap Moi and the work of the new wonder drug discovered was hailed as a major step against HIV/AIDS. Kemron was the trade name for a low-dose of alpha interferon, manufactured form of a natural body chemical in a tablet form that dissolves in the mouth. Clinical trials of Kemron funded by WHO in five African Countries did not find any health benefits reported by Kemri Scientists. Thereafter, WHO in a press release in its headquarters in Geneva, Switzerland, termed Kemron as an experimental drug of unproven benefit for HIV/AIDS treatment. The American National Institute of Health concluded that no one had been able to duplicate the effects claimed by scientists behind Kemron. In 1998 Prof. Davy Koech led the Commission of Inquiry into the Education System of Kenya. Hosted by Kenya Broadcasting Cooperation (KBC) in 2019, Prof. Koech cited bad peer review on his experimental drug and that he was currently overseeing reexamination of Kemron and further research in China.\nProfessor Richard Kiprono Mibey has discovered more than 120 species of fungi, made major input to the discovery of environmentally friendly fungi for bio-control of the obnoxious water hyacinth weed in Lake Victoria has contributed to the preservation of rare and highly specialised micro-fungi of Kenyan plants.\nProfessor Paul Kiprono Chepkwony, the incumbent governor of Kericho County has declared in a Kenyan comedy show, Churchill Show (hosted in Tea Hotel Kericho in 2018) a lengthy list pending and granted patents on various fields of Biochemistry.\nProfessor Moses King'eno Rugut is a Kenyan Research Scientist and the current C.E.O of the National Commission for Science, Technology and Innovation. He sits in the board of National Quality Control Laboratory, Kenya Agricultural &amp; Livestock Research Organization, committee member on Drug Registration at Pharmacy &amp; Poisons Board since 1999 and National Museums of Kenya. He also served as the Director General of the defunct KARI that was de-gazetted and was preceded by a newly established state agency KALRO and as Deputy Secretary at the Ministry of Higher Education, Science and Technology before being appointed the chief executive officer, National Commission for Science, Technology and Innovation. He was awarded Head of State's Commendations in the year 2008 for his distinguished service to the nation and subsequently awarded with the Order of the Grand Warrior, OGW in the year 2016 Prof. Moses Rugut has authored, co-authored or authored publications alongside other authors. Some of these publications include: Seroepidemiological survey of Taenia saginata cysticercosis in Kenya; Diagnosis of Taenia saginata cysticercosis in Kenyan cattle by antibody and antigen ELISA; Anthelmintic resistance amongst sheep and goats in Kenya and \"Epidemiology and control of ruminant helminths in the Kericho Highlands of Kenya.\"\nGladys Chepkirui Ngetich is a Kenyan engineer of Kipsigis origin, and a Rhodes scholar pursuing a doctorate degree in aerospace engineering at the University of Oxford, in the United Kingdom. She is the recipient of the Tanenbaum Fellowship and the Babaroa Excellence Award. In 2018, Ngetich was credited with a patent in collaboration with Rolls-Royce Plc. Her research work has been in \"BBC Science\" and the \"Oxford Science Blog and Medium\". She received the ASME IGTI Young Engineer Turbo Expo Participation Award, for her paper at the 2018 Annual American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) conference. In September 2018, \"Business Daily Africa\" named Ngitech among its \"Top 40 Under 40 Women in Kenya in 2018\". In 2019 she started investigating sustainable space science using a Schmidt Science Fellowship. Ngetich is the co-founder of the ILUU, a Nairobi-based non-profit that aims to inspire girls and women.\n Dr Richard Kiprotich Chepkwony is a Kenyan wildlife ecologist of Kipsigis origin and currently the Senior Assistant Director at the Kenya Wildlife Service and the State Department of Wildlife, Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Heritage. He hails from Cheborgei Bureti Sub-County, Kericho County. He studied at Chepsir Primary school in Kericho East. He was awarded a scholarship by the Interdisciplinary Research Fund INREF-CCGIAR-EVOCA programme in 2016 to the Wageningen University and Research (WUR) in the Kingdom of the Netherlands, from where he obtained his doctorate degree in wildlife Ecology and Innovations in 2021. He is an alumnus of Kaplong Boys' High School in Bomet County and Moi University Eldoret, Kenya, where he obtained his bachelor's and Master of Science degrees in wildlife management and Ecology. He has also studied environmental sciences at Tokyo International centre, Japan; Information technology at the Kenya School of Government; Kenya Wildlife Service Law Enforcement Academy-Manyani, among others. He has published widely in the fields of ticks and tick-borne diseases, technology and innovation, Spatial biopolitics of infectious disease control, human-wildlife interactions and Plant Ecology. He is supervising PhD and master's students from Wageningen University and Research. He has a vast knowledge of human-wildlife coexistence, spanning more than 23 years.\nPolitics.\nCommunity politics.\nThe Kipsigis community is a rich political arena. The Kipsigis present themselves in a united political front along with their kin, the Kalenjin mass. With the leadership of Daniel Moi, Kalenjin community took a leftist form and were in favour of devolved governance under the alias \"Majimboism\". When Moi became the president of Kenya, Kalenjins shifted to a right-wing front with solemn support for Moi and his government. During Moi's regime, incidences of politically motivated violence took place and Kipsigis for the most part were touted as perpetrators. Under Mwai Kibaki, Kipsigis and Kalenjin in entirety took a passive political approach which then bounced back to a roller coaster of leftist and right-wing support in allegiance to the rising star of Kalenjin Politics, Dr. William Samoei Ruto.\nProminent leadership.\nPresidency.\nWhilst the Kipsigis tribe consider Jomo Kenyatta as the spurious love child of the Kipsigis Orkoiyot, Chebochok Kiptonui Arap Boiso, they aspire to present Kenya with a president. Apparently. William Samoei Kipchirchir Ruto, Kipsigis in origin and from Komosi clan has served in various ministerial positions, and as the Deputy President of Kenya under Uhuru Kenyatta's presidency. As of August 2022, William Ruto was announced the winner of the Kenyan 2022 general elections and after a court appeal by the defeated candidate, Raila Odinga, Ruto's win was upheld. William Samoei Ruto was inaugurated in September 2022 as the fifth president of the Republic of Kenya and is currently the incumbent president.\nCabinet Ministers and Cabinet Secretaries.\nThere have been a number of cabinet ministers and cabinet secretaries from the Kipsigis ethnicity. A number of them include\nMAU Settlement Programs and evictions.\nThe Kipsigis initial settlement was at Tulwaap Kipsigis in Londiani; strategically, the hill makes up part of the Mau Forest reserve in Kenya. The Kipsigis believe they have a 'god-given' claim upon the forest which alludes to the adoption at some point in the Kipsigis history of the aboriginal hunter-gatherer tribe, the Okiek who are native to a region between Mount Kenya stretching up all the way to Mau Forest in Rift Valley. Mau crisis started when the trust land was allocated to group ranches between the 1980s and 1990s who were mainly ethnic Maasai elite during Daniel Moi's Kanu era. The problem exacerbated about when the group ranches went beyond the cutline and occupied forest land. Part of the Mau Forest was initially a trust land under the defunct Narok County Council. Traditionally, the forest has been inhabited by the Ogiek. However, due to immigration from other ethnic groups, large parts of the forest area were cleared for settlement. In 2004, the famous Ndungu Report listed these land allocations, terming them illegal and recommended their revocation of them. Some evictions were done between 2004 and 2006 without a resettlement option. In 2005, the government placed a caveat on all title deeds issued to claimants, saying they were irregularly issued.\nIn 2008, the Kibaki regime through the then Prime Minister Raila Odinga ordered evictions to be effected by October 2008 in order to protect the forest from destruction. The order was opposed by several Rift Valley politicians led by Isaac Ruto. The then Agriculture Minister William Ruto, proposed evictees be allocated land elsewhere. Later, Environment Minister John Michuki would reverse the order. Subsequently, in 2008, there was a political row over the resettlement of people in the Mau Forest who had been allocated land in the 1980s and 1990s.\nRedress for violations by British colonial government.\nIn 2017, a consortium from the Kipsigis community organised by Professor Paul Kiprono Chepkwony and led by Karim Ahmad Khan sought redress for human rights violations committed by the British government during the colonial period. The plaintiffs were more than 100,000 ethnic Kipsigis victims and the members of Talai Clan.\nProvisions for Oorgoiik.\nThe Talai clansmen returned or continued to peacefully live with Kipsigis people after independence. After the campaign of AIM and Catholic church the Talai clansmen were sidelined and hated but today, they exist peacefully with the Kipsigis and take upon the identity of the Kipsigis equally like any other clansmen. Notably, the residents of Chepalungu constituency (today's Sotik and Chepalungu constituencies) voted in Tamason Barmalel, the grandson of Koitalel Arap Samoei, as their MP between 1969 and 1974.\nAllocations of land made by the Kenyan Government under Taaita Towet and Daniel arap Moi to the Talai clansmen has been reported to be grabbed and commercialised by corrupt agents and thus, those living in Kericho live in hardship and poverty. \nConflicts and violence.\nWhile fairly known for a disposition to be welcoming and hospitable, the Kipsigis are also infamous in Kenya for having participated or led offensive stance during some of Kenya's ethnic violence where in some, ethnic cleansing was a characteristic. The overarching cause for this violence has primarily been discriminatory politics, land contentions and incitement. The Kipsigis amass into the Kalenjin group which in totality portray a united political alliance thus making them subject to discrimination and incitement. Secondary intrinsic factors for violence machinate through a condition of sinuosity jumbled up between historical injustices, conceitedness from historical precolonial war efforts and demographics where unemployment is rife among the youth and a majority of the population is disadvantaged and disenfranchised economically.\nAfter a comprehensive risk assessment of social, economic and political factors that increase the likelihood of genocide in Kenya, the Sentinel Project for Genocide Prevention's May 2011 report identified several risk factors including; a low degree of democracy, isolation from the international community, high levels of military expenditure, severe government discrimination or active repression of native groups, socioeconomic deprivation combined with group-based inequality and a legacy of intergroup hatred among other risk factors.\n1992 skirmishes.\nIn 1992, a series of events contributed to a feeling of uncertainty in Kenya, these events included widespread charges of government corruption that had brought halts or cuts in the flow of foreign aid upon which Kenya's economy depended on, and protests against the government of President Daniel arap Moi that resulted in police attacks on demonstrators. Forby, under diplomatic pressure, the KANU regime under Daniel Toroitich Arap Moi caved to the political demand and need for multi-party democracy. Prior to 1992 elections, because of their support for the nascent opposition, KANU affiliates incited Kalenjin against Kikuyu around the idea that Kikuyu were non-indigenous and had appropriated Kalenjin land. As a result, ethnic cleaning campaigns before during and after the 1992 general elections erupted in a bid out of spite for the out-group and phobia for the tribal claim on land. According to some accounts 779 people were killed and about 56,000 displaced.\n2008 post-election violence.\nIn January and February 2008, following the 2007 Kenyan general elections, post-election violence spontaneously erupted throughout the country but in the Rift Valley province; the violence span out and evolved from acts of riots and protests to all out violence against the Kisii and Kikuyu communities who were affiliated to the President Mwai Kibaki's PNU party. A characteristic of the violence it seemed was to expel the out-groups but not necessarily to kill. There was also looting of businesses and firms run by the out-groups as well as on some government properties. The pattern of violence subsequently showed planning and organization by politicians, businessmen, village leaders and local leaders, who enlisted criminal gangs to execute the violence. This was particularly the case in Rift Valley and Nairobi. In Naivasha, Nakuru and the slum areas of Nairobi, Kikuyu gangs were mobilized and used to unleash violence against Luos, Luhyas and Kalenjins, and to expel them from their rented residences. In many instances the police action added to the violence, with considerable evidence that officers took sides and used terror tactics against slum dwellers. In some instances, sexual violence took the form of individual and gang rapes and female and male genital mutilation.\n2018 Maa-Kipsigis skirmishes.\nThe Maasai and the Kipsigis have historically and traditionally antagonised each other right from and a period earlier than the Maasai era. This usually manifested as cattle raids, eventual battles and the subsequent southward thwarting and ejection of the Maasai. After Kenya's independence, there have been periodic tensions between the Maasai and the Kipsigis which have backgrounds in history and traditions and fuelled by political incitement especially during the elections period. Politicians have been said to fuel the clashes with their remarks, both in public forums and on social media. In 2018 for instance, Narok County Senator Ledama Olekina, part of the Maasai community, has been criticised for remarks about the evictions.\nIn 2018 particularly, the Uhuru government under the Minister of Lands evicted a section of the Mau Complex settlers who are mainly of Kipsigis ethnicity. The evictions were particularly forceful, inconsiderate, inhuman and without compensation. A major section of the Maasai leaders supported the evictions and are said or known to have committed hate speech. In the wake of the polarisation, the Maasai are reported to have attacked Kipsigis evictees and in retaliation, Kipsigis men in Narok and Bomet counties retaliated. The battles implored the use of crude or/and traditional weaponry including nuts (a nut used to fit to a screw fitted onto a wooden handle about a foot and a half long), spears, bows and arrows, swords and torches (or at least, petrol/gasoline and lighters).\nFollowing the 2018 evictions and Maasai-Kipsigis clashes, several human-rights defenders came together to file a paper in protest of the human-rights violations committed by the Kenyan government in evicting people from the forests; it said in part, \"The actions of the Government of Kenya in forcibly evicting tens of thousands of people from forests violates a range of human rights, which are contained in international instruments to which Kenya is a State Party.\" Kenyan lawyer Leonard Sigey Bett filed a petition with the International Criminal Court at The Hague in the Netherlands challenging the evictions. Environmental conservation groups generally support the eviction of people from the forest, but only if the exercise is done amicably and humanely.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17160", "revid": "47023628", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17160", "title": "Knife", "text": "Tool or weapon with a cutting edge or blade\nA knife (pl.: knives; from Old Norse 'knife, dirk') is a tool or weapon with a cutting edge or blade, usually attached to a handle or hilt. One of the earliest tools used by humanity, knives appeared at least 2.5 million years ago, as evidenced by the Oldowan tools. Originally made of wood, bone, and stone (such as flint and obsidian), over the centuries, in step with improvements in both metallurgy and manufacturing, knife blades have been made from copper, bronze, iron, steel, ceramic, and titanium. Most modern knives have fixed or folding blades, with styles varying by maker and country.\nKnives can serve various purposes. Hunters use a hunting knife, soldiers use the combat knife, scouts, campers, and hikers carry a pocketknife; there are kitchen knives for preparing foods (the chef's knife, the paring knife, bread knife, cleaver), table knife (butter knives and steak knives), weapons (daggers or switchblades), knives for throwing or juggling, and knives for religious ceremony or display (the kirpan).\nParts.\nA modern knife consists of:\nThe blade edge can be plain or serrated, or a combination of both. Single-edged knives may have a \"reverse edge\" or \"false edge\" occupying a section of the spine. These edges are usually serrated and are used to further enhance function.\nThe handle, used to grip and manipulate the blade safely, may include a \"tang\", a portion of the blade that extends into the handle. Knives are made with partial tangs (extending part way into the handle, known as \"stick tangs\") or full tangs (extending the full length of the handle, often visible on top and bottom). There is also the \"enter\u00e7ado\" construction method present in antique knives from Brazil, such as the Sorocaban Knife, which consists in riveting a repurposed blade to the ricasso of a bladeless handle. The handle may include a bolster, a piece of heavy material (usually metal) situated at the front or rear of the handle. The bolster, as its name suggests, is used to mechanically strengthen the knife.\nBlade.\nKnife blades can be manufactured from a variety of materials, each of which has advantages and disadvantages. Carbon steel, an alloy of iron and carbon, can be very sharp. It holds its edge well, and remains easy to sharpen, but is vulnerable to rust and stains. Stainless steel is an alloy of iron, chromium, possibly nickel, and molybdenum, with only a small amount of carbon. It is not able to take quite as sharp an edge as carbon steel, but is highly resistant to corrosion. High carbon stainless steel is stainless steel with a higher amount of carbon, intended to incorporate the better attributes of carbon steel and stainless steel. High carbon stainless steel blades do not discolor or stain, and maintain a sharp edge. Laminated blades use multiple metals to create a layered structure, combining the attributes of both. For example, a harder, more brittle steel may be pressed between an outer layer of softer, tougher stainless steel to reduce vulnerability to corrosion. In this case, however, the part most affected by corrosion, the edge, is still vulnerable. Damascus steel is a form of pattern welding with similarities to laminate construction. Layers of different steel types are welded together, but then the stock is manipulated to create patterns in the steel.\nTitanium is a metal that has a higher strength-to-weight ratio and more flexible than steel. Although less hard and unable to take as sharp an edge, carbides in the titanium alloy allow them to be heat-treated to a sufficient hardness. Ceramic blades are hard, brittle, lightweight, and do not corrode: they may maintain a sharp edge for years with no maintenance at all, but are fragile and will break if dropped on a hard surface or twisted in use. They can only be sharpened on silicon carbide sandpaper and appropriate grinding wheels. Plastic blades are not sharp and are usually serrated to enable them to cut. They are often disposable.\nSteel blades are commonly shaped by forging or stock removal. Forged blades are made by heating a single piece of steel, then shaping the metal while hot using a hammer or press. Stock removal blades are shaped by grinding and removing metal. With both methods, after shaping, the steel must be heat treated. This involves heating the steel above its critical point, then quenching the blade to harden it. After hardening, the blade is tempered to remove stresses and make the blade tougher. Mass manufactured kitchen cutlery uses both the forging and stock removal processes. Forging tends to be reserved for manufacturers' more expensive product lines, and can often be distinguished from stock removal product lines by the presence of an integral bolster, though integral bolsters can be crafted through either shaping method.\nKnives are sharpened in various ways. Flat ground blades have a profile that tapers from the thick spine to the sharp edge in a straight or convex line. Seen in cross section, the blade would form a long, thin triangle, or where the taper does not extend to the back of the blade, a long thin rectangle with one peaked side. Hollow ground blades have concave, beveled edges. The resulting blade has a thinner edge, so it may have better cutting ability for shallow cuts, but it is lighter and less durable than flat ground blades and will tend to bind in deep cuts. Serrated blade knives have a wavy, scalloped or saw-like blade. Serrated blades are more well suited for tasks that require aggressive 'sawing' motions, whereas plain edge blades are better suited for tasks that require push-through cuts (e.g., shaving, chopping, slicing).\nMany knives have holes in the blade for various uses. Holes are commonly drilled in blades to reduce friction while cutting, increase single-handed usability of pocket knives, and, for butchers' knives, allow hanging out of the way when not in use.\nFixed-blade features.\nA fixed blade knife, sometimes called a sheath knife, does not fold or slide, and is typically stronger due to the tang, the extension of the blade into the handle, and lack of moving parts.\nFolding blade features.\nA folding knife connects the blade to the handle through a pivot, allowing the blade to fold into the handle. To prevent injury to the knife user through the blade accidentally closing on the user's hand, folding knives typically have a locking mechanism. Different locking mechanisms are favored by various individuals for reasons such as perceived strength (lock safety), legality, and ease of use.\nPopular locking mechanisms include:\nAnother prominent feature of many folding knives is the opening mechanism. Traditional pocket knives and Swiss Army knives commonly employ the nail nick, while modern folding knives more often use a stud, hole, disk, or \"flipper\" located on the blade, all of which have the benefit of allowing the user to open the knife with one hand.\nThe \"wave\" feature is another prominent design, which uses a part of the blade that protrudes outward to catch on one's pocket as it is drawn, thus opening the blade; this was patented by Ernest Emerson and is not only used on many of the Emerson knives, but also on knives produced by several other manufacturers, notably Spyderco and Cold Steel.\n\"Automatic\" or \"switchblade\" knives open using the stored energy from a spring that is released when the user presses a button or lever or other actuator built into the handle of the knife. Automatic knives are severely restricted by law in the UK and most American states.\nIncreasingly common are \"assisted opening\" knives which use springs to propel the blade once the user has moved it past a certain angle. These differ from automatic or switchblade knives in that the blade is not released by means of a button or catch on the handle; rather, the blade itself is the actuator. Most assisted openers use flippers as their opening mechanism. Assisted opening knives can be as fast or faster than automatic knives to deploy.\nCommon locking mechanisms.\nIn the lock back, as in many folding knives, a stop pin acting on the top (or behind) the blade prevents it from rotating clockwise. A hook on the tang of the blade engages with a hook on the rocker bar which prevents the blade from rotating counter-clockwise. The rocker bar is held in position by a torsion bar. To release the knife the rocker bar is pushed downwards as indicated and pivots around the rocker pin, lifting the hook and freeing the blade.\nWhen negative pressure (pushing down on the spine) is applied to the blade all the stress is transferred from the hook on the blade's tang to the hook on the rocker bar and thence to the small rocker pin. Excessive stress can shear one or both of these hooks rendering the knife effectively useless. Knife company Cold Steel uses a variant of the lock back called the Tri-Ad Lock which introduces a pin in front of the rocker bar to relieve stress on the rocker pin, has an elongated hole around the rocker pin to allow the mechanism to wear over time without losing strength and angles the hooks so that the faces no longer meet vertically.\nThe bolt in the bolt lock is a rectangle of metal that is constrained to slide only back and forward. When the knife is open a spring biases the bolt to the forward position where it rests above the tang of the blade preventing the blade from closing. Small knobs extend through the handle of the knife on both sides allowing the user to slide the bolt backward freeing the knife to close. The Axis Lock used by knife maker Benchmade is functionally identical to the bolt lock except that it uses a cylinder rather than a rectangle to trap the blade. The Arc Lock by knife maker SOG is similar to the Axis Lock except the cylinder follows a curved path rather than a straight path.\nIn the liner lock, an L-shaped split in the liner allows part of the liner to move sideways from its resting position against the handle to the centre of the knife where it rests against the flat end of the tang. To disengage, this leaf spring is pushed so it again rests flush against the handle allowing the knife to rotate. A frame lock is functionally identical but instead of using a thin liner inside the handle material uses a thicker piece of metal as the handle and the same split in it allows a section of the frame to press against the tang.\nSliding blade features.\nA sliding knife is a knife that can be opened by sliding the knife blade out the front of the handle. One method of opening is where the blade exits out the front of the handle point-first and then is locked into place (an example of this is the gravity knife). Another form is an OTF (out-the-front) switchblade, which only requires the push of a button or spring to cause the blade to slide out of the handle and lock into place. To retract the blade back into the handle, a release lever or button, usually the same control as to open, is pressed. A very common form of sliding knife is the sliding utility knife (commonly known as a stanley knife or boxcutter).\nHandle.\nThe handles of knives can be made from a number of different materials, each of which has advantages and disadvantages. Handles are produced in a wide variety of shapes and styles. Handles are often textured to enhance grip.\nMore exotic materials usually only seen on art or ceremonial knives include: Stone, bone, mammoth tooth, mammoth ivory, oosik (walrus penis bone), walrus tusk, antler (often called stag in a knife context), sheep horn, buffalo horn, teeth, and mop (mother of pearl or \"pearl\"). Many materials have been employed in knife handles.\nHandles may be adapted to accommodate the needs of people with disabilities. For example, knife handles may be made thicker or with more cushioning for people with arthritis in their hands. A non-slip handle accommodates people with palmar hyperhidrosis.\nTypes.\nWeapons.\nAs a weapon, the knife is universally adopted as an essential tool. It is the essential element of a knife fight. For example:\nUtensils.\nA primary aspect of the knife as a tool includes dining, used either in food preparation or as cutlery. Examples of this include:\nTools.\nAs a utility tool the knife can take many forms, including:\nRituals and superstitions.\nThe knife plays a significant role in some cultures through ritual and superstition, as the knife was an essential tool for survival since early man. Knife symbols can be found in various cultures to symbolize all stages of life; for example, a knife placed under the bed while giving birth is said to ease the pain, or, stuck into the headboard of a cradle, to protect the baby; knives were included in some Anglo-Saxon burial rites, so the dead would not be defenseless in the next world. The knife plays an important role in some initiation rites, and many cultures perform rituals with a variety of knives, including the ceremonial sacrifices of animals. Samurai warriors, as part of bushido, could perform ritual suicide, or seppuku, with a tant\u014d, a common Japanese knife. An athame, a ceremonial knife, is used in Wicca and derived forms of neopagan witchcraft.\nIn Greece, a black-handled knife placed under the pillow is used to keep away nightmares. As early as 1646 reference is made to a superstition of laying a knife across another piece of cutlery being a sign of witchcraft. A common belief is that if a knife is given as a gift, the relationship of the giver and recipient will be severed. Something such as a small coin, dove or a valuable item is exchanged for the gift, rendering \"payment.\"\nLegislation.\nSome types of knives are restricted by law, and carrying of knives may be regulated, because they are often used in crime, although restrictions vary greatly by jurisdiction and type of knife. For example, some laws prohibit carrying knives in public while other laws prohibit possession of certain knives, such as switchblades.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17163", "revid": "50903768", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17163", "title": "Knockout", "text": "Fight-ending, winning criterion in certain full-contact combat sports\nA knockout (abbreviated to KO or K.O.) is a fight-ending, winning criterion in several full-contact combat sports, such as boxing, kickboxing, Muay Thai, mixed martial arts, karate, some forms of taekwondo and other sports involving striking, as well as fighting-based video games. A full knockout is considered any legal strike or combination thereof that renders an opponent unable to continue fighting.\nThe term is often associated with a sudden traumatic loss of consciousness caused by a physical blow. Single powerful blows to the head (particularly the jawline and temple) can produce a cerebral concussion or a carotid sinus reflex with syncope and cause a sudden, dramatic KO. Body blows, particularly the liver punch, can cause progressive, debilitating pain that can also result in a KO.\nIn boxing and kickboxing, a knockout is usually awarded when one participant falls to the canvas and is unable to rise to their feet within a specified period of time, typically because of exhaustion, pain, disorientation, or unconsciousness. For example, if a boxer is knocked down and is unable to continue the fight within a ten-second count, they are counted as having been knocked out and their opponent is awarded the KO victory.\nIn mixed martial arts (MMA) competitions, no time count is given after a knockdown, as the sport allows submission grappling as well as ground and pound. If a fighter loses consciousness (\"goes limp\") as a result of legal strikes, it is declared a KO. Even if the fighter loses consciousness for a brief moment and wakes up again to continue to fight, the fight may be stopped and a KO declared. As many MMA fights can take place on the mat rather than standing, it is possible to score a KO via ground and pound, a common victory for grapplers. \nIn fighting games such as \"Street Fighter\" and \"Tekken\", a player scores a knockout by fully depleting the opponent's health bar, with the victor being awarded the round. The player who wins the most rounds, either by scoring the most knockouts or by having more vitality remaining when time expires during each round, wins the match. In some fighting games like Soul Calibur as well as platform fighters like Super Smash Bros, the player can also score a KO when the opponent falls off the fighting area. This differs from combat sports in reality, where a knockout ends the match immediately. However, some fighting games aim for a more realistic experience, with titles like \"Fight Night\" adhering to the rules of professional boxing, although technically they are classified as sports games, and share many of the same features as NFL and NBA video games.\nTechnical knockout.\nA technical knockout (TKO or T.K.O.), stoppage, or referee stopped contest (RSC) is declared when the referee decides during a round that a fighter cannot safely continue the match for any reason. Certain sanctioning bodies also allow the official attending physician at ringside to stop the fight as well. In amateur boxing, and in many regions professionally, including championship fights sanctioned by the World Boxing Association (WBA), a TKO is declared when a fighter is knocked down three times in one round (called an \"automatic knockout\" in WBA rules). Furthermore, in amateur boxing, a boxer automatically wins by TKO if his opponent is knocked down four times in an entire match.\nIn MMA bouts, the referee may declare a TKO if a fighter cannot intelligently defend themselves while being repeatedly struck.\nDouble knockout.\nA double knockout, both in real-life combat sports and in fighting-based video games, occurs when both fighters trade blows and knock each other out simultaneously and are both unable to continue fighting.\nIn amateur boxing, a double knockout result is determined based on the round of competition. In all contests \"except\" the final, both fighters are declared to have lost the contest and are eliminated, since a boxer is suspended 30-540 days for a knockout under boxing regulations. In the final, where there must be a winner, the contest ends as if the bell sounded at the end of the final round, and the round is scored, with the winner determined by points. However, if both boxers are downed, both rise up, but one has reached the limit of knockdowns, the winning boxer is the one who has not reached the three/four knockdown limit.\nPhysical characteristics.\nLittle is known as to what exactly causes one to be knocked unconscious, but many agree it is related to trauma to the brain stem. This usually happens when the head rotates sharply, often as a result of a strike. There are three general manifestations of such trauma:\nA basic principle of boxing and other combat sports is to defend against this vulnerability by keeping both hands raised about the face and the chin tucked in. This may still be ineffective if the opponent punches effectively to the solar plexus.\nA fighter who becomes unconscious from a strike with sufficient knockout power is referred to as having been \"knocked out\" or \"KO'd\" (\"kay-ohd\"). Losing balance without losing consciousness is referred to as being \"knocked down\" (\"down but not out\"). Repeated blows to the head, regardless of whether they cause loss of consciousness, may in severe cases cause strokes or paralysis in the immediacy, and over time have been linked to permanent neurodegenerative diseases such as chronic traumatic encephalopathy (\"punch-drunk syndrome\"). Because of this, many physicians advise against sports involving knockouts.\nKnockdown.\nA knockdown occurs when a fighter touches the floor of the ring with any part of the body other than the feet following a hit, but is able to rise back up and continue fighting. The term is also used if the fighter is hanging on to the ropes, caught between the ropes, or is hanging over the ropes and is unable to fall to the floor and cannot protect himself. A knockdown triggers a count by the referee (normally to 10); if the fighter fails the count, then the fight is ended as a KO.\nA flash knockdown is a knockdown in which the fighter hits the canvas but is not noticeably hurt or affected.\nBoxing's 50 knockout club (professional boxers with 50 or more knockouts).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17165", "revid": "51002370", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17165", "title": "Kalahari Desert", "text": "Semi-arid sandy savanna in Southern Africa\nThe Kalahari Desert is a large semiarid sandy savanna in Southern Africa covering , including much of Botswana, as well as parts of Namibia and South Africa.\nEtymology.\n\"Kalahari\" is derived from the Tswana word \"Kgala\", meaning \"the great thirst\", or \"Kgalagadi\", meaning \"a waterless place\"; the Kalahari has vast areas covered by red sand without any permanent surface water.\nHistory.\nThe Kalahari Desert was not always an arid environment. Geological and paleoclimatic evidence suggests that during parts of the late Pleistocene, the region experienced significantly wetter and cooler conditions. Fossil flora and fauna from Gcwihaba Cave in northwestern Botswana indicate that the area supported more abundant vegetation and permanent water sources between roughly 30,000 and 11,000 Before Present (BP), with the most humid period occurring after 17,500 BP. Sediment cores, pollen records, and fossilized animal remains from other parts of the Kalahari, including the Makgadikgadi Pans and Okavango Basin, corroborate these findings, showing evidence of large paleolakes and river systems that once covered much of what is now desert.\nDuring these wetter phases, the Kalahari likely supported populations of large mammals such as antelopes, elephants, and even hippopotamuses, alongside diverse plant species typical of savanna and woodland biomes. As the global climate shifted toward the Holocene around 11,000 BP, rainfall decreased and evaporation rates rose, leading to the gradual desiccation of the region and the establishment of the semi-arid ecosystem characteristic of the modern Kalahari Desert.\nGeography.\nDrainage of the desert is by dry black valleys, seasonally inundated pans, and the large salt pans of the Makgadikgadi Pan in Botswana and Etosha Pan in Namibia. The only permanent river, the Okavango, flows into a delta in the northwest, forming marshes that are rich in wildlife. Ancient dry riverbeds\u2014called \"Ouramba\"\u2014traverse the central northern reaches of the Kalahari and provide standing pools of water during the rainy season.\nA semi-desert, with huge tracts of excellent grazing after good rains, the Kalahari supports more animals and plants than a true desert, such as the Namib Desert to the west. There is little rainfall, and the summer temperature is very high. The driest areas usually receive of rain per year, and the wettest just a little over . The surrounding Kalahari Basin covers over extending farther into Botswana, Namibia, and South Africa, encroaching into parts of Angola, Zambia and Zimbabwe.\nClimate.\nThe climate is sub-humid rather than semi-arid in the north and east, where the dry forests, savannahs, and salt lakes prevail. South and west, where the vegetation is predominantly xeric savanna or even a semi-desert, the climate is \"Kalaharian\" semi-arid. The Kalaharian climate is subtropical: average annual temperature greater than or equal to , at peaks reaching and above, with mean monthly temperature of the coldest month strictly below , and is semi-arid with the dry season from April to September, the coldest six months of the year. It is the southern tropical equivalent of the Sahelian climate with the wet season during summer. The altitude has been adduced as the explanation why the Kalaharian climate is not tropical; its altitude ranges from 600 to 1600 meters (and generally from 800 to 1200 meters), resulting in a cooler climate than that of the Sahel or Sahara. For example, winter frost is common from June to August, rarely seen in the warmer Sahelian regions. For the same reason, summer temperatures certainly can be very hot, but not in comparison to regions of low altitude in the Sahel or Sahara, where some stations record average temperatures of the warmest month around , whereas the average temperature of the warmest month in any region in the Kalahari never exceeds , though daily temperatures occasionally reach up to close to ( at Twee Rivieren Rest Camp in 2012).\nThe dry season lasts eight months or more, and the wet season typically from less than one month to four months, depending on location. The southwestern Kalahari is the driest area, particularly a small region toward the west-southwest of Tsaraxaibis (Southeast of Namibia). The average annual rainfall ranges from around 110\u00a0mm (close to aridity) to more than 500\u00a0mm in some north and east areas. During summertime in all regions, rainfall may go with heavy thunderstorms. In the driest and sunniest parts of the Kalahari, over 4,000 hours of sunshine are recorded annually on average.\nIn the Kalahari, there are three main mechanisms of atmospheric circulation, dominated by the Kalahari High anticyclone in winter, and by the Kalahari Heat Low in summer:\nThere are huge subterranean water reserves beneath parts of the Kalahari; the Dragon's Breath Cave, for example, is the largest documented non-subglacial underground lake. Such reserves may partly be the residues of ancient lakes; the Kalahari Desert was once a much wetter place. The ancient Lake Makgadikgadi dominated the area, covering the Makgadikgadi Pan and surrounding areas, but it drained or dried out some 10,000 years ago. It may have once covered as much as . In ancient times, there was sufficient moisture for farming, with dikes and dams collecting the water. These are now filled with sediment, breached, or no longer in use, though they can be readily seen via Google Earth.\nThe Kalahari has had a complex climatic history over the past million or so years, in line with major global changes. Changes in the last 250,000 years have been reconstructed from various data sources, providing evidence of former extensive lakes and drier periods. During the latter, the area of the Kalahari has expanded to include parts of western Zimbabwe, Zambia, and Angola.\nVegetation and flora.\nDue to its low aridity, the Kalahari supports a variety of flora. The native flora includes acacia trees and many other herbs and grasses. The kiwano fruit, also known as the horned melon, melano, African horned cucumber, jelly melon, or hedged gourd, is endemic to a region in the Kalahari Desert (specific region unknown).\nEven where the Kalahari \"desert\" is dry enough to qualify as a desert in the sense of having low precipitation, it is not strictly speaking a desert because it has too dense a ground cover. The main region that lacks ground cover is in the southwest Kalahari (southeast of Namibia, northwest of South Africa, and southwest of Botswana) in the south of the Kgalagadi Transfrontier Park. For instance, in the ZF Mgcawu District Municipality of South Africa, total vegetation cover may be as low as 30.72% on non-protected (from cattle grazing) farmlands south of Twee Rivieren Rest Camp and 37.74% in the protected (from cattle grazing) South African side of the Kgalagadi Transfrontier Park: these southernmost Kalahari xeric savanna areas are truly semi-deserts. However, in all the remaining Kalahari, except on salt pans during the dry season, the vegetation cover can be denser, up to almost 100%, in some limited areas.\nIn an area of about 600,000\u00a0km2 in the south and west of the Kalahari, the vegetation is mainly xeric savanna. This area is the ecoregion identified by World Wide Fund for Nature as Kalahari xeric savanna AT1309. Typical savanna grasses include \"Schmidtia\", \"Stipagrostis\", \"Aristida\", and \"Eragrostis\"; these are interspersed with trees such as Camelthorn (\"Vachellia erioloba\"), Grey Camelthorn (Vachellia \"haematoxylon\"), shepherd's tree (\"Boscia albitrunca\"), Blackthorn (\"Senegalia mellifera\"), and Silver Cluster-Leaf (\"Terminalia sericea\").\nIn certain areas where the climate is drier, it becomes a true semi-desert with ground not entirely covered by vegetation: \"open\" as opposed to \"closed\" vegetation. Examples include the north of the ZF Mgcawu District Municipality, itself in the north of South Africa, and the Keetmanshoop Rural in the southeast of Namibia. In the north and east, dry forests cover an area of over 300,000\u00a0km2 in which Rhodesian teak and several species of acacia are prominent. These regions are termed Kalahari Acacia-Baikiaea woodlands AT0709.\nOutside the Kalahari \"desert\", but in the Kalahari basin, halophytic vegetation to the north is adapted to pans, lakes that are completely dry during the dry season, and maybe for years during droughts, such as in Etosha (Etosha Pan halophytics AT0902) and Makgadikgadi (Zambezian halophytics AT0908).\nA totally different vegetation is adapted to the perennial fresh water of the Okavango Delta, an ecoregion termed Zambezian flooded grasslands AT0907.\nFauna.\nThe Kalahari is home to the lion (\"Panthera leo\"), cheetah (\"Acinonyx jubatus\"), African leopard (\"Panthera pardus\"), spotted hyena (\"Crocuta crocuta\"), brown hyena (\"Parahyaena brunnea\"), and African wild dog (\"Lycaon pictus pictus\"). Birds of prey include the secretarybird (\"Sagittarius serpentarius\"), martial eagle (\"Polemaetus bellicosus\") and other eagles, the giant eagle owl (\"Bubo lacteus\") and other owls, falcons, goshawks, kestrels, and kites. Other animals include wildebeest, springbok, gemsbok and other antelopes, Cape porcupines (\"Hystrix africaeaustralis\"), and ostriches (\"Struthio camelus\").\nSome of the areas within the Kalahari are seasonal wetlands, such as the Makgadikgadi Pans of Botswana. This area, for example, supports numerous halophilic species, and in the rainy season, tens of thousands of flamingos visit these pans.\nProtected areas.\nThe following protected areas were established in the Kalahari:\nPopulation.\nThe San people have lived in the Kalahari for 20,000 years as hunter-gatherers. They hunt wild game with bows and poisoned arrows and gather edible plants, such as berries, melons and nuts, as well as insects. The San get most of their water requirements from plant roots and desert melons found on or under the desert floor. They often store water in the blown-out shells of ostrich eggs. The San live in huts built from local materials\u2014the frame is made of branches, and the roof is thatched with long grass. Most of their hunting and gathering techniques replicate those of pre-historic tribes. Bantu-speaking Tswana, Kgalagadi, and Herero and a small number of European settlers also live in the Kalahari desert. The city of Windhoek is situated in the Kalahari Basin.\nKalahari, San and diamonds.\nIn 1996, De Beers evaluated the potential of diamond mining at Gope. In 1997, the eviction of the San and Bakgalagadi tribes in the Central Kalahari Game Reserve from their land began.\nIn 2006, the High Court of Botswana ruled in favor of the San and Bakgalagadi tribes in the reserve, finding their eviction unlawful. The Government of Botswana granted a permit to De Beers' Gem Diamonds/Gope Exploration Company (Pty) Ltd. to conduct mining activities within the reserve.\nSettlements within the Kalahari.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17166", "revid": "43646904", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17166", "title": "Katanga Province", "text": "Katanga was one of the four large provinces created in the Belgian Congo in 1914.\nIt was one of the eleven provinces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo between 1966 and 2015, when it was split into the Tanganyika, Haut-Lomami, Lualaba, and Haut-Katanga provinces. Between 1971 and 1997 (during the rule of Mobutu Sese Seko when Congo was known as Zaire), its official name was Shaba Province.\nKatanga's area encompassed . Farming and ranching are carried out on the Katanga Plateau. The eastern part of the province is a rich mining region which supplies cobalt, copper, tin, radium, uranium, and diamonds. The region's former capital, Lubumbashi, is the second-largest city in the Congo.\nHistory.\nCopper mining in Katanga dates back over 1,000 years, and mines in the region were producing standard-sized ingots of copper for international transport by the end of the 10th century CE.\nIn the 1890s, the province was beleaguered from the south by Cecil Rhodes' Northern Rhodesia, and from the north by the Belgian Congo, the personal possession of King Leopold II of Belgium. Msiri, the King of the Yeke Kingdom, held out against both, but eventually Katanga was subsumed by the Belgian Congo.\nAfter 1900, the Societe Generale de Belgique practically controlled all of the mining in the province through Union Mini\u00e8re du Haut Katanga (UMHK). This included uranium, radium, copper, cobalt, zinc, cadmium, germanium, manganese, silver, gold, and tin.\nIn 1915, a deposit of pitchblende and other uranium minerals of a higher grade than had ever been found before anywhere in the world and higher than any found since were discovered at Shinkolobwe. The discovery was kept secret by UMHK. After World War I ended a factory was built at Olen; the secrecy was lifted at the end of 1922 with the announcement of the production of the first gram of radium from the pitchblende. By the start of World War II, the mining companies \"constituted a state within the Belgian Congo\". The Shinkolobwe mine near Jadotville (now Likasi) was at the centre of the Manhattan Project.\nIn 1960, after the Democratic Republic of the Congo (then called Republic of the Congo) gained independence from Belgium, the UMHK, Moise Tshombe and Godefroid Munongo supported the secession of Katanga province from the Congo. This was supported by Belgium but opposed by the Congolese Prime Minister Patrice Lumumba. This led to the assassination of Lumumba and the Katanga Crisis (or \"Congo Crisis\"), which lasted from 1960 to 1965. The breakaway State of Katanga existed from 1960 to 1963, then was reintegrated.\nIn 2005, the new constitution specified that Katanga was to be split up into separately administered provinces.\nMilitias such as Mai Mai Kata Katanga led by G\u00e9d\u00e9on Kyungu Mutanga fought for Katanga to secede, and his group briefly took over the provincial capital Lubumbashi in 2013.\nIn 2015, Katanga Province was split into the constitutional provinces of Tanganyika, Haut-Lomami, Lualaba, and Haut-Katanga.\nEconomy.\nCopper mining is an important part of the economy of Katanga province. Cobalt mining by individual contractors is also prevalent. A number of reasons have been advanced for the failure of the vast mineral wealth of the province to increase the overall standard of living. The local provincial budget was US$440\u00a0million in 2011.\nLubumbashi, the mining capital of the Democratic Republic of Congo, is a hub for many of the country's biggest mining companies. The Democratic Republic of Congo produces \"more than 3 percent of the world\u2019s copper and half its cobalt, most of which comes from Katanga\".\nMajor mining concessions include Tilwezembe and Kalukundi.\nGeography.\nThe province bordered Angola and formed the entire Congolese border with Zambia. It also bordered Tanzania \u2013 although on Lake Tanganyika rather than on land. Katanga has a wet and dry season. Rainfall is about .\nThe province was divided in 2015 into five successor provinces, based on the districts of Katanga at that time:\nEducation and medical care.\nThe University of Lubumbashi, located in the northern part of Lubumbashi city, is the largest university in the province and one of the largest in the country.\nTESOL, the English Language School of Lubumbashi, is a secondary school that serves the expatriate community. It was founded in 1987 on the grounds of the French School, Lyc\u00e9e Fran\u00e7ais Blaise Pascal, which suspended operations in 1991 with a new French School starting in 2009.\nKatanga province has the highest rate of infant mortality in the world, with 184 of 1000 babies born expected to die before the age of five.\nTransportation.\nThe Congo Railway provides Katanga Province with limited railway service centered on Lubumbashi. Reliability is limited. Lubumbashi International Airport is located northeast of Lubumbashi. In April 2014, a train derailment killed 63 people.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17167", "revid": "14383484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17167", "title": "Katmandu", "text": ""}
{"id": "17168", "revid": "50706919", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17168", "title": "Kathmandu", "text": "Capital and largest city in Nepal\nKathmandu () is the capital and largest city of Nepal, situated in the central part of the country within the Kathmandu Valley. As per the 2021 Nepal census, it has a population of 845,767 residing in 105,649 households, with approximately 4 million people in the surrounding metropolitan area. The city stands at an elevation of above sea level.\nRecognized as one of the oldest continuously inhabited places in the world, Kathmandu's history dates back to the 2nd century AD. Historically known as the \"Nepal Mandala\", the valley has been the cultural and political hub for the Newar people, a significant urban civilization in the Himalayan region. Kathmandu served as the royal capital of the Kingdom of Nepal and is home to numerous palaces, temples, and gardens reflecting its rich heritage. Since 1985, it has hosted the headquarters of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC).\nToday, Kathmandu remains the epicenter of Nepal's history, art, culture, and economy. It has a multi-ethnic population with a Hindu majority and a significant Vajrayana Buddhist presence. Religious and cultural festivals are integral to life in the city. Tourism plays a vital role in the economy, with the city serving as a gateway to the Nepal Himalayas. Kathmandu is home to several World Heritage Sites, including the Durbar Square, Swayambhu Mahachaitya, Bouddha, and Pashupatinath.\nThe Kathmandu Valley has been experiencing rapid urbanization, with a growth rate of 4% per year as of 2010, making it one of the fastest-growing metropolitan areas in South Asia.\nEtymology.\nThe Nepali name \"Kathmandu\" comes from Kasthamandap, a building that stood in Kathmandu Durbar Square and was completely destroyed by the April 2015 Nepal earthquake (it has since been reconstructed). In Sanskrit, \"K\u0101\u1e63\u1e6dha\" (\u0915\u093e\u0937\u094d\u0920) is \u201cwood\" and \"Ma\u1e47\u1e0dapa\" (\u092e\u0923\u094d\u0921\u092a) is \u201cpavilion\u201d. \nThis public pavilion, also known as \"Maru Satta\" in Newari, was rebuilt in 1596 by Biseth in the period of King Laxmi Narsingh Malla. The three-storey structure was made entirely of wood and used neither iron nails nor supports. According to legends, all the timber used to build the pagoda was obtained from a single tree.\nThe colophons of ancient manuscripts, dated as late as the 20th century, refer to Kathmandu as in Nepal Mandala. Mah\u0101nagar means \"great city\". The city is called in a vow that Buddhist priests still recite to this day. Thus, Kathmandu is also known as . During medieval times, the city was sometimes called K\u0101ntipur (). This name is derived from two Sanskrit words \u2013 and . is a word that stands for \"beauty\" and is mostly associated with light and means place, thus giving it the meaning, \"City of light\".\nAmong the indigenous Newar people, Kathmandu is known as \"Ye\u1e43 Dey\" (), and Patan and Bhaktapur are known as \"Yala Dey\" () and \"Khwopa Dey\" () respectively. \"Yen\" is the shorter form of \"Yambu\" (), which originally referred to the northern half of Kathmandu. The older northern settlements were referred to as Yambi while the southern settlement was known as Yangala.\nHistory.\nArchaeological excavations in parts of Kathmandu have found evidence of ancient civilizations. The oldest of these findings is a statue, found in Maligaon, that was dated at 185 AD. The excavation of Dhando Chaitya uncovered a brick with an inscription in Brahmi script. Archaeologists believe that it is two thousand years old. Stone inscriptions are ubiquitous elements at the heritage sites and are key sources for the history of Nepal.\nThe earliest Western reference to Kathmandu appears in an account of Portuguese Jesuit Father Joao Cabral who passed through the Kathmandu Valley in the spring of 1628 and was received graciously by the king of that time, probably King Lakshminarasimha Malla of Kathmandu on their way from Tibet to India. Father Cabral reported that they reached \"Cadmendu\", the capital of Nepal kingdom.\nAncient history.\nThe ancient history of Kathmandu is described in its traditional myths and legends. According to the scripture of Swayambhu Purana, present-day Kathmandu was once a huge and deep lake where dwelt mythical serpents (N\u0101gas) like Karkotaka, Takshaka and Kulika and the Buddhas, bodhisattvas, hermits, yogis, gods and goddesses as well as other celestial beings used to come for ablution in its water. Vipass\u012b Buddha, who lived ninety-one kalpas (aeon) ago, came on a pilgrimage and sowed the seed of a lotus in the lake which grew into a lotus flower with thousand petals. The flower emitted eternal radiant form of light with the Five Great Buddhas, Vairocana, Akshobhya, Ratnasambhava, Amit\u0101bha and Amoghasiddhi appearing on each side of the differently coloured rays of the light. Following on the footsteps of Vipass\u012b Buddha, Sikh\u012b Buddha and Vessabh\u016b Buddha came to pay homage to the lotus flower thirty-one kalpas ago. Later on, Bodhisattva Manjushri came to the lake and pondered how to drain the lake so that people can traverse and pay homage to the radiant light. Out of his compassion, he drained the lake out of the valley by cutting the mountain with his indestructible sword; and created other lakes nearby to give shelter to the mythical serpents. The self-arisen ray of light in a thousand - petaled lotus came to be worshipped as Swayambhu. Manjushri then established a city called Manjupattan, and made Dharmakar the ruler of the valley land. After some time, a demon named Banasura closed the outlet, and the valley again turned into a lake. Krishna came to Nepal, killed Banasura, and again drained out the water by cutting the edge of Chobhar hill with this Sudarshana Chakra. He brought some cowherds along with him, and made Bhuktaman the king of Nepal.\nKotirudra Samhita of Shiva Purana, Chapter 11, \"Shloka\" 18 refers to the place as Nayapala city, which was famous for its Pashupati Shivalinga. The name Nepal probably originates from this city Nayapala. Very few historical records exists of the period before medieval Licchavi rulers. According to Gopalraj Vansawali, a genealogy of Nepali monarchy, the rulers of Kathmandu Valley before the Licchavis were Gopalas, Mahispalas, Aabhirs, Kirat, and Somavanshi. The Kirata dynasty was established by Yalamber. During the Kirata era, a settlement called Yambu existed in the northern half of old Kathmandu. In some of the Sino-Tibetan languages, Kathmandu is still called Yambu. Another smaller settlement called Yengal was present in the southern half of old Kathmandu, near Manjupattan. During the reign of the seventh Kirata ruler, Jitedasti, Buddhist monks entered Kathmandu valley and established a forest monastery at Sankhu.\nLicchavi era.\nThe Licchavis from Vaisali in modern-day Bihar migrated north and defeated the Kirats, establishing the Licchavi dynasty circa 400 AD. During this era, following the genocide of Shakyas in Lumbini by Virudhaka, the survivors migrated north and entered the forest monastery, masquerading as Koliyas. From Sankhu, they migrated to Yambu and Yengal (Lanjagwal and Manjupattan) and established the first permanent Buddhist monasteries of Kathmandu. This created the basis of Newar Buddhism, which is the only surviving Sanskrit-based Buddhist tradition in the world. With their migration, Yambu was called Koligram and Yengal was called Dakshin Koligram during most of the Licchavi era.\nEventually, the Licchavi ruler Gunakamadeva merged Koligram and Dakshin Koligram, founding the city of Kathmandu. The city was designed in the shape of \"Chandrahrasa\", the sword of Manjushri. The city was surrounded by eight barracks guarded by Ajimas. One of these barracks is still in use at Bhadrakali (in front of Singha Durbar). The city served as an important transit point in the trade between India and Tibet, leading to tremendous growth in architecture. Descriptions of buildings such as Managriha, Kailaskut Bhawan, and Bhadradiwas Bhawan have been found in the surviving journals of travellers and monks who lived during this era. For example, the famous 7th-century Chinese traveller Xuanzang described Kailaskut Bhawan, the palace of the Licchavi king Amshuverma. \nThe trade route also led to cultural exchange as well. The artistry of the Newar people\u2014the indigenous inhabitants of the Kathmandu Valley\u2014became highly sought after during this era, both within the Valley and throughout the greater Himalayas. Newar artists travelled extensively throughout Asia, creating religious art for their neighbours. For example, Araniko led a group of his compatriot artists through Tibet and China. Bhrikuti, the princess of Nepal who married Tibetan monarch Songts\u00e4n Gampo, was instrumental in introducing Buddhism to Tibet.\nMalla era.\nThe Licchavi era was followed by the Malla era. Rulers from Tirhut, upon being attacked by the Delhi Sultanate, fled north to the Kathmandu valley. They intermarried with Nepali royalty, and this led to the Malla era. The early years of the Malla era were turbulent, with raids and attacks from Khas and Turk Muslims. There was also a devastating earthquake which claimed the lives of a third of Kathmandu's population, including the king Abhaya Malla. These disasters led to the destruction of most of the architecture of the Licchavi era (such as Mangriha and Kailashkut Bhawan), and the loss of literature collected in various monasteries within the city. Despite the initial hardships, Kathmandu rose to prominence again and, during most of the Malla era, dominated the trade between India and Tibet. Nepali currency became the standard currency in trans-Himalayan trade.\nDuring the later part of the Malla era, Kathmandu Valley comprised four fortified cities: Kantipur, Lalitpur, Bhaktapur, and Kirtipur. These served as the capitals of the Malla confederation of Nepal. These states competed with each other in the arts, architecture, esthetics, and trade, resulting in tremendous development. The kings of this period directly influenced or involved themselves in the construction of public buildings, squares, and temples, as well as the development of waterspouts, the institutionalisation of trusts (called guthis), the codification of laws, the writing of dramas, and the performance of plays in city squares. Evidence of an influx of ideas from India, Tibet, China, Persia, and Europe among other places can be found in a stone inscription from the time of king Pratap Malla. Books have been found from this era that describe their tantric tradition (e.g. Tantrakhyan), medicine (e.g.\u00a0Haramekhala), religion (e.g.\u00a0Mooldevshashidev), law, morals, and history. Amarkosh, a Sanskrit-Nepal Bhasa dictionary from 1381, was also found. Architecturally notable buildings from this era include Kathmandu Durbar Square, Patan Durbar Square, Bhaktapur Durbar Square, the former durbar of Kirtipur, Nyatapola, Kumbheshwar, the Krishna temple, and others.\nMedieval era.\nEarly Shah rule.\nThe Gorkha Kingdom ended the Malla confederation after the Battle of Kathmandu in 1768. This marked the beginning of the modern era in Kathmandu. The Battle of Kirtipur was the start of the Gorkha conquest of the Kathmandu Valley. Kathmandu was adopted as the capital of the Gorkha empire, and the empire itself was dubbed Nepal. During the early part of this era, Kathmandu maintained its distinctive culture. Buildings with characteristic Nepali architecture, such as the nine-story tower of Basantapur, were built during this era. However, trade declined because of continual war with neighbouring nations. Bhimsen Thapa supported France against Great Britain; this led to the development of modern military structures, such as modern barracks in Kathmandu. The nine-storey tower Dharahara was originally built during this era.\nRana rule.\nRana rule over Nepal started with the Kot massacre of 1846, which occurred near Hanuman Dhoka Durbar. During this massacre, most of Nepal's high-ranking officials were massacred by Jung Bahadur Rana and his supporters. Another massacre, the Bhandarkhal Massacre, was also conducted by Kunwar and his supporters in Kathmandu. During the Rana regime, Kathmandu's alliance shifted from anti-British to pro-British; this led to the construction of the first buildings in the style of Western European architecture. The most well-known of these buildings include Singha Durbar, Garden of Dreams, Shital Niwas, and the old Narayanhiti palace. The first modern commercial road in the Kathmandu Valley, the New Road, was also built during this era. Trichandra College (the first college of Nepal), Durbar High School (the first modern school of Nepal), and Bir Hospital (the first hospital of Nepal) were built in Kathmandu during this era. Education was only accessible to the privileged class. Rana rule was marked by despotism, economic exploitation and religious persecution.\nModern History (2000-Present).\nThe turn of the 21st century brought major political and social upheavals to Kathmandu. In June 2001, the Nepalese royal massacre at Narayanhiti Palace claimed the lives of King Birendra, Queen Aishwarya, Crown Prince Dipendra, and several others, and following Dipendra\u2019s brief, comatose reign, Gyanendra was appointed king. After the 2006 Revolution, it was turned into a museum. \nKathmandu later became the center of the 2006 People\u2019s Movement (\"Jana Andolan II\"), when widespread protests forced King Gyanendra to restore parliament on 24 April 2006 and set Nepal on the path toward becoming a federal democratic republic. \nOn 28 February 2025, a magnitude 6.1 earthquake struck north of Kathmandu, Nepal, according to the National Earthquake Monitoring and Research Centre. The quake, centered in Sindhupalchok District near the Himalayan border with Tibet, was measured at magnitudes ranging from 5.5 to 6.1 by different agencies. Despite strong tremors that startled residents, no significant damage or casualties were reported, except for a minor landslide and a prison inmate who sustained a broken hand while fleeing. Local officials confirmed structural cracks in a police post but no major destruction.\nIn September 2025, widespread Gen Z protests erupted in Kathmandu after the government imposed a ban on multiple social media platforms. The protests quickly grew to include complaints about corruption, nepotism, and lack of opportunity. The army was deployed on the streets of Kathmandu, and many government buildings and residences of important government officials were burnt. Security forces responded with lethal force, resulting in dozens of casualties and major damage to government property, and the prime minister eventually resigned. Following the unrest, President Ram Chandra Poudel appointed former Supreme Court Chief Justice Sushila Karki as Nepal\u2019s first female prime minister, and parliament was dissolved with fresh elections scheduled for March 2026.\nGeography.\nKathmandu is in the northwestern part of the Kathmandu Valley to the north of the Bagmati River and covers an area of . The average elevation is above sea level. The city is bounded by several other municipalities of the Kathmandu valley: south of the Bagmati by Lalitpur Metropolitan City (Patan), with which it forms one urban area surrounded by a ring road, to the southwest by Kirtipur and to the east by Madyapur Thimi. To the north the urban area extends into several municipalities; Nagarjun, Tarakeshwor, Tokha, Budhanilkantha, Gokarneshwor and Kageshwori Manohara. However, the urban agglomeration extends well beyond the neighbouring municipalities, e.g. to Bhaktapur, and nearly covers the entire Kathmandu Valley.\nKathmandu is dissected by eight rivers, the main river of the valley, the Bagmati and its tributaries, of which the Bishnumati, Dhobi Khola, Manohara Khola, Hanumante Khola, and Tukucha Khola are predominant. The mountains from where these rivers originate are in the elevation range of , and have passes which provide access to and from Kathmandu and its valley. An ancient canal once flowed from Nagarjuna Hill through Balaju to Kathmandu; this canal is now extinct.\nThe city of Kathmandu and the surrounding valley are in the \"Deciduous Monsoon Forest Zone\" (altitude range of ), one of five vegetation zones defined for Nepal. The dominant tree species in this zone are oak, elm, beech, maple and others, with coniferous trees at higher altitude.\nKathmandu administration.\nKathmandu and adjacent cities are composed of neighbourhoods, which are utilized quite extensively and more familiar among locals. However, administratively the city is divided into 32 wards, numbered from 1 to 32. Earlier, there were 35 wards which made it the metropolitan city with the largest number of the wards.\nClimate.\nUnder K\u00f6ppen's climate classification, portions of the city with at lower elevations (1300-1400m), which make up 88% of the total area, have a humid subtropical climate (Cwa), while portions of the city with higher elevations generally have a subtropical highland climate (Cwb). In the Kathmandu Valley, which is representative of its valley's climate, the average summer temperature varies from . The average winter temperature is .\nFive major climatic regions are found in Nepal. Of these, High hills of Kathmandu Valley including Chandragiri hill is in the \"Warm Temperate Zone\" (elevation ranging from ), where the climate is fairly temperate, atypical for the region. This zone is followed by the \"Cool Temperate Zone\" with elevation varying between .\nThe city generally has a climate with warm days followed by cool nights and mornings. Unpredictable weather is expected, given that temperatures can drop to or less during the winter. The lowest ever temperature of \u22123.5\u00a0\u00b0C was recorded in 1978. While snowfall is generally confined to the hills surrounding the city, there have been a few instances of snowfall in city, most notably in 1945 and 2007.\nRainfall is mostly monsoon-based (about 65% of the total concentrated during the monsoon months of June to September), and decreases substantially () from eastern Nepal to western Nepal. The average annual rainfall for the city is around 1400\u00a0mm (55\u00a0in). On average humidity is 75%. The chart below is based on data from the Nepal Bureau of Standards &amp; Meteorology, Weather Meteorology for 2005. The chart provides minimum and maximum temperatures during each month. The annual amount of precipitation was for 2005, as per monthly data included in the table above. The decade of 2000\u20132010 saw highly variable and unprecedented precipitation anomalies in Kathmandu. This was mostly due to the annual variation of the southwest monsoon. For example, 2001 recorded only of precipitation due to an extraordinarily weak monsoon season. In contrast, 2003 was the wettest year ever in Kathmandu, totaling over of precipitation due to an exceptionally strong monsoon season.\nAir quality.\nAir pollution is a major issue in the Kathmandu Valley. According to the 2016 World Health Organization's Ambient Air Pollution Database, the annual average PM2.5 (particulate matter) concentration in 2013 was 49\u00a0\u03bcg/m3, which is 4.9 times higher than recommended by the World Health Organization. \nStarting in early 2017, the Government of Nepal and the Embassy of the United States in Kathmandu have monitored and publicly share real-time air quality data. In Nepal and Kathmandu, the annual premature deaths due to air pollution reached 37,399 and 9,943 respectively, according to a Republica news report published on 23 November 2019. This indicates, around a quarter of the total deaths due to air pollution in Nepal are in Kathmandu.\nGovernment and public services.\nCivic administration.\nKathmandu Municipal Corporation (KMC) is the chief nodal agency for the administration of Kathmandu. The Municipality of Kathmandu was upgraded to a metropolitan city in 1995.\nMetropolitan Kathmandu is divided into five sectors: the Central Sector, the East Sector, the North Sector, the City Core and the West Sector. For civic administration, the city is further divided into 32 administrative wards. The Council administers the Metropolitan area of Kathmandu city through its 177 elected representatives and 20 nominated members. It holds biannual meetings to review, process and approve the annual budget and make major policy decisions. The ward's profile documents for the 32 wards prepared by the Kathmandu Metropolitan Council is detailed and provides information for each ward on population, the structure and condition of houses, the type of roads, educational, health and financial institutions, entertainment facilities, parking space, security provisions, etc. It also includes lists of development projects completed, on-going and planned, along with informative data about the cultural heritage, festivals, historical sites and the local inhabitants. Ward 16 is the largest, with an area of 437.4\u00a0ha; ward 26 is the smallest, with an area of 4\u00a0ha.\nKathmandu is the headquarters of the surrounding Kathmandu District.\nLaw and order.\nThe Metropolitan Police is the main law enforcement agency in the city. It is headed by a commissioner of police. The Metropolitan Police is a division of the Nepal Police, and the administrative control lies with the Ministry of Home Affairs.\nFire service.\nThe fire service, known as the \"Barun Yantra Karyalaya\" (), opened its first station in Kathmandu in 1937 with a single vehicle. An iron tower was erected to monitor the city and watch for a fire. As a precautionary measure, firemen were sent to the areas which were designated as accident-prone areas. In 1944, the fire service was extended to the neighbouring cities of Lalitpur and Bhaktapur. In 1966, a fire service was established in Kathmandu central airport. In 1975, a West German government donation added seven fire engines to Kathmandu's fire service. The fire service in the city is also overlooked by an international non-governmental organization, the Firefighters Volunteer Association of Nepal (FAN), which was established in 2000 with the purpose of raising public awareness about fire and improving safety.\nElectricity and water supply.\nElectricity in Kathmandu is regulated and distributed by the Nepal Electricity Authority (NEA). Water supply and sanitation facilities are provided by the Kathmandu Upatyaka Khanepani Limited (KUKL). There is a severe shortage of water for household purposes such as drinking, bathing, cooking and washing and irrigation. People have been using bottled mineral water, water from tank trucks and from the ancient dhunge dharas () for all the purposes related to water. The city water shortage should be solved by the completion of the much plagued Melamchi Water Supply Project by the end of 2019. Despite continued efforts by governmental bodies, Kathmandu is one of the most polluted cities in Nepal, largely due to overpopulation.\nWaste management.\nWaste management may be through composting in municipal waste management units, and at houses with home composting units. Both systems are common and established in India and neighbouring countries.\nDemographics.\nKathmandu's urban cosmopolitan character has made it the most populous city in Nepal. According to the National Population Census of 2011, the total population of Kathmandu city was 975,543 in 254,292 households with an annual growth rate of 6.12% with respect to the population figure of 2001. 70% of the total population residing in Kathmandu are aged between 15 and 59.\nIn one decade, the population increased from 427,045 in 1991 to 671,805 in 2001. The population was projected to reach 915,071 in 2011 and 1,319,597 by 2021. To keep up this population growth, the KMC-controlled area of expanded to in 2001. With this new area, the population density which was 85 in 1991 remained 85 in 2001; it is likely to jump to 111 in 2011 and 161 in 2021.\nLanguages.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the 2011 census, Nepali is the most common mother tongue in Kathmandu, with 62% of the population speaking it as their mother tongue. Newari is spoken by 19%, and the other languages spoken in the city include Tamang (6%), Maithili (3%), Bhojpuri (2%), Gurung (2%), Magar (2%) and Sherpa (1%) as their first language. English is also spoken by many.\nEthnic groups.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe largest group is the native Newars, whose various sub-groups combine to make up 24.59% of the population. The Bahuns, also known as Hill-Brahmin or Khas Brahmin, representing 21.62% of the population. They are part of the broader Khas community, as are the Chhetri, the third largest group, who account for 18.66% of the population. Tamang community composites of 7.74% making them 4th largest group in Kathmandu metropolitan.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt; \nArchitecture and cityscape.\nThe ancient trade route between India and Tibet that passed through Kathmandu enabled a fusion of artistic and architectural traditions from other cultures to be amalgamated with local art and architecture. The monuments of Kathmandu City have been influenced over the centuries by Hindu and Buddhist religious practices. The architectural treasure of the Kathmandu valley has been categorized under the well-known seven groups of heritage monuments and buildings. In 2006 UNESCO declared these seven groups of monuments as a World Heritage Site (WHS). The seven monuments zones cover an area of , with the buffer zone extending to . The Seven Monument Zones inscribed originally in 1979 and with a minor modification in 2006 are the Durbar squares of Hanuman Dhoka, Patan and Bhaktapur, the Hindu temples of Pashupatinath and Changunarayan, the Buddhist stupas of Swayambhunath and Boudhanath.\nDurbar Squares.\nThe literal meaning of Durbar Square is a \"place of palaces\". There are three preserved Durbar Squares in Kathmandu valley and one unpreserved in Kirtipur. The Durbar Square of Kathmandu is in the old city and has heritage buildings representing four kingdoms (Kantipur, Lalitpur, Bhaktapur, Kirtipur); the earliest being the Licchavi dynasty. The complex has 50 temples and is distributed in two quadrangles of the Durbar Square. The outer quadrangle has the Kasthamandap, Kumari Ghar, and Shiva-Parvati Temple; the inner quadrangle has the Hanuman Dhoka palace. The squares were severely damaged in the April 2015 earthquake.\nHanuman Dhoka is a complex of structures with the royal palace of the Malla kings and of the Shah dynasty. It is spread over five acres. The eastern wing (with ten courtyards) is the oldest part, dating to the mid-16th century. It was expanded by King Pratap Malla in the 17th century with many temples. The royal family lived in this palace until 1886 when they moved to Narayanhiti Palace. The stone inscription outside is in fifteen languages.\nKumari Ghar is a palace in the centre of the Kathmandu city, next to the Durbar square where a royal Kumari selected from several Kumaris resides. Kumari (or Kumari Devi), is the tradition of worshipping young pre-pubescent girls as manifestations of the divine female energy (or \"devi\") in South Asian countries. In Nepal, the selection process is very rigorous. Previously, during the time of the monarchy, the queen and the priests used to appoint the proposed Kumari with delicate process of astrological examination and physical examination of 32 'gunas'. The \"china\" (), an ancient Hindu astrological report of the Kumari and the reigning king, has been said to be similar. The Kumari is believed to be a bodily incarnation of the goddess Taleju (the Nepali name for Durga) until she menstruates, after which it is believed that the goddess vacates her body. Serious illness or a major loss of blood from an injury also causes her to revert to common status. The current Kumari, Trishna Shakya, age three at the time of appointment, was installed in September 2017 succeeding Matina Shakya who was the first Kumari of Kathmandu after the end of the monarchy.\nKasthamandap is a three-storeyed temple enshrining an image of Gorakhnath. It was built in the 16th century in the pagoda style. The name of Kathmandu is a derivative of the word \"Kasthamandap\". It was built under the reign of King Laxmi Narsingha Malla. Kasthamandap stands at the intersection of two ancient trade routes linking India and Tibet at Maru square. It was originally built as a rest house for travellers.\nPashupatinath temple.\nThe Pashupatinath Temple () is a famous 5th century Hindu temple dedicated to Shiva. Located on the banks of the Bagmati River, the Pashupatinath Temple is the oldest Hindu temple in Kathmandu. It served as the seat of national deity, Pashupatinath, until Nepal was secularized. However, a significant part of the temple was destroyed by Mughal invaders in the 14th century and little or nothing remains of the original 5th-century temple exterior. The temple as it stands today was built in the 19th century, although the image of the bull and the black four-headed image of Pashupati are at least 300 years old. The temple is a UNESCO World Heritage Site. Shivaratri, or the night of Shiva, is the most important festival that takes place here, attracting thousands of devotees and sadhus.\nBelievers in Pashupatinath (mainly Hindus) are allowed to enter the temple premises, but non-Hindu visitors are allowed to view the temple only from the across the Bagmati River. The priests who perform the services at this temple have been Brahmins from Karnataka in southern India since the time of Malla king Yaksha Malla. This tradition is believed to have been started at the request of Adi Shankara who sought to unify the states of Bh\u0101ratam, a region in south Asia believed to be ruled by a mythological king Bharata, by encouraging cultural exchange. This procedure is followed in other temples around India, which were sanctified by Adi Shankara.\nThe temple is built in the pagoda style of architecture, with cubic constructions and carved wooden rafters (tundal) on which they rest, and two-level roofs made of copper and gold.\nBoudhanath.\nBoudhanath (; also written as \"Bouddhanath\", \"Bodhnath\", \"Baudhanath\" or the \"Kh\u0101sa\" \"Chaitya\"), is one of the holiest Buddhist sites in Nepal, along with the Swayambhunath. It is a very popular tourist site. Boudhanath is known as Kh\u0101sti by Newars and as Bauddha or Bodhn\u0101th by speakers of Nepali. About from the centre and northeastern outskirts of Kathmandu, the stupa's massive mandala makes it one of the largest spherical stupas in Nepal. Boudhanath became a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1979.\nThe base of the stupa has 108 small depictions of the Dhyani Buddha Amitabha. It is surrounded with a brick wall with 147 niches, each with four or five prayer wheels engraved with the mantra, \"Om mani padme hum\". At the northern entrance where visitors must pass is a shrine dedicated to Ajima, the goddess of smallpox. Every year the stupa attracts many Tibetan Buddhist pilgrims who perform full body prostrations in the inner lower enclosure, walk around the stupa with prayer wheels, chant, and pray. Thousands of prayer flags are hoisted up from the top of the stupa downwards and dot the perimeter of the complex. The influx of many Tibetan refugees from China has seen the construction of over 50 Tibetan gompas (monasteries) around Boudhanath.\nSwayambhu.\nSwayambhunath () is a Buddhist stupa atop a hillock at the northwestern part of the city. This is among the oldest religious sites in Nepal. Although the site is considered Buddhist, it is revered by both Buddhists and Hindus. The stupa consists of a dome at the base; above the dome, there is a cubic structure with the eyes of Buddha looking in all four directions. There are pentagonal \"toran\" above each of the four sides, with statues engraved on them. Behind and above the torana there are thirteen tiers. Above all the tiers, there is a small space above which lies a \"gajur\".\nRani Pokhari.\nRanipokhari () is a historic artificial pond nestled in the heart of Kathmandu. It was built by king Pratap Malla in 1670 for his beloved queen after she lost her son and could not recover from her loss. A large stone statue of an elephant in the south signifies the image of Pratap Malla and his two sons. Balgopaleshwor Temple stands still inside the temple above the pond. Rani Pokhari is opened once a year during the final day of Tihar i.e. Bhai Tika and Chhath festival. The world's largest Chhath takes place every year in Ranipokhari. The pond is one of Kathmandu's most famous landmarks and is known for its religious and aesthetic significance. After sustaining damages from the 2015 earthquake, Ranipokhari went under development, which began in 2019 and the reconstruction was completed in October 2020.\nCulture.\nArts.\nKathmandu valley the City of Newars is described as \"an enormous treasure house of art and sculptures\", which are made of wood, stone, metal, and terracotta, and found in profusion in temples, shrines, stupas, gompas, chaityas and palaces. The art objects are also seen in street corners, lanes, private courtyards, and in open ground. Most art is in the form of icons of gods and goddesses. Kathmandu valley has had this art treasure for a very long time, but received worldwide recognition only after the country opened to the outside world in 1950.\nThe religious art of Nepal and Kathmandu in particular consists of an iconic symbolism of the Mother Goddesses such as: Bhavani, Durga, Gaja-Lakshmi, Hariti-Sitala, Mahsishamardini, Saptamatrika (seven mother goddesses), and Sri-Lakshmi (wealth-goddess). From the 3rd century BCE, apart from the Hindu gods and goddesses, Buddhist monuments from the Ashokan period (it is said that Ashoka visited Nepal in 250\u00a0BC) have embellished Nepal in general and the valley in particular. These art and architectural edifices encompass three major periods of evolution: the Licchavi or classical period (500 to 900\u00a0AD), the post-classical period (1000 to 1400\u00a0AD), with strong influence of the Palla art form; the Malla period (1400 onwards) that exhibited explicitly tantric influences coupled with the art of Tibetan Demonology.\nA broad typology has been ascribed to the decorative designs and carvings created by the people of Nepal. These artists have maintained a blend of Hinduism and Buddhism. The typology, based on the type of material used are: stone art, metal art, wood art, terracotta art, and painting.\nMuseums.\nKathmandu is home to a number of museums and art galleries, including the National Museum of Nepal and the Natural History Museum of Nepal. Nepal's art and architecture is an amalgamation of two ancient religions, Hinduism and Buddhism. These are amply reflected in the many temples, shrines, stupas, monasteries, and palaces in the seven well-defined Monument Zones of the Kathmandu valley are part of a UNESCO World Heritage Site. This amalgamation is also reflected in the planning and exhibitions in museums and art galleries throughout Kathmandu and its sister cities of Patan and Bhaktapur. The museums display unique artefacts and paintings from the 5th century CE to the present day, including archaeological exportation.\nMuseums and art galleries in Kathmandu include:\nThe National Museum is in the western part of Kathmandu, near the Swayambhunath stupa in a historical building constructed in the early 19th century by General Bhimsen Thapa. It is the most important museum in the country, housing an extensive collection of weapons, art and antiquities of historic and cultural importance. The museum was established in 1928 as a collection house of war trophies and weapons, and the initial name of this museum was \"Chhauni Silkhana\", meaning \"the stone house of arms and ammunition\". Given its focus, the museum contains many weapons, including locally made firearms used in wars, leather cannons from the 18th\u201319th century, and medieval and modern works in wood, bronze, stone and paintings.\nThe Natural History Museum is in the southern foothills of Swayambhunath hill and has a sizeable collection of different species of animals, butterflies, and plants. The museum is noted for its display of species, from prehistoric shells to stuffed animals.\nThe Tribhuvan Museum contains artifacts related to King Tribhuvan (1906\u20131955). It has a variety of pieces including his personal belongings, letters, and papers, memorabilia related to events he was involved in and a rare collection of photos and paintings of Royal family members. The Mahendra Museum is dedicated to the King Mahendra (1920\u20131972). Like the Tribhuvan Museum, it includes his personal belongings such as decorations, stamps, coins and personal notes and manuscripts, but it also has structural reconstructions of his cabinet room and office chamber. The Hanumandhoka Palace, a lavish medieval palace complex in the Durbar, contains three separate museums of historic importance. These museums include the Birendra museum, which contains items related to the second-last monarch, King Birendra.The enclosed compound of the Narayanhiti Palace Museum is in the north-central part of Kathmandu. \"Narayanhiti\" () comes from \"Narayana\" (), a form of the Hindu god Vishnu, and \"Hiti\" (), meaning \"water spout\" (the temple of lord Vishnu is opposite to the palace, and the water spout is east of the main entrance to the precinct). The current palace building was built in 1970 in front of the old palace, built in 1915, in the form of a contemporary pagoda. It was built on the occasion of the marriage of the then crown prince and heir apparent to the throne, Birendra. The southern gate of the palace is at the crossing of Prithvipath and Durbar Marg roads. The palace area covers and is fully secured with gates on all sides. This palace was the scene of the Nepali royal massacre. After the fall of the monarchy, it has been converted into a museum.\nThe Taragaon Museum presents the modern history of the Kathmandu valley. It seeks to document 50 years of research and cultural heritage conservation of the Kathmandu Valley, documenting what artists, photographers, architects, and anthropologists from abroad had contributed in the second half of the 20th century. The actual structure of the museum showcases restoration and rehabilitation efforts to preserve the built heritage of Kathmandu. It was designed by Carl Pruscha (master-planner of the Kathmandu Valley) in 1970 and constructed in 1971. Restoration works began in 2010 to rehabilitate the Taragaon hostel into the Taragaon Museum. The design uses local brick along with modern architectural design elements, as well as the use of circle, triangles and squares. The museum is within a short walk from the Boudhanath stupa, which itself can be seen from the museum tower.\nArt galleries.\nKathmandu is a centre for art in Nepal, displaying the work of contemporary artists in the country and also collections of historical artists. Patan in particular is an ancient city noted for its fine arts and crafts. Art in Kathmandu is vibrant, demonstrating a fusion of traditionalism and modern art, derived from a great number of national, Asian, and global influences. Nepali art is commonly divided into two areas: the idealistic traditional painting known as Paubhas in Nepal and perhaps more commonly known as Thangkas in Tibet, closely linked to the country's religious history and on the other hand the contemporary western-style painting, including nature-based compositions or abstract artwork based on Tantric elements and social themes of which painters in Nepal are well noted for. Internationally, the British-based charity, the Kathmandu Contemporary Art Centre is involved with promoting arts in Kathmandu.\nKathmandu houses many notable art galleries. The NAFA Gallery, operated by the Arts and crafts Department of the Nepal Academy is housed in Sita Bhavan, a neo-classical old Rana palace.\nThe Srijana Contemporary Art Gallery, inside the Bhrikutimandap Exhibition grounds, hosts the work of contemporary painters and sculptors, and regularly organizes exhibitions. It also runs morning and evening classes in the schools of art. Also of note is the Moti Azima Gallery, in a three-storied building in Bhimsenthan which contains an impressive collection of traditional utensils and handmade dolls and items typical of a medieval Newar house, giving an important insight into Nepali history. The J Art Gallery near the former royal palace in Durbarmarg displays the artwork of eminent, established Nepali painters. The Nepal Art Council Gallery, in the Babar Mahal, on the way to Tribhuvan International Airport contains artwork of both national and international artists and extensive halls regularly used for art exhibitions.\nLiterature.\nThe National Library of Nepal is located in Patan. It is the largest library in the country with more than 70,000 books in English, Nepali, Sanskrit, Hindi,Maithili and Nepal Bhasa. The library is in possession of rare scholarly books in Sanskrit and English dating from the 17th century. Kathmandu also contains the Kaiser Library, in the Kaiser Mahal on the ground floor of the Ministry of Education building. This collection of around 45,000 books is derived from a personal collection of Kaiser Shamsher Jang Bahadur Rana. It covers a wide range of subjects including history, law, art, religion, and philosophy, as well as a Sanskrit manual of Tantra, which is believed to be over 1,000 years old. The 2015 earthquake caused severe damage to the Ministry of Education building, and the contents of the Kaiser Library have been temporarily relocated.\nThe Asa Archives are also noteworthy. They specialize in medieval history and religious traditions of the Kathmandu valley. The archives, in Kulambhulu, have a collection of some 6,000 loose-leaf handwritten books and 1,000 palm-leaf manuscripts (mostly in Sanskrit or Nepal Bhasa) and a manuscript dated to 1464.\nCinema and theatre.\nKathmandu is home to Nepali cinema and theatres. The city contains several theatres, including the National Dance Theatre in Kanti Path, the Ganga Theatre, the Himalayan Theatre and the Aarohan Theater Group founded in 1982. The M. Art Theater is based in the city. The Gurukul School of Theatre organizes the Kathmandu International Theater Festival, attracting artists from all over the world. A mini theatre has been opened at the Hanumandhoka Durbar Square, established by the Durbar Conservation and Promotion Committee.\nKathmandu has a number of cinemas (old single screen establishments and some new multiplexes) showing Nepali, Bollywood and Hollywood films. Some old establishments include Vishwajyoti Cinema Hall, Jai Nepal Hall, Kumari Cinema Hall, Gopi Krishna Cinema Hall and Guna Cinema Hall. Kathmandu also houses some international standard cinema theatres and multiplexes, such as QFX Cinemas, Cine De Chef, Fcube Cinemas, Q's Cinemas, Big Movies, BSR Movies and many more.\nIn October 2023, Kathmandu was named a UNESCO City of Film and joined the UNESCO Creative Cities Network.\nMusic.\nKathmandu is the center of music and dance in Nepal, and these art forms are integral to understanding the city. Musical performances are organized in cultural venues. Music is a part of the traditional aspect of Kathmandu. Gunla is the traditional music festival according to Nepal Sambat. Newar music originated in Kathmandu. Furthermore, music from all over Nepal can be found in Kathmandu.\nA number of hippies visited Kathmandu during the 1970s and introduced rock music and jazz to the city. Kathmandu is noted internationally for its jazz festival, popularly known as Jazzmandu. It is the only jazz festival in the Himalayan region and was established in March 2002. The festival attracts musicians from countries worldwide, such as Australia, Denmark, United States, Benin, and India.\nThe city has been referenced in numerous songs, including works by Cat Stevens ('Katmandu', \"Mona Bone Jakon\" (1970), Bob Seger ('Katmandu', \"Beautiful Loser\" (1975)), Rush ('A Passage to Bangkok', \"Pulling into Kathmandu\"; \"2112\", 1976), John Lennon ('Nobody Told Me' (1984, posthumously)), Krematorij ('Kathmandu', \"Three Springs\" (2000)), Fito P\u00e1ez (\"Tr\u00e1fico por Katmand\u00fa\"\u00a0\u2013 \"Traffic through Kathmandu\") and Cavalcade ('Kathmandu Kid') 2019.\nCuisine.\nThe staple food of most people in Kathmandu is dal bhat. This consists of rice and lentil soup, generally served with vegetable curries, achar and sometimes chutney. Momo, a type of Nepali version of Tibetan dumpling, has become prominent in Nepal with many street vendors and restaurants selling it. It is one of the most popular fast foods in Kathmandu. Various Nepali variants of momo including buff (i.e. buffalo) dumplings, chicken dumplings, and vegetarian momo are famous in Kathmandu.\nMost of the cuisines found in Kathmandu are non-vegetarian. However, the practice of vegetarianism is not uncommon, and vegetarian cuisines can be found throughout the city. Consumption of beef is very uncommon and considered taboo in many places. \"Buff\" (meat of water buffalo) is very common. There is a strong tradition of \"buff\" consumption in Kathmandu, especially among Newars, which is not found in other parts of Nepal. Consumption of pork was considered taboo until a few decades ago. Due to the intermixing with Kirat cuisine from eastern Nepal, pork has found a place in Kathmandu dishes. A fringe population of devout Hindus and Muslims consider it taboo. The Muslims forbid eating \"buff\" as from Quran while Hindus eat all varieties except beef as they consider cow to be a goddess and symbol of purity. The chief lunch/snack for locals and visitors is mostly \"Momo\" or \"Chowmein\".\nKathmandu had only one western-style restaurant in 1955. A large number of restaurants in Kathmandu have since opened, catering Nepali cuisine,Mithila cuisine,Tibetan cuisine, Chinese cuisine and Indian cuisine in particular. Many other restaurants have opened to accommodate locals, expatriates, and tourists. The growth of tourism in Kathmandu has led to culinary creativity and the development of hybrid foods to accommodate for tourists such as American chop suey, which is a sweet-and-sour sauce with crispy noodles with a fried egg commonly added on top and other westernized adaptations of traditional cuisine. Continental cuisine can be found in selected places.\nKathmandu has a larger proportion of tea drinkers than coffee drinkers. Tea, locally known as Chiya, is widely served. It is richer and contains tea leaves boiled with milk, sugar, and spices. Tea shops that specially serve tea with other snacks are widely available. Alcohol is widely drunk, and there are numerous local variants of alcoholic beverages. Drinking and driving is illegal, and authorities have a zero-tolerance policy. Ailaa and thwon (alcohol made from rice) are the alcoholic beverages of Kathmandu, found in all the local bhattis (alcohol serving eateries). Chhyaang, tongba (fermented millet or barley) and raksi are alcoholic beverages from other parts of Nepal which are found in Kathmandu. However, shops and bars in Kathmandu widely sell western and Nepali beers.\nFestivals.\nMost of the fairs and festivals in Kathmandu originated in the Malla period or earlier. Traditionally, these festivals were celebrated by Newars. In recent years, these festivals have found wider participation from other Kathmanduites as well. As the capital of the Nepal, various national festivals are celebrated in Kathmandu. With mass migration to the city, the cultures of Khas from the west, Kirats from the east, Bon/Tibetan from the north, and Mithila from the south meet in the capital and mingle harmoniously. The festivities such as the Ghode (horse) Jatra, Indra Jatra, Dashain Durga Puja festivals, Shivratri and many more are observed by all Hindu and Buddhist communities of Kathmandu with devotional fervor and enthusiasm. Social regulation in the codes enacted incorporates Hindu traditions and ethics. These were followed by the Shah kings and previous kings, as devout Hindus and protectors of the Buddhist religion.\nThe cultural continuity has been maintained for centuries in the exclusive worship of goddesses and deities in Kathmandu and the rest of the country. These deities include the Ajima, Taleju (or Tulja Bhavani or Taleju Bhawani brought from Simraungadh) and her other form : Digu Taleju (or Degu Taleju) and Kumari (the living goddess). The artistic edifices have now become places of worship in the everyday life of the people, therefore a roster is maintained to observe annual festivals. There are 133 festivals held in the year.\nSome of the traditional festivals observed in Kathmandu, apart from those previously mentioned, are Bada Dashain, Tihar, Chhath, Maghe Sankranti, Nag Panchami, Janai Purnima, Pancha Dan, Teej/Rishi Panchami, Pahan Charhe, Jana Baha Dyah Jatra (White Machchhendranath Jatra), and Matatirtha Aunsi.\nReligions.\nHinduism.\nHinduism is one of the indigenous beliefs of the city. Assumedly, together with the kingdom of Licchhavi (c. 400 to 750), Hinduism and the endogam social stratification of the caste was established in Kathmandu Valley. The Pashupatinath Temple, Changu Narayan Temple, and the Kasthamandap are of particular importance to Hindus. Other notable Hindu temples in Kathmandu and the surrounding valley include Bajrayogini Temple, Dakshinkali Temple, Guhyeshwari Temple, and the Shobha Bhagawati shrine.\nThe Bagmati River which flows through Kathmandu is considered a holy river both by Hindus and Buddhists, and many Hindu temples are on the banks of this river. The importance of the Bagmati also lies in the fact that Hindus are cremated on its banks, and Kirants are buried in the hills by its side. According to the Nepali Hindu tradition, the dead body must be dipped three times into the Bagmati before cremation. The chief mourner (usually the first son) who lights the funeral pyre must take a holy riverwater bath immediately after cremation. Many relatives who join the funeral procession also take bath in the Bagmati or sprinkle the holy water on their bodies at the end of cremation as the Bagmati is believed to purify people spiritually.\nBuddhism.\nBuddhism was brought into Kathmandu with the arrival of Buddhist monks during the time of Buddha (c. 563 \u2013 483 BCE). They established a forest monastery in Sankhu. This monastery was renovated by Shakyas after they fled genocide from Virudhaka (r. 491\u2013461 BCE).\nDuring the Hindu Lichchavi era (c. 400 to 750), various monasteries and orders were created which successively led to the formation of Newar Buddhism, which is still practiced in the primary liturgical language of Hinduism, Sanskrit.\nLegendary Princess Bhrikuti (7th-century) and artist Araniko (1245\u20131306 CE) from that tradition of Kathmandu valley played a significant role in spreading Buddhism in Tibet and China. There are over 108 traditional monasteries (Bahals and Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds) in Kathmandu based on Newar Buddhism. Since the 1960s, the permanent Tibetan Buddhist population of Kathmandu has risen significantly so that there are now over fifty Tibetan Buddhist monasteries in the area. Also, with the modernization of Newar Buddhism, various Theravada Bihars have been established.\nKirat Mundhum.\nKirant Mundhum is one of the indigenous animistic practices of Nepal. It is practiced by the Kirat people. Some animistic aspects of Kirant beliefs, such as ancestor worship (worship of Ajima) are also found in Newars of Kirant origin. Ancient religious sites believed to be worshipped by ancient Kirats, such as Pashupatinath, Wanga Akash Bhairabh (Yalambar) and Ajima are now worshipped by people of all Dharmic religions in Kathmandu. Kirats who have migrated from other parts of Nepal to Kathmandu practice Mundhum in the city.\nOther religions.\nSikhism is practiced primarily in Gurudwara at Kupundole. An earlier temple of Sikhism is also present in Kathmandu which is now defunct.\nJainism is practiced by a small community. A Jain temple is present in Gyaneshwar, where Jains practice their faith.\nAccording to the records of the Spiritual Assembly of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds of Nepal, there are approximately 300 followers of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith in Kathmandu valley. They have a national office in Shantinagar, Baneshwor. The Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds also have classes for children at the National Centre and other localities in Kathmandu.\nIn Kathmandu alone there are about 170 Christian churches. Christian missionary hospitals, welfare organizations, and schools are also operating. Nepali citizens who served as soldiers in Indian and British armies, who had converted to Christianity while in service, on return to Nepal continue to practice their religion. They have contributed to the spread of Christianity and the building of churches in Nepal and in Kathmandu, in particular.\nEducation.\nThe oldest modern school in Nepal, the Durbar High School, and the oldest college, the Tri-Chandra College, are both in Kathmandu. The largest (according to number of students and colleges), the oldest and most distinguished university in Nepal, the Tribhuvan University, is located in Kirtipur.\nThe oldest engineering college in Nepal, Thapathali Campus also lies in Kathmandu. Not surprisingly the best schools and colleges of Nepal are located in Kathmandu and its adjoining cities. Every year thousands of students from all over Nepal arrive at Kathmandu to get admission in the various schools and colleges.\nHealthcare.\nHealthcare in Kathmandu is the most developed in Nepal, and the city and surrounding valley is home to some of the best hospitals and clinics in the country. Bir Hospital is the oldest, established in July 1889 by Bir Shamsher Jang Bahadur Rana. Notable hospitals include Bir Hospital, Nepal Medical College (Jorpati) and Teaching Hospital, Tribhuvan University Institute of Medicine (Teaching Hospital), Patan Hospital, Kathmandu Model Hospital, Scheer Memorial Hospital, Om Hospital, Norvic Hospital, Grande International Hospital, Nobel Hospital and many more.\nThe city is supported by specialist hospitals/clinics such as Shahid Shukraraj Tropical Hospital, Shahid Gangalal Foundation, Kathmandu Veterinary Hospital, Nepal Eye Hospital, Kanti Children's Hospital, Nepal International Clinic (Travel and Mountain Medicine Center), Neuro Center, Spinal Rehabilitation center and Bhaktapur Cancer Hospital. Most of the general hospitals are in the city center, although several clinics are elsewhere in Kathmandu district.\nTilganga Institute of Ophthalmology is an ophthalmology hospital in Kathmandu. It pioneered the production of low cost intraocular lenses (IOLs), which are used in cataract surgery. The team of Dr. Sanduk Ruit in Tilganga pioneered sutureless small-incision cataract surgery (SICS), a technique which has been used to treat 4 million of the world's 20\u00a0million people with cataract blindness.\nMedical colleges.\nInstitute of Medicine, the central college of Tribhuvan University is the first medical college of Nepal and is in Maharajgunj, Kathmandu. It was established in 1972 and started to impart medical education from 1978. Other major institutions include Patan Academy of Health Sciences, Kathmandu Medical College, Nepal Medical College, KIST Medical College, Nepal Army Institute of Health Sciences, National Academy of Medical Sciences (NAMS) and Kathmandu University School of Medical Sciences (KUSMS), are also in or around Kathmandu.\nEconomy.\nThe location and terrain of Kathmandu have played a significant role in the development of a stable economy which spans millennia. The city is in an ancient lake basin, with fertile soil and flat terrain. This geography helped form a society based on agriculture. This, combined with its location between India and China, helped establish Kathmandu as an important trading centre over the centuries. Kathmandu's trade is an ancient profession that flourished along an offshoot of the Silk Road which linked India and Tibet. From centuries past, Lhasa Newar merchants of Kathmandu have conducted trade across the Himalaya and contributed to spreading art styles and Buddhism across Central Asia. Other traditional occupations are farming, metal casting, woodcarving, painting, weaving, and pottery.\nKathmandu is the most important industrial and commercial centre in Nepal. The Nepal Stock Exchange, the head office of the national bank, the chamber of commerce, as well as head offices of national and international banks, telecommunication companies, the electricity authority, and various other national and international organizations are in Kathmandu. The major economic hubs are the New Road, Durbar Marg, Ason and Putalisadak.\nThe economic output of the metropolitan area of around Rs. 550\u00a0billion approximately per year alone is worth more than one third of national GDP (nominal), while the per capita income of $2200 is approximately three times the national average. Kathmandu exports handicrafts, artworks, garments, carpets, pashmina, paper; trade accounts for 21% of its revenues. Manufacturing is also important and accounts for 19% of the revenue that Kathmandu generates. Garments and woolen carpets are the most notable manufactured products. Other economic sectors in Kathmandu include agriculture (9%), education (6%), transport (6%), and hotels and restaurants (5%). Kathmandu is famous for lokta paper and pashmina shawls.\nTourism.\nTourism in Nepal is considered an important industry. In 1956, air transportation was established and the construction of Tribhuvan Highway, between Kathmandu and Raxaul, was started. Separate organizations were created in Kathmandu to promote the tourism industry, including the Tourism Development Board, the Department of Tourism, and the Civil Aviation Department. Furthermore, Nepal became a member of several international tourist associations. Establishing diplomatic relations with other nations further accentuated this activity. The hotel industry, travel agencies, the training of tourist guides, and targeted publicity campaigns are the chief reasons for the significant growth of this industry in Nepal and in Kathmandu in particular.\nTourism is a major source of income for most of the people in the city, with several hundred thousand visitors annually. Hindu and Buddhist pilgrims from all over the world visit Kathmandu's religious sites such as Pashupatinath Temple, Swayambhunath, Boudhanath, Changu Narayan Temple, and Budhanilkantha Temple. From a mere 6,179 tourists in 1961/62, the number increased to 491,504 in 1999/2000. In economic terms, the foreign exchange registered 3.8 percent of the GDP in 1995/96 but then started declining. Following the end of Nepalese Civil War, there was a significant rise in the number of tourist arrivals, with 509,956 tourists recorded in 2009. Since then, tourism has improved as the country transitioned into a republic. The high level of tourism is attributed to the natural grandeur of the Himalayas and the cultural heritage of the country which is continuously preserved and restored at great cost.\nThe neighbourhood of Thamel is Kathmandu's primary go-to place for tourists and is widely regarded as the center of Kathmandu's nightlife, packed with guest houses, restaurants, shops, and bookstores, catering to tourists. Another neighbourhood of growing popularity is Jhamel, a name for Jhamsikhel that was coined to rhyme with Thamel. Jhochhen Tol, also known as \"Freak Street\" remains a traveler haunt. This original meeting place for international guests in Kathmandu became known in the 1960s and 1970s through folklore told by hippies in Europe and North America.\nWith the opening of the tourist industry after the change in the political scenario of Nepal in 1950, the hotel industry drastically improved. Now Kathmandu boasts several luxury hotels with some including casinos. Ason is a bazaar and ceremonial square on the old trade route to Tibet.\nTransport.\nRoad.\nThe total length of roads in Nepal is recorded to be , as of 2003\u201304. This fairly large network has helped the economic development of the country, particularly in the fields of agriculture, horticulture, vegetable farming, industry and also tourism. In view of the hilly terrain, transportation takes place in Kathmandu are mainly by road and air. Kathmandu is connected by the Tribhuvan Highway to the south connecting India, Prithvi Highway to the west and Araniko Highway to the north connecting China. The BP Highway connects Kathmandu to the eastern part of Nepal through Sindhuli District. The BP Highway was constructed as a short cut from Kathmandu to Terai.\nSajha Yatayat provides regular bus services throughout Kathmandu and the surrounding valley. Other bus companies including micro-bus companies operate several unscheduled routes. Trolleybuses in Kathmandu used to be operate on the route between Tripureshwor and Suryabinayak Municipality.\nAirport.\nTribhuvan International Airport is abbreviated as TIA and in 2024 nonstop international destinations included a wide range of airports. Domestic flights are offered by several Nepali airlines. Larger aircraft that can land and takeoff on the runways of Tribhuvan International Airport are Boeing 777, Airbus A330, and Boeing 787 Dreamliner. However, the overwhelming number of scheduled flights are landed and started with the ATR 72/42 and the Bombardier Dash 8.\nMountaineering.\nRopeways and cable cars.\nRopeways in Nepal are an important transportation means in hilly terrain. A ropeway operated between Kathmandu and Hetauda over a length of which carried 25 tonnes of goods per hour. Service was discontinued due to poor carrying capacity and maintenance issues. During the Rana period, a ropeway was constructed between Matatirtha in Kathmandu to Dhorsing in Makwanpur District of over in length, which carried a cargo of 8 tonnes per hour. At present, cable cars are operated from Kathmandu to the Chandragiri Hills.\nMedia.\nKathmandu is the television hub of Nepal. Nepal Television (established in 1984) is the oldest and most-watched television channel in Nepal, as is government-owned NTV PLUS and also Kantipur Television, Image Channel, Sagarmatha Television, Himalaya TV, AP1 TV, and other channels.\nThe headquarters of many of the country's news outlets are also in the city including Kathmandu Tribune, the government-owned Gorkhapatra (the oldest national daily newspaper in Nepal), The Kathmandu Post, Nepali Times, Kantipur Publications and its paper Kantipur, Naya Patrika, The Himalayan Times, Karobar Economic Daily, Aarthik Abhiyan National Daily and Jana Aastha National Weekly.\nNepal Republic Media, the publisher of myRepublica, joined a publishing alliance with the International Herald Tribune (IHT) to publish the Asia Pacific Edition of IHT from Kathmandu from 20 July 2011. There is also a state-run National News Agency (RSS).\nRadio Nepal is a state-run organization that operates national and regional radio stations; these stations are: Hits FM, Radio Kantipur, HBC 94 FM, Radio Sagarmatha and Image FM. The BBC also has an FM broadcasting station in Kathmandu. Some community radio stations such as Radio Pratibodh and Radio Upatyaka also broadcast within the valley.\nSports.\nCricket, football and volleyball are the most popular sports among the younger generation in Nepal and there are several stadiums in the city. The sport is governed by the National Sports Council from its headquarters in Kathmandu. The only international football stadium in the city is the Dasharath Rangasala, a multi-purpose stadium used mostly for football matches and cultural events, in the neighbourhood of Tripureshwor. Built in 1956, it is the largest stadium in Nepal with a capacity of 25,000 spectators. The Martyr's Memorial League is also held in this ground every year. The stadium was renovated with Chinese aid before the 8th South Asian Games were held in Kathmandu in 1999 and floodlights were installed. Kathmandu is home to the oldest football clubs of Nepal such as Ranipokhari Corner Team (RCT), Sankata Club and New Road Team (NRT). Other prominent clubs include Manang Marsyangdi Club, Machhindra FC, Tribhuvan Army Club (TAC) and Nepal Police Club.\nKathmandu is also home of some of the oldest cricket clubs in Nepal, such as Yengal Sports Club. Kathmandu Gorkhas represents Kathmandu in the Nepal Premier League.\nInternational relations and organizations.\nKathmandu established an International Relations Secretariat in order to promote international relations. The city's first international relationship was established in 1975 with the city of Eugene, Oregon, United States; this was further enhanced by establishing formal relationships with 15 other cities: Matsumoto (Japan), Rochester (United States), Fredericksburg (United States), Boulder (United States), Yangon (formerly Rangoon, Myanmar), Xi'an (China), Shenzhen (China), Chengdu (China), Lhasa (China), Nanjing (China), Lanzhou (China), Minsk (Belarus), Varanasi (India), Seoul (South Korea) and Pyongyang (North Korea). \nKathmandu's constant endeavour is to enhance its interaction with other South Asian countries, other international agencies and many other major cities of the world to achieve better urban management and developmental programs for Kathmandu. Kathmandu is home to several international and regional organizations, including the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) and the International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD).\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nKathmandu is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotable people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nKathmandu days: The blight and the plight by Chandra k. Bhatt. Publisher: Niyogi Books, New Delhi. https://booksmandala.com/books/kathmandu-days-44588&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17169", "revid": "2278355", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17169", "title": "Kington Magna", "text": "Village in Dorset, England\nKington Magna is a village and civil parish in the Blackmore Vale area of Dorset, England, about southwest of Gillingham.\nHistory.\nThe name Kington Magna means 'great King's Town'; it derives from \"cyne-\" (later \"cyning\") and \"t\u016bn\", Old English for 'royal estate or manor'. The affix \"magna\", Latin for great, was added to distinguish it from Little Kington, a smaller settlement nearby. In 1086 in the Domesday Book these were recorded together in three entries as \"Chintone\", which had 27 households and a total taxable value of 13 geld units, and was in the hundred of Gillingham. In 1243 it was recorded as Magna Kington. Most of the current buildings in the village are no older than the seventeenth century. In 1851 a Primitive Methodist chapel was built in the village; it was on Chapel Hill, which runs parallel to Church Hill. In 1860 a pottery was established at Bye Farm, north of the main village; it manufactured tiles, drainpipes, bricks, and chimney and flower pots. The parish church of All Saints was restored and enlarged in 1862; most of the building, except for the late 15th-century west tower, was rebuilt. Near the church is a pond which was a medieval fishpond.\nGeography.\nThe parish covers about and, as well as the main village, includes the small settlement of Nyland in the west. The main village is sited on the slopes of a Corallian limestone hill, overlooking the flat Oxford Clay valley of the small River Cale, which drains into the Stour. In 1906 Sir Frederick Treves wrote in his \"Highways &amp; Byways in Dorset\" that the village \"straggles down hill like a small mountain stream.\"\nDemography.\nIn the 2011 census the parish had 180 dwellings, 169 households and a population of 389.\nTransport.\nThe nearest railway station is in Gillingham. Trains run on the Exeter to Waterloo line.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17171", "revid": "4796325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17171", "title": "Kiosk", "text": "Small booths offering goods and services\nHistorically, a kiosk (from fa \" ku\u0161k\") was a small garden pavilion open on some or all sides common in Persia, the Indian subcontinent, and in the Ottoman Empire from the 13th century onward. Today, several examples of this type of kiosk still exist in and around the Topkap\u0131 Palace in Istanbul, and they can be seen in Balkan countries.\nThe word is used in English-speaking countries for small booths offering goods and services. In Australia they usually offer food service. Freestanding computer terminals dispensing information are called interactive kiosks.\nEtymology.\nEtymological data points to the Middle Persian word \"k\u014d\u0161k\" 'palace, portico' as the origin, via Turkish \"k\u00f6\u015fk\" 'pavilion' and French \"kiosque\" or Italian \"chiosco\".\nHistory and origins.\nA kiosk is an open summer-house or pavilion usually having its roof supported by pillars with screened or totally open walls. As a building type, it was first introduced by the Sasanid and the next used as a small building attached to the main mosque from Seljuks, which consisted of a domed hall with open arched sides. This architectural concept gradually evolved into a small yet grand residence used by Ottoman sultans, the most famous examples of which are quite possibly the Tiled Kiosk (\"\u00c7inili K\u00f6\u015fk\" in Turkish) and Baghdad Kiosk (\"Ba\u011fdat K\u00f6\u015fk\u00fc\" in Turkish). The former was built in 1473 by Mehmed II (\"the Conqueror\") at the Topkap\u0131 Palace, Istanbul, and consists of a two storey building topped with a dome and having open sides overlooking the gardens of the palace. The Baghdad Koshk was also built at the Topkap\u0131 Palace in 1638\u201339, by Sultan Murad IV. The building is again domed, offering direct views onto the gardens and park of the Palace as well as the architecture of the city of Istanbul.\nSultan Ahmed III (1703\u20131730) also built a glass room of the Sofa Kiosk at the Topkap\u0131 Palace incorporating some Western elements, such as the gilded brazier designed by Duplessis p\u00e8re, which was given to the Ottoman ambassador by King Louis XV of France.\nThe first English contact with Turkish Kiosk came through Lady Wortley Montagu (1689\u20131762), the wife of the English ambassador to Istanbul, who in a letter written on 1 April 1717 to Anne Thistlethwayte, mentions a \"chiosk\" describing it as \"raised by 9 or 10 steps and enclosed with gilded lattices\".\nEuropean monarchs adopted the building type. Stanis\u0142aw Leszczy\u0144ski, king of Poland and father-in-law of Louis XV, built kiosks for himself based on his memories of his captivity in Turkey. These kiosks were used as garden pavilions serving coffee and beverages but later were converted into band stands and tourist information stands decorating most European gardens, parks and high streets.\nConservatories were in the form of corridors connecting the Pavilion to the stables and consisting of a passage of flowers covered with glass and linked with orangery, a greenhouse, an aviary, a pheasantry and hothouses. The influence of Muslim and Islamo-Indian forms appears clearly in these buildings and particularly in the pheasantry where its higher part is an adaptation of the kiosks found on the roof of Allahabad Palace, as illustrated by Thomas Daniell. Today's conservatories incorporate many elements of Islamic architecture, although modern art forms have shifted from the classical art forms that were used in earlier times.\nSmall shops and caf\u00e9s.\nIn the Western Hemisphere and in English-speaking countries, a \"kiosk\" is also a booth with an open window on one side. Some vendors operate from kiosks (see mall kiosk), selling small, inexpensive consumables such as newspapers, magazines, lighters, street maps, cigarettes, live and frozen fishing bait and confections.\nIn Australia, the word is commonly used for small buildings that are used to dispense mainly take-away food and drinks, on beaches, in shopping arcades or in parks. Since the 21st century, many of these have been upgraded and serve fancier food and barista-made coffee.\nAn information kiosk (or information booth) dispenses free information in the form of maps, pamphlets, and other literature, and/or advice offered by an attendant.\nInteractive kiosks.\nAn electronic kiosk (or computer kiosk or interactive kiosk) houses a computer terminal that often employs custom kiosk software designed to function while preventing users from accessing system functions. Indeed, \"kiosk mode\" describes such a mode of software operation. Computerized kiosks may store data locally, or retrieve it from a computer network. Some computer kiosks provide a free, informational public service, while others serve a commercial purpose (see mall kiosk). Touchscreens, trackballs, computer keyboards, and pushbuttons are all typical input devices for interactive computer kiosk. Touchscreen kiosks are commercially used as industrial appliances, reducing lines, eliminating paper, improving efficiency and service. Their uses are unlimited from refrigerators to airports, health clubs, movie theaters and libraries.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17173", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17173", "title": "KIS", "text": ""}
{"id": "17174", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17174", "title": "Knowbot Information Service", "text": "The Knowbot Information Service (KIS), also known as netaddress, is an Internet user search engine that debuted in December 1989. Although it searched users, not content, it could be argued to be the first search engine on the Internet as it queried more than a single network for information. It provided a uniform user interface to a variety of remote directory services such as whois, finger, X.500, and MCI Mail. By submitting a single query to KIS, a user can search a set of remote white pages services and see the results of the search in a uniform format. There are several interfaces to the KIS service including e-mail and telnet. Another KIS interface imitates the Berkeley whois command.\nKIS consists of two distinct types of modules that interact with each other (typically across a network) to provide the service. One module is a user agent module that runs on the KIS mail host machine. The second module is a remote server module (possibly on a different machine) that interrogates various database services across the network and provides the results to the user agent module in a uniform fashion. Interactions between the two modules can be via messages between knowbots or by actual movement of knowbots.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17176", "revid": "1588193", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17176", "title": "KISS principle", "text": "Design principle preferring simplicity\nKISS (\"Keep it simple, stupid\") is a design principle first noted by the U.S. Navy in 1960. First seen partly in American English by at least 1938, KISS implies that simplicity should be a design goal. The phrase has been associated with aircraft engineer Kelly Johnson. The term \"KISS principle\" was in popular use by 1970. Variations on the phrase (usually as some euphemism for the more churlish \"stupid\") include \"keep it super simple\", \"keep it simple, silly\", \"keep it short and simple\", \"keep it short and sweet\", \"keep it simple and straightforward\", \"keep it small and simple\", \"keep it simple, soldier\", \"keep it simple, sailor\", \"keep it simple, sweetie\", \"keep it stupidly simple\", or \"keep it sweet and simple\".\nOrigin.\nThe acronym of \"Keep it simple, stupid\" was reportedly coined by Kelly Johnson, lead engineer at the Lockheed Skunk Works (creators of the Lockheed U-2 and SR-71 Blackbird spy planes, among many others). However, the variant \"Keep it Short and Simple\" is attested from a 1938 issue of the \"Minneapolis Star\".\nWhile popular usage has transcribed it for decades as \"Keep it simple, stupid\", Johnson transcribed it simply as \"Keep it simple stupid\" (no comma), and this reading is still used by many authors.\nThe principle is best exemplified by the story of Johnson handing a team of design engineers a handful of tools, with the challenge that the jet aircraft they were designing must be repairable by an average mechanic in the field under combat conditions with only these tools. Hence, the \"stupid\" refers to the relationship between the way things break and the sophistication available to repair them.\nThe acronym has been used by many in the U.S. military, especially the U.S. Navy and United States Air Force, and in the field of software development.\nVariants.\nThe principle most probably finds its origins in similar minimalist concepts, such as:\nHeath Robinson contraptions and Rube Goldberg's machines, intentionally overly-complex solutions to simple tasks or problems, are humorous examples of \"non-KISS\" solutions.\nUsage.\nIn film animation.\nMaster animator Richard Williams explains the KISS principle in his book \"The Animator's Survival Kit\", and Disney's Nine Old Men write about it in \"\", a considerable work of the genre. The problem faced is that inexperienced animators may \"over-animate\" in their works, that is, a character may move too much and do too much. Williams urges animators to \"KISS\".\nIn popular culture.\nIn the Filipino neo-noir film \"Segurista\", KISS is invoked by Mrs Librada (played by Liza Lorena) as an approach to selling insurance.\nIn the American version of \"The Office\", Michael Scott's advice to Dwight Schrute before making any decision is KISS (Keep it Simple, Stupid).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17177", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17177", "title": "Kit", "text": "Kit may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "17178", "revid": "37482880", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17178", "title": "KL0", "text": "Kernel Language 0 (KL0) is a sequential logic programming language based on Prolog, used in the ICOT Fifth generation computer project.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17179", "revid": "50335349", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17179", "title": "KL1", "text": "KL1, or Kernel Language 1 is an experimental and-parallel version of KL0 developed for the ICOT Fifth Generation Computer project. KL1 is an implementation of Flat GHC (a subset of the Guarded Horn Clauses language by Kazunori Ueda), making it a parallelised Prolog variant.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17180", "revid": "38056903", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17180", "title": "Klamath people", "text": "Native American tribe\nThe Klamath people are a Native American tribe of the Plateau culture area in Southern Oregon and Northern California. Today Klamath people are enrolled in the federally recognized tribes:\nHistory.\nPre-contact.\nThe Klamath people lived in the area around the Upper Klamath Lake (E-ukshi - \u201cLake\u201d) and the Klamath, Williamson (K\u00f3ke - \u201cRiver\u201d), Wood River (E-ukalksini K\u00f3ke), and Sprague (Plaikni K\u00f3ke - \u201cRiver Uphill\u201d) rivers. They subsisted primarily on fish and gathered roots and seeds. While there was knowledge of their immediate neighbors, apparently the Klamath were unaware of the existence of the Pacific Ocean. Albert Gatschet has described this position as leaving the Klamath living in a \"protracted isolation\" from outside cultures.\nNorth of their tribal territory lived the Molala (\"Kuikni maklaks\"), in the northeast and east in the desert-like plains were various Northern Paiute bands (\"Sh\u00e1'ttumi\", collective term for Northern Paiute, Bannock and Northern Shoshone) - among them the \"Goyat\u00f6ka Band\" (\"Crayfish Eaters\"), direct south their Modoc kin (\"Mo'dokni maklaks\" - \"Southern People, i.e. Tule Lake People\") with whom they shared the Modoc Plateau, in the southwest were living Shasta peoples (\"S[h]asti maklaks\") and the Klamath River further downstream the Karuk and Yurok (both: \"Skatchpalikni\" - \"People along the Scott River\"), in the west and northwest were the Latgawa (\"Upland Takelma\") (according to Spier: \"Walumskni\" - \"Enemy\") and Takelma/Dagelma (\"Lowland/River Takelma\") (more likely both were called: \"W\u00e1lamsknitumi, W\u00e1lamskni maklaks\" - \u201cRogue River People\u201d). Beyond the Cascade Range (\"Y\u00e1makisham Yaina\" - \u201cmountains of the Northerners\u201d) in the Rogue River Valley (\"W\u00e1lamsh\") lived the \"Rogue \"River\" Athabascan (\"W\u00e1lamsknitumi, W\u00e1lamskni maklaks\" - \u201cRogue River People\u201d) and further south along the Pit River (\"Moatuashamkshini/M\u00f3atni K\u00f3ke\" - \"River of the Southern Dwellers\") lived the Achomawi and Atsugewi (both called: \"M\u00f3atuash maklaks\" - \"Southern Dweller\", or \"Southern People\").\nThe Klamath were known to raid neighboring tribes, such as the Achomawi on the Pit River, and occasionally to take prisoners as slaves. They traded with the Wasco-Wishram at The Dalles. However, scholars such as Alfred L. Kroeber and Leslie Spier consider these slaving raids by the Klamath to begin only with the acquisition of the horse.\nThese natives made southern Oregon their home for long enough to witness the eruption of Mount Mazama. It was a legendary volcanic mountain who is the creator of Crater Lake (\"gi\u02d1w\"), now considered to be a beautiful natural formation.\nContact.\nIn 1826, Peter Skene Ogden, an explorer for the Hudson's Bay Company, first encountered the Klamath people, and he was trading with them by 1829. The United States frontiersman Kit Carson admired their arrows, which were reported to be able to shoot through a house.\nTreaty with the United States.\nThe Klamaths, Modocs, and the Yahooskin (Yahuskin) Band of Northern Paiute (in Paiute known as: Goyat\u00f6ka - \"Crayfish eaters\"), which was erroneously called \"Upper Sprague River Snakes\" believed to be a Band of \"Snake Indians\", the collective name given to the Northern Paiute, Bannock, and Shoshone Native American tribes, signed a treaty with the United States in 1864, establishing the Klamath Reservation to the northeast of Upper Klamath Lake. This area was largely part of the traditional territory controlled by the \u0103\u2032ukuckni Klamath band. The treaty required the tribes to cede the land in the Klamath Basin, bounded on the north by the 44th parallel, to the United States. In return, the United States was to make a lump sum payment of $35,000, and annual payments totalling $80,000 over 15 years, as well as providing infrastructure and staff for the reservation. The treaty provided that, if the Indians drank or stored intoxicating liquor on the reservation, the payments could be withheld; the United States could also locate additional tribes on the reservation in the future. The tribes requested Lindsay Applegate as the agent to represent the United States to them. The Indian agent estimated the total population of the three tribes at about 2,000 when the treaty was signed..\nPost-treaty history.\nSince termination of recognition of their tribal sovereignty in 1954 (with federal payments not disbursed until 1961), the Klamath and neighboring tribes have reorganized their government and revived tribal identity. The Klamath, along with the Modoc and Yahooskin, have formed the federally recognized Klamath Tribes confederation. Their tribal government is based in Chiloquin, Oregon.\nSome Klamath live on the Quartz Valley Indian Community in Siskiyou County, California.\nCulture.\nSubdivisions.\nTraditionally there were several cultural subdivisions among the Klamath, based on the location of their residency within the Klamath Basin. Despite this, the five recognized \"tribelets\" (the Klamath Tribes count six) mutually considered each other the same ethnic group, about 1,200 people in total. Like many Indigenous cultures of the Pacific Northwest, the Klamath lived a semi-sedentary life. Winter settlements were in permanent locations that were reoccupied annually. Construction of the earth-lodges would begin in Autumn, with materials salvaged from abandoned, dilapidated buildings made in previous years. Leslie Spier has detailed some of the winter settlement patterns for Klamath as follows:\nThe towns are not isolated, compact groups of houses, but stretch along the banks for half a mile or more. In fact, the settlements on Williamson river below the Sprague river junction form a practically continuous string of houses for five or six miles, the house pits being, in many spots, crowded close together. Informants insisted that many of these were occupied at the same time. When we consider that these earth-lodges may have housed several families, there is strong suggestion of a considerable population.\nMarriage.\nMarriage was a unique practice for the Klamath, compared to neighboring cultures found in the borderlands of modern Oregon, California, Nevada and Idaho. For example, unlike the Hupa, Karok, and Yurok, the Klamath didn't hold formal talks between families for a bride price. Especially notable was the cultural norm that allowed wives to leave husbands, as they were \"in no sense chattel ... and certainly cannot be disposed of as a possession.\"\nEthnobotany.\nThe Klamath use Apocynum cannabinum as a fiber and eat the roots of Lomatium canbyi. They use the rootstocks of Sagittaria cuneata as food. They use Carex, weaving the leaves into mats, using the juice of the pith as a beverage, eating the fresh stems for food and using the tuberous base of the stem for food.\nDentalium.\nDentalium shells were common among the Klamath prior to colonization. Compared to other native cultures, dentalium didn't hold as much financial use among the Klamath. However, longer shells were generally held to be more valuable. Nonetheless, these shells were esteemed primarily for as jewelry and personal adornment. Septum piercings were commonly given to younger members of Klamath families to allow inserting dentalium. Some individuals wouldn't however use any shells in their septum. Spier gives the following account for their usage:\nThe septum of the nose is pierced and the ear lobes, the latter twice or even more frequently. Both sexes insert dentalium shells horizontally through the septum ... Ear pendants are a group of four dentalia hung in a bunch by their tips.\nThe use of dentalium in septum piercings, in addition to other means of ornamentation, was common among the Wasco-Wishram as well.\nClassifications.\nThe Klamath people are grouped with the Plateau Indians\u2014the peoples who originally lived on the Columbia River Plateau. They were most closely linked with the Modoc people.\nLanguage.\nThe Klamath spoke one dialect of the Klamath\u2013Modoc language - the northern or \"fi-ukshikni\" dialect, the other - the \"southern\" dialect being spoken by the Modoc people, who lived south of the Klamath. Once thought to be a language isolate, Klamath\u2013Modoc is now considered a member of the Plateau Penutian language family.\nBoth the Klamath and the Modoc called themselves \"maqlaqs\", \"maqlags\" or \"Maklaks\" meaning \"people\". When they wanted to distinguish between themselves they added \"knii\" (\"people from/of\"), the Klamath were called \"?ewksiknii\", \"people of the [Klamath] Lake\", and the Modoc were called \"moowatdal'knii\", \"people of the south\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17184", "revid": "39544904", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17184", "title": "Kleene closure", "text": ""}
{"id": "17185", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17185", "title": "Kleene, Stephen Cole", "text": ""}
{"id": "17186", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17186", "title": "Klerer\u2013May System", "text": "Programming language oriented to numerical scientific programming\nThe Klerer\u2013May System is a programming language developed in the mid-1960s, oriented to numerical scientific programming, whose most notable feature is its two-dimensional syntax based on traditional mathematical notation.\nFor input and output, the Klerer\u2013May system used a Friden Flexowriter modified to allow half-line motions for subscripts and superscripts. The character set included digits, upper-case letters, subsets of 14 lower-case Latin letters and 18 Greek letters, arithmetic operators (codice_1 codice_2 codice_3 codice_4 codice_5) and punctuation (codice_6 codice_7 codice_8 codice_9), and eight special line-drawing characters (resembling codice_10 codice_11 codice_12 codice_13 codice_14 codice_15 codice_16 codice_17) used to construct multi-line brackets and symbols for summation, products, roots, and for multi-line division or fractions.\nThe system was intended to be forgiving of input mistakes, and easy to learn; its reference manual was only two pages.\nThe system was developed by Melvin Klerer and Jack May at Columbia University's Hudson Laboratories in Dobbs Ferry, New York, for the Office of Naval Research, and ran on GE-200 series computers.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17187", "revid": "141654", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17187", "title": "Klone", "text": ""}
{"id": "17188", "revid": "47592591", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17188", "title": "KL-ONE", "text": "KL-ONE (pronounced \"kay ell won\") is a knowledge representation system in the tradition of semantic networks and frames; that is, it is a frame language. The system is an attempt to overcome semantic indistinctness in semantic network representations and to explicitly represent conceptual information as a structured inheritance network.\nOverview.\nThere is a whole family of KL-ONE-like systems. One of the innovations that KL-ONE initiated was the use of a deductive classifier, an automated reasoning engine that can validate a frame ontology and deduce new information about the ontology based on the initial information provided by a domain expert. \nFrames in KL-ONE are called concepts. These form hierarchies using subsume-relations; in the KL-ONE terminology a super class is said to subsume its subclasses. \nMultiple inheritance is allowed. Actually a concept is said to be well-formed only if it inherits from more than one other concept. All concepts, except the top concept (usually THING), must have at least one super class. \nIn KL-ONE descriptions are separated into two basic classes of concepts: primitive and defined. Primitives are domain concepts that are not fully defined. This means that given all the properties of a concept, this is not sufficient to classify it. They may also be viewed as incomplete definitions. Using the same view, defined concepts are complete definitions. Given the properties of a concept, these are necessary and sufficient conditions to classify the concept.\nThe slot-concept is called roles and the values of the roles are role-fillers. There are several different types of roles to be used in different situations. The most common and important role type is the generic RoleSet that captures the fact that the role may be filled with more than one filler.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17189", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17189", "title": "Kip Keino", "text": ""}
{"id": "17190", "revid": "917223", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17190", "title": "Kipchoge Keino", "text": "Kenyan athlete\nKipchoge Hezekiah Keino is a retired Kenyan track and field athlete. He was the chairman of the Kenyan Olympic Committee (KOC) until 29 September 2017. A two-time Olympic gold medalist, Keino was among the first in a long line of successful middle and long distance runners to come from the country and has helped and inspired many of his countrymen and women to become the athletics force that they are today. In 2000, he became an honorary member of the International Olympic Committee (IOC). In 2012, he was one of 24 athletes inducted as inaugural members of the IAAF Hall of Fame.\nEarly life.\nKeino was born on 17 January 1940 in Kipsamo, Nandi District, Kenya. His name, \"Kipchoge\", is a Nandi language expression for \"born near the grain storage shed.\" His parents died when he was a youngster and he was raised by an aunt. After finishing school, he joined the Kenya Police. Before taking up athletics, he played rugby.\nAthletic career.\nHe began his international career at the 1962 Commonwealth Games in Perth, Western Australia where he came eleventh in the three miles. At the 1964 Summer Olympics he finished fifth in 5000 m and just missed qualification for the 1500 m final.\nOn 27 August 1965, Keino lowered the 3000 m world record by over 6 seconds to 7:39.6 in his first attempt at the distance. He won two gold medals (1500 and 5000 metres) at the inaugural All-Africa Games. Later in that year, he broke the 5000 m world record held by Ron Clarke, clocking 13:24.2. At the 1966 Commonwealth Games in Kingston, Jamaica, he won both the mile run and three-mile run. In the next Commonwealth Games, Keino won the 1500 metres and was third in the 5000 metres.\nAt the 1968 Summer Olympics in Mexico City, he won the 1500 metres gold medal (defeating American favourite and world record holder Jim Ryun by 20 metres, the largest winning margin in the history of the event) and 5000 m silver medal. Four years later, he won the 3000 metres steeplechase gold and 1500 metres silver at the 1972 Summer Olympics in Munich, Germany. Keino was the flag bearer for Kenya in the 1964 Summer Olympics and the 1972 Summer Olympics opening ceremonies. Keino retired in 1973. He is on the cover of the October 1968 issue of \"Track and Field News\", the first issue following the Olympics. He shared the cover of the September 1969 issue with Naftali Bon.\nPersonal life.\nKeino resides on a farm in Eldoret, Kenya where he controls and runs a charitable organization for orphans. He is married to Phyllis Keino.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17193", "revid": "35930533", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17193", "title": "Knud Rasmussen", "text": "Greenlandic-Danish polar explorer and anthropologist (1879\u20131933)\nKnud Johan Victor Rasmussen (; 7 June 1879\u00a0\u2013 21 December 1933) was a Greenlandic-Danish polar explorer and anthropologist. He has been called the \"father of Eskimology\" (now often known as Inuit Studies or Greenlandic and Arctic Studies) and was the first European to cross the Northwest Passage via dog sled. He remains well known in Greenland, Denmark and among Canadian Inuit.\nEarly years.\nRasmussen was born in Jacobshavn (now called Ilulissat), Greenland, the son of a Danish missionary, the vicar Christian Rasmussen, and an Inuk\u2013Danish mother, Lovise Rasmussen (n\u00e9e Fleischer). He had two siblings.\nRasmussen spent his early years in Greenland among the Kalaallit where he learnt to speak Kalaallisut, hunt, drive dog sleds and live in harsh Arctic conditions. \"My playmates were native Greenlanders; from the earliest boyhood I played and worked with the hunters, so even the hardships of the most strenuous sledge-trips became pleasant routine for me.\"\nHe was later educated in Lynge, North Zealand, Denmark. Between 1898 and 1900 he pursued an unsuccessful career as an actor and opera singer.\nCareer.\nHe went on his first expedition in 1902\u20131904, known as The Danish Literary Expedition, with J\u00f8rgen Br\u00f8nlund, Harald Moltke and Ludvig Mylius-Erichsen, to examine Inuit culture. After returning home, he went on a lecture circuit and wrote \"The People of the Polar North\" (1908), a combination travel journal and scholarly account of Inuit folklore. In 1908, he married Dagmar Andersen.\nIn 1910, Rasmussen and friend Peter Freuchen established Thule Trading Station in North Star Bay near Mount Dundas in Greenland as a trading base. The name \"Thule\" was chosen because it was the most northerly trading post in the world, literally the \"Ultima Thule\". The station became the home base for a series of seven expeditions, known as the \"Thule Expeditions\", between 1912 and 1933.\nThe Thule expeditions.\nThe First Thule Expedition (1912, Rasmussen and Freuchen) aimed to test Robert Peary's claim that a channel divided Peary Land from Greenland. They proved this was not the case in a remarkable journey across the inland ice that almost killed them. Clements Markham, president of the Royal Geographical Society, called the journey the \"finest ever performed by dogs.\" Freuchen wrote personal accounts of this journey (and others) in \"Vagrant Viking\" (1953) and \"I Sailed with Rasmussen\" (1958). In 1915, he translated Mathias Storch's novel into Danish (\"The Dream\" in English; translated as ), the first novel written in Greenlandic.\nThe Second Thule Expedition (1916\u20131918) was larger with a team of seven men, which set out to map a little-known area of Greenland's north coast. This journey was documented in Rasmussen's account \"Greenland by the Polar Sea\" (1921). The trip was beset with two fatalities, the only in Rasmussen's career, namely Thorild Wulff and Hendrik Olsen. The Third Thule Expedition (1919) was depot-laying for Roald Amundsen's polar drift in the ship \"Maud\". The Fourth Thule Expedition (1919\u20131920) was in east Greenland where Rasmussen spent several months collecting ethnographic data near Angmagssalik.\nRasmussen's \"greatest achievement\" was the massive Fifth Thule Expedition (1921\u20131924) which was designed to \"attack the great primary problem of the origin of the Eskimo race.\" A ten-volume account (\"The Fifth Thule Expedition 1921\u20131924\" (1946)) of ethnographic, archaeological and biological data was collected, and many artifacts are still on display in museums in Denmark. The team of seven first went to eastern Arctic Canada where they began collecting specimens, taking interviews (including the shaman Aua, who told him of Uvavnuk), and excavating sites.\nRasmussen left the team and traveled for 16 months with two Inuit hunters by dog sled across North America to Nome, Alaska, and for less than 48 hours (because of visa problems) to Russia, where he interviewed a few of the local Inuit, the Yupiks. He found they did indeed speak the same language as other Inuit. (Bown, pp 257-259). He was the first European to cross the Northwest Passage by dog sled. His journey is recounted in \"Across Arctic America\" (1927), considered today a classic of polar expedition literature. This trip has also been called the \"Great Sled Journey\" and was dramatized in the Canadian film \"The Journals of Knud Rasmussen\" (2006).\nFor the next seven years, Rasmussen traveled between Greenland and Denmark giving lectures and writing. In 1931, he went on the Sixth Thule Expedition, designed to consolidate Denmark's claim on a portion of eastern Greenland that was contested by Norway.\nThe Seventh Thule Expedition (1933) was meant to continue the work of the sixth, but Rasmussen contracted pneumonia after an episode of food poisoning attributed to eating kiviaq, dying a few weeks later in Copenhagen at the age of 54. During this expedition Rasmussen worked on the film \"The Wedding of Palo\", which Rasmussen wrote the screenplay for. The film was directed by Friedrich Dalsheim and completed in 1934 under the Danish title \"Palos brudef\u00e6rd.\"\nHonours.\nIn addition to several capes and glaciers, Knud Rasmussen Range in Greenland is named after him, as is the Knud Rasmussen-class patrol vessel and its lead ship, the HDMS Knud Rasmussen.\nHe was awarded an Honorary Fellowship from the American Geographical Society in 1912, and its Daly Medal in 1924. The Royal Geographical Society awarded him their Founder's Medal in 1923 and the Royal Danish Geographical Society their Hans Egede Medal in 1924. He was made honorary doctor at the University of Copenhagen in 1924, and the University of St Andrews in 1927.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17194", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17194", "title": "Knute Kenneth Rockne", "text": ""}
{"id": "17195", "revid": "675360", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17195", "title": "Knute Rockne", "text": "Norwegian-American football player and coach (1888\u20131931)\nKnute Kenneth Rockne (; March 4, 1888 \u2013 March 31, 1931) was an American football player and coach at the University of Notre Dame. Leading Notre Dame for 13 seasons, Rockne accumulated over 100 wins and three national championships.\nRockne is regarded as one of the greatest coaches in college football history. His biography at the College Football Hall of Fame, where he was inducted in 1951, identifies him as \"without question, American football's most-renowned coach\". Rockne helped to popularize the forward pass and made the Notre Dame Fighting Irish a major factor in college football.\nIn 1931, at the age of 43, Rockne died in a plane crash.\nEarly life.\nKnut Larsen Rokne was born in Voss, Norway, to smith and wagonmaker Lars Knutson Rokne (1858\u20131912) and his wife, Martha Pedersdatter Gjermo (1859\u20131944). He immigrated to the US with his parents when he was five years old. He grew up in the Logan Square area of Chicago, on the northwest side of the city. Rockne learned to play football in his neighborhood and later played end in a local group the Logan Square Tigers. He attended Lorenz Brentano elementary school and North West Division High School in Chicago where he played football and ran track.\nAfter Rockne graduated from high school, he took a job as a mail dispatcher with the post office in Chicago for four years. His clerk's salary was $600 in 1907 and $900 in 1909. When he was 22, he had saved enough money to continue his education. He was admitted to the University of Notre Dame in Indiana to finish his schooling. Rockne excelled as a football end there, winning All-American honors in 1913. In track and field, he competed in the pole vault, long jump, shot put, and 880 yard run.[]. Rockne also worked as a lifeguard at the Cedar Point park in Sandusky, Ohio in the summer of 1913.\nRockne helped to transform the college game in a single contest. On November 1, 1913, the Notre Dame squad stunned the highly regarded Army team 35\u201313 in a game played at West Point. Led by quarterback Charlie \"Gus\" Dorais and Rockne, the Notre Dame team attacked the Cadets with an offense that featured both the expected powerful running game but also long and accurate downfield forward passes from Dorais to Rockne. This game was not the \"invention\" of the forward pass, but it was the first major contest in which a team used the forward pass regularly throughout the game.\nEarly career.\nAt Notre Dame.\nAt Notre Dame, Rockne studied chemistry and graduated in 1914 with a degree in pharmacy. He worked as a laboratory assistant to noted polymer chemist Julius Arthur Nieuwland at Notre Dame and helped with the football team, but he rejected further work in chemistry after receiving an offer to coach football. \nAs pro football player.\nIn 1914, Rockne was recruited by quarterback George \"Peggy\" Parratt to play for the Akron Indians. Rockne played both end and halfback and teamed with Parratt on several successful forward pass plays during their title drive. Rockne moved to Massillon, Ohio, in 1915 along with former Notre Dame teammate Dorais to play with the professional Massillon Tigers. Rockne and Dorais brought the forward pass to professional football from 1915 to 1917 when they led the Tigers to the championship in 1915. \"Pro Football in the Days of Rockne\" by Emil Klosinski maintains the worst loss ever suffered by Rockne was in 1917. He coached the South Bend Jolly Fellows Club when they lost 40\u20130 to the Toledo Maroons.\nNotre Dame coach.\nWhile many trace Knute Rockne's debut as a Notre Dame football coach to the war-torn 1918 season, or in 1914 when he became an assistant coach under Jesse Harper, his first position was actually for the Corby and Sorin Hall football teams as a student-athlete in 1912 and 1913. These teams represented residence halls on the university grounds that competed against one another in various sports, the most popular of which was football. The term for these competitions is colloquially known as \"interhall\" sports. Ironically, while Rockne holds the highest winning-percentage of any major college football coach, his overall record in the interhall football league was a paltry 2\u20135\u20134 across two seasons.\nDuring 13 years as head coach, Rockne led Notre Dame to 105 victories, 12 losses, 5 ties, and 3 consensus national championships, which included 5 undefeated and untied seasons. Rockne posted the highest all-time winning percentage (.881) for a major college football coach. His schemes utilized the eponymous Notre Dame Box offense and the 7\u20132\u20132 defense. Rockne's box included a shift. The backfield lined up in a T-formation, then quickly shifted into a box to the left or right just as the ball was snapped.\nRockne also recognized that intercollegiate sports had a show-business aspect. Thus he worked hard promoting Notre Dame football to make it financially successful. He used his charm to court favor from the media, which then consisted of newspapers, wire services and radio stations and networks, to obtain free advertising for Notre Dame football. He was successful as a promoter for South Bend-based Studebaker and other products. Through sustained effort, work with Studebaker, several side jobs, and coaching at the University of Notre Dame, Rockne eventually earned an income of $75,000 from all his financial activities combined.\n1918\u20131930.\nDuring the war-torn season of 1918, Rockne took over from his predecessor Jesse Harper and posted a 3\u20131\u20132 record, losing only to the MAC Aggies (now the MSU Spartans). He made his coaching debut on September 28, 1918, against Case Tech in Cleveland, earning a 26\u20136 victory. In the backfield were Leonard Bahan, George Gipp, and Curly Lambeau. In Gipp, Rockne had an ideal handler of the forward pass.\nRockne handled the line and Gus Dorais handled the backfield of the 1919 team. The team went undefeated and was a national champion, though the championship is not recognized by Notre Dame.\nGipp died on December 14, 1920, just two weeks after being elected Notre Dame's first All-American by Walter Camp. He likely contracted strep throat and pneumonia while giving punting lessons after his final game, on November 20 against Northwestern University. Since antibiotics were not available in the 1920s, treatment options for such infections were limited and they could be fatal even to the young and healthy. It was while on his hospital bed and speaking to Rockne that he is purported to have delivered the line \"win just one for the Gipper\".\nJohn Mohardt led the 1921 Notre Dame team to a 10\u20131 record with 781 rushing yards, 995 passing yards, 12 rushing touchdowns, and 9 passing touchdowns. Grantland Rice wrote, \"Mohardt could throw the ball to within a foot or two of any given space\" and noted that the 1921 Notre Dame team \"was the first team we know of to build its attack around a forward passing game, rather than use a forward passing game as a mere aid to the running game\". Mohardt had both Eddie Anderson and Roger Kiley at end to receive his passes.\nThe national champion 1924 team included the \"Four Horsemen\" backfield of Harry Stuhldreher, Don Miller, Jim Crowley, and Elmer Layden. The line was known as the \"Seven Mules\". The Irish capped an undefeated 10\u20130 season with a victory over Stanford in the Rose Bowl.\nFor all his success, Rockne also made what an Associated Press writer called \"one of the greatest coaching blunders in history\". Instead of coaching his 1926 team against Carnegie Tech, Rockne traveled to Chicago for the Army\u2013Navy Game to \"write newspaper articles about it, as well as select an All-America football team\". Carnegie Tech used the coach's absence as motivation for a 19\u20130 win; the upset likely cost the Irish a chance for a national title.\nThe 1928 team lost to national champion Georgia Tech. \"I sat at Grant Field and saw a magnificent Notre Dame team suddenly recoil before the furious pounding of one man\u2013Peter Pund\", said Rockne. \"Nobody could stop him. I counted 20 scoring plays that this man ruined.\" Rockne wrote of an attack on his coaching in the \"Atlanta Journal\", \"I am surprised that a paper of such fine, high standing [as yours] would allow a zipper to write in his particular vein ... the article by Fuzzy Woodruff was not called for.\"\nOn November 10, 1928, the Fighting Irish were tied with Army 0\u20130 at the end of the half. Rockne entered the locker room and told the team the words he heard on Gipp's deathbed in 1920: \"I've got to go, Rock. It's all right. I'm not afraid. Some time, Rock, when the team is up against it, when things are going wrong and the breaks are beating the boys, tell them to go in there with all they've got and win just one for the Gipper. I don't know where I'll be then, Rock. But I'll know about it, and I'll be happy.\" This inspired the team, who then won the game 12\u20136. The phrase \"Win one for the Gipper\" was later used as a political slogan by Ronald Reagan, who in 1940 portrayed Gipp in \"Knute Rockne, All American.\"\nBoth the 1929 and the 1930 teams went undefeated and were national champions. According to interviews, Rockne considered his 1929 team his strongest overall. Rockne also said he considered his 1930 team to have been his best offensively before the departure of Jumping Joe Savoldi. Rockne was struck with illness in 1929, and the \"de facto\" head coach was assistant Tom Lieb. Rockne's all-time All-America backfield was Jim Thorpe, Red Grange, George Gipp, and George Pfann.\nPersonal life.\nRockne met Bonnie Gwendoline Skiles (1891\u20131956) of Kenton, Ohio, an avid gardener, while the two were employed at Cedar Point. Bonnie was the daughter of George Skiles and Huldah Dry. The two married at Sts. Peter and Paul Catholic Church in Sandusky, Ohio, on July 14, 1914, with Father William F. Murphy officiating and Gus Dorais as best man. They had four children: Knute Lars Jr., William Dorias, Mary Jeane and John Vincent. Rockne converted from Lutheranism to the Catholic Church on November 20, 1925. The Rev. Vincent Mooney, C.S.C., baptized Rockne in the Log Chapel on Notre Dame's campus.\nIn 1986 his grandson, Paul Michael Rockne, was killed in the Edmond post office shooting.\nPlane crash and public reaction.\nRockne died in the crash of a Transcontinental &amp; Western Air airliner in Kansas on March 31, 1931, while en route to participate in the production of the film \"The Spirit of Notre Dame\" (released October 13, 1931). He had stopped in Kansas City to visit his two sons, Bill and Knute Jr., who were in boarding school there at the Pembroke-Country Day School. A little over an hour after taking off from Kansas City, one of the Fokker Trimotor's wings broke up in flight. The plane crashed into a wheat field near Bazaar, Kansas, killing Rockne and seven others.\nCoincidentally, Jess Harper, Rockne's friend and the coach he had replaced at Notre Dame, lived approximately from the spot of the crash. Harper was called to make a positive identification of Rockne's body. A memorial dedicated to the victims stands on the spot where the plane crashed. The memorial is surrounded by a wire fence with wooden posts and was maintained for many years by James Heathman, who, at the age of 13 in 1931, was one of the first people to arrive at the site of the crash.\nRockne's unexpected death startled the nation and triggered a national outpouring of grief, comparable to the death of a president. President Herbert Hoover called Rockne's death \"a national loss\". King Haakon VII of Norway posthumously knighted Rockne and sent a personal envoy, Olaf Bernts, Norwegian consul in Chicago, to Rockne's funeral.\nRockne was buried in Highland Cemetery in South Bend, the city adjacent to the Notre Dame campus. Six of his players from the previous year (Marty Brill, Tom Yarr, Frank Carideo, Marchy Schwartz, Tom Conley, and Larry Mullins) carried him to his final resting place. More than 100,000 people lined the route of his funeral procession, and the funeral, held at the Basilica of the Sacred Heart, was broadcast live on network radio across the United States and in Europe as well as parts of South America and Asia. In 2024, Rockne was reinterred on the campus of Notre Dame.\nDriven by the public feeling for Rockne, the crash story played out at length in nearly all the nation's newspapers and public demand for an inquiry into the crash's causes and circumstances ensued. The cause of the damage was determined to be that the plane's plywood outer skin was bonded to the ribs and spars with water-based aliphatic resin glue, and flight in rain had caused the bond to deteriorate to the point that sections of the plywood suddenly separated. The national outcry over the disaster triggered sweeping changes to aircraft design, manufacturing, operation, inspection, maintenance, regulation, and crash investigation, igniting a safety revolution that ultimately transformed airline travel worldwide from one of the most dangerous forms of travel to one of the safest.\nLegacy.\nRockne was not the first coach to use the forward pass, but he helped popularize it nationally. Most football historians agree that a few schools, notably St. Louis University (under coach Eddie Cochems), Michigan, Carlisle, and Minnesota, had passing attacks in place before Rockne arrived at Notre Dame. The great majority of passing attacks, however, consisted solely of short pitches and shovel passes to stationary receivers. Additionally, few of the major Eastern teams that constituted the news media center of college football at the time used the pass.\nIn the summer of 1913, while he was a lifeguard on the beach at Cedar Point in Sandusky, Ohio, Rockne and his college teammate and roommate Gus Dorais worked on passing techniques. These were employed in games by the 1913 Notre Dame squad and subsequent Harper- and Rockne-coached teams and included many features common in modern passing, including having the passer throw the ball overhand and having the receiver run under a football and catch the ball in stride.\nThat fall, Notre Dame upset heavily favored Army 35\u201313 at West Point thanks to a barrage of Dorais-to-Rockne long downfield passes. The game played an important role in displaying the potency of the forward pass and \"open offense\" and convinced many coaches to add pass plays to their play books. The game is dramatized in the movies \"Knute Rockne, All American\" and \"The Long Gray Line\". In May 1949, Knute Rockne appeared in the Master Man story on Kid Eternity comics, volume 1, number 15.\nThere is a Knute Rockne Street in San Antonio, Texas.\nCoaching tree.\nRockne served under one head coach:\n31 of Rockne's former players at Notre Dame later became head coaches:\nAssistant coaches under Rockne who later became head coaches:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17198", "revid": "49696380", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17198", "title": "Kariba Dam", "text": "The Kariba Dam is a double curvature concrete arch dam in the Kariba Gorge of the Zambezi river basin between Zambia and Zimbabwe. The dam stands tall and long. The dam forms Lake Kariba, which extends for and holds of water.\nConstruction.\nThe dam was constructed on the orders of the Government of the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland, a 'federal colony' within the British Empire. The consulting engineers Gibb, Coyne, Sogei (Kariba) (PVT.) Limited, a joint venture of consulting engineers, which included Sir Alexander Gibb &amp; Partners, whose team was led by Sir Angus Paton, and Coyne et Bellier, whose team was led by Andr\u00e9 Coyne. The double curvature concrete arch dam was constructed between 1955 and 1959 by Cogefar-Impresit of Italy at a cost of $135,000,000 for the first stage with only the Kariba South power cavern. Final construction and the addition of the Kariba North Power cavern by Mitchell Construction was not completed until 1977, due to largely political problems, for a total cost of $480,000,000. During construction, 86 construction workers lost their lives.\nThe dam was officially opened by Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother on 17 May 1960.\nPower generation.\nThe Kariba Dam supplies of electricity to parts of both Zambia (the Copperbelt) and Zimbabwe and generates per annum. Each country has its own power station on the north and south bank of the dam, respectively. The south station belonging to Zimbabwe has been in operation since 1960 and had six generators of capacity each for a total of .\nOn November 11, 2013 it was announced by Zimbabwe's Finance Minister, Patrick Chinamasa that capacity at the Zimbabwean (South) Kariba hydropower station would be increased by 300 megawatts. The cost of upgrading the facility has been supported by a $319m loan from China. The deal is a clear example of Zimbabwe's \"Look East\" policy, which was adopted after falling out with Western powers. Construction on the Kariba South expansion began in mid-2014 and was initially expected to be complete in 2019.\nIn March 2018, president Emmerson Mnangagwa commissioned the completed expansion of \"Kariba South Hydroelectric Power Station\". The addition of two new turbines raised capacity at this station to . The expansion work was done by Sinohydro, at a cost of US$533 million. Work started in 2014, and was completed in March 2018.\nThe north station belonging to Zambia has been in operation since 1976, and has four generators of each for a total of ; work to expand this capacity by an additional to was completed in December 2013. Two additional 180 MW generators were added.\nLocation.\nThe Kariba Dam project was planned and carried out by the Government of the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland. The Federation was often referred to as the Central African Federation (CAF). The CAF was a 'federal colony' within the British Empire in southern Africa that existed from 1953 to the end of 1963, comprising the former self-governing British colony of Southern Rhodesia and the former British protectorates of Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland. Northern Rhodesia had decided earlier in 1953 (before the Federation was founded) to build a dam within its territory, on the Kafue River, a major tributary of the Zambezi. It would have been closer to Northern Rhodesia's Copperbelt, which was in need of more power. This would have been a cheaper and less grandiose project, with a smaller environmental impact. Southern Rhodesia, the richest of the three, objected to a Kafue dam and insisted that the dam be sited instead at Kariba. Also, the capacity of the Kafue dam was much lower than that at Kariba. Initially, the dam was managed and maintained by the Central African Power Corporation. The Kariba Dam is now owned and operated by the Zambezi River Authority, which is jointly and equally owned by Zimbabwe and Zambia.\nSince Zambia's independence, three dams have been built on the Kafue River: the Kafue Gorge Upper Dam, Kafue Gorge Lower Dam and the Itezhi-Tezhi Dam.\nEnvironmental impacts.\nPopulation displacement and resettlement.\nThe creation of the reservoir forced resettlement of about 57,000 Tonga people living along the Zambezi on both sides. \nThere are many different perspectives on how much resettlement aid was given to the displaced Tonga. British author David Howarth described the efforts in Northern Rhodesia:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Everything that a government can do on a meagre budget is being done. Demonstration gardens have been planted, to try to teach the Tonga more sensible methods of agriculture, and to try to find cash crops that they can grow. The hilly land has been plowed in ridge contours to guard against erosion. In Sinazongwe, an irrigated garden has grown a prodigious crop of pawpaws, bananas, oranges, lemons, and vegetables, and shown that the remains of the valley could be made prolific if only money could be found for irrigation. Cooperative markets have been organized, and Tonga are being taught to run them. Enterprising Tonga have been given loans to set themselves up as farmers. More schools have been built than the Tonga ever had before, and most of the Tonga are now within reach of dispensaries and hospitals.\"\nAnthropologist Thayer Scudder, who has studied these communities since the late 1950s, wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Today, most are still 'development refugees'. Many live in less-productive, problem-prone areas, some of which have been so seriously degraded within the last generation that they resemble lands on the edge of the Sahara Desert.\"\nAmerican writer Jacques Leslie, in \"Deep Water\" (2005), focused on the plight of the people displaced by Kariba Dam, and found the situation little changed since the 1970s. In his view, Kariba remains the worst dam-resettlement disaster in African history.\nBasilwizi Trust.\nIn an effort to regain control of their lives, the local people who were displaced by the Kariba dam's reservoir formed the Basilwizi Trust in 2002. The Trust seeks mainly to improve the lives of people in the area through organizing development projects and serving as a conduit between the people of the Zambezi Valley and their country's decision-making process. \nRiver ecology.\nThe Kariba Dam controls 90% of the total runoff of the Zambezi River, thus changing the downstream ecology dramatically.\nWildlife rescue.\nFrom 1958 to 1961, Operation Noah captured and removed around 6,000 large animals and numerous small ones threatened by the lake's rising waters.\nRecent activity.\nOn 6 February 2008, the BBC reported that heavy rain could lead to a release of water from the dam, which would force 50,000 people downstream to evacuate.\nRising levels led to the opening of the floodgates in March 2010, requiring the evacuation of 130,000 people who lived in the floodplain, and causing concerns that flooding would spread to nearby areas.\nIn March 2014, at a conference organized by the Zambezi River Authority, engineers warned that the foundations of the dam had weakened and there was a possibility of dam failure unless repairs were made.\nOn 3 October 2014 the BBC reported that \"The Kariba Dam is in a dangerous state. Opened in 1959, it was built on a seemingly solid bed of basalt. But, in the past 50 years, the torrents from the spillway have eroded that bedrock, carving a vast crater that has undercut the dam's foundations. \u2026 engineers are now warning that without urgent repairs, the whole dam will collapse. If that happened, a tsunami-like wall of water would rip through the Zambezi valley, reaching the Mozambique border within eight hours. The torrent would overwhelm Mozambique's Cahora Bassa Dam and knock out 40% of southern Africa's hydroelectric capacity. Along with the devastation of wildlife in the valley, the Zambezi River Authority estimates that the lives of 3.5 million people are at risk.\"\nIn June 2015 The Institute of Risk Management South Africa completed a Risk Research Report entitled \"Impact of the failure of the Kariba Dam\". It concluded: \"Whilst we can debate whether the Kariba\nDam will fail, why it might occur and when, there is no doubt that the impact across the region would be devastating.\"\nIn January 2016 it was reported that water levels at the dam had dropped to 12% of capacity. Levels fell by , which is just above the minimum operating level for hydropower. Low rainfalls and overuse of the water by the power plants have left the reservoir near empty, raising the prospect that both Zimbabwe and Zambia will face water shortages.\nIn July and September 2018, \"The Lusaka Times\" reported that work had started relating to the plunge pool and cracks in the dam wall.\nOn 22 February 2019 Bloomberg reported \"Zambia has reduced hydropower production at the Kariba Dam because of rapidly declining water levels\" but \"Zambia doesn't anticipate power cuts as a result of shortages\". On 5 August that year, the same publication reported that the reservoir was near empty, and that it may have to stop hydropower production.\nAs of November 2020 the water level in the Kariba reservoir has remained steady around the 25% capacity, up from nearly half that in November 2019. The Zambezi River Authority has stated that it is optimistic about rainfall estimates for the 2020/2021 rainfall season, allocating an increased amount of water for power production. At that time, the reservoir held 15.77 billion cubic meters of water, with the water line sitting at around 478.30 metres (1,569.23 ft), just above the minimum capacity for power generation of 475.50 metres (1,560.04 ft).\nIt was reported in February 2022 that rehabilitation work has been underway since 2017 on the Kariba dam. The Zambezi River Authority (ZRA) said that work on the Kariba Dam Rehabilitation Project (KDRP), which includes efforts to reconfigure the plunge pool and rebuild the spillway gates, is scheduled to be finished in 2025. The rehabilitation of the dam is being financed by the European Union (EU), the World Bank, the Swedish government and the African Development Bank (AfDB), with the Zambian and Zimbabwe governments contributing counterpart funding. The project\u2019s goal is to guarantee the structural integrity of the Kariba Dam, assuring the sustained generation of power primarily for the benefit of the inhabitants of Zimbabwe and Zambia and the broader Southern African Development Community area. The work on redesigning the plunge pool involves bulk excavating the rock in the current pool to assist plunge pool stabilization and avoid additional scouring or erosion along the weak fault zone towards the dam foundation. This reshaping work will be accomplished by constructing a temporary water-tight cofferdam to complete the reshaping work under dry conditions.\nAn energy crisis due to drought and low water levels continued into January 2023, with water level falling to just 1% of capacity and output limited to 800 MW for a fraction of the day.\nIndustrial power users have proposed a 250 MW floating solar plant on Lake Kariba to improve electricity reliability.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17199", "revid": "42425010", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17199", "title": "Keilhauite", "text": "Keilhauite (also known as \"yttrotitanite\") is a variety of the mineral titanite of a brownish black color, related to titanite in form. It consists chiefly of silicon dioxide, titanium dioxide, calcium oxide, and yttrium oxide. The variety was described in 1841 and named for Baltazar Mathias Keilhau (1797\u20131858) a Norwegian geologist.\nKeilhauite has a chemical formula of . It differs from titanite only in that calcium is substituted by up to 10 percent .\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17201", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17201", "title": "Kekule von Stradonitz", "text": ""}
{"id": "17202", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17202", "title": "Kingsley Amis", "text": "English author, critic and teacher (1922\u20131995)\nSir Kingsley William Amis (16 April 1922 \u2013 22 October 1995) was an English novelist, poet, critic and teacher. He wrote more than 20 novels, six volumes of poetry, a memoir, short stories, radio and television scripts, and works of social and literary criticism. He is best known for satirical comedies such as \"Lucky Jim\" (1954), \"One Fat Englishman\" (1963), \"Ending Up\" (1974), \"Jake's Thing\" (1978) and \"The Old Devils\" (1986). His biographer Zachary Leader called Amis \"the finest English comic novelist of the second half of the twentieth century.\" In 2008, \"The Times\" ranked him ninth on a list of the 50 greatest British writers since 1945. He was the father of the novelist Martin Amis. Amis was knighted in 1990. \nEarly life.\nKingsley Amis was born on 16 April 1922 in Clapham, south London, the only child of William Robert Amis (1889\u20131963), a clerk\u2014\"quite an important one, fluent in Spanish and responsible for exporting mustard to South America\"\u2014for the mustard manufacturer Colman's in the City of London, and his wife Rosa Annie (n\u00e9e Lucas). \nAmis's grandparents were wealthy. William Amis's father, the glass merchant Joseph James Amis, owned a mansion called Barchester at Purley, then part of Surrey. Amis considered J. J. Amis\u2014always called \"Pater\" or \"Dadda\"\u2014\"a jokey, excitable, silly little man\", whom he \"disliked and was repelled by\". His wife Julia \"was a large, dreadful, hairy-faced creature ... whom [Amis] loathed and feared\". His mother's parents lived at Camberwell. Her father George was an enthusiastic collector of books and Baptist chapel organist who was employed at a Brixton gentleman's outfitters as a tailor's assistant and was \"the only grandparent [Amis] cared for\". Amis hoped to inherit much of his grandfather's library, but his grandmother Jemima\u2014whom Amis already disliked for her habit of mocking her husband when he read his favourite passages to Amis, making \"faces and gestures at him while his head was lowered to the page\"\u2014permitted him to take only five volumes, on condition he wrote \"from his grandfather's collection\" on the flyleaf of each.\nAmis was raised at Norbury\u2014in his later estimation \"not really a place. It's an expression on a map ... really I should say I came from Norbury station.\" Having been educated first at St Hilda's, an \"undistinguished, long-vanished local school ... an independent girls' school of the kind which also took small boys, before they became pubescent and dangerous\", he then moved to nearby Norbury College. In 1940, the Amises moved to Berkhamsted, Hertfordshire. \nAcademic and political career.\nLike his father before him, Amis won a scholarship to the City of London School. In April 1941, after his first year, he was admitted on a scholarship to St John's College, Oxford, where he read English. There he met Philip Larkin, with whom he formed the most important friendship of his life.\nIn June 1941, Amis joined the Communist Party of Great Britain. He broke with communism in 1956, in view of Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev's denunciation of Joseph Stalin in his speech \"On the Cult of Personality and Its Consequences\". In July 1942, he was called up for national service and served in the Royal Corps of Signals. He returned to Oxford in October 1945 to complete his degree. Although he worked hard and earned a first in English in 1947, he had decided by then to give much of his time to writing.\nHe was a lecturer in English at the University College of Swansea from 1949 to 1961.\nDays after Sally's birth, Amis's first novel, \"Lucky Jim\", was published to great acclaim. Critics felt it had caught the flavour of Britain in the 1950s and ushered in a new style of fiction. By 1972, its impressive sales in Britain had been matched by 1.25 million paperback copies sold in the United States. It was translated into 20 languages, including Polish, Hebrew, Korean, and Serbo-Croat. The novel won the Somerset Maugham Award for fiction and Amis became one of the writers known as the Angry Young Men. \"Lucky Jim\" was among the first British campus novels, setting a precedent for later generations of writers such as Malcolm Bradbury, David Lodge, Tom Sharpe and Howard Jacobson. As a poet, Amis was associated with The Movement.\nIn 1958\u20131959 Amis made the first of two visits to the United States, as a visiting fellow in creative writing at Princeton University and a visiting lecturer at other northeastern universities. On returning to Britain, he fell into a rut, and he began looking for another post. After 13 years at Swansea, Amis became a fellow of Peterhouse, Cambridge, in 1961, but regretted the move within a year, finding Cambridge an academic and social disappointment. He resigned in 1963, intent on moving to Majorca, although he actually moved no further than London.\nLiterary work.\nAmis is widely known as a satirist in mid- to late-20th-century Britain, but his literary work included poetry, criticism and essays. At university he met the poet Philip Larkin, with whom he formed a deep friendship, with a quarter of Amis's letters addressed to him. \nAmis's first novel, \"Lucky Jim\" (1954), was widely perceived as part of the Angry Young Men movement of the 1950s. It satirised the highbrow academic set of an unnamed university through the eyes of a struggling young lecturer of history, and sparked the rise of the campus novel. \n\"That Uncertain Feeling\" (1955) features a young provincial librarian and his temptation to adultery. \"I Like It Here\" (1958) takes a contemptuous view of \"abroad\" after Amis's own travels on the Continent with a young family. \"Take a Girl Like You\" (1960) traces a young schoolmaster's courtship and ultimate seduction of the heroine.\nWith \"The Anti-Death League\" (1966), Amis introduced speculative elements that continued in works such as \"The Green Man\" (1969) (mystery/horror) and \"The Alteration\" (1976) (alternative history). His interest in science fiction dated to childhood and was reflected in his 1958 Christian Gauss Lectures at Princeton, published as \"New Maps of Hell: A Survey of Science Fiction\".\nAmis admired dystopian writers such as Frederik Pohl and C. M. Kornbluth and coined the term \"comic inferno\" to describe humorous dystopias, particularly those of Robert Sheckley. With Robert Conquest, he co-edited the \"Spectrum\" science fiction anthologies, which drew heavily upon 1950s numbers of the magazine \"Astounding Science Fiction.\" His novels and poems of the period often engaged with themes of religious doubt and the value of everyday happiness.\nAmis also continued to write comic realism in \"I Want It Now\" (1968) and \"Girl, 20\" (1971), which depict the \"swinging\" atmosphere of late-1960s London and his amateur interests such as music. \nHis essays and criticism were collected in \"What Became of Jane Austen? and Other Essays\" (1968), in which he reviewed books such as Colin Wilson's \"The Outsider\", Iris Murdoch's d\u00e9but novel \"Under the Net\", and William Empson's \"Milton's God\".\nAmis admired Ian Fleming's James Bond novels, and in the late 1960s began composing works connected with Bond, either under a pseudonym or uncredited. He published \"The James Bond Dossier\" (1965) under his own name, \"The Book of Bond\" \"or, Every Man His Own 007\" (1965) as \"Lt Col. William ('Bill') Tanner\", and the continuation novel \"Colonel Sun\" (1968) under the pseudonym \"Robert Markham\".\nCritics often called Amis's fiction misogynistic, notably \"Stanley and the Women\" (1984). Amis was a prolific womanizer who sometimes felt guilty about it and wrote about that guilt in books like \"Take a Girl Like You\".\nAmis edited \"The New Oxford Book of Light Verse\" (1978), a revision of an original volume by his friend W. H. Auden. \"The Amis Anthology\" (1988), a personal selection of his favourite poems, grew out of his work for a London newspaper, in which he selected a poem a day and gave it a brief introduction.\nAmis was shortlisted for the Booker Prize three times, for \"Ending Up\" (1974), \"Jake's Thing\" (1978), and \"The Old Devils\" (1986), the last of which won the prize.\nIn 2008, \"The Times\" ranked Amis 13th on its list of the 50 greatest British writers since 1945.\nPersonal life.\nPolitical views.\nAmis joined the Communist Party of Great Britain as a young man at Oxford and left it in 1956. He later called this stage of his political life \"the callow Marxist phase that seemed almost compulsory in Oxford\". Amis remained nominally on the political left for some time after the war, declaring in the 1950s that he would always vote for the Labour Party.\nAmis eventually moved further to the political right, a development he discussed in the essay \"Why Lucky Jim Turned Right\" (1967); his conservatism and anti-communism are visible in works like the dystopian novel \"Russian Hide and Seek\" (1980). In 1967, Amis, Robert Conquest, John Braine, and several other authors signed a letter to \"The Times\" titled \"Backing for U.S. Policies in Vietnam\", supporting the US government in the Vietnam War. He spoke at the Adam Smith Institute, arguing against government subsidy for the arts.\nAmis's religious views appear in a response reported in his \"Memoirs\". To the Russian poet Yevgeny Yevtushenko's question, \"You atheist?\" Amis replied, \"It's more that I hate Him.\"\nCharacter.\nBy his own admission and according to his biographers, Amis was a serial adulterer for much of his life. This was a major factor in the breakdown of his first marriage. A famous photograph of a sleeping Amis on a Yugoslav beach shows the slogan (written in lipstick by wife Hilary) on his back \"1 Fat Englishman\u2014I fuck anything.\"\nIn one memoir, Amis wrote, \"Now and then I become conscious of having the reputation of being one of the great drinkers, if not one of the great drunks, of our time\". He suggests this reflects a na\u00efve tendency in readers to apply the behaviour of his characters to himself. He enjoyed drink and spent a good deal of time in pubs. Hilary Rubinstein, who accepted \"Lucky Jim\" for Victor Gollancz, commented, \"I doubted whether Jim Dixon would have gone to the pub and drunk ten pints of beer... I didn't know Kingsley very well, you see.\"\nClive James commented: \"All on his own, he had the weekly drinks bill of a whole table at the Garrick Club even before he was elected. After he was, he would get so tight there that he could barely make it to the taxi.\" But Amis was adamant that inspiration did not come from a bottle: \"Whatever part drink may play in the writer's life, it must play none in his or her work.\"\nThis matched a disciplined approach to writing. For \"many years\" Amis imposed a rigorous daily schedule on himself, segregating writing and drink. Mornings were spent on writing, with a minimum daily output of 500 words. Drinking began about lunchtime, when this had been achieved. Such self-discipline was essential to Amis's prodigious output.\nYet according to James, Amis reached a turning point when his drinking ceased to be social and became a way of dulling his remorse and regret at his behaviour towards Hilly. \"Amis had turned against himself deliberately... It seems fair to guess that the troubled grandee came to disapprove of his own conduct.\" His friend Christopher Hitchens said: \"The booze got to him in the end, and robbed him of his wit and charm as well as of his health.\"\nAntisemitism.\nAmis had an unclear relationship with antisemitism, which he sometimes expressed but also claimed to dislike. He occasionally speculated on common Jewish stereotypes. Antisemitism was sometimes present in his conversations and letters to friends and associates, such as \"The great Jewish vice is glibness, fluency ... also possibly just bullshit, as in Marx, Freud, Marcuse\", or \"Chaplin [who was not Jewish] is a horse's arse. He's a Jeeeew you see, like the Marx Brothers, like Danny Kaye.\" It is a minor theme in \"Stanley and the Women\", about a paranoid schizophrenic. Of the cultural complexion of the United States, Amis said: \"I've finally worked out why I don't like Americans ... . Because everyone there is either a Jew or a hick.\" Amis himself called his antisemitism \"very mild\".\nFamily.\nIn 1946 Amis met Hilary Bardwell. They married in 1948 after she became pregnant with their first child, Philip. Amis initially arranged for her to have a back-street abortion, but changed his mind, fearing for her safety. Two other children followed: Martin in August 1949 and Sally in January 1954.\nIn 1963, Hilary discovered that Amis was having an affair with the novelist Elizabeth Jane Howard. Hilary and Amis separated in August and he went to live with Howard, divorcing Hilary and marrying Howard in 1965. In 1968 he moved with Howard to Lemmons, a house in Barnet, north London. She and Amis divorced in 1983.\nIn his last years, Amis shared a house with Hilary and her third husband, Alastair Boyd, 7th Baron Kilmarnock, in a deal brokered by their sons to ensure he could be cared for until his death. Martin Amis's memoir \"Experience\" describes his father's life, charm and decline.\nIn August 1995, Amis fell after a suspected stroke. After apparently recovering, he worsened and died on 22 October 1995 at St Pancras Hospital, London. He was cremated and his ashes laid to rest at Golders Green Crematorium.\nPartial bibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17203", "revid": "1591", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17203", "title": "Kluge around", "text": ""}
{"id": "17204", "revid": "40778474", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17204", "title": "Kana", "text": "Japanese syllabic writing systems\n are syllabaries used to write Japanese phonological units, morae. In current usage, \"kana\" most commonly refers to \"hiragana\" and \"katakana\". It can also refer to their ancestor , which were Chinese characters used phonetically to transcribe Japanese (e.g. \"man'y\u014dgana\"); and \"hentaigana\", which are historical variants of the now-standard hiragana.\nKatakana, with a few additions, are also used to write Ainu. A number of systems exist to write the Ry\u016bky\u016ban languages, in particular Okinawan, in hiragana. Taiwanese kana were used in Taiwanese Hokkien as ruby text for Chinese characters in Taiwan when it was under Japanese rule.\nEach kana character corresponds to one phoneme or syllable, unlike kanji, which generally each corresponds to a morpheme. Apart from the five vowels, it is always CV (consonant onset with vowel nucleus), such as \"ka\", \"ki\", \"sa\", \"shi\", etc., with the sole exception of the C grapheme for nasal codas usually romanised as \"n\". The structure has led some scholars to label the system \"moraic\", instead of \"syllabic\", because it requires the combination of two syllabograms to represent a CVC syllable with coda (e.g. CV\"n\", CV\"m\", CV\"ng\"), a CVV syllable with complex nucleus (i.e. multiple or expressively long vowels), or a CCV syllable with complex onset (i.e. including a glide, C\"y\"V, C\"w\"V).\nThe limited number of phonemes in Japanese, as well as the relatively rigid syllable structure, makes the kana system a very accurate representation of spoken Japanese.\nEtymology.\n\"Kana\" is a compound of and , which eventually collapsed into \"kanna\" and ultimately \"kana\". \"Kana\" were so called in contrast with which were kanji used \"regularly\" (kanji used for their meanings as they are now), or more specifically the writing of such kanji.\nIt was not until the 18th century that the early-nationalist movement, which promoted a move away from Sinocentric academia, began to reanalyze the script from a phonological point of view. In the following centuries, contrary to the traditional Sinocentric view, \"kana\" began to be considered a national Japanese writing system that was distinct from Chinese characters, which is the dominant view today.\nTerms.\nAlthough the term 'kana' is now commonly understood as hiragana and katakana, it actually has broader application as listed below:\nHiragana and katakana.\nThe following table reads, in goj\u016bon order, as \"a\", \"i\", \"u\", \"e\", \"o\" (down first column), then \"ka\", \"ki\", \"ku\", \"ke\", \"ko\" (down second column), and so on. \"n\" appears on its own at the end. Asterisks mark unused combinations.\nDiacritics.\nSyllables beginning with the voiced consonants [g], [z], [d] and [b] are spelled with kana from the corresponding unvoiced columns (\"k\", \"s\", \"t\" and \"h\") and the voicing mark, \"dakuten\". Syllables beginning with [p] are spelled with kana from the \"h\" column and the half-voicing mark, \"handakuten\".\nDigraphs.\nSyllables beginning with palatalized consonants are spelled with one of the seven consonantal kana from the \"i\" row followed by small \"ya\", \"yu\" or \"yo\". These digraphs are called y\u014don.\nModern usage.\nThe difference in usage between hiragana and katakana is stylistic. Usually, hiragana is the default syllabary, and katakana is used in certain special cases. Hiragana is used to write native Japanese words with no kanji representation (or whose kanji is thought obscure or difficult), as well as grammatical elements such as particles and inflections (okurigana). Today katakana is most commonly used to write words of foreign origin that do not have kanji representations, as well as foreign personal and place names. Katakana is also used to represent onomatopoeia and interjections, emphasis, technical and scientific terms, transcriptions of the Sino-Japanese readings of kanji, and some corporate branding.\nKana can be written in small form above or next to lesser-known kanji in order to show pronunciation; this is called furigana. Furigana is used most widely in children's or learners' books. Literature for young children who do not yet know kanji may dispense with it altogether and instead use hiragana combined with spaces.\nSystems supporting only a limited set of characters, such as Wabun code for Morse code telegrams and single-byte digital character encodings such as JIS X 0201 or EBCDIK, likewise dispense with kanji, instead using only katakana. This is not necessary in systems supporting double-byte or variable-width encodings such as Shift JIS, EUC-JP, UTF-8 or UTF-16.\nHistory.\nOld Japanese was written entirely in kanji, and a set of kanji called \"man'y\u014dgana\" were first used to represent the phonetic values of grammatical particles and morphemes. As there was no consistent method of sound representation, a phoneme could be represented by multiple kanji, and even those kana's pronunciations differed in whether they were to be read as or , making decipherment problematic. The , a poetry anthology assembled sometime after 759 and the eponym of \"man'y\u014dgana\", exemplifies this phenomenon, where as many as almost twenty kanji were used for the mora \"ka\". The consistency of the kana used was thus dependent on the style of the writer. Hiragana developed as a distinct script from cursive \"man'y\u014dgana\", whereas katakana developed from abbreviated parts of regular script \"man'y\u014dgana\" as a glossing system to add readings or explanations to Buddhist sutras. Both of these systems were simplified to make writing easier. The shapes of many hiragana resembled the Chinese cursive script, as did those of many katakana the Korean \"gugyeol\", suggesting that the Japanese followed the continental pattern of their neighbors.\nKana is traditionally said to have been invented by the Buddhist priest K\u016bkai in the ninth century. K\u016bkai certainly brought the Siddha\u1e43 script of India home on his return from China in 806; his interest in the sacred aspects of speech and writing led him to the conclusion that Japanese would be better represented by a phonetic alphabet than by the kanji which had been used up to that point. The modern arrangement of kana reflects that of the devanagari order used for Sanskrit in the Buddhist Siddha\u1e43 script hybrid known by the Japanese at the time, before, the traditional \"iroha\" arrangement used to follow the order of a poem which uses each kana once. Kana's vowel (a-i-u-e-o) and consonant (k, s, t, n, h, m, y, r, w) order coincide with the Sanskrit order, except for the letter s, but that is explained by the properties of Old Japanese and the version of Siddham buddhist monks learnt at the time. However, the first time this order was used in Japanese was during the Heian period by My\u014dkaku, a priest and Sanskrit scholar of the 12th century, member of the same order of K\u016bkai and credited as reviving Saskrit studies. In 1695, a priest named Keich\u016b published a 5 volume book that is considered to be fundamental in fixing the sound order to this day; and this work, in turn, was probably based on an earlier 3 volume systematic study of the grammar and the writing system of the Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit, written by another priest, Kakugen, in 1681, also member of the order of K\u016bkai and My\u014dkaku.\nHowever, hiragana and katakana did not quickly supplant \"man'y\u014dgana\". It was only in 1900 that the present set of kana was codified. All the other forms of hiragana and katakana developed before the 1900 codification are known as . Rules for their usage as per the spelling reforms of 1946, the , which abolished the kana for \"wi\" (\u3090\u30fb\u30f0), \"we\" (\u3091\u30fb\u30f1), and \"wo\" (\u3092\u30fb\u30f2) (except that the last was reserved as the accusative particle).\nCollation.\nKana are the basis for collation in Japanese. They are taken in the order given by the \"goj\u016bon\" (\u3042 \u3044 \u3046 \u3048 \u304a ... \u308f \u3092 \u3093), though iroha (\u3044 \u308d \u306f \u306b \u307b \u3078 \u3068 ... \u305b \u3059 (\u3093)) ordering is used for enumeration in some circumstances. Dictionaries differ in the sequence order for long/short vowel distinction, small \"tsu\" and diacritics. As Japanese does not use word spaces (except as a tool for children), there can be no word-by-word collation; all collation is kana-by-kana.\nIn Unicode.\nThe hiragana range in Unicode is U+3040 ... U+309F, and the katakana range is U+30A0 ... U+30FF. The obsolete and rare characters (\"wi\" and \"we\") also have their proper code points.\nCharacters U+3095 and U+3096 are hiragana small \"ka\" and small \"ke\", respectively. U+30F5 and U+30F6 are their katakana equivalents. Characters U+3099 and U+309A are combining dakuten and handakuten, which correspond to the spacing characters U+309B and U+309C. U+309D is the hiragana iteration mark, used to repeat a previous hiragana. U+309E is the voiced hiragana iteration mark, which stands in for the previous hiragana but with the consonant voiced (\"k\" becomes \"g\", \"h\" becomes \"b\", etc.). U+30FD and U+30FE are the katakana iteration marks. U+309F is a ligature of \"yori\" (\u3088\u308a) sometimes used in vertical writing. U+30FF is a ligature of \"koto\" (\u30b3\u30c8), also found in vertical writing.\nAdditionally, there are halfwidth equivalents to the standard fullwidth katakana. These are encoded within the Halfwidth and Fullwidth Forms block (U+FF00\u2013U+FFEF), starting at U+FF65 and ending at U+FF9F (characters U+FF61\u2013U+FF64 are halfwidth punctuation marks):\nThere is also a small \"Katakana Phonetic Extensions\" range (U+31F0 ... U+31FF), which includes some additional small kana characters for writing the Ainu language. Further small kana characters are present in the \"Small Kana Extension\" block.\nUnicode also includes \"Katakana letter archaic E\" (U+1B000), as well as 255 archaic Hiragana, in the Kana Supplement block. It also includes a further 31 archaic Hiragana in the Kana Extended-A block.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Unicode chart Kana Supplement/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Unicode chart Kana Extended-A/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Kana Extended-B block was added in September, 2021 with the release of version 14.0:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17206", "revid": "48612934", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17206", "title": "KMS", "text": "KMS may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "17207", "revid": "26580587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17207", "title": "Knowledge management system", "text": ""}
{"id": "17209", "revid": "36277548", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17209", "title": "Knights of the Lambda Calculus", "text": "Semi-fictional hacking organization\nThe Knights of the Lambda Calculus is a semi-fictional organization of expert Lisp and Scheme hackers. The name refers to the lambda calculus, a mathematical formalism invented by Alonzo Church, with which Lisp is intimately connected, and references the Knights Templar.\nThere is no actual organization that goes by the name \"Knights of the Lambda Calculus\"; it mostly only exists as a hacker culture in-joke. The concept most likely originated at MIT. For example, in the Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs http://, Gerald Jay Sussman presents the audience with the button, saying they are now members of this special group. However, according to the Jargon File, a \"well-known LISPer\" has been known to give out buttons with Knights insignia on them, and some people have claimed to have membership in the Knights.\nIn popular culture.\nA group that evolved from, or is similar to them, called \"The Knights of the Eastern Calculus\", makes a major appearance in the anime series \"Serial Experiments Lain\", the logo of which is a reference to Freemasonry. References to MIT professors and other American computer scientists are prominent in Episode 9 of the series. At one point in the anime, Lain is seen with code displayed on her handheld device that appears to be Lisp.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17210", "revid": "8280245", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17210", "title": "Knowbot", "text": "A knowbot is a kind of bot that automatically collects certain specified information from web sites.\nKNOWBOT is the acronym for Knowledge-Based Object Technology. This term, used as early as 1988 and known to have been implemented by December 1989 at the latest describes computer-based objects developed for collecting and storing specific information, to use that information to accomplish a particular task, and to enable sharing that information with other objects or processes. An early use of knowbots was to provide a computerized assistant to users to complete redundant detailed tasks without a need to train the user in computer technology.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17211", "revid": "9203640", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17211", "title": "Knuth", "text": "Knuth is a surname of Nordic origin. Bearers of the name include:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Surname listThis page lists people with the surname . "}
{"id": "17212", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17212", "title": "KOMPILER", "text": "In computing, the KOMPILER was one of the first language compilation and runtime systems for International Business Machines' IBM 701, the fastest commercial U.S. computer available in 1955.\nInformation on KOMPILER is listed on page 16 of Volume 2, Number 5 (May 1959) of the \"Communications of the ACM\". Known versions are KOMPILER 2 for IBM 701 and KOMPILER 3 for the IBM 704. KOMPILER was eventually replaced by a Fortran compiler on the IBM 704.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17213", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17213", "title": "KornShell", "text": "Bourne shell backward compatible Unix shell created by David Korn\nKornShell (codice_1) is a Unix shell which was developed by David Korn at Bell Labs in the early 1980s and announced at USENIX on July 14, 1983. The initial development was based on Bourne shell source code. Other early contributors were Bell Labs developers Mike Veach and Pat Sullivan, who wrote the Emacs and vi-style line editing modes' code, respectively. KornShell is backward-compatible with the Bourne shell and includes many features of the C shell, inspired by the requests of Bell Labs users.\nFeatures.\nKornShell complies with POSIX.2, Shell and Utilities, Command Interpreter (IEEE Std 1003.2-1992.) Major differences between KornShell and the traditional Bourne shell include:\nHistory.\nKornShell was originally proprietary software. In 2000 the source code was released under a license particular to AT&amp;T, but since the ksh93q release in early 2005 it has been licensed under the Eclipse Public License. KornShell is available as part of the AT&amp;T Software Technology (AST) Open Source Software Collection. As KornShell was initially only available through a proprietary license from AT&amp;T, a number of free and open source alternatives were created. These include pdksh, mksh, Bash, and Z shell.\nThe functionality of the original KornShell, ksh88, was used as a basis for the standard POSIX.2, Shell and Utilities, Command Interpreter (IEEE Std 1003.2-1992).\nSome vendors still ship their own versions of the older ksh88 variant, sometimes with extensions. ksh93 is maintained on GitHub.\nAs \"Desktop KornShell\" (dtksh), ksh93 is distributed as part of the Common Desktop Environment. This version also provides shell-level mappings for Motif widgets. It was intended as a competitor to Tcl/Tk.\nThe original KornShell, ksh88, became the default shell on AIX in version 4, with ksh93 being available separately.\nUnixWare 7 includes both ksh88 and ksh93. The default Korn shell is ksh93, which is supplied as /usr/bin/ksh, and the older version is available as /usr/bin/ksh88. UnixWare also includes dtksh when CDE is installed.\nThe ksh93 distribution underwent a less stable fate after the authors left AT&amp;T around 2012 at stable version ksh93u+. The primary authors continued working on a ksh93v- beta branch until around 2014. That work was eventually taken up primarily by Red Hat in 2017 (due to customer requests) and resulted in the eventual initial release of ksh2020 in the fall of 2019. That initial release (although fixing several prior stability issues) introduced breakage and compatibility issues. In March 2020, AT&amp;T decided to roll back the community changes, stash them in a branch, and restart from ksh93u+, as the changes were too broad and too ksh-focused for the company to absorb into a project in maintenance mode. ksh2020 was released as a \"major release for several reasons\" such as removal of EBCDIC support, dropping support for binary plugins written for ksh93u+ and removal of some broken math functions, but has never been maintained or supported by AT&amp;T (not even on its initial release date). The ksh2020 source code has received no commits since February 2020 and it was archived read only in October 2021.\nFollowing the issues with the ksh2020 branch and its abandonment, a new repository was created in May 2020 for the ksh93u+m branch, based on the last stable AT&amp;T release (ksh93u+ 2012-08-01) where bugfix development actively continues.\nPrimary contributions to the main software branch.\nFor the purposes of the lists below, the main software branch of KSH is defined as the original program, dating from July 1983, up and through the release of KSH2020 in late 2019.\nContinuing development of follow-on versions (branches) of KSH have split into different groups starting in 2020 and are not elaborated on below.\nPrimary individual contributors.\nThe following are listed in a roughly ascending chronological order of their contributions:\nPrimary corporate contributors.\nThe following are listed in a roughly ascending chronological order of their contributions:\nDonated corporate resources.\nBesides the primary major contributing corporations (listed above), some companies have contributed free resources to the development of KSH. These are listed below (alphabetically ordered):\nVariants.\nThere are several forks and clones of KornShell:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17214", "revid": "4788526", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17214", "title": "Kilt", "text": "Skirt-like garment worn with Scottish Highland dress and sometimes more broadly\nA kilt ( ) is a garment resembling a wrap-around knee-length skirt, made of twill-woven worsted wool with heavy pleats at the sides and back and traditionally a tartan pattern. Originating in the Scottish Highland dress for men, it is first recorded in the 16th century as the great kilt, a full-length garment whose upper half could be worn as a cloak. The small kilt or \"modern kilt\" emerged in the 18th century, and is essentially the bottom half of the great kilt. Since the 19th century, it has become associated with the wider culture of Scotland, and more broadly with Gaelic or Celtic heritage. \nAlthough the kilt is most often worn by men on formal occasions and at Highland games and other sporting events, it has also been adapted as an item of informal male clothing, returning to its roots as an everyday garment. Kilts are now made for casual wear in a variety of materials. Alternative fastenings may be used and pockets inserted to avoid the need for a sporran. Kilts have also been adopted as female wear for some sports.\nHistory.\nThe kilt first appeared as the great kilt, the ' or belted plaid, during the 16th century. The ' or great kilt was a full-length garment whose upper half could be worn as a cloak draped over the shoulder, or brought up over the head. A version of the \"\" (philibeg), or small kilt (also known as the walking kilt), similar to the modern kilt was invented by an English Quaker from Lancashire named Thomas Rawlinson some time in the 1720s. He felt that the belted plaid was \"cumbrous and unwieldy\", and his solution was to separate the skirt and convert it into a distinct garment with pleats already sewn, which he himself began making. His associate, Iain MacDonnell, chief of the MacDonnells of Inverness, also began making it, and when clansmen employed in logging, charcoal manufacture and iron smelting saw their chief making the new apparel, they soon followed making the kilt. From there its making use spread \"in the shortest space\" amongst the Highlanders, and even amongst some of the Northern Lowlanders. It has been suggested there is evidence that the philibeg with unsewn pleats was made from the 1690s. The kilt's design continued to evolve over the centuries, adapting to practical needs.\nVariants.\nThe name \"kilt\" is applied to a range of garments:\nAccording to the \"Dictionary of the Scots Language\" and \"Oxford English Dictionary\", the noun derives from a verb \"to kilt\", originally meaning \"to gird up; to tuck up (the skirts) round the body\", which is apparently of Scandinavian origin.\nScotland.\nOrganisations that sanction and grade the competitions in Highland dancing and piping all have rules governing acceptable attire for the competitors. These rules specify that kilts are to be worn (except that in the national dances, the female competitors will be wearing the Aboyne dress).\nDesign and construction.\nThe Scottish kilt displays uniqueness of design, construction, and convention which differentiate it from other garments fitting the general description. It is a tailored garment that is wrapped around the wearer's body at the natural waist (between the lowest rib and the hip) starting from one side (usually the wearer's left), around the front and back and across the front again to the opposite side. The fastenings consist of straps and buckles on both ends, the strap on the inside end usually passing through a slit in the waistband to be buckled on the outside; alternatively it may remain inside the waistband and be buckled inside.\nA kilt covers the body from the waist down to the centre of the knees. The overlapping layers in front are called \"aprons\" and are flat; the single layer of fabric around the sides and back is pleated. A kilt pin may be fastened to the front apron on the free corner (but is not passed through the layer below, as its function is to add weight). Underwear may or may not be worn, as the wearer prefers, although tradition has it that a \"true Scotsman\" should wear nothing under his kilt. The Scottish Tartans Authority, however, warns that in some circumstances the practice could be \"childish and unhygienic\" and flying \"in the face of decency\".\nFabrics.\nThe typical kilt as seen at modern Highland games events is made of twill woven worsted wool. The twill weave used for kilts is a \"2\u20132 type\", meaning that each weft thread passes over and under two warp threads at a time. The result is a distinctive diagonal-weave pattern in the fabric which is called the twill line. This kind of twill, when woven according to a given sett or written colour pattern \"(see below)\" is called tartan. In contrast kilts worn by Irish pipers are made from solid-colour cloth, with saffron or green being the most widely used colours.\nKilting fabric weights are given in ounces per yard and run from the very-heavy, regimental worsted of approximately down to a light worsted of about . The most common weights for kilts are and . The heavier weights are more appropriate for cooler weather, while the lighter weights would tend to be selected for warmer weather or for active use, such as Highland dancing. Some patterns are available in only a few weights.\nA modern kilt for a typical adult uses about 6\u20138 yards of single-width (about 26\u201330\u00a0inches) or about 3\u20134 yards of double-width (about 54\u201360\u00a0inches) tartan fabric. Double-width fabric is woven so that the pattern exactly matches on the selvage. Kilts are usually made without a hem because a hem would make the garment too bulky and cause it to hang incorrectly. The exact amount of fabric needed depends upon several factors including the size of the sett, the number of pleats put into the garment, and the size of the person. For a full kilt, 8 yards of fabric would be used regardless of size and the number of pleats and depth of pleat would be adjusted according to their size. For a very large waist, it may be necessary to use 9 yards of cloth.\nSetts.\nOne of the most-distinctive features of the authentic Scots kilt is the tartan pattern, the \"sett\", it exhibits. The association of particular patterns with individual clans and families can be traced back perhaps one or two centuries. It was only in the 19th-century Victorian era that the system of named tartans known today began to be systematically recorded and formalised, mostly by weaving companies for mercantile purposes. Up until this point, Highland tartans held regional associations rather than being identified with any particular clan.\nToday there are also tartans for districts, counties, societies and corporations. There are also setts for states and provinces; schools and universities; sporting activities; individuals; and commemorative and simple generic patterns that anybody can wear (see History of the kilt for the process by which these associations came about).\nSetts are always arranged horizontally and vertically, never diagonally (except when adapted for women's skirts). They are specified by their thread counts, the sequence of colours and their units of width. As an example, the Wallace tartan has a thread count given as \"K/4 R32 K32 Y/4\" (K is black, R is red, and Y is yellow). This means that 4 units of black thread will be succeeded by 32 units of red, etc., in both the warp and the weft. Typically, the units are the actual number of threads, but as long as the proportions are maintained, the resulting pattern will be the same. This thread count also includes a pivot point indicated by the slash between the colour and thread number. The weaver is supposed to reverse the weaving sequence at the pivot point to create a mirror image of the pattern. This is called a symmetrical tartan. Some tartans, like Buchanan, are asymmetrical, which means they do not have a pivot point. The weaver weaves the sequence all the way through and then starts at the beginning again for the next sett.\nSetts are further characterised by their size, the number of inches (or centimetres) in one full repeat. The size of a given sett depends on not only the number of threads in the repeat but also the weight of the fabric. This is because the heavier the fabric, the thicker the threads will be, and thus the same number of threads of a heavier-weight fabric will occupy more space. The colours given in the thread count are specified as in heraldry, although tartan patterns are not heraldic. The exact shade which is used is a matter of artistic freedom and will vary from one fabric mill to another as well as in dye lot to another within the same mill.\nTartans are commercially woven in four standard colour variations that describe the overall tone. \"Ancient\" or \"Old\" colours may be characterised by a slightly faded look intended to resemble the vegetable dyes that were once used, although in some cases \"Old\" simply identifies a tartan that was in use before the current one. Ancient greens and blues are lighter while reds appear orange. \"Modern\" colours are bright and show off modern aniline dyeing methods. The colours are bright red, dark hunter green, and usually navy blue. \"Weathered\" or \"Reproduction\" colours simulate the look of older cloth weathered by the elements. Greens turn to light brown, blues become grey, and reds are a deeper wine colour. The last colour variation is \"Muted\" which tends toward earth tones. The greens are olive, blues are slate blue, and red is an even deeper wine colour. This means that of the approximately 3500 registered tartans available in the Scottish Tartans Authority database as of 2004 there are four possible colour variations for each, resulting in around 14,000 recognised tartan choices.\nSetts were registered until 2008, with the \"International Tartan Index\" (\"ITI\") of the charitable organisation Scottish Tartans Authority (STA), which maintained a collection of fabric samples characterised by name and thread count, for free, which had its register, combined with others to form the \"Scottish Register of Tartans\" (\"SRT\") of the statutory body the National Archives of Scotland (NAS), if the tartan meets SRT's criteria, for \u00a370 as of 2010. Although many tartans are added every year, most of the registered patterns available today were created in the 19th century onward by commercial weavers who worked with a large variety of colours. The rise of Highland romanticism and the growing Anglicisation of Scottish culture by the Victorians at the time led to registering tartans with clan names. Before that, most of these patterns were more connected to geographical regions than to any clan. There is therefore nothing symbolic about the colours, and nothing about the patterns is a reflection of the status of the wearer.\nMeasurements.\nAlthough ready-to-wear kilts can be obtained in standard sizes, a custom kilt is tailored to the individual proportions of the wearer. At least three measurements, the waist, hips, and length of the kilt, are usually required. Sometimes the rise (distance above the waist) or the fell (distance from waistline to the widest part of the hips) is also required.\nA properly made kilt, when buckled on the tightest holes of the straps, is not so loose that the wearer can easily twist the kilt around their body, nor so tight that it causes \"scalloping\" of the fabric where it is buckled. Additionally, the length of the kilt when buckled at the waist reaches a point no lower than halfway across the kneecap and no higher than about an inch above it.\nPleating and stitching.\nA kilt can be pleated with either box or knife pleats. A knife pleat is a simple fold, while the box pleat is bulkier, consisting of two knife pleats back-to-back. Knife pleats are the most common in modern civilian kilts. Regimental traditions vary. The Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders use box pleats, while the Black Watch make their kilts of the same tartan with knife pleats. These traditions were also passed on to affiliated regiments in the Commonwealth, and were retained in successor battalions to these regiments in the amalgamated Royal Regiment of Scotland.\nPleats can be arranged relative to the pattern in two ways. In \"pleating to the stripe\", one of the vertical stripes in the tartan is selected and the fabric is then folded so that this stripe runs down the center of each pleat. The result is that along the pleated section of the kilt (the back and sides) the pattern appears different from the unpleated front, often emphasising the horizontal bands rather than creating a balance between horizontal and vertical. This is often called military pleating because it is the style adopted by many military regiments. It is also widely used by pipe bands.\nIn \"pleating to the sett\", the fabric is folded so that the pattern of the sett is maintained and is repeated all around the kilt. This is done by taking up one full sett in each pleat, or two full setts if they are small. This causes the pleated sections to have the same pattern as the unpleated front.\nAny pleat is characterised by depth and width. The portion of the pleat that protrudes under the overlying pleat is the size or width. The pleat width is selected based on the size of the sett and the amount of fabric to be used in constructing the kilt, and will generally vary from about 1/2\" to about 3/4\".\nThe depth is the part of the pleat which is folded under the overlying pleat. It depends solely on the size of the tartan sett even when pleating to the stripe, since the sett determines the spacing of the stripes.\nThe number of pleats used in making kilts depends upon how much material is to be used in constructing the garment and upon the size of the sett.\nThe pleats across the fell are tapered slightly since the wearer's waist is usually narrower than the hips and the pleats are usually stitched down either by machine or by hand.\nIn Highland dancing, it is easy to see the effect of the stitching on the action of a kilt. The kilt hugs the dancer's body from the waist down to the hipline and, from there, in response to the dancer's movements, it breaks sharply out. The way the kilt moves in response to the dance steps is an important part of the dance. If the pleats were not stitched down in this portion of the kilt, the action, or movement, would be quite different. Kilts made for Highland dancing are typically pleated to the sett, as opposed to the stripe. \nAccessories.\nThe Scottish kilt is usually worn with kilt hose (woollen socks), turned down at the knee, often with garters and flashes, and a (Gaelic for \"purse\": a type of pouch), which hangs around the waist from a chain or leather strap. This may be plain or embossed leather, or decorated with sealskin, fur, or polished metal plating.\nOther common accessories, depending on the formality of the context, include:\nStyles of kilt wear.\nToday most Scottish people regard kilts as formal dress or national dress. Although there are still a few people who wear a kilt daily, it is generally owned or hired to be worn at weddings or other formal occasions and may be worn by anyone regardless of nationality or descent. For semi-formal wear, kilts are usually worn with a Prince Charlie coatee (worn with a black bow tie) or an Argyll jacket (worn with a black bow tie or a regular necktie). Full formal is white-tie and calls for a more formal coat, such as the Sherrifmuir doublet or regulation doublet. Irish formal dress is distinguished from Highland dress by the Brian Boru jacket, a modified Prince Charlie with a shawl collar, chain closure and round buttons. In all these cases, the coats are worn with an accompanying waistcoat (vest).\nKilts are also used for parades by groups such as the Boys' Brigade and Scouts, and in many places kilts are seen in force at Highland games and pipe band championships as well as being worn at Scottish country dances and ceilidhs.\nCertain regiments and other units of the British Army and armies of other Commonwealth nations (including Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and South Africa) with a Scottish heritage still continue to wear kilts as part of dress or duty uniform, though they have not been used in combat since 1940 Uniforms in which kilts are worn include ceremonial dress, service dress, and barracks dress. Kilts are considered appropriate for ceremonial and less formal parades, office duties, walking out, mess dinners, classroom instruction, and band practice. Ceremonial kilts have also been developed for the US Marine Corps, and the pipe and drum bands of the US Military Academy, US Naval Academy, and Norwich University (the military college of Vermont).\nIt is becoming somewhat less rare to see them in the workplace. Casual use of kilts dressed down with lace-up boots or moccasins, and with T-shirts or golf shirts, is becoming increasingly familiar at Highland games. The kilt is associated with a sense of Scottish national pride and will often be seen being worn, along with a football top, when members of the Tartan Army are watching a football or rugby match. The small sgian-dubh knife is sometimes replaced by a wooden or plastic alternative or omitted altogether for security concerns; for example, it typically is not allowed to be worn or carried onto a commercial aircraft.\nIreland.\nThough the origins of the Irish kilt continue to be a subject of debate, current evidence suggests that kilts originated in the Scottish Highlands and Isles and were worn by Irish nationalists from at least 1850s onwards and then cemented from the early 1900s as a symbol of Gaelic identity.\nA garment that has often been mistaken for kilts in early depictions is the Irish ('saffron shirt'), a long tunic traditionally made from yellow cloth, but also found in other solid colours (e.g. black, green, red, or brown), or striped. Solid-coloured kilts were first adopted for use by Irish nationalists and thereafter by Irish regiments serving in the British Army, but they could often be seen in late 19th and early 20th century photos in Ireland especially at political and musical gatherings, as the kilt was re-adopted as a symbol of Gaelic nationalism in Ireland during this period. Tartan was rarer in Irish kilts, as it was more expensive to manufacture. For the most part it was usually only used for sashes, trews and shawls. Wealthy Irish such as the Gaelic chieftains and high-ranking soldiers could afford tartan kilts.\nWithin the world of Irish dancing, boys' kilts have been largely abandoned, especially since the worldwide popularity of Riverdance and the revival and interest in Irish dancing generally.\nThe Irish still wear kilts but they are largely restricted to formal events and weddings. Irish marching bands often dress in kilts as well.\nOther Celtic nations.\nAlthough not a traditional component of national dress outside Scotland or Ireland, kilts have become recently popular in the other Celtic nations as a sign of Celtic identity. Kilts and tartans can therefore also be seen in Wales, Cornwall, the Isle of Man, Brittany and Galicia; Northumbrian kilts in border tartan have also been adopted.\nThere are currently sixteen Breton tartans officially recorded in the Scottish tartan registries. The Breton tartans are: Brittany National (Breton National), Brittany Walking, Lead it Of, and a further nine county tartans (Kerne, Leon, Tregor, Gwened, Dol, St. Malo, Rennes, Nantes, St. Brieuc). Others have been recently created for smaller areas in Brittany (Ushent, Bro Vigoudenn and Menez Du \"Black Mountain\").\nThere are three Galician tartans recorded in the Scottish registries: Galicia, \"Gallaecia \u2013 Galician National\", and Bombeiros Voluntarios De Galicia. There is historical evidence of the use of tartan and kilt in Galicia up to the 18th century.\nKilts are also traditionally worn by some people in Austria, especially in Carinthia and Upper Austria, due to their Celtic heritage.\nContemporary designs.\nKilts and other male skirts in general were relaunched as a trend during the 1980s. Stephen Sprouse introduced a black denim mini-skirt over black denim jeans in 1983. Then in 1984, Jean Paul Gaultier made waves in the fashion industry when he reintroduced mini skirts and kilts for men.\nStarting in the late 1990s, contemporary kilts (also known as modern kilts, fashion kilts, and, especially in the United States, utility kilts) have appeared in the clothing marketplace in Scotland, the US, and Canada in a range of fabrics, including leather, denim, corduroy, and cotton. They may be designed for formal or casual dress, for use in sports or outdoor recreation, or as white or blue collar workwear. Some are closely modelled on traditional Scottish kilts, but others are similar only in being knee-length skirt-like garments for men. They may have box pleats, symmetrical knife pleats and be fastened by snaps, studs or velcro instead of buckles. Many are designed to be worn without a sporran, and may have pockets or tool belts attached.\nIn Canada, kilts are widely common as part of female dress at schools with a uniform policy. As well, due to the rich Scottish heritage of the country, they may frequently be seen at weddings and formal events. In Nova Scotia, they may even be worn as common daily attire.\nIn 2008, a USPS letter carrier, Dean Peterson, made a formal proposal that the kilt be approved as an acceptable postal uniform\u2014for reasons of comfort. The proposal was defeated at the convention of the 220,000-member National Association of Letter Carriers in 2008 by a large margin.\n5.11 Tactical produced a \"tactical duty kilt\" as an April Fools' joke but has continued producing it. The contemporary hybrid kilts are made up of tartan-woven fabric material.\nFemale athletes, especially lacrosse and field hockey players, often wear lacrosse kilts, a simple form of contemporary kilt. They will typically wear compression shorts or spandex underneath. Such kilts are popular among many levels of lacrosse, from youth leagues to college leagues, although some teams are replacing the kilt with the more streamlined athletic skirt.\nMen's kilts are often seen in popular contemporary media. For example, in the Syfy series \"Tin Man\", side characters are shown wearing kilts as peasant working clothes. Trends in everyday fashion, especially in the Gothic subculture, have led to a popularisation of the kilt as an alternative to more conventional menswear. Some of these are made of PVC or cotton-polyester blends.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17215", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17215", "title": "KQML", "text": ""}
{"id": "17216", "revid": "23939382", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17216", "title": "Knowledge Query and Manipulation Language", "text": "Computer language and protocol\nThe Knowledge Query and Manipulation Language, or KQML, is a language\nand protocol for communication among software agents and knowledge-based systems. It was\ndeveloped in the early 1990s as part of the DARPA knowledge Sharing Effort, which was aimed at developing techniques for building large-scale knowledge bases which are \nshare-able and re-usable. While originally conceived of as an interface to knowledge based systems, it was soon repurposed as an Agent communication language.\nWork on KQML was led by Tim Finin of the University of Maryland, Baltimore County and Jay Weber of EITech and involved contributions from many researchers.\nThe KQML message format and protocol can be used to interact with an intelligent system, either by an application program, or by another intelligent system. KQML's \"performatives\" are operations that agents perform on each other's knowledge and goal stores. Higher-level interactions such as contract nets and negotiation are built using these. KQML's \"communication facilitators\" coordinate the interactions of other agents to support knowledge sharing. \nExperimental prototype systems support concurrent engineering, intelligent design, intelligent planning, and scheduling.\nKQML is superseded by FIPA-ACL.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17217", "revid": "49664845", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17217", "title": "KR", "text": "KR is the ISO 3166-1 alpha-2 and WMO country code for South Korea.\nKR or Kr may also refer to:\nOther.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "17218", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17218", "title": "Kohl Rabi", "text": ""}
{"id": "17220", "revid": "34792401", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17220", "title": "Sara Jane Olson", "text": "American bank robber (born 1947)\nSara Jane Olson (born Kathleen Ann Soliah, January 16, 1947) is an American far-left activist who was a member of the Symbionese Liberation Army (SLA) in 1975. The group disbanded and she was a fugitive for decades before being arrested. In 2001, she pleaded guilty to attempted murder related to a failed bombing plot. In 2003 she pleaded guilty to second-degree murder related to the death of a customer during a botched bank robbery the SLA committed in California. Known then as Soliah, she was also accused of helping a group hide Patty Hearst, a kidnapped newspaper heiress, in 1974. After being federally indicted in 1976, Soliah was a wanted fugitive for several decades. She lived for periods in Zimbabwe and the U.S. states of Washington and Minnesota.\nWhile in Minnesota, she legally changed her name to Sara Jane Olson, married, and had a family. Arrested in 1999, she pleaded guilty in 2001 to two counts of possessing explosives with intent to murder, and in 2003 to second-degree murder, both stemming from her SLA activities in the 1970s. She was sentenced to 14 years in prison. She was mistakenly released for five days in March 2008 due to an error made in calculating her parole and was rearrested. She was released on parole on March 17, 2009.\nOn November 4, 2020, Olson was arrested along with several others for blocking Interstate 94 in Minneapolis during a protest.\nEarly life and education.\nKathleen Soliah was born on January 16, 1947, in Fargo, North Dakota, while her family was living in Barnesville, Minnesota. When she was eight, her conservative Lutheran family relocated to Southern California. Soliah attended the University of California, Santa Barbara, where she initially majored in English. While in college, she participated in theater and was cast in a production of \"J.B.\"\nSymbionese Liberation Army.\nAfter graduating with a bachelor of arts degree in theater, Soliah moved to Berkeley, California, with her boyfriend, James Kilgore.\nShe met Angela Atwood at an acting audition where they both won lead roles. They became inseparable during the play's run. Atwood tried to sponsor Soliah as a member of the Symbionese Liberation Army (SLA), a leftist group she had joined. Soliah, Kilgore, and Soliah's brother Steve and sister Josephine followed the SLA closely without joining.\nAtwood and five other core members of the SLA, including leader Donald DeFreeze, were killed in May 1974 during a standoff and shootout with police at a house near Watts, Los Angeles. They were being pursued for armed robbery of banks, the November 1973 murder of Oakland school superintendent Marcus Foster, and the 1974 kidnapping of heiress Patty Hearst.\nThe Soliahs organized memorial rallies for the SLA victims, including one in Berkeley's Willard Park (called Ho Chi Minh park by activists), where Soliah spoke in support of Atwood and was covertly filmed by the FBI.\nShe said that SLA members had been: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;viciously attacked and murdered by 500 pigs in L.A. while the whole nation watched. Well, I believe that Gelina [Atwood] and her comrades fought until the last minutes, and though I would like to have her with me here right now, I know that she lived happy and she died happy. And in that sense, I'm so very proud of her. SLA soldiers \u2013 I know it is not necessary to say; but keep on fighting. I'm with you and we are with you!\nSoliah asserted that Atwood \"was a truly revolutionary woman ... among the first white women to fight so righteously for their beliefs and to die for what they believed in\".\nFounding SLA member and fugitive Emily Harris visited Soliah, who was working at a bookstore. Soliah later recalled, \"I was glad she was alive. I expected them to be killed at any time.\" She felt sorry for the group and agreed to help the remaining members hide from the police and FBI. She assisted them by procuring supplies for their San Francisco hideout, and birth certificates of dead infants that could be reused for false identification.\nCrocker National Bank robbery and Myrna Opsahl murder.\nOn April 21, 1975, SLA members robbed the Crocker National Bank in Carmichael, California. In the process they killed Myrna Opsahl, a mother of four depositing money for her church.\nPatty Hearst, who had acted as getaway driver during the crime, later provided the information that led police to implicate the SLA in the robbery and murder. She identified Soliah as one of the robbers. According to Hearst, Soliah kicked a pregnant teller in the abdomen, leading to her suffering a miscarriage.\nPolice later searched Soliah's room at the SLA safehouse on Precita Avenue in San Francisco. They found several rounds of 9\u00a0mm ammunition on the floor and in a 9\u00a0mm Browning Hi-Power semi-automatic pistol in Soliah's dresser drawer. Manufacturing marks appeared to match similar cartridges found in Opsahl's body during the autopsy. In 2002, new forensics technology allowed police to link these shells definitively to those found at Crocker Bank; they charged former members of SLA, including Soliah, with the crime. Prosecutor Michael Latin said that Soliah was tied to the crime through fingerprints, a palm print, and handwriting evidence. The palm print was found on a garage door where the SLA kept a getaway car.\nLos Angeles Police Department bombs.\nOn August 21, 1975, a bomb that came close to detonating was discovered where a Los Angeles Police Department patrol car had been parked earlier in front of an International House of Pancakes restaurant. After the bomb was discovered, all Los Angeles police were ordered to search under their cars and another bomb was found in front of a police station about a mile away. Soliah was accused of planting the bombs in an attempt to avenge the SLA members who had died in 1974 in the shootout with LA police.\nThe pipe bombs were rigged to detonate as the patrol cars drove away. One police officer present that day described the first bomb as one of \"the most dangerous pipe bombs he had ever seen\" and said: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This device was designed to go off when that car was moved, and the only way you move a car is to get in and drive it. This bomb wasn't directed against property. It wasn't directed against the car. You could have thrown a device under the car and lit a fuse and then ran. It was directed at whoever got in the car and moved it, however, it would have also taken out anybody in the vicinity.\nSoliah and five other SLA members were indicted in 1976 for setting the police bombs. She vanished before the trial could start. When Soliah was brought to trial at the turn of the century, prosecutors did not believe the evidence against her was a \"slam dunk\" but did believe it was enough to convince a jury of her guilt. Two witnesses who testified in the 1976 grand jury indictment had died by the time Soliah (now known as Sara Jane Olson) was tried. At the grand jury, a plumber who had sold materials used in the bomb had picked Soliah out of a lineup as one of the buyers. A bomb expert had said the explosive could have been built in Soliah's apartment. Police could not identify any fingerprints on the devices other than those of the officers who had disarmed them. But Soliah's fingerprint, handwriting, and signature were identified on a letter sent to order a fuse that could only be used for bomb-making. Components matching those used in the police car bombs were found in a locked closet at the Precita Avenue house where Soliah lived with the other remaining members of the SLA.\nUnderground life, capture, and prosecution.\nIn February 1976, a grand jury indicted Soliah in the bombing case. Soliah went underground and became a fugitive for 23 years.\nShe moved to Minnesota, having assumed the alias Sara Jane Olson. Olson is a common surname in the state because of the large Scandinavian-American population. In 1980, she married physician Gerald Frederick \"Fred\" Peterson, with whom she had three daughters.\nOlson and Peterson also lived in Zimbabwe, where Peterson worked for a British medical missionary group. After their return, they settled in Saint Paul, Minnesota, where Olson picked up her acting career. She was active in Saint Paul on community issues. Her husband described the family as interested in progressive social causes.\nOn March 3, 1999, and again on May 15, 1999, Soliah was profiled on the \"America's Most Wanted\" television program. After a tip generated by the show, she was arrested on June 16, 1999. Soliah was charged in the police bomb case with conspiracy to commit murder, possession of explosives, explosion, and attempt to ignite an explosive with intent to murder.\nShortly after her arrest, Soliah legally changed her name to Sara Jane Olson. She also published a cookbook, \"Serving Time: America's Most Wanted Recipes\".\nOn October 31, 2001, she accepted a plea bargain and pleaded guilty to two counts of possessing explosives with intent to murder. As part of a plea bargain, the other charges were dropped.\nPlea controversy.\nImmediately after entering the plea, Olson told reporters that she was innocent. She said that she had taken a plea bargain because, due to the political climate after the September 11 attacks, she believed that an accused bomber could not receive a fair jury trial:\nIt became clear to me that the incident would have a remarkable effect on the outcome of this trial ... the effect was probably going to be negative. That's really what governed this decision, not the truth or honesty, but what was probably in my best interests and the interests of my family.\nAngered by Olson's announcement that she had lied in court, Superior Court Judge Larry Fidler ordered another hearing on November 6. There he asked her several times if she was guilty of the charges. Olson replied, \"I want to make it clear, Your Honor, that I did not make that bomb. I did not possess that bomb. I did not plant that bomb. But under the concept of aiding and abetting, I plead guilty.\"\nOn November 13, Olson filed a motion requesting to withdraw her guilty plea, acknowledging that she understood the judge when he read the charges against her. Rather, she said: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I realize I cannot plead guilty when I know I am not. ... Cowardice prevented me from doing what I knew I should: Throw caution aside and move forward to trial. ... I am not second-guessing my decision as much as I have found the courage to take what I know is the honest course. Please, Judge Fidler, grant my request to go to trial.\nSentencing in explosives charges.\nOn December 3, 2001, Judge Fidler offered to let Olson testify under oath about her role in the case. She refused. He said, \"I took those pleas twice ... were you lying to me then or are you lying to me now?\" and denied her request to withdraw her plea.\nObservers expected her to serve three to five years, but on January 18, 2002, she was sentenced to two consecutive 10-years-to-life terms. At Soliah's 2002 sentencing hearing on the bombing, police officer John Hall, who had been in the car parked over the bomb, talked about a little girl who stood feet away with her family:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFidler said that under California law, the Board of Prison Terms could later reduce the sentence. Olson's lawyers asserted that due to discrepancies between 1970s laws and current California laws, Olson would most likely serve five years, which could be reduced to two years for good behavior. The Board of Prison Terms did later change the sentence.\nAt Olson's sentencing hearing, her teenage daughter Leila, her pastor, and her husband spoke in her defense. Her mother testified on the stand that Olson had never been part of the SLA. She criticized prosecutors and police, who she asserted had harassed the family.\nSentencing in Opsahl murder.\nOn January 16, 2002, first-degree murder charges for the killing of Myrna Opsahl were filed against Olson and four other SLA members: Emily Harris, Bill Harris, Michael Bortin (who had married Olson's sister Josephine), and James Kilgore, who remained a fugitive. Judge Fidler arraigned Olson on the murder charges immediately following her sentencing hearing on January 18 for the explosives case. Olson pleaded not guilty to that charge at the time.\nOn November 7, 2002, along with the other three defendants, Olson pleaded guilty to a reduced charge of second-degree murder. On February 14, 2003, she was sentenced to the maximum term allowed under her plea bargain, six years, to be served concurrently with the 14-year sentence she was already serving.\nIncarceration and release.\nThe state Board of Prison Terms had scrapped Olson's original sentence in October 2002 in exchange for a longer 14-year sentence, saying Olson's crimes had the potential for great violence and targeted multiple victims. She appealed, and in July 2004, a judge said there was \"no analysis\" of how the state Board of Prison Terms had decided 14 years was appropriate and threw the sentence out. Her sentence was converted to five years and four months.\nThe state appealed and an appeals court panel restored her full 14-year sentence as of April 12, 2007. It ruled that a lower court did not follow procedure when it allowed Olson to appeal.\nOlson served her time at the Central California Women's Facility in Chowchilla. Her custody status was \"Close A\", which is reserved for inmates requiring the most supervision. This status limited her privileges and required that she be counted seven times a day. It also prevented her from seeking relocation to a facility closer to her home. David Nickerson, Olson's attorney, said that her status reflected the Department of Corrections' view that she was a potential flight risk.\nOlson's husband and three daughters continued to support her during her imprisonment; they took turns visiting her frequently in Chowchilla.\nIn a 2007 interview with \"Marie Claire\" magazine (published by Hearst Corporation), Olson's 23-year-old daughter Emily Peterson dismissed her mother's radical past with the SLA. She said of her mother, \"She lived in Berkeley. It was kind of normal... I always tell people she wasn't a terrorist. She was an urban guerrilla.\" Olson never publicly expressed remorse or regret for her actions.\nRelease from prison and rearrest.\nOlson was released on parole from the Central California Women's Facility in Chowchilla on March 17, 2008. For five days, she stayed at her mother's home in Palmdale and spent some time hiking with her husband.\nOn March 21, 2008, she was rearrested when it was decided that she had been mistakenly released a year early from prison due to a miscalculation by the parole board. Her attorney claimed that the action was politically motivated. Olson was taken back into custody by the California Department of Corrections and placed in the California Institution for Women in Corona for another year.\nRelease and parole.\nAfter serving seven years in prison, about half her sentence, Olson was released on March 17, 2009, to serve her parole in Minnesota. Police unions in both Minnesota and California protested the arrangement, saying that they believed her parole should be served in California, where her crimes were committed.\nIn a letter to California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger, Minnesota Governor Tim Pawlenty also protested Olson being allowed to return to Minnesota.\nInterstate 94 protest.\nYears after her return to Minnesota, on November 4, 2020, Olson participated in a protest in Minneapolis called by the National Alliance Against Racist and Political Repression after the U.S. presidential election. Olson and several others marched onto Interstate 94, where they were met with a response from the Minneapolis Police Department and Minnesota State Patrol. Several hundred protesters were arrested. \nOlson was originally charged with creating a public nuisance, but the charge was lowered to a petty misdemeanor. She rejected a plea deal offered to most of the demonstrators. On December 3, 2021, after a trial by a judge, she was convicted and fined $378. Olson appealed the conviction on the grounds that the state lacked evidence to find her guilty of using a controlled-access highway as a pedestrian. On November 21, 2022, the judge in the appeal case said that the circumstances of the events did not support Olson's innocence and denied the appeal.\nPersonal life.\nSoliah grew up in Palmdale, California, the daughter of Norwegian-American parents Elsie Soliah (n\u00e9e Engstr\u00f8m) and Martin Soliah, an English teacher and coach at Palmdale High School.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17221", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17221", "title": "Katherine Hepburn", "text": ""}
{"id": "17222", "revid": "855500226", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17222", "title": "Kilts", "text": ""}
{"id": "17223", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17223", "title": "K and R", "text": ""}
{"id": "17224", "revid": "1283808198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17224", "title": "Kent Recursive Calculator", "text": "KRC (Kent Recursive Calculator) is a lazy functional language developed by David Turner from November 1979 to October 1981 based on SASL, with pattern matching, guards and ZF expressions (now more usually called list comprehensions). Two implementations of KRC were written: David Turner's original one in BCPL running on EMAS, and Simon J. Croft's later one in C under Unix, and KRC was the main language used for teaching functional programming at the University of Kent at Canterbury (UK) from 1982 to 1985.\nThe direct successor to KRC is Miranda, which includes a polymorphic type discipline based on that of Milner's ML.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17225", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17225", "title": "K and R C", "text": ""}
{"id": "17226", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17226", "title": "Kremvax", "text": "Hoax Usenet site at the Kremlin\nKremvax was originally a fictitious Usenet site at the Kremlin, named like the then large number of Usenet VAXen with names of the form \"foo\"vax. Kremvax was announced on April 1, 1984, in a posting ostensibly originated there by Soviet leader Konstantin Chernenko. The posting was actually forged by Piet Beertema of CWI (in Amsterdam) as an April Fool's prank\u2014\"because the notion that Usenet might ever penetrate the Iron Curtain seemed so totally absurd at the time\".\nOther fictitious sites mentioned in the hoax were moskvax and kgbvax. The actual origin of the email was mcvax, one of the first European sites on the internet.\nSix years later, Usenet was joined by demos.su, the first genuine site based in Moscow. Some readers needed convincing that the postings from it were not just another prank. Vadim Antonov, the senior programmer at Demos and the major poster from there until mid-1991, was quite aware of all this, and referred to it frequently in his own postings. Antonov later arranged to have the domain's gateway site named kremvax.demos.su, turning fiction into truth and, according to one account, \"demonstrating that the hackish sense of humor transcends cultural barriers\".\nDuring the mid-1980s, Usenet users were not aware of the official X.25 computer connections between USSR and other countries. The X.25 connections had existed since 1980, primarily via VNIIPAS and Academset to Soviet bloc countries and Austrian hosts at IIASA and IAEA. In 1983, the \"San Francisco Moscow Teleport (SFMT)\" venture was created to maintain USSR-American digital connections via VNIIPAS with its own Usenet analogues later known as \"Sovamnet\" (\"Soviet-American net\").\nIn 1992, the company Sun Microsystems, a commercial rival to VAX, gifted an own-made server to pioneer Soviet commercial network RELCOM. The company demanded that the server was named \"KremlSun\", an allusion to then-legendary \"Kremvax\", and made a root DNS server for the .su domain. The conditions were met, and the server became one of the initial devices when forming the Moscow Internet Exchange, since then the largest Russian Internet exchange point.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17227", "revid": "45789152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17227", "title": "KRL (programming language)", "text": "KRL is a knowledge representation language, developed by Daniel G. Bobrow and Terry Winograd while at Xerox PARC and Stanford University, respectively. It is a frame-based language. \nKRL was an attempt to produce a language which was nice to read and write for the engineers who had to write programs in it, processed like human memory, so you could have realistic AI programs, had an underlying semantics which was firmly grounded like logic languages, all in one, all in one language. And I think it - again, in hindsight - it just bogged down under the weight of trying to satisfy all those things at once. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17230", "revid": "10951369", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17230", "title": "KSH", "text": "KSH or ksh may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "17231", "revid": "327592", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17231", "title": "KSL", "text": "KSL may refer to:\nOther.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "17232", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17232", "title": "Knowledge Systems Laboratory", "text": "Knowledge Systems Laboratory (KSL) was an artificial intelligence research laboratory within the Department of Computer Science at Stanford University until 2007, located in the Gates Computer Science Building, Stanford. Work focused on knowledge representation for shareable engineering knowledge bases and systems, computational environments for modelling physical devices, architectures for adaptive intelligent systems, and expert systems for science and engineering.\nKSL had projects with Stanford Medical Informatics (SMI), the Stanford Artificial Intelligence Lab (SAIL), the Stanford Formal Reasoning Group (SFRG), the Stanford Logic Group, and the Stanford Center for Design Research (CDR).\nPast members.\nThis is a partial list (in alphabetical order) of past members:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17233", "revid": "17482101", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17233", "title": "KSR", "text": "KSR may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "17234", "revid": "33839581", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17234", "title": "KTH", "text": "KTH may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "17237", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17237", "title": "Kungliga Tekniska Hogskolan", "text": ""}
{"id": "17239", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17239", "title": "Kvatro Telecom", "text": ""}
{"id": "17240", "revid": "24630446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17240", "title": "John-F.-Kennedy-Platz", "text": "Square in Berlin-Sch\u00f6neberg\nJohn-F.-Kennedy-Platz (John F. Kennedy Square), formerly Rudolph-Wilde-Platz, in the Sch\u00f6neberg section of Berlin is the square in front of the former city hall of West Berlin (Rathaus Sch\u00f6neberg). It was here, on June 26, 1963, that US President John F. Kennedy gave his famous speech to the Berliners, in which he stated: \"Ich bin ein Berliner\". The square was renamed John-F.-Kennedy-Platz on 25 November 1963, three days after Kennedy's assassination, and a large plaque dedicated to Kennedy, mounted on wall next to the entrance to the city hall, was unveiled one year after Kennedy's speech.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nAndreas Daum, \"Kennedy in Berlin\". Cambridge University Press, New York, 2008, "}
{"id": "17241", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17241", "title": "Kyoto Common Lisp", "text": "Kyoto Common Lisp (KCL) is an implementation of Common Lisp by Taichi Yuasa and Masami Hagiya, written in C to run under Unix-like operating systems. KCL is compiled to ANSI C. It conforms to Common Lisp as described in the 1984 first edition of Guy Steele's book \"Common Lisp the Language\" and is available under a licence agreement.\nKCL was implemented from scratch, outside of the standard committee, solely on the basis of the specification. It was one of the first Common Lisp implementations ever, and exposed a number of holes and mistakes in the specification that had gone unnoticed.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17243", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17243", "title": "KaZaA", "text": ""}
{"id": "17245", "revid": "1189543", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17245", "title": "Karl Gustav Ahlefeldt", "text": "Danish actor (1910\u20131985)\nKarl Gustav Henry Folmer Ahlefeldt (13 March 1910\u00a0\u2013 25 March 1985) was a Danish film actor. He appeared in the Carl Theodor Dreyer masterpiece \"Gertrud\" (1965).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17246", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17246", "title": "Kateretes", "text": "Genus of beetles\nKateretes is a genus of short-winged flower beetles in the family Kateretidae. There are about six described species in \"Kateretes\".\nSpecies.\nThese six species belong to the genus \"Kateretes\":\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17247", "revid": "21640150", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17247", "title": "Keeling Islands", "text": ""}
{"id": "17248", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17248", "title": "Keflav\u00edk", "text": "Keflav\u00edk (pronounced , meaning \"Driftwood Bay\") is a town in the Reykjanes region in southwest Iceland. It is included in the municipality of Reykjanesb\u00e6r whose population as of 2016 is 15,129.\nIn 1995, Keflav\u00edk merged with nearby Njar\u00f0v\u00edk and Hafnir to form the municipality of Reykjanesb\u00e6r. Keflav\u00edk International Airport, the country's largest airport (serving nearby Reykjav\u00edk) is adjacent to the town.\nHistory.\nKeflav\u00edk was founded by Scottish entrepreneurs and engineers in the 16th century, and developed on account of its fishing and fish processing industry. \nIn the 1940s an airport was built next to the town by the United States military, which served as an important refueling stop for trans-Atlantic flights, especially during World War II.\nDuring the Cold War, Naval Air Station Keflavik played an important role in monitoring marine and submarine traffic from the Norwegian and Greenland seas into the Atlantic Ocean. Forces from the United States Air Force were added to provide radar monitoring, fighter intercept, in-flight refueling, and aerial/marine rescue. With increasing ranges for aircraft and the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the base became less important, and the last U.S. personnel were withdrawn in 2006.\nWithin Iceland, Keflav\u00edk was renowned as a rich source of musicians during the 1960s and 1970s, and came to be known as \"b\u00edtlab\u00e6rinn\" or \"The Beatle Town\".\nGeography and climate.\nThe local geography is dominated by fields of basalt rubble, interspersed with a few hardy plants and mosses.\nThe climate of Keflav\u00edk is subpolar oceanic (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfc\") with cool summers and moderately cold winters. There is not a truly dry month but June is the month that gets the least amount of precipitation. Winter high temperatures average above the freezing mark, and summer high temperatures are cool to mild. The warmest month on average is July with an average high of and the coldest is January with an average high of .\nSport.\nThe town is represented in sports by \u00cd\u00fer\u00f3tta- og ungmennaf\u00e9lag Keflav\u00edkur.\nIn popular culture.\nThe former NATO military base Naval Air Station Keflavik is used as a setting for an important story line in Tom Clancy's novel \"Red Storm Rising\".\nNAS Keflavik is also a central setting in Icelandic writer Arnaldur Indri\u00f0ason's 1999 mystery \"Nap\u00f3leonsskj\u00f6lin\", translated into English in 2011 as \"Operation Napoleon\".\nThe compilation album for local beat band Thor's Hammer is titled \"From Keflav\u00edk, With Love\", and was released in 2001 on Big Beat Records.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "17249", "revid": "32990417", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17249", "title": "James &quot;Kibo&quot; Parry", "text": "American Usenetter\nJames Parry (born July 13, 1967), commonly known by his nickname and username Kibo , is a Usenetter known for his sense of humor, various surrealist net pranks, an absurdly long signature, and a machine-assisted knack for \"kibozing\": joining any thread in which \"kibo\" was mentioned. His exploits have earned him a multitude of enthusiasts, who celebrate him as the head deity of the parody religion \"Kibology\", centered on the humor newsgroup alt.religion.kibology.\nBackground.\nJames Parry grew up and lived in Scotia, New York. He showed early computing skills, such as being able to open up and reprogram ROM video game cartridges such as those for the Atari 2600, but was more interested in graphics and artistic pursuits. In this vein, he was initially a computer engineering major at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI) in Troy, New York, but then moved to Boston, Massachusetts in 1990 and attended Emerson College, where he studied videography and graphic design. At that time, he also worked as a typeface designer and for the world.std.com internet service provider. He developed several fonts in use today. One of his better-known works is the typography for Philip K. Dick's novel \"Gather Yourselves Together\".\nGrowing fame.\nIn the early 1990s, as public awareness grew of the Internet and Usenet, Parry received publicity, including a cover story in \"Wired\" magazine and mentions in \"Playboy\" and \"The Times\". He became known on Usenet for grepping all occurrences of the term \"Kibo\"\u2014whether intended to refer to Kibo himself or not\u2014and replying, often in a fanciful manner. A typical exchange:\n Mary Rose Campbell wrote:\n &gt;At CMU, we also have something called Gray Matter in the center of Skibo\n &gt;(our student union substitute). It's a bunch of shapes, walls, holes,\n &gt;and steps covered with the same dark gray carpet that's on the floor.\n &gt;It looks like a giant cat toy.\n Actually, it's a life-size model of S. Kibo himself, my great great\n grand-uncle. This was before he evolved past the 'giant metazoic\n amoeba' stage a few aeons ago. Now he's a trilobite.\n \u2013 K.\nThis practice of searching Usenet for mentions of one's own name became known as \"kibozing\". In 2006, Parry estimated that he had posted \"an average of 20 articles a week to alt.religion.kibology during the past 15 years, probably about 500 words of original content per article, that's... seven point eight mmmmillion [\"sic\"] words. Equivalent to about 100 books.\"\nHe is perhaps best known on Usenet for his famous (or infamous) \"Happynet Proclamation\" (1992), circulated to many newsgroups, some absurdly unrelated, which satirized the endless flamewars on the network, with Parry posing as a godlike being issuing an edict full of in-jokes and humor targets that claimed to unify all news into one glorious totality, \"happynet\". In the article, Kibo claimed that:\n ********* HAPPYNET: THE NET THAT'S HAPPIER THAN YOU! *********\n UNDER THE AUSPICES OF THE ALL-WISE LEADER KIBO,\n THE NEW NETWORK SHALL BE ORGANIZED THUSLY:\n Three hierarchies encompassing ALL HUMAN DISCOURSE.\n =&gt; nonbozo.*\n =&gt; bozo.*\n =&gt; megabozo.*\n Existing groups will be moved into the new organization scheme, resulting\n in nonbozo.news.announce.newusers, bozo.rec.pets, megabozo.talk.bizarre,\n nonbozo.comp.virus, bozo.alt.sex, megabozo.alt.fan.lemurs, bozo.postmodern,\n etc., as determined by scientific measurements of the bozosity of the\n groups, measured by Leader Kibo's Council On Scientific Bozosity and the\n faculty of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (Troy, NY), world leaders in\n bozosity assessment.\n It is estimated that the breakdown will be thus:\n 1.0000% nonbozo.*\n 90.0000% bozo.*\n 9.0000% megabozo.* (Computations courtesy of Bell Labs)\n Bozo.* will, of course, be subdivided logically: bozo.nerd.*, bozo.tv.*,\n bozo.inane.*, bozo.boring.*, bozo.sex.*, bozo.argue.*.\nKibology and alt.religion.kibology.\nKibology is a parody religion created by Parry, the central figure. Practitioners of Kibology are called 'Kibologists' or (sometimes more disdainfully) 'Kibozos'. Parry began Kibology about 1989. In its early Usenet days, it was centered in the newsgroups talk.bizarre and the Church of the SubGenius group \"alt.slack\", until the creation of its own Usenet group, alt.religion.kibology in late 1991. The religious satire of Kibology shares tenets of other parody religions, including similar concepts to the Flying Spaghetti Monster and Invisible Pink Unicorn. The alt.religion.kibology newsgroup remained active through the 1990s, with gradually less emphasis on the joke religion and more satirizing popular culture and internet culture as a sort of online comedy writer's collaboration room. The group collectively invented and developed the sport of 'trolling,' with Kibo writing rules and a points system for trolling other Usenet newsgroups. Other popular regular contributors kept the group active even during \"Kibo\"'s periodic absences from Usenet. In 2003, the group spawned a band, Interr\u00f6bang Cartel, which by 2011 had written and recorded more than 80 songs.\nHallmarks.\nThe term \"bozo\" and related jokes like the physics particle the \"bozon\" were Parry hallmarks. Revisions of the Manifesto were published in 1994 and 1998. HappyWeb was introduced in 1999.\nIn 1992, at age 25 (ten years younger than the constitutional minimum age for election), he launched a spoof campaign for President of the United States.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17250", "revid": "50477913", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17250", "title": "Kiritimati", "text": "Coral atoll in the northern Line Islands, Kiribati\nKiritimati (), also known as Christmas Island, is a Pacific Ocean atoll in the northern Line Islands. It is part of the Republic of Kiribati. The name is derived from the English word \"Christmas\" written in Gilbertese according to its phonology, in which the combination is pronounced /s/.\nKiritimati is one of the world's largest atolls in terms of land area, consisting of about land area and a network of lagoons;. The atoll is about in perimeter, while the lagoon shoreline extends for over . Kiritimati comprises over 70% of the total land area of Kiribati, a country encompassing 33 Pacific atolls and islands.\nIt lies north of the equator, south of Honolulu, and from San Francisco. Kiritimati is in the world's furthest forward time zone, UTC+14, and is therefore one of the first inhabited places on Earth to experience New Year's Day (see also Caroline Atoll, Kiribati). Although it lies east of the 180th meridian, the Republic of Kiribati realigned the International Date Line in 1995, placing Kiritimati to the west of the dateline.\nNuclear tests were conducted on and around Kiritimati by the United Kingdom in the late 1950s, and by the United States in 1962. During these tests, the island was not evacuated, exposing the i-Kiribati residents and the British, New Zealand, and Fijian servicemen to nuclear radiation.\nThe entire island is a wildlife sanctuary; access to five particularly sensitive areas is restricted.\nHistory.\nKiritimati was initially inhabited by Polynesian people. Radiometric dating from sites on the island place the period of human use between 1250 and 1450 AD. Permanent human settlement on Kiritimati likely didn't occur until 1882. Stratigraphic layers excavated in fire pits show alternating bands of charcoal indicating heavy use and local soil indicating a lack of use. As such, some researchers have suggested that Kiritimati was used intermittently (likely by people from Tabuaeran to the north) as a place to gather resources such as birds and turtles in a similar fashion to the ethnographically documented use of the five central atolls of the Caroline Islands.\nArchaeological sites on the island are concentrated along the east (windward) side of the island and known sites represent a series of habitation sites, marae, and supporting structures such as canoe storage sheds and navigational aids.\nThe atoll was then discovered by Europeans with the Spanish expedition of Hernando de Grijalva in 1537, that charted it as \"Acea\". This discovery was referred by a contemporary, the Portuguese Ant\u00f3nio Galv\u00e3o, governor of Ternate, in his book \"Tratado dos Descubrimientos\" of 1563. During his third voyage, Captain James Cook visited the island on Christmas Eve (24\u00a0December) 1777 and the island was put on a map in 1781 as \"\u00eele des Tortues\" (Turtles Island) by Tobias Conrad Lotter in Augsburg. Whaling vessels visited the island from at least 1822. and it was claimed by the United States under the Guano Islands Act of 1856, though little actual mining of guano took place.\nPermanent settlement started in 1882, mainly by workers in coconut plantations and fishermen. In 1902, the British Government granted a 99-year lease on the island to Levers Pacific Plantations. The company planted 72,863\u00a0coconut palms on the island and introduced silver-lipped pearl oysters into the lagoon. The settlement did not endure: Extreme drought killed 75% of the coconut palms, and the island was abandoned from 1905 to 1912.\nMany of the toponyms in the island date to Father Emmanuel Rougier, a French priest who leased the island from 1917 to 1939, and planted some 500,000\u00a0coconut trees there. He lived in his \"Paris\" house (now only small ruins) located at \"Benson Point\", across the Burgle Channel from \"Londres\" at \"Bridges Point\" (today London) where he established the port. He gave the name of \"Poland\" to a village where Stanis\u0142aw (Stanislaus) Pe\u0142czy\u0144ski, his Polish plantation manager then lived.\nJoe English, of Medford, Massachusetts, Rougier's plantation manager from 1915 to 1919, named \"Joe's Hill\" (some high) after himself. English and two teenagers were marooned on the island for a year and a half (1917\u20131919) as transport had stopped due to the Spanish flu breaking out in Tahiti and around the world. English was later rescued by British admiral John Jellicoe. English, thinking that the rescue ship was German and the war was still in effect, pulled his revolver on the admiral Jellicoe, causing a short standoff until some explanation defused the situation.\nKiritimati was occupied by the Allies in World War II with the U.S. in control of the island garrison. The atoll was important to hold, since Japanese occupation would allow interdiction of the Hawaii-to-Australia supply route. For the first few months there were next to no recreational facilities on the island, and the men amused themselves by shooting sharks in the lagoon. The island's first airstrip was constructed at this time to supply the Air Force weather station and communications center. The airstrip also provided rest and refuelling facilities for planes travelling between Hawaii and the South Pacific. The 1947 census listed only 47\u00a0inhabitants on the island. The U.S. Guano Islands Act claim was formally ceded by the Treaty of Tarawa between the U.S. and Kiribati. The treaty was signed in 1979 and ratified in 1983.\nSpain's sovereignty rights.\nDuring the dispute over the Caroline Islands between Germany and Spain in 1885 which was arbitrated by Pope Leo XIII, the sovereignty of Spain over the Caroline and Palau islands as part of the Spanish East Indies was analysed by a commission of cardinals and confirmed by an agreement signed on 17\u00a0December 1885. Its Article\u00a02 specifies the limits of Spanish sovereignty in South Micronesia, being formed by the Equator and 11\u00b0N\u00a0Latitude and by 133\u00b0 and 164\u00b0\u00a0Longitude. In 1899, Spain sold the Marianas, Carolines, and Palau to Germany after its defeat in 1898 in the Spanish\u2013American War. However Emilio Pastor Santos, a researcher of the Spanish National Research Council, claimed in 1948 that there was historical basis to argue that Kiritimati (\"Acea\" on the Spanish maps) and some other islands had never been considered part of the Carolines, supported by the charts and maps of the time. Despite having sought acknowledgement of the issue regarding interpretation of the treaty, no Spanish government has made any attempt to assert sovereignty over Kiritimati, and the case remains a historical curiosity.\nNuclear bomb tests.\nDuring the Cold War Kiritimati was used for nuclear weapons testing by the United Kingdom and the US. The United Kingdom conducted its first hydrogen bomb test series, Grapple 1\u20133, at Malden Island from 15\u00a0May to 19 June 1957 and used Kiritimati as the operation's main base. On 8 November 1957, the first H-bomb was detonated over the southeastern tip of Kiritimati in the Grapple X test. Subsequent tests in 1958 (Grapple Y and Z) also took place above or near Kiritimati.\nThe United Kingdom detonated some of nuclear payload near and directly above Kiritimati in 1957\u20131958, while the total yield of weapons tested by the United States in the vicinity of the island between 25\u00a0April and 11\u00a0July 1962 was . During the British Grapple X test, yield was stronger than expected, resulting in the blast demolishing buildings and infrastructure. Islanders were usually not evacuated during the nuclear weapons testing, and data on the environmental and public health impact of these tests remains contested. Servicemen believe that cancer and genetic damage were consequences of their occupational exposure and have sought apologies and compensation without success. A spokesperson for the UK's Ministry of Defence stated in 2018 that \"the National Radiological Protection Board has carried out three large studies of nuclear test veterans and found no valid evidence to link participation in these tests to ill health.\"\nThe United States also conducted 22\u00a0successful nuclear detonations over the island as part of Operation Dominic in 1962. Some toponyms (like \"Banana\" and \"Main Camp\") come from the nuclear testing period, during which at times over 4,000\u00a0servicemen were present. By 1969, military interest in Kiritimati had ended and the facilities were mostly dismantled. However, some communications, transport, and logistics facilities were converted for civilian use, which Kiritimati uses to serve as the administrative centre for the Line Islands.\nPresent status.\nThe island's population increased from about 2,000 in 1989 to about 5,000 in the early 2000s, and reached 7,369 at the 2020 Census. Kiritimati has three representatives in the Maneaba ni Maungatabu. There are five main villages on the island, four populated and one abandoned; Banana, Tabwakea and London, which are located along the main road on the northern part of the island, and Poland (near South West Point) and unpopulated Paris (near Benson Point), which are across the main lagoon to the south.\nLondon is the main village and hosts the port facility, and the ministry of the Line and Phoenix islands.\nPoland hosts a Catholic church, dedicated under the auspices of Saint Stanislaus.\nBanana is near Cassidy International Airport but may be relocated closer to London to prevent groundwater contamination.\nParis is an abandoned village and is no longer listed in census reports.\nEducation.\nThere is a primary school in Poland and two high schools on the road between Tabwakea and Banana: one Catholic, St. Francis High School, and one Protestant. The government high school, Melaengi Tabai Secondary School, is located on Tabuaeran (though the government of Kiribati wished to re-open its campus on Kiritimati instead). The University of Hawaii has a climatological research facility on Kiritimati. The Kiribati Institute of Technology (KIT), based on Tarawa, opened a campus on Kiritimati in June 2019.\nCommerce.\nMost of the atoll's food supplies have to be imported. Potable water can be in short supply, especially around November in La Ni\u00f1a years. A large and modern jetty, handling some cargo, was built by the Japanese at London. Marine fish provide a large portion of the island's nutrition, although overfishing has caused a drastic decrease in the populations of large, predatory fish over the last several years.\nExports of the atoll are mainly copra (dried coconut pulp); the state-owned coconut plantation covers about . In addition aquarium fish and seaweed are exported. A 1970s project to commercially breed \"Artemia salina\" brine shrimp in the salt ponds was abandoned in 1978. In recent years there have been attempts to explore the viability of live crayfish and chilled fish exports and salt production.\nTransport.\nCassidy International Airport (CXI) is located just north of Banana and North East Point. It has a paved runway with a length of and was for some time the only airport in Kiribati to serve the Americas, via an Air Pacific (now Fiji Airways) flight to Honolulu, Hawaii. Te Mauri Travel no longer offers weekly charter flights from Honolulu.\nAir Tungaru was serving Kiritimati in 1981 with nonstop Boeing 727-100 jet flights to Honolulu (HNL), Papeete, Tahiti (PPT) and Tarawa (TRW) with each service operating once a week with the service to Papeete being operated in association with Union de Transports Aeriens (UTA), a French airline. Aloha Airlines introduced its weekly nonstop jet service between Honolulu and the island in 1986 operated with a Boeing 737-200. Aloha was continuing to serve Kiritimati from 2000 to 2003 with 737 jet service to and from Honolulu nonstop. Air Pacific ran flights to Kiritimati until 2008, when they ceased service over concerns about the condition of the runway. Services resumed in 2010. A monthly air freight service is flown using a chartered Boeing 727 from Honolulu operated by Asia Pacific Airlines.\nAeon Field is an abandoned airport, constructed before the British nuclear tests. It is located on the southeastern peninsula.\nCommunications.\nThe islands' remote location in the Central Pacific has meant that communications with the world has always been challenging.\nAs of October 2023 all calls and data rely on satellite connection only with very slow internet connection. It now has 3G data towers in June 2025.\nIn July 2022 The Southern Cross NEXT 15,857\u00a0km submarine cable system, entered service, connecting Los Angeles and Sydney with a dedicated 377 kilometers (one fiber pair) branch to Tabwakea, Kiritimati. The cable landing station is located in Tabwakea, owned by Bwebwerikinet Limited. As of October 2023 the landing station was built, but still not commissioned. Apart from Australia and the US, the cable will also provide direct low latency connection to Fiji, New Zealand and Tokelau.\nTourism.\nThere is a small amount of tourism, mainly associated with anglers interested in lagoon fishing (for bonefish in particular) or offshore fishing. Week-long ecotourism packages during which some of the normally closed areas can be visited are also available.\nChristmas Island (Kiritimati) is recognized as a world-class destination for Fly fishing on its extensive, shallow hard-sand flats and clear lagoon waters. The island offers ideal conditions for species such as Bonefish and Giant trevally, attracting anglers seeking both moderate-sized and trophy fish.\nThe remote location and relatively low fishing pressure allow for an immersive flats-fishing experience. Improved accessibility through renewed tourism infrastructure has helped establish Kiritimati as one of the premier saltwater fly fishing destinations in the Pacific.\nIn recent years, surfers have discovered that there are good waves during the Northern Hemisphere's winter season and there are interests developing to service these recreational tourists. There is some tourism-related infrastructure, such as a small hotel, rental facilities, and food services.\nProspective launch sites.\nIn the early 1950s, Wernher von Braun proposed using this island as a launch site for crewed spacecraft, based on its proximity to the equator, and the generally empty ocean down-range (east).\nThere is a Japanese JAXA satellite tracking station. The abandoned Aeon Field had at one time been proposed for reuse by the Japanese for their now-canceled HOPE-X space shuttle project.\nKiritimati is also located fairly close to the Sea Launch satellite launching spot at 0\u00b0\u00a0N 154\u00b0\u00a0W, about 370\u00a0kilometres (200\u00a0nmi) to the east in international waters.\nGeography.\nKiritimati's roughly lagoon area opens to the sea in the northwest; \"Burgle Channel\" (the entrance to the lagoon) is divided into the northern \"Cook Island Passage\" and the southern \"South Passage\". The southeastern part of the lagoon area is partially desiccated. The lagoon area currently consists of a main lagoon at Burgle Channel. Southeast of this, the lagoon gradually transitions into a network of subsidiary lagoons, tidal flats, partially hypersaline brine ponds and salt pans which have a total combined area of about . Thus, the land and lagoon areas can only be given approximately, as no firm boundary exists between the main island body and the salt flats.\nKiritimati is a raised coral atoll with about land area surrounding a lagoon area of roughly the same size. Kiritimati has the largest land area in the world amongst atolls that contain a lagoon, and the third largest land area overall, after Lifou Island and Rennell Island. Kiritimati is often cited as being the world's largest atoll by land area, however, because Lifou Island and Rennell Island do not have lagoons and therefore end up being overlooked as atolls.\nIn addition to the main island, there are several smaller ones. \"Cook Island\" is part of the atoll proper but unconnected to the Kiritimati mainland. It is a sand/coral island of , divides Burgle Channel into the northern and the southern entrance, and has a large seabird colony. Islets (\"motu\"s) in the lagoon include \"Motu Tabu\" () with its \"Pisonia\" forest and the shrub-covered \"Motu Upua\" (also called Motu Upou or Motu Upoa, ) at the northern side, and \"Ngaontetaake\" () at the eastern side.\n\"Joe's Hill\" (originally \"La colline de Joe\") on the north coast of the south-eastern peninsula, southeast of Artemia Corners, is the highest point on the atoll, at about ASL. On the northwestern peninsula for example, the land rises only to some , which is still considerable for an atoll. Due to its isolation in the vast Pacific Ocean, \"Joe's Hill\" is the 33rd most topographically isolated summit on Earth.\nVaskess Bay is a large bay which extends along the southwest coast of Kiritimati Island.\nClimate.\nDespite its proximity to the Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ), Kiritimati is located in an equatorial dry zone and rainfall is rather low except during El Ni\u00f1o years; on average per year, in some years it can be as little as and much of the flats and ponds can dry up, as happened in late 1978. On the other hand, in some exceptionally wet years abundant downpours in March\u2013April may result in a total annual precipitation of over . Kiritimati is thus affected by regular, severe droughts. They are exacerbated by its geological structure; climatically \"dry\" Pacific islands are more typically located in the \"desert belt\" at about 30\u00b0N or S latitude. Kiritimati is a raised atoll, and although it does occasionally receive plenty of precipitation, little is retained given the porous carbonate rock, the thin soil, and the absence of dense vegetation cover on much of the island, while evaporation is constantly high. Consequently, Kiritimati is one of the rather few places close to the Equator which have an effectively arid climate.\nThe temperature is constantly between with more diurnal temperature variation than seasonal variation. Easterly trade winds predominate.\nDemography.\nAt the first census done in the Gilbert and Ellice Islands colony in 1931, there were only 38 inhabitants on the island, most of them workers of the Emmanuel Rougier Company. After WWII in 1947 there were 52 inhabitants. After the nuclear tests, in 1963, this had increased to 477, reducing to 367 by 1967 but increasing again to 674 in 1973, 1,265 in 1978, 1,737 in the 1985 census, 2,537 in 1990, 3,225 in 1995, 3,431 in 2000, 5,115 in 2005, 5,586 in 2010, 6,456 in 2015 and 7,369 in 2020. This was the fastest population growth in Kiribati.\nEcology.\nThe flora and the fauna consist of taxa adapted to drought. Terrestrial fauna is scant; there are no truly native land mammals and only one native land bird \u2013 Kiribati's endemic reed-warbler, the bokikokiko (\"Acrocephalus aequinoctialis\"). The 1957 attempt to introduce the endangered Rimitara lorikeet (\"Vini kuhlii\") has largely failed; a few birds seem to linger on, but the lack of abundant coconut palm forest, on which this tiny parrot depends, makes Kiritimati a suboptimal habitat for this species.\nFlora.\nThe natural vegetation on Kiritimati consists mostly of low shrubland and grassland. What little woodland exists is mainly open coconut palm (\"Cocos nucifera\") plantation. There are three small woods of catchbird trees (\"Pisonia grandis\"), at Southeast Point, Northwest Point, and on Motu Tabu. The latter was planted there in recent times. About 50 introduced plant species are found on Kiritimati; as most are plentiful around settlements, former military sites and roads, it seems that these only became established in the 20th century.\nBeach naupaka (\"Scaevola taccada\") is the most common shrub on Kiritimati; beach naupaka scrub dominates the vegetation on much of the island, either as pure stands or interspersed with tree heliotrope (\"Heliotropium foertherianum\") and bay cedar (\"Suriana maritima\"). The latter species is dominant on the drier parts of the lagoon flats where it grows up to tall. Tree heliotrope is most commonly found a short distance from the sea- or lagoon-shore. In some places near the seashore, a low vegetation dominated by Polynesian heliotrope (\"Heliotropium anomalum\"), yellow purslane (\"Portulaca lutea\") and common purslane (\"P. oleracea\") is found. In the south and on the sandier parts, \"Sida fallax\", also growing up to 2 m tall, is abundant. On the southeastern peninsula, \"S. fallax\" grows more stunted, and Polynesian heliotrope, yellow and common purslane as well as the spiderling \"Boerhavia repens\", the parasitic vine \"Cassytha filiformis\", and Pacific Island thintail (\"Lepturus repens\") supplement it. The last species dominates in the coastal grasslands. The wetter parts of the lagoon shore are often covered by abundant growth of shoreline purslane (\"Sesuvium portulacastrum\").\nPerhaps the most destructive of the recently introduced plants is sweetscent (\"Pluchea odorata\"), a camphorweed, which is considered an invasive weed as it overgrows and displaces herbs and grasses. The introduced creeper \"Tribulus cistoides\", despite having also spread conspicuously, is considered to be more beneficial than harmful to the ecosystem, as it provides good nesting sites for some seabirds.\n\"See also \"Extinction\" below.\"\nBirds.\nMore than 35\u00a0bird species have been recorded from Kiritimati. As noted above, only the bokikokiko (\"Acrocephalus aequinoctialis\"), perhaps a few Rimitara lorikeets (\"Vini kuhlii\") \u2013 if any remain at all \u2013 and the occasional eastern reef egret (\"Egretta sacra\") make up the entire landbird fauna. About 1,000\u00a0adult bokikokikos are to be found at any date, but mainly in mixed grass/shrubland away from the settlements.\nOn the other hand, seabirds are plentiful on Kiritimati, and make up the bulk of the breeding bird population. There are 18\u00a0species of seabirds breeding on the island, and Kiritimati is one of the most important breeding grounds anywhere in the world for several of these:\nPhaethontiformes\nCharadriiformes\nProcellariiformes\nPelecaniformes\nKiritimati's lagoon and the saltflats are a prime location for migratory birds to stop over or even stay all winter. The most commonly seen migrants are ruddy turnstone (\"Arenaria interpres\"), Pacific golden plover (\"Pluvialis fulva\"), bristle-thighed curlew (\"Numenius tahitiensis\"), and wandering tattler (\"Tringa incana\"); other seabirds, waders, and even dabbling ducks can be encountered every now and then. Around 7\u00a0October (\u00b15\u00a0days), some 20\u00a0million sooty shearwaters pass through here en route from the North Pacific feeding grounds to breeding sites around New Zealand.\nOther fauna.\nThe only mammals native to the region are the common Polynesian rat (\"Rattus exulans\") and the goats. The rat seems to have been introduced by seafarers many centuries before Cook arrived in 1777 (he mentioned them already being present); goats have been extinct since 14\u00a0January 2004. Black rats (\"Rattus rattus\") were present at some time, perhaps introduced by 19th-century sailors or during the nuclear tests. They were not able to gain a foothold between predation by cats and competitive exclusion by Polynesian rats, and no black rat population is found on Kiritimati today.\nUp to 2,000\u00a0feral cats can in some years be found on the island; the population became established in the 19th\u00a0century. Their depredations seriously harm the birdlife. Since the late 19th\u00a0century, they have driven about 60% of the seabird species from the mainland completely, and during particular dry spells they will cross the mudflats and feast upon the birds on the \"motu\"s. Spectacled tern chicks seem to be a favourite food of the local cat population. There are some measures being taken to ensure the cat population does not grow. That lowering the cat population by some amount would much benefit Christmas and its inhabitants is generally accepted, but the situation is too complex to simply go and eradicate them outright. A limited population of feral pigs exists. They were once plentiful and wreaked havoc especially on the \"Onychoprion\" and noddies. Pig hunting by locals has been encouraged, and was highly successful at limiting the pig population to a sustainable level, while providing a source of cheap protein for the islanders.\nThere are some \"supertramp\" lizards which have reached the island by their own means. Commonly seen are the mourning gecko (\"Lepidodactylus lugubris\") and the skink \"Cryptoblepharus boutonii\"; the four-clawed gecko (\"Gehyra mutilata\") is seen less often.\nThere are some crustaceans of note to be found on Kiritimati and in the waters immediately adjacent. The amphibious coconut crab (\"Birgus latro\") is not as common as on Teraina. Ghost crabs (genus \"Ocypode\"), \"Cardisoma carnifex\" and \"Geograpsus grayi\" land crabs, the strawberry land hermit crab (\"Coenobita perlatus\") are also notable. Introduced brine shrimp \"Artemia salina\" populate the island's saline ponds.\nEcology of the reef.\nOverfishing and pollution have impacted on the ocean surrounding the island. In the ocean surrounding uninhabited islands of the Northern Line Islands, Sharks comprised 74% of the top predator biomass (329\u00a0g/m2) at Kingman Reef and 57% at Palmyra Atoll (97\u00a0g/m2), whereas low shark numbers have been observed at Tabuaeran and Kiritimati.\nGreen turtles (\"Chelonia mydas\") regularly nest in small numbers on Kiritimati. The lagoon is famous among sea anglers worldwide for its bonefish (\"Albula glossodonta\"), and has been stocked with \"Oreochromis\" tilapia to decrease overfishing of marine species. Though the tilapias thrive in brackish water of the flats, they will not last long should they escape into the surrounding ocean.\nGiant Trevally (Caranx ignobilis) are found in large numbers both inside and outside of the lagoon and along the surrounding reefs. Very large specimens of Giant Trevally can be found around these surrounding reefs and they are sought after by many fishermen in addition to Bonefish.\nConservation and extinction.\nIn December\u00a01960, the British colonial authority gazetted Kiritimati as a bird sanctuary under the \"Gilbert and Ellice Island Colony Wild Birds Protection Ordinance\" of 1938. Access to Cook Island, Motu Tabu, and Motu Upua was restricted. Kiritimati was declared a Wildlife Sanctuary in May\u00a01975, in accordance with the Wildlife Conservation Ordinance of the then self-governing colony. Ngaontetaake and the sooty tern breeding grounds at North West Point also became restricted-access zones. Two years later, active conservation measures got underway.\nTo a limited extent, permits to enter the restricted areas for purposes like research or small-scale ecotourism are given. Kiribati's Wildlife Conservation Unit participates in the Kiritimati Development Committee and the Local Land Planning Board, and there exists an integrated program of wildlife conservation and education. New Zealand is a major sponsor of conservation efforts on Kiritimati.\nFormer egg gathering.\nEgg collecting for food on a massive scale was frequent in the past but is now outlawed. The sooty terns for example could sustain occasional collection of effectively all of a season's eggs (over 10\u00a0million), if given sufficient time to recover and if cats are absent. In theory, even egg collecting on a scale that significantly decreases costly food imports could be possible, but not until the cat and rat populations have been brought under control. Poaching remains a concern; with the population rising and spreading out on Kiritimati, formerly remote bird colonies have become more accessible; the red-tailed tropicbirds and the \"Sula\" especially are strongly affected by hunting and disturbance. Tropicbirds are mainly poached for their feathers, which are used in local arts and handicraft; it would certainly be possible to obtain them from living birds as was routinely done at the height of the Polynesian civilisation.\nFeral cats.\nIt may seem that the former numbers of seabirds may only ever be approached again by the wholesale eradication of the feral cats. While this has been since shown to be feasible, it is not clear whether even a severe curtailing of the cat population would be desirable: Though it previously was assumed that the small Polynesian rat is of little, if any, harm to seabirds, even house mice have been shown to eat seabird nestlings. Most nesting birds, in particularly Procellariiformes, are now accepted to be jeopardised by \"Rattus exulans\". Kiritimati's cats meanwhile, are very fond of young seabirds; it even seems that their behaviour shifts accordingly, with cats being generally less territorial, and congregating in numbers at active bird colonies; they generally eschew hunting rats when seabird chicks are in plenty.\nPossession of an unneutered female cat on Kiritimati is illegal, and owners need to prevent their domestic cats from running wild (such animals are usually quickly killed in traps set for this purpose). Nighttime cat hunting has made little effect on the cat population. As noted above, vigorous protection of active nesting grounds from cats by traps and poison, supplemented by shooting, while otherwise leaving them alone to hunt rats may well be the optimal solution.\nRadiation hazards.\nThere is no reliable data on the environmental and public health impact of the nuclear tests conducted on the island in the late 1950s. A 1975 study claimed that there was negligible radiation hazard; certainly, fallout was successfully minimised. More recently however, a Massey University study of New Zealand found chromosomal translocations to be increased about threefold on average in veterans who participated in the tests; most of the relevant data remains classified to date.\n1982\u20131983 El Ni\u00f1o.\nThe 1982\u20131983 \"mega-El Ni\u00f1o\" devastated seabird populations on Kiritimati. In some species, mortality rose to 90% and breeding success dropped to zero during that time.\nIn general, El Ni\u00f1o conditions will cause seabird populations to drop, taking several years to recover at the present density of predators. Global warming impact on Kiritimati is thus unpredictable. El Ni\u00f1o events seem to become shorter but more frequent in a warmer climate.\nClimate change.\nMuch of the island's infrastructure and habitation, with the notable exception of the airport area, is located to the leeward and thus somewhat protected from storms.\nA rising sea level does not appear to be particularly problematic; the increasing flooding of the subsidiary lagoons would provide easily observed forewarning, and might even benefit seabird populations by making the \"motu\"s less accessible to predators. In fact, geological data suggests that Kiritimati has withstood prehistoric sea level changes well.\nThe biggest hazard caused by a changing climate would seem to be more prolonged and/or severe droughts, which could even precipitate the island's abandonment (as happened in 1905). However, it is not clear how weather patterns would change, and it may be that precipitation increases.\nExtinction.\nThe type specimen of the Tuamotu sandpiper (\"Prosobonia cancellata\") was collected on Christmas Island in 1778, probably on 1 or 2\u00a0January, during Captain Cook's visit. The expedition's naturalist William Anderson observed the bird, and it was painted by William Ellis (linked below). The single specimen was in Joseph Banks's collection at the end of the 18th\u00a0century, but later was lost or destroyed. There is some taxonomic dispute regarding the Kiritimati population.\nAs all \"Prosobonia\" seem(ed) to be resident birds, unwilling to undertake long-distance migrations, an appropriate treatment would be to consider the extinct population the nominate subspecies, as \"Prosobonia cancellata cancellata\" or Kiritimati sandpiper, distinct from the surviving Tuamotu Islands population more than to the southeast.\nIt may have been, but probably was not, limited to Kiritimati; while no remains have been found, little fieldwork has been conducted, and judging from the Tuamotu sandpiper's habits, almost all Line Islands would have offered suitable habitat.\nThe Kiritimati population of \"P.\u00a0cancellata\" disappeared in the earlier part of the 19th century or so, almost certainly due to predation by introduced mammals. While \"Prosobonia\" generally manage to hold their own against Polynesian rats, they are highly vulnerable to the black rat and feral cats. Given the uncertainties surrounding the introduction date and maximum population of the former, the cats seem to be the main culprits in the Kiritimati sandpiper's extinction.\nGiven that the island was apparently settled to some extent in prehistoric times, it may have already lost bird species then. The geological data indicates that Kiritimati is very old and was never completely underwater in the Holocene at least; thus it might have once harboured highly distinct wetland birds.\nThe limited overall habitat diversity on Kiritimati nonetheless limits the range of such hypothetical taxa, as does biogeography due to its remote location. At least one, possibly several \"Gallirallus\" and / or \"Porzana\" rails make the most likely candidates, given their former presence in the region, and that conditions on Kiritimati would seem well suited. Perhaps a \"Todiramphus\" kingfisher was also present; such a bird would probably have belonged to the sacred kingfisher (\"T.\u00a0sanctus\") group, as that species today occurs as a vagrant in Micronesia, and related forms are resident in southeastern Polynesia. These birds would have fallen victim to the Polynesian rat. In the case of the rails (which would have almost certainly been flightless) hunting by occasionally resident Polynesians, in addition to predation by the imported rats, likely contributed to their extinction.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17253", "revid": "1319509534", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17253", "title": "Kubla Khan", "text": "Poem by Samuel Taylor Coleridge\n\"Kubla Khan: or A Vision in a Dream\" () is a poem written by Samuel Taylor Coleridge, completed in 1797 and published in 1816. It is sometimes given the subtitles \"A Vision in a Dream\" and \"A Fragment.\" According to Coleridge's preface to \"Kubla Khan\", the poem was composed one night after he experienced an opium-influenced dream after reading a work describing Xanadu, the summer capital of the Mongol-led Yuan dynasty of China founded by Kublai Khan (Emperor Shizu of Yuan). Upon waking, he set about writing lines of poetry that came to him from the dream until he was interrupted by \"a person on business from Porlock\". The poem could not be completed according to its original 200\u2013300 line plan as the interruption caused him to forget the lines. He left it unpublished and kept it for private readings for his friends until 1816 when, at the prompting of Lord Byron, it was published.\nThe poem is vastly different in style from other poems written by Coleridge. The first stanza of the poem describes Kublai Khan's pleasure dome built alongside a sacred river fed by a powerful fountain. The second stanza depicts the sacred river as a darker, supernatural and more violent force of nature. Ultimately the clamor and energy of the physical world breaks through into Kublai's inner turmoil and restlessness. The third and final stanza of the poem is the narrator's response to the power and effects of an Abyssinian maid's song, which enraptures him but leaves him unable to act on her inspiration unless he could hear her once again. Together, the stanzas form a comparison of creative power that does not work with nature and creative power that is harmonious with nature. Coleridge concludes by describing a hypothetical audience's reaction to the song in the language of religious ecstasy.\nSome of Coleridge's contemporaries denounced the poem and questioned his story of its origin. It was not until years later that critics began to openly admire the poem. Most modern critics now view \"Kubla Khan\" as one of Coleridge's three great poems, along with \"The Rime of the Ancient Mariner\" and \"Christabel\". The poem is considered one of the most famous examples of Romanticism in English poetry, and is one of the most frequently anthologized poems in the English language. The manuscript is a permanent exhibit at the British Library in London.\nPoem.\nThe poem is divided into three irregular stanzas, which move loosely between different times and places.\nThe first stanza begins with a fanciful description of the origin of Kublai Khan's capital Xanadu (lines 1\u20132). It is described as being near the river Alph, which passes through caves before reaching a dark sea (lines 3\u20135). Ten miles of land were surrounded with fortified walls (lines 6\u20137), encompassing lush gardens and forests (lines 8\u201311).\nThe second stanza describes a mysterious canyon (lines 12\u201316). A hydrothermal explosion erupted from the canyon (lines 17\u201319), throwing rubble into the air (lines 20\u201323) and forming the source of the sacred river Alph (line 24). The river wandered through the woods, then reached the caves and dark sea described in the first stanza (lines 25\u201328). Kubla Khan, present for the eruption, heard a prophecy of war (lines 29\u201330). An indented section presents an image of the pleasure-dome reflected on the water, surrounded by the sound of the geyser above ground and the river underground (lines 31\u201334). A final un-indented couplet describes the dome again (lines 35\u201336).\nThe third stanza shifts to the first-person perspective of the poem's speaker. He once saw a woman in a vision playing a dulcimer (lines 37\u201341). If he could revive her song within himself, he says, he would revive the pleasure dome itself with music (lines 42\u201347). Those who heard would also see themselves there, and cry out a warning (lines 48\u201349). Their warning concerns an alarming male figure (line 50). The stanza ends with instructions and a warning, to carry out a ritual because he has consumed the food of Paradise (lines 51\u201354).\nComposition and publication.\nDate of composition.\n\"Kubla Khan\" was likely written in October 1797, though the precise date and circumstances of the first composition of \"Kubla Khan\" are slightly ambiguous, due to limited direct evidence. Coleridge usually dated his poems, but did not date \"Kubla Khan\", and did not mention the poem directly in letters to his friends.\nColeridge's descriptions of the poem's composition attribute it to 1797. In a manuscript in Coleridge's handwriting (known as the Crewe manuscript), a note by Coleridge says that it was composed \"in the fall of the year, 1797.\" In the preface to the first published edition of the poem, in 1816, Coleridge says that it was composed during an extended stay he had made in Somerset during \"the summer of the year 1797.\" On 14 October 1797, Coleridge wrote a letter to John Thelwall which, although it does not directly mention \"Kubla Khan\", expresses many of the same feelings as in the poem, suggesting that these themes were on his mind. All of these details have led to the consensus of an October 1797 composition date.\nA May 1798 composition date is sometimes proposed because the first written mention of the poem is in Dorothy Wordsworth's journal of October 1798, where she mentions \"carrying \"Kubla\" to a fountain\". October 1799 has also been suggested because by then Coleridge would have been able to read Robert Southey's \"Thalaba the Destroyer\", a work which drew on the same sources as \"Kubla Khan\". At both time periods, Coleridge was again in the area of Ash Farm, near Culbone Church, where Coleridge consistently described composing the poem. However, the October 1797 composition date is more widely accepted.\nComposition in a dream.\nIn September 1797, Coleridge lived in Nether Stowey in the southwest of England and spent much of his time walking through the nearby Quantock Hills with his fellow poet William Wordsworth and Wordsworth's sister Dorothy (his route today is memorialised as the \"Coleridge Way\"). Some time between 9 and 14 October 1797, when Coleridge says he had completed the tragedy \"Osorio\", he left Stowey for Lynton. On his return journey, he became sick and rested at Ash Farm, located near Culbone Church and one of the few places to seek shelter on his route. There, he had a dream which inspired the poem.\nColeridge described the circumstances of his dream and the poem in two places: on a manuscript copy written some time before 1816, and in the preface to the printed version of the poem published in 1816. The manuscript states: \"This fragment with a good deal more, not recoverable, composed, in a sort of Reverie brought on by two grains of Opium taken to check a dysentry, at a Farm House between Porlock &amp; Linton, a quarter of a mile from Culbone Church.\" The printed preface describes his location as \"a lonely farm house between Porlock and Linton, on the Exmoor confines of Somerset and Devonshire,\" and embellishes the events into a narrative which has sometimes been seen as part of the poem itself.\nAccording to the extended preface narrative, Coleridge was reading \"Purchas his Pilgrimes\" by Samuel Purchas, and fell asleep after reading about Kublai Khan. Then, he says, he \"continued for about three hours in a profound sleep... during which time he had the most vivid confidence, that he could not have composed less than from two or three hundred lines ... On Awaking he appeared to himself to have a distinct recollection of the whole, and taking his pen, ink, and paper, instantly and eagerly wrote down the lines that are here preserved.\" The passage continues with a famous account of an interruption: \"At this moment he was unfortunately called out by a person on business from Porlock... and on his return to his room, found, to his no small surprise and mortification, that though he still retained some vague and dim recollection of the general purpose of the vision, yet, with the exception of some eight or ten scattered lines and images, all the rest had passed away.\" The \"person on business from Porlock\" later became a term to describe interrupted genius. When John Livingston Lowes taught the poem, he told his students \"If there is any man in the history of literature who should be hanged, drawn, and quartered, it is the man on business from Porlock.\"\nThere are some problems with Coleridge's account, especially the claim to have a copy of Purchas with him. It was a rare book, unlikely to be at a \"lonely farmhouse\", nor would an individual carry it on a journey; the folio was heavy and almost 1,000 pages in size. It is possible that the words of Purchas were merely remembered by Coleridge and that the depiction of immediately reading the work before falling asleep was to suggest that the subject came to him accidentally. Critics have also noted that unlike the manuscript, which says he had taken two grains of opium, the printed version of this story says only that \"In consequence of a slight indisposition, an anodyne had been prescribed.\" The image of himself that Coleridge provides is of a dreamer who reads works of lore and not as an opium addict. Instead, the effects of the opium, as described, are intended to suggest that he was not used to its effects.\nAccording to some critics, the second stanza of the poem, forming a conclusion, was composed at a later date and was possibly disconnected from the original dream.\nPublication.\nAfter its composition, Coleridge periodically read the poem to friends, as to the Wordsworths in 1798, but did not seek to publish it. Coleridge's friend, the author Mary Robinson wrote a response to the poem titled, \"To the Poet Coleridge,\" which was first published in the October, 17, 1800 edition of \"The Morning Post\", and was later included in her \"Poetical Works\" compilation in 1806. In 1808 an anonymous contributor to the \"Monthly Repertory of English Literature\" quoted two lines from it in a book review.\nThe poem was set aside until 1815 when Coleridge compiled manuscripts of his poems for a collection titled \"Sibylline Leaves\". It did not feature in that volume, but Coleridge did read the poem to Lord Byron on 10 April 1816.\nByron persuaded Coleridge to publish the poem, and on 12 April 1816, a contract was drawn up with the publisher John Murray for \u00a380. The Preface of \"Kubla Khan\" explained that it was printed \"at the request of a poet of great and deserved celebrity, and as far as the author's own opinions are concerned, rather as a psychological curiosity, than on the ground of any supposed \"poetic\" merits.\" Coleridge's wife discouraged the publication, and Charles Lamb, a poet and friend of Coleridge, expressed mixed feelings, worrying that the printed version of the poem couldn't capture the power of the recited version.\n\"Kubla Khan\" was published with \"Christabel\" and \"The Pains of Sleep\" on 25 May 1816. Coleridge included the subtitle \"A Fragment\" to defend against criticism of the poem's incomplete nature. The original published version of the work was separated into 2 stanzas, with the first ending at line 30. The poem was printed four times in Coleridge's life, with the final printing in his \"Poetical Works\" of 1834. In the final work, Coleridge added the expanded subtitle \"Or, A Vision in a Dream. A Fragment\". Printed with \"Kubla Khan\" was a preface that stated a dream provided Coleridge the lines. In some later anthologies of Coleridge's poetry, the preface is dropped along with the subtitle denoting its fragmentary and dream nature. Sometimes, the preface is included in modern editions but lacks both the first and final paragraphs.\nSources.\nPurchas and Marco Polo.\nThe book Coleridge was reading before he fell asleep was \"Purchas, his Pilgrimes, or Relations of the World and Religions Observed in All Ages and Places Discovered, from the Creation to the Present\", by the English clergyman and geographer Samuel Purchas, published in 1613. The book contained a brief description of Xanadu, the summer capital of the Mongol ruler Kublai Khan. Coleridge's preface says that he was reading the following sentence, or words of the same substance, in Purchas's \"Pilgrimage\":\n Here the Khan Kubla commanded a palace to be built, and a stately garden thereunto. And thus ten miles of fertile ground were inclosed with a wall.\nColeridge names the wrong book by Purchas (Purchas wrote three books, his \"Pilgrimage\", his \"Pilgrim\", and his \"Pilgrimes\"; the last was his collection of travel stories), and misquotes the line. The text about Xanadu in \"Purchas, His Pilgrimes\", which Coleridge admitted he did not remember exactly, was:\nIn Xandu did Cublai Can build a stately Pallace, encompassing sixteen miles of plaine ground with a wall, wherein are fertile Meddowes, pleasant Springs, delightfull streames, and all sorts of beasts of chase and game, and in the middest thereof a sumptuous house of pleasure, which may be moved from place to place.\nThis quotation was based upon the writings of the Venetian explorer Marco Polo who is widely believed to have visited Xanadu in about 1275. Marco Polo also described a large portable palace made of gilded and lacquered cane or bamboo which could be taken apart quickly and moved from place to place. This was the \"sumptuous house of pleasure\" mentioned by Purchas, which Coleridge transformed into a \"stately pleasure dome\".\nIn terms of spelling, Coleridge's printed version differs from Purchas's spelling, which refers to the Mongol ruler as \"Cublai Can\", and from the spelling used by Milton, \"Cathaian Can\". His original manuscript spells the name \"Cubla Khan\" and the place \"Xannadu\".\nMount Abora.\nIn the Crewe manuscript (the earlier unpublished version of the poem), the Abyssinian maid is singing of Mount Amara, rather than Abora. Mount Amara is a real mountain, today called Amba Geshen, located in the Amhara Region of modern Ethiopia, formerly known as the Abyssinian Empire. It was a natural fortress, and was the site of the royal treasury and the royal prison. The sons of the Emperors of Abyssinia, except for the heir, were held prisoner there, to prevent them from staging a coup against their father, until the Emperor's death.\nMount Amara was visited between 1515 and 1521 by Portuguese priest, explorer and diplomat Francisco Alvares (1465\u20131541), who was on a mission to meet the Christian king of Ethiopia. His description of Mount Amara was published in 1540, and appears in \"Purchas, his Pilgrimes\", the book Coleridge was reading before he wrote \"Kubla Khan\". Mount Amara also appears in Milton's \"Paradise Lost\", where it is \"by some suppos'd / True Paradise under the Ethiop line,\" where Abyssinian kings keep their children guarded.\nMount Amara is in the same region as Lake Tana, the source of the Blue Nile river. Ethiopian tradition says that the Blue Nile is the River Gihon of the Bible, one of the four rivers that flow out of the Garden of Eden in the Book of Genesis, which says that Gihon flows through the Kingdom of Kush, the Biblical name for Ethiopia and Sudan. In fact the Blue Nile is very far from the other three rivers mentioned in Genesis 2:10\u201314, but this belief led to the connection in 18th and 19th century English literature between Mount Amara and Paradise.\nAbyssinian maid.\nThe Abyssinian maid is similar to the way Coleridge describes Lewti in another poem he wrote around the same time, \"Lewti\". The connection between Lewti and the Abyssinian maid makes it possible that the maid was intended as a disguised version of Mary Evans, who appears as a love interest since Coleridge's 1794 poem \"The Sigh\". Evans, in these poems, appears as an object of sexual desire and a source of inspiration. She is also similar to the later subject of many of Coleridge's poems, Asra, based on Sara Hutchinson.\nLiterary precedents for the Abyssinian maid include a description in Heliodorus's work \"Aethiopian History\", with its description of \"a young Lady, sitting upon a Rock, of so rare and perfect a Beauty, as one would have taken her for a Goddess, and though her present misery opprest her with extreamest grief, yet in the greatness of her afflection, they might easily perceive the greatness of her Courage: A Laurel crown'd her Head, and a Quiver in a Scarf hanged at her back\". Her description in the poem is also related to Isis of Apuleius's \"Metamorphoses,\" and to John Keats's Indian woman in \"Endymion\" who is revealed to be the moon goddess.\nOther sources.\nCharles Lamb provided Coleridge on 15 April 1797 with a copy of his \"A Vision of Repentance\", a poem that discussed a dream containing imagery similar to those in \"Kubla Khan\". The poem could have provided Coleridge with the idea of a dream poem that discusses fountains, sacredness, and even a woman singing a sorrowful song.\nThere are additional strong literary connections to other works, including John Milton's \"Paradise Lost\", Samuel Johnson's \"Rasselas\", Chatterton's \"African Eclogues\", William Bartram's \"Travels through North and South Carolina\", Thomas Burnet's \"Sacred Theory of the Earth\", Mary Wollstonecraft's \"A Short Residence in Sweden\", Plato's \"Phaedrus and Ion\", Maurice's \"The History of Hindostan\", and Heliodorus's \"Aethiopian History\". The poem also contains allusions to the Book of Revelation in its description of New Jerusalem and to the paradise of William Shakespeare's \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\". The sources used for \"Kubla Khan\" are also used in Coleridge's \"The Rime of the Ancient Mariner\".\nOpium itself has also been seen as a \"source\" for many of the poem's features, such as its disorganized action. These features are similar to writing by other contemporary opium eaters and writers, such as Thomas de Quincey and Charles Pierre Baudelaire.\nColeridge may also have been influenced by the surrounding of Culbone Combe and its hills, gulleys, and other features including the \"mystical\" and \"sacred\" locations in the region. Other geographic influences include the river, which has been tied to Alpheus in Greece and is similar to the Nile. The caves have been compared to those in Kashmir.\nStyle.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Kubla Khan\"\n&lt;poem&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Poetically break lines/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nFragmentation.\nAccording to Coleridge's account, the poem is an incomplete fragment. Originally, he says, his dream included between 200 and 300 lines, but he was able to compose only the first 30 before he was interrupted. The second stanza is not necessarily part of the original dream and refers to the dream in the past tense. \"Kubla Khan\" is also related to the genre of fragmentary poetry, with internal images reinforcing the idea of fragmentation that is found within the form of the poem. The poem's self-proclaimed fragmentary nature combined with Coleridge's warning about the poem in the preface turns \"Kubla Khan\" into an \"anti-poem\", a work that lacks structure, order, and leaves the reader confused instead of enlightened. However, the poem has little relation to the other fragmentary poems Coleridge wrote.\nThe first lines of the poem follow iambic tetrameter with the initial stanza relying on heavy stresses. The lines of the second stanza incorporate lighter stresses to increase the speed of the meter to separate them from the hammer-like rhythm of the previous lines. There also is a strong break following line 36 in the poem that provides for a second stanza, and there is a transition in narration from a third person narration about Kubla Khan into the poet discussing his role as a poet. Without the Preface, the two stanzas form two different poems that have some relationship to each other but lack unity. This is not to say they would be two different poems, since the technique of having separate parts that respond to another is used in the genre of the odal hymn, as in the poetry of other Romantic poets including John Keats or Percy Bysshe Shelley. However, the odal hymn as used by others has a stronger unity among its parts, and Coleridge believed in writing poetry that was unified organically. It is possible that Coleridge was displeased by the lack of unity in the poem and added a note about the structure to the Preface to explain his thoughts.\nSound.\nThe poem's language is highly stylised with a strong emphasis on sound devices that change between the poem's original two stanzas. The poem relies on many sound-based techniques, including cognate variation and chiasmus. In particular, the poem emphasises the use of the \"\u00e6\" sound and similar modifications to the standard \"a\" sound to make the poem sound Asian. Its rhyme scheme found in the first seven lines is repeated in the first seven lines of the second stanza. There is a heavy use of assonance and alliteration, especially in the first line: \"In Xanadu did Kubla Khan\". The stressed sounds, \"Xan\", \"du\", \"Ku\", \"Khan\", contain assonance in their use of the sounds a-u-u-a, have two rhyming syllables with \"Xan\" and \"Khan\", and employ alliteration with the name \"Kubla Khan\" and the reuse of \"d\" sounds in \"Xanadu\" and \"did\". To pull the line together, the \"i\" sound of \"In\" is repeated in \"did\". Later lines do not contain the same amount of symmetry but do rely on assonance and rhymes throughout. Though the lines are interconnected, the rhyme scheme and line lengths are irregular.\nMajor themes.\nPoetic imagination.\nOne theory says that \"Kubla Khan\" is about poetry and the two sections discuss two types of poems. The power of the imagination is an important component to this theme. The poem celebrates creativity and how the poet is able to experience a connection to the universe through inspiration. As a poet, Coleridge places himself in an uncertain position as either master over his creative powers or a slave to it. The dome city represents the imagination and the second stanza represents the relationship between a poet and the rest of society. The poet is separated from the rest of humanity after he is exposed to the power to create and is able to witness visions of truth. This separation causes a combative relationship between the poet and the audience as the poet seeks to control his listener through a mesmerising technique. The poem's emphasis on imagination as subject of a poem, on the contrasts within the paradisal setting, and its discussion of the role of poet as either being blessed or cursed by imagination, has influenced many works, including Alfred Tennyson's \"Palace of Art\" and William Butler Yeats's Byzantium based poems. There is also a strong connection between the idea of retreating into the imagination found within Keats's \"Lamia\" and in Tennyson's \"Palace of Art\". The Preface, when added to the poem, connects the idea of the paradise as the imagination with the land of Porlock, and that the imagination, though infinite, would be interrupted by a \"person on business\". The Preface then allows for Coleridge to leave the poem as a fragment, which represents the inability for the imagination to provide complete images or truly reflect reality. The poem would not be about the act of creation but a fragmentary view revealing how the act works: how the poet crafts language and how it relates to himself.\nThrough use of the imagination, the poem is able to discuss issues surrounding tyranny, war, and contrasts that exist within paradise. Part of the war motif could be a metaphor for the poet in a competitive struggle with the reader to push his own vision and ideas upon his audience. As a component to the idea of imagination in the poem is the creative process by describing a world that is of the imagination and another that is of understanding. The poet, in Coleridge's system, is able to move from the world of understanding, where men normally are, and enter into the world of the imagination through poetry. When the narrator describes the \"ancestral voices prophesying war\", the idea is part of the world of understanding, or the real world. As a whole, the poem is connected to Coleridge's belief in a secondary Imagination that can lead a poet into a world of imagination, and the poem is both a description of that world and a description of how the poet enters the world. The imagination, as it appears in many of Coleridge's and Wordsworth's works, including \"Kubla Khan\", is discussed through the metaphor of water, and the use of the river in \"Kubla Khan\" is connected to the use of the stream in Wordsworth's \"The Prelude\". The water imagery is also related to the divine and nature, and the poet is able to tap into nature in a way Kubla Khan cannot harness its power.\nThe nature of paradise.\nAlthough the land is one of man-made \"pleasure\", there is a natural, \"sacred\" river that runs past it. The lines describing the river have a markedly different rhythm from the rest of the passage. The land is constructed as a garden, but like Eden after Man's fall, Xanadu is isolated by walls. The finite properties of the constructed walls of Xanadu are contrasted with the infinite properties of the natural caves through which the river runs. The poem expands on the gothic hints of the first stanza as the narrator explores the dark chasm in the midst of Xanadu's gardens, and describes the surrounding area as both \"savage\" and \"holy\". Yarlott interprets this chasm as symbolic of the poet struggling with decadence that ignores nature. It may also represent the dark side of the soul, the dehumanising effect of power and dominion. Fountains are often symbolic of the inception of life, and in this case may represent forceful creativity. Since this fountain ends in death, it may also simply represent the life span of a human, from violent birth to a sinking end. Yarlott argues that the war represents the penalty for seeking pleasure, or simply the confrontation of the present by the past. Though the exterior of Xanadu is presented in images of darkness, and in context of the dead sea, we are reminded of the \"miracle\" and \"pleasure\" of Kubla Khan's creation. The vision of the sites, including the dome, the cavern, and the fountain, are similar to an apocalyptic vision. Together, the natural and man-made structures form a miracle of nature as they represent the mixing of opposites together, the essence of creativity. In the third stanza, the narrator turns prophetic, referring to a vision of an unidentified \"Abyssinian maid\" who sings of \"Mount Abora\". Harold Bloom suggests that this passage reveals the narrator's desire to rival Khan's ability to create with his own. The woman may also refer to Mnemosyne, the Greek personification of memory and mother of the muses, referring directly to Coleridge's claimed struggle to compose this poem from memory of a dream. The subsequent passage refers to unnamed witnesses who may also hear this, and thereby share in the narrator's vision of a replicated, ethereal, Xanadu. Harold Bloom suggests that the power of the poetic imagination, stronger than nature or art, fills the narrator and grants him the ability to share this vision with others through his poetry. The narrator would thereby be elevated to an awesome, almost mythical status, as one who has experienced an Edenic paradise available only to those who have similarly mastered these creative powers.\nIn the tradition from which Coleridge drew, the Tatars ruled by Kubla Khan were depicted as uncivilized worshippers of the sun, connected to either the Cain or Ham line of outcasts. In the tradition Coleridge relies on, the Tatar worship the sun because it reminds them of paradise, and they build gardens because they want to recreate paradise. The Tatars are connected to the Judaeo Christian ideas of Original Sin and Eden: Kubla Khan is of the line of Cain and fallen, but he wants to overcome that state and rediscover paradise by creating an enclosed garden. The place was described in negative terms and seen as an inferior representation of paradise, and Coleridge's ethical system did not connect pleasure with joy or the divine. However, Coleridge describes Khan in a peaceful light and as a man of genius. He seeks to show his might but does so by building his own version of paradise. The description and the tradition provide a contrast between the daemonic and genius within the poem, and Khan is a ruler who is unable to recreate Eden.\nThe dome, as described in \"The History of Hindostan\", was related to nature worship as it reflects the shape of the universe. Coleridge believed in a connection between nature and the divine but believed that the only dome that should serve as the top of a temple was the sky. He thought that a dome was an attempt to hide from the ideal and escape into a private creation, and Kubla Khan's dome is a flaw that keeps him from truly connecting to nature. Purchas's work does not mention a dome but a \"house of pleasure\". The use of dome instead of house or palace could represent the most artificial of constructs and reinforce the idea that the builder was separated from nature. However, Coleridge did believe that a dome could be positive if it was connected to religion, but the Khan's dome was one of immoral pleasure and a purposeless life dominated by sensuality and pleasure.\nCritical response.\nThe reception of \"Kubla Khan\" has changed substantially over time. Initial reactions to the poem were lukewarm, despite praise from notable figures like Lord Byron and Walter Scott. The work went through multiple editions, but the poem, as with his others published in 1816 and 1817, had poor sales. Initial reviewers saw some aesthetic appeal in the poem, but considered it unremarkable overall. As critics began to consider Coleridge's body of work as whole, however, \"Kubla Khan\" was increasingly singled out for praise. Positive evaluation of the poem in the 19th and early 20th centuries treated it as a purely aesthetic object, to be appreciated for its evocative sensory experience. Later criticism continued to appreciate the poem, but no longer considered it as transcending concrete meaning, instead interpreting it as a complex statement on poetry itself and the nature of individual genius.\nDuring Coleridge's lifetime.\nLiterary reviews at the time of the collection's first publication generally dismissed it. At the time of the poem's publication, a new generation of critical magazines, including \"Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine\", \"Edinburgh Review\", and \"Quarterly Review\", had been established, with critics who were more provocative than those of the previous generation. These critics were hostile to Coleridge due to a difference of political views, and due to a puff piece written by Byron about the \"Christabel\" publication. The first of the negative reviews was written by William Hazlitt, literary critic and Romantic writer, who criticized the fragmentary nature of the work. Hazlitt said that the poem \"comes to no conclusion\" and that \"from an excess of capacity, [Coleridge] does little or nothing\" with his material. The only positive quality which Hazlitt notes is a certain aesthetic appeal: he says \"we could repeat these lines to ourselves not the less often for not knowing the meaning of them,\" revealing that \"Mr Coleridge can write better \"nonsense\" verse than any man in English.\" As other reviews continued to be published in 1816, they, too, were lukewarm at best. The poem received limited praise for \"some playful thoughts and fanciful imagery,\" and was said to \"have much of the Oriental richness and harmony\" but was generally considered unremarkable.\nThese early reviews generally accepted Coleridge's story of composing the poem in a dream, but dismissed its relevance, and observed that many others have had similar experiences. More than one review suggested that the dream had not merited publication. One reviewer questioned whether Coleridge had really dreamed his composition, suggesting that instead he likely wrote it rapidly upon waking.\nMore positive appraisals of the poem began to emerge when Coleridge's contemporaries evaluated his body of work overall. In October 1821, Leigh Hunt singled out Kubla Khan as one of Coleridge's best works, praising the poem's evocative, dreamlike beauty. An 1830 review of Coleridge's \"Poetical Works\" similarly praised for its \"melodious versification,\" describing it as \"perfect music.\" An 1834 review, published shortly after Coleridge's death, also praised \"Kubla Khan\"'s musicality. These three later assessments of \"Kubla Khan\" responded more positively to Coleridge's description of composing the poem in a dream, as an additional facet of the poetry.\nVictorian period.\nVictorian critics praised the poem and some examined aspects of the poem's background. John Sheppard, in his analysis of dreams titled \"On Dreams\" (1847), lamented Coleridge's drug use as getting in the way of his poetry but argued: \"It is probable, since he writes of having taken an 'anodyne,' that the 'vision in a dream' arose under some excitement of that same narcotic; but this does not destroy, even as to his particular case, the evidence for a wonderfully inventive action of the mind in sleep; for, whatever were the exciting cause, the fact remains the same\". Hall Caine, in his 1883 survey of the original critical response to \"Christabel\" and \"Kubla Khan\", praised the poem and declared: \"It must surely be allowed that the adverse criticism on 'Christabel' and 'Kubla Khan' which is here quoted is outside all tolerant treatment, whether of raillery or of banter. It is difficult to attribute such false verdict to pure and absolute ignorance. Even when we make all due allowance for the prejudices of critics whose only possible enthusiasm went out to 'the pointed and fine propriety of Poe,' we can hardly believe that the exquisite art which is among the most valued on our possessions could encounter so much garrulous abuse without the criminal intervention of personal malignancy.\" In a review of H. D. Traill's analysis of Coleridge in the \"English Men of Letters\", an anonymous reviewer wrote in the 1885 \"Westminster Review\": \"Of 'Kubla Khan,' Mr. Traill writes: 'As to the wild dream-poem 'Kubla Khan,' it is hardly more than a psychological curiosity, and only that perhaps in respect of the completeness of its metrical form.' Lovers of poetry think otherwise, and listen to these wonderful lines as the voice of Poesy itself.\"\nCritics at the end of the 19th century favoured the poem and placed it as one of Coleridge's best works. When discussing \"Christabel\", \"Rime of the Ancient Mariner\" and \"Kubla Khan\", an anonymous reviewer in the October 1893 \"The Church Quarterly Review\" wrote, \"In these poems Coleridge achieves a mastery of language and rhythm which is nowhere else conspicuously evident in him.\" In 1895, Andrew Lang reviewed the \"Letters of Coleridge\" in addition to Coleridge's \"Kubla Khan\", \"Christabel\" and \"Rime of the Ancient Mariner\", saying: \"all these poems are 'miraculous;' all seem to have been 'given' by the dreaming 'subconscious self' of Coleridge. The earliest pieces hold no promise of these marvels. They come from what is oldest in Coleridge's nature, his uninvited and irrepressible intuition, magical and rare, vivid beyond common sight of common things, sweet beyond sound of things heard.\" G E Woodberry, in 1897, said that \"Christabel\", \"Rime of the Ancient Mariner\", and \"Kubla Khan\" \"are the marvelous creations of his genius. In these it will be said there is both a world of nature new created, and a dramatic method and interest. It is enough for the purpose of the analysis if it be granted that nowhere else in Coleridge's work, except in these and less noticeably in a few other instances, do these high characteristics occur.\" In speaking of the three poems, he stated they \"have besides that wealth of beauty in detail, of fine diction, of liquid melody, of sentiment, thought, and image, which belong only to poetry of the highest order, and which are too obvious to require any comment. 'Kubla Khan' is a poem of the same kind, in which the mystical effect is given almost wholly by landscape.\"\n1920s\u201330s.\nThe 1920s contained analysis of the poem that emphasised the poem's power. In \"Road to Xanadu\" (1927), a book length study of \"The Rime of the Ancient Mariner\" and \"Kubla Khan\", John Livingston Lowes said that the poems were \"two of the most remarkable poems in English\". When turning to the background of the works, he argued, \"Coleridge as Coleridge, be it said at once, is a secondary moment to our purpose; it is the significant process, not the man, which constitutes our theme. But the amazing \"modus operandi\" of his genius, in the fresh light which I hope I have to offer, becomes the very abstract and brief chronicle of the procedure of the creative faculty itself.\" After breaking down the various aspects of the poem, Lowes stated, \"with a picture of unimpaired and thrilling vividness, the fragment ends. And with it ends, for all save Coleridge, the dream. 'The earth hath bubbles as the water has, and this is of them.' For 'Kubla Khan' is as near enchantment, I suppose, as we are like to come in this dull world. And over it is cast the glamour, enhanced beyond all reckoning in the dream, of the remote in time and space \u2013 that visionary presence of a vague and gorgeous and mysterious Past which brooded, as Coleridge read, above the inscrutable Nile, and domed pavilions in Cashmere, and the vanished stateliness of Xanadu.\" He continued by describing the power of the poem: \"For none of the things which we have seen \u2013 dome, river, chasm, fountain, caves of ice, or floating hair \u2013 nor any combination of them holds the secret key to that sense of an incommunicable witchery which pervades the poem. That is something more impalpable by far, into which entered who can tell what traceless, shadowy recollections...The poem is steeped in the wonder of all Coleridge's enchanted voyagings.\" Lowes then concluded about the two works: \"Not even in the magical four and fifty lines of 'Kubla Khan' is sheer visualizing energy so intensely exercised as in 'The Ancient Mariner.' But every crystal-clear picture there, is an integral part of a preconceived and consciously elaborated whole...In 'Kubla Khan' the linked and interweaving images irresponsibly and gloriously stream, like the pulsing, fluctuating banners of the North. And their pageant is as aimless as it is magnificent...There is, then...one glory of 'Kubla Khan' and another glory of 'The Ancient Mariner,' as one star differeth from another star in glory.\" George Watson, in 1966, stated that Lowes's analysis of the poems \"will stand as a permanent monument to historical criticism.\" Also in 1966, Kenneth Burke, declared, \"Count me among those who would view this poem both as a marvel, and as 'in principle' \"finished\".\"\nT. S. Eliot attacked the reputation of \"Kubla Khan\" and sparked a dispute within literary criticism with his analysis of the poem in his essay \"Origin and Uses of Poetry\" from \"The Use of Poetry and the Use of Criticism\" (1933): \"The way in which poetry is written is not, so far as our knowledge of these obscure matters as yet extends, any clue to its value...The faith in mystical inspiration is responsible for the exaggerated repute of 'Kubla Khan'. The imagery of that fragment, certainly, whatever its origins in Coleridge's reading, sank to the depths of Coleridge's feeling, was saturated, transformed there...and brought up into daylight again.\" He goes on to explain, \"But it is not \"used\": the poem has not been written. A single verse is not poetry unless it is a one-verse poem; and even the finest line draws its life from its context. Organization is necessary as well as 'inspiration'. The re-creation of word and image which happens fitfully in the poetry of such a poet as Coleridge happens almost incessantly with Shakespeare.\" Geoffrey Yarlott, in 1967, responds to Eliot to say, \"Certainly, the enigmatic personages who appear in the poem...and the vaguely incantatory proper names...appear to adumbrate rather than crystalize the poet's intention. Yet, though generally speaking intentions in poetry are nothing save as 'realized', we are unable to ignore the poem, despite Mr Eliot's strictures on its 'exaggerated repute'.\" He continued, \"We may question without end \"what\" it means, but few of us question if the poem is worth the trouble, or whether the meaning is worth the having. While the feeling persists that there is something there which is profoundly important, the challenge to elucidate it proves irresistible.\" However, Lilian Furst, in 1969, countered Yarlott to argue that, \"T. S. Eliot's objection to the exaggerated repute of the surrealist \"Kubla Khan\" is not unjustified. Moreover, the customary criticism of Coleridge as a cerebral poet would seem to be borne out by those poems such as \"This Lime-tree Bower my Prison\" or \"The Pains of Sleep\", which tend more towards a direct statement than an imaginative presentation of personal dilemma.\"\n1940s\u201360s.\nDuring the 1940s and 1950s, critics focused on the technique of the poem and how it relates to the meaning. In 1941, G. W. Knight wrote that \"Kubla Khan\" \"needs no defence. It has a barbaric and oriental magnificence that asserts itself with a happy power and authenticity too often absent from visionary poems set within the Christian tradition.\" Humphrey House, in 1953, praised the poem and said of beginning of the poem: \"The whole passage is full of life because the verse has both the needed energy and the needed control. The combination of energy and control in the rhythm and sound is so great\" and that Coleridge's words \"convey so fully the sense of inexhaustible energy, now falling now rising, but persisting through its own pulse\". Also in 1953, Elisabeth Schneider dedicated her book to analysing the various aspects of the poem, including the various sound techniques. When discussing the quality of the poem, she wrote, \"I sometimes think we overwork Coleridge's idea of 'the balance or reconciliation of opposite or discordant qualities.' I have to come back to it here, however, for the particular flavor of \"Kubla Khan\", with its air of mystery, is describable in part through that convenient phrase. Yet, the 'reconciliation' does not quite occur either. It is in fact avoided. What we have instead is the very spirit of 'oscillation' itself.\" Continuing, she said, \"The poem is the soul of ambivalence, oscillation's very self; and that is probably its deepest meaning. In creating this effect, form and matter are intricately woven. The irregular and inexact rhymes and varied lengths of the lines play some part. More important is the musical effect in which a smooth, rather swift forward movement is emphasized by the relation of grammatical structure to line and rhyme, yet is impeded and thrown back upon itself even from the beginning\". She then concluded: \"Here in these interwoven oscillations dwells the magic, the 'dream,' and the air of mysterious meaning of \"Kubla Khan\". I question whether this effect was all deliberately through [\"sic?\"] out by Coleridge, though it might have been. It is possibly half-inherent in his subject...What remains is the spirit of 'oscillation,' perfectly poeticized, and possibly ironically commemorative of the author.\" Following in 1959, John Beer described the complex nature of the poem: \"'Kubla Khan' the poem is not a meaningless reverie, but a poem so packed with meaning as to render detailed elucidation extremely difficult.\" In responding to House, Beer wrote, \"That there is an image of energy in the fountain may be accepted: but I cannot agree that it is creative energy of the highest type.\"\nCritics of the 1960s focused on the reputation of the poem and how it compared to Coleridge's other poems. In 1966, Virginia Radley considered Wordsworth and his sister as an important influence to Coleridge writing a great poem: \"Almost daily social intercourse with this remarkable brother and sister seemed to provide the catalyst to greatness, for it is during this period that Coleridge conceived his greatest poems, 'Christabel,' 'The Rime of the Ancient Mariner,' and 'Kubla Khan,' poems so distinctive and so different from his others that many generations of readers know Coleridge solely through them.\" She latter added that \"Of all the poems Coleridge wrote, three are beyond compare. These three, 'The Ancient Mariner,' 'Christabel,' and 'Kubla Khan,' produced an aura which defies definition, but which might be properly be called one of 'natural magic.'\" What sets apart the poem from the others is its \"verbal enactment of the creative process\" which makes it \"unique even among the three poems of high imagination.\" To Radley, \"the poem is skilfully wrought, as are all the poems of high imagination. The opposites within it are diverse and effectively so. In tone, the poem juxtaposes quiet with noise...Action presents its contrasts also...These seemingly antithetical images combine to demonstrate the proximity of the known and the unknown worlds, the two worlds of Understanding and Imagination.\" In concluding about the poem, she argued, \"In truth, there are other 'Fears in Solitude' than that written by Coleridge and there are other 'Frosts at Midnight'; but there are no other 'Ancient Mariners' or 'Kubla Khans,' nor are there likely to be. In evaluating Coleridge's poetry, it can readily be seen and accepted that for the poems of high imagination his reputation is eternally made.\"\nIn the same year as Radley, George Watson argued that \"The case of 'Kubla Khan' is perhaps the strangest of all \u2013 a poem that stands high even in English poetry as a work of ordered perfection is offered by the poet himself, nearly twenty years after its composition, as a fragment. Anyone can accept that a writer's head should be full of projects he will never fulfil, and most writers are cautious enough not to set them down; Coleridge, rashly, did set them down, so that his very fertility has survived as evidence of infertility.\" He later argued that the poem \"is probably the most original poem about poetry in English, and the first hint outside his notebooks and letters that a major critic lies hidden in the twenty-five-year-old Coleridge.\" In conclusion about the poem, Watson stated, \"The triumph of 'Kubla Khan,' perhaps, lies in its evasions: it hints so delicately at critical truths while demonstrating them so boldly. The contrasts between the two halves of the poem...So bold, indeed, that Coleridge for once was able to dispense with any language out of the past. It was his own poem, a manifesto. To read it now, with the hindsight of another age, is to feel premonitions of the critical achievement to come...But the poem is in advance, not just of these, but in all probability of any critical statement that survives. It may be that it stands close to the moment of discovery itself.\" After responding to Eliot's claims about \"Kubla Khan\", Yarlott, in 1967, argued that \"few of us question if the poem is worth the trouble\" before explaining that \"The ambiguities inherent in the poem pose a special problem of critical approach. If we restrict ourselves to what is 'given', appealing to the poem as a 'whole', we shall fail probably to resolves its various cruxes. Hence, there is a temptation to look for 'external' influences ... The trouble with all these approaches is that they tend finally to lead \"away\" from the poem itself.\" When describing specifics, he argued, \"The rhythmical development of the stanza, too, though technically brilliant, evokes admiration rather than delight. The unusually heavy stresses and abrupt masculine rhymes impose a slow and sonorous weightiness upon the movement of the iambic octosyllabics which is quite in contrast, say, to the light fast metre of the final stanza where speed of movement matches buoyancy of tone.\" Following in 1968, Walter Jackson Bate called the poem \"haunting\" and said that it was \"so unlike anything else in English\".\n1970s\u2013present.\nCriticism during the 1970s and 1980s emphasised the importance of the Preface while praising the work. Norman Fruman, in 1971, argued: \"To discuss 'Kubla Khan' as one might any other great poem would be an exercise in futility. For a century and a half its status has been unique, a masterpiece \"sui generis\", embodying interpretive problems wholly its own...It would not be excessive to say that no small part of the extraordinary fame of 'Kubla Khan' inheres in its alleged marvellous conception. Its Preface is world-famous and has been used in many studies of the creative process as a signal instance in which a poem has come to us directly from the unconscious.\"\nIn 1981, Kathleen Wheeler contrasts the Crewe Manuscript note with the Preface: \"Contrasting this relatively factual, literal, and dry account of the circumstances surrounding the birth of the poem with the actual published preface, one illustrates what the latter is not: it is not a literal, dry, factual account of this sort, but a highly literary piece of composition, providing the verse with a certain mystique.\" In 1985, David Jasper praised the poem as \"one of his greatest meditations on the nature of poetry and poetic creation\" and argued \"it is through irony, also, as it unsettles and undercuts, that the fragment becomes a Romantic literary form of such importance, nowhere more so than in 'Kubla Khan'.\" When talking about the Preface, Jasper asserted that it \"profoundly influenced the way in which the poem has been understood\". Responding in part to Wheeler in 1986, Charles Rzepka analysed the relationship between the poet and the audience of the poem while describing \"Kubla Khan\" as one of \"Coleridge's three great poems of the supernatural\". He continued by discussing the preface: \"despite its obvious undependability as a guide to the actual process of the poem's composition, the preface can still, in Wheeler's words, lead us 'to ponder why Coleridge chose to write a preface...' What the preface describes, of course, is not the actual process by which the poem came into being, but an analogue of poetic creation as \"logos\", a divine 'decree' or fiat which transforms the Word into the world.\"\nDuring the 1990s, critics continued to praise the poem with many critics placing emphasis on what the Preface adds to the poem. David Perkins, in 1990, argued that \"Coleridge's introductory note to \"Kubla Khan\" weaves together two myths with potent imaginative appeal. The myth of the lost poem tells how an inspired work was mysteriously given to the poet and dispelled irrecoverably.\" Also in 1990, Thomas McFarland stated, \"Judging by the number and variety of critical effort to interpret their meaning, there may be no more palpably symbolic poems in all of English literature than \"Kubla Khan\" and \"The Ancient Mariner\".\" In 1996, Rosemary Ashton stated that the poem was \"one of the most famous poems in the language\" and claimed the Preface as \"the most famous, but probably not the most accurate, preface in literary history.\" Richard Holmes, in 1998, declared the importance of the poem's Preface while describing the reception of the 1816 volume of poems: \"However, no contemporary critic saw the larger possible significance of Coleridge's Preface to 'Kubla Khan', though it eventually became one of the most celebrated, and disputed, accounts of poetic composition ever written. Like the letter from the fictional 'friend' in the \"Biographia\", it brilliantly suggests how a compressed fragment came to represent a much larger (and even more mysterious) act of creation\".\nIn 2002, J. C. C. Mays pointed out that \"Coleridge's claim to be a great poet lies in the continued pursuit of the consequences of 'The Ancient Mariner,' 'Christabel' and 'Kubla Khan' on several levels.\" Adam Sisman, in 2006, questioned the nature of the poem itself: \"No one even knows whether it is complete; Coleridge describes it as a 'fragment,' but there is a case for doubting this. Maybe it is not a poem at all. Hazlitt called it 'a musical composition'...Though literary detectives have uncovered some of its sources, it remains difficult to say what the poem is about.\" In describing the merits of the poem and its fragmentary state, he said, \"The poem stands for itself: beautiful, sensuous and enigmatic.\" During the same year, Jack Stillinger wrote that \"Coleridge wrote only a few poems of the first rank \u2013 perhaps no more than a dozen, all told \u2013 and he seems to have taken a very casual attitude toward them...he kept 'Kubla Khan' in manuscript for nearly twenty years before offering it to the public 'rather as a psychological curiosity, than on the grounds of any supposed \"poetic\" merits'\". Harold Bloom, in 2010, argued that Coleridge wrote two kinds of poems and that \"The daemonic group, necessarily more famous, is the triad of \"The Ancient Mariner\", \"Christabel\", and 'Kubla Khan.'\" He goes on to explain the \"daemonic\": \"Opium was the avenging daemon or \"alastor\" of Coleridge's life, his dark or fallen angel, his experiential acquaintance with Milton's Satan. Opium was for him what wandering and moral tale-telling became for the Mariner \u2013 the personal shape of repetition compulsion. The lust for paradise in 'Kubla Khan,' Geraldine's lust for Christabel \u2013 these are manifestations of Coleridge's revisionary daemonization of Milton, these are Coleridge's countersublime. Poetic genius, the genial spirit itself, Coleridge must see as daemonic when it is his own rather than when it is Milton's.\"\nMusical settings.\nExcerpts from the poem have been put to music by Samuel Coleridge-Taylor, Granville Bantock, Humphrey Searle, and Paul Turok; and Charles Tomlinson Griffes composed an orchestral tone poem in 1912 (revised 1916).\nCanadian rock band Rush refers to the poem directly in the 1977 song \"Xanadu\", in which the narrator finds the site, obtains immortality after having \"drunk the milk of Paradise\" but goes mad after a thousand years, finding time stopped outside and himself unable to leave.\nBritish band Frankie Goes to Hollywood alludes to the poem in the song \"Welcome to the Pleasuredome\" from its eponymous 1984 debut album. However, they altered the quoted wording to \"In Xanadu did Kublai Khan a pleasuredome erect\".\nGerman band Blind Guardian makes several references to the poem in the lyrics of their song \"Sacred Mind\" on their 2015 concept album \"Beyond the Red Mirror\", and the associated page in the album book includes the following quote: \"Then all the charm is broken - all that phantom-world so fair Vanishes, and a thousand circlets spread\". Within the story, Xanadu or the pleasure-dome is a temptation intended to mislead the hero on his journey, and the last obstacle he must overcome before reaching the Red Mirror. \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17254", "revid": "1318091293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17254", "title": "Kashubian language", "text": "West Slavic language\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nKashubian () or Cassubian (; ; ) is a West Slavic language belonging to the Lechitic subgroup.\nIn Poland, it has been an officially recognized ethnic-minority language since 2005. Approximately 87,600 people use mainly Kashubian at home. It is the only remnant of the Pomeranian language. It is close to standard Polish with influence from Low German and the extinct Polabian (West Slavic) and Old Prussian (West Baltic) languages.\nThe Kashubian language exists in two different forms: vernacular dialects used in rural areas, and literary variants used in education.\nOrigin.\nKashubian is assumed to have evolved from the language spoken by some tribes of Pomeranians called Kashubians, in the region of Pomerania, on the southern coast of the Baltic Sea between the Vistula and Oder rivers. It first began to evolve separately in the period from the 13th to the 15th century as the Polish-Pomeranian linguistic area began to divide based around important linguistic developments centred in the western (Kashubian) part of the area.\nIn the 19th century Florian Ceynowa became Kashubian's first known activist. He undertook tremendous efforts to awaken Kashubian self-identity through the establishment of Kashubian language, customs, and traditions. He felt strongly that Poles were born brothers and that Kashubia was a separate nation.\nThe Young Kashubian movement followed in 1912, led by author and doctor Aleksander Majkowski, who wrote for the paper Zrz\u00ebsz Kasz\u00ebbsk\u00f4 as part of the Zrz\u00ebszinc\u00eb group. The group contributed significantly to the development of the Kashubian literary language.\nThe earliest printed documents in Polish with Kashubian elements date from the end of the 16th century. The modern orthography was first proposed in 1879.\nRelated languages.\nMany scholars and linguists debate whether Kashubian should be recognized as a Polish dialect or separate language. In terms of historical development, it is a separate Lechitic West Slavic language, but, in terms of modern influence, Polish is a prestige language. Kashubian is closely related to Slovincian, and both of them are dialects of Pomeranian. Despite this, some linguists, in Poland and elsewhere, consider it a divergent dialect of Polish. Dialectal diversity is so great within Kashubian that a speaker of southern dialects has considerable difficulty in understanding a speaker of northern dialects. The spelling and the grammar of Polish words written in Kashubian, which is most of its vocabulary, are highly unusual, making it difficult for native Polish speakers to comprehend written text in Kashubian.\nLike in Polish, about 5% of loanwords in Kashubian are from High German and Low German (such as \"\" \"art\"). Unlike in Polish, these are mostly from Low German and only occasionally from High German. Other sources of loanwords include the Baltic languages.\nSpeakers.\nPoland.\nThe number of speakers of Kashubian varies widely from source to source. In the 2021 census, approximately 87,600 people in Poland declared that they used Kashubian at home, a decrease from over 108,000 in the 2011 census. Of these, only 1,700 reported speaking exclusively in Kashubian within their homes, down from 3,800 in 2011. However, experts caution that changes in census methodology and the socio-political climate may have influenced these results. The number of people who can speak at least some Kashubian is higher, around 366,000. All Kashubian speakers are also fluent in Polish. A number of schools in Poland use Kashubian as a teaching language. It is an official alternative language for local administration purposes in Gmina Sierakowice, Gmina Linia, Gmina Parchowo, Gmina Luzino and Gmina \u017bukowo in the Pomeranian Voivodeship. Most respondents say that Kashubian is used in informal speech among family members and friends. This is most likely because Polish is the official language and spoken in formal settings.\nAmericas.\nDuring the Kashubian diaspora of 1855\u20131900, 115,700 Kashubians emigrated to North America, with around 15,000 emigrating to Brazil. Among the Polish community of Renfrew County, Ontario, Kashubian is widely spoken to this day, despite the use of more formal Polish by parish priests. In Winona, Minnesota, which Ramu\u0142t termed the \"Kashubian Capital of America\", Kashubian was regarded as \"poor Polish,\" as opposed to the \"good Polish\" of the parish priests and teaching sisters. Consequently, Kashubian failed to survive Polonization and died out shortly after the mid-20th century.\nLiterature.\nImportant for Kashubian literature was \"X\u0105\u017ceczka dlo Kaszebov\" by Florian Ceynowa (1817\u20131881). Hieronim Derdowski (1852\u20131902 in Winona, Minnesota) was another significant author who wrote in Kashubian, as was Aleksander Majkowski (1876\u20131938) from Ko\u015bcierzyna, who wrote the Kashubian national epic \"The Life and Adventures of Remus\". Jan Trepczyk was a poet who wrote in Kashubian, as was Stanis\u0142aw Pestka. Kashubian literature has been translated into Czech, Polish, English, German, Belarusian, Slovene and Finnish. Aleksander Majkowski and Alojzy Nagel belong to the most commonly translated Kashubian authors of the 20th century. A considerable body of Christian literature has been translated into Kashubian, including the New Testament, much of it by Adam Ryszard Sikora (OFM). Franciszek Grucza graduated from a Catholic seminary in Pelplin. He was the first priest to introduce Catholic liturgy in Kashubian.\nWorks.\nThe earliest recorded artifacts of Kashubian date back to the 15th century and include a book of spiritual psalms that were used to introduce Kashubian to the Lutheran church:\nEducation.\nThroughout the communist period in Poland (1948\u20131989), Kashubian greatly suffered in education and social status. Kashubian was represented as folklore and prevented from being taught in schools. Following the collapse of communism, attitudes on the status of Kashubian have been gradually changing. It has been included in the program of school education in Kashubia although not as a language of teaching or as a required subject for every child, but as a foreign language taught 3 hours per week at parents' explicit request. Since 1991, it is estimated that there have been around 17,000 students in over 400 schools who have learned Kashubian. Kashubian has some limited usage on public radio and had on public television. Since 2005, Kashubian has enjoyed legal protection in Poland as an official regional language. It is the only language in Poland with that status, which was granted by the \"Act of 6 January 2005 on National and Ethnic Minorities and on the Regional Language\" of the Polish Parliament. The act provides for its use in official contexts in ten communes in which speakers are at least 20% of the population. The recognition means that heavily populated Kashubian localities have been able to have road signs and other amenities with Polish and Kashubian translations on them.\nDialects.\nFriedrich Lorentz wrote in the early 20th century that there were three main Kashubian dialects. These include the\nOther researches would argue that each tiny region of the Kaszuby has its own dialect, as in \"Dialects and Slang of Poland\": \nPhonology.\nThe phonological system of the Kashubian language is similar in many ways to those of other Slavic languages. It is famous for and has a large vowel inventory, with 9 oral vowels and 2 nasal vowels.\nVowel length.\nFriedrich Lorentz argued that northern dialects had contrastive vowel length, but later studies showed that any phonemic length distinctions had disappeared by 1900. Any other vowel length is used for expressive purposes or is the result of syllable stress. All traces of vowel length can now be seen in vowel alterations.\nSyllable stress.\nKashubian features free placement of stress, and in some cases, mobile stress, and in northern dialects, unstressed syllables can result in vowel reduction. An archaic word final stress is preserved in some two-syllable adjectives, adverbs, and regularly in the comparative degree of adverbs, in some infinitives and present and past tense forms, some nouns ending in \"-\u00f4\", in diminutives. ending in \"-ik\"/\"-yk\", nouns formed with \"-c\" and \"-k\", and some prepositional phrases with pronouns.\nStress mobility can be observed in nouns, where in the singular the stress is initial, but in the plural it's on the final syllable of the stem, i.e. but , and in some verb forms, i.e. vs . Some dialects have merged \"\u00eb\" with \"e\", making the distinction contrastive. Most of this mobility is limited to morphology and stress has largely stabilized in Kashubian.\nNorthern and central dialects show a much more limited mobility, as northern dialects show stabilization on initial stress, and central shows constant distance between the stressed syllable and the initial syllable of the word. Proclitics such as prepositions, pronouns, and grammatical particles such as may take initial stress.\nEastern groups place accents on the penultimate syllable.\nThe difference between southern and northern dialects dates as far back as the 14th\u201315th century and is the result of changes to the Proto-Slavic vowel length system.\nConsonants.\nKashubian has simple consonants with a secondary articulation along with complex ones with secondary articulation.\nVoicing and devoicing.\nKashubian features the same system of voicing assimilation as standard Polish.\nVocabulary.\nGerman has been the source for most loanwords in Kashubian, with an estimated 5% of the vocabulary, as opposed to 3% in Polish.\nKashubian, like other Slavic languages, has a rich system of derivational morphology, with prefixes, suffixes, deverbals, compounds, among others.\nOrthography.\nKashubian alphabet.\nThe following digraphs are also used:\nSample text.\nArticle 1 of the \"Universal Declaration of Human Rights\" in Kashubian:\n\"Wsz\u00ebtczi l\u00ebdze rodz\u0105 s\u00e3 w\u00f2lny \u00eb r\u00f3wny w sw\u00f2ji cz\u00ebstnoce \u00eb sw\u00f2jich prawach. Maj\u0105 \u00f2ni dost\u00f3ne roz\u00ebm \u00eb s\u00ebmieni\u00e9 \u00eb n\u00f4l\u00e9g\u00f4 jima p\u00f2st\u00e3p\u00f2wac wobec dr\u00ebdzich w d\u00ebch\u00f9 brac\u00ebnot\u00eb. \"\nArticle 1 of the \"Universal Declaration of Human Rights\" in English:\n\"All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17256", "revid": "1318143137", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17256", "title": "Kim Milford", "text": "American singer-songwriter (1951\u20131988)\nRichard Kim Milford (February 7, 1951 \u2013 June 16, 1988), known professionally as Kim Milford, was an American actor, singer-songwriter, and composer. He was known for his stage acting in musicals such as \"The Rocky Horror Show\" and \"Jesus Christ Superstar\".\nEarly life.\nBorn in Glen Ridge, New Jersey, Milford grew up in Winnetka, Illinois. His older sister, Penelope, also became an actress. Milford attended New Trier High School.\nCareer.\nActing.\nMilford first appeared at the stock theatre in Chicago at age 10. In 1971, he appeared at The Kennedy Center in Leonard Bernstein\u2019s \"Mass\". At age 17, he was in the original stage version of \"Hair\" on Broadway, playing Woof and Claude. In 1976, he was awarded the Faith and Freedom Award by the Religious Heritage of America for his portrayal of the Prodigal Son in \"Round Trip\". Milford later performed in the first concert tour of \"Jesus Christ Superstar\" playing Jesus and Judas. He also appeared in the original American production of \"The Rocky Horror Show\" as Rocky with the Los Angeles Roxy Cast and in the Broadway production. He reprised his role in the 1980 North American Tour production. He also appeared in the plays \"Henry Sweet Henry\" (1967), \"Your Own Thing\", \"Rockabye Hamlet\" (1975\u201376), \"More Than You Deserve\", \"Sunset\", and \"All Bets Off\".\nIn addition to stage work, Milford appeared in the 1975 television movies \"Song of the Succubus\" and \"Rock-a-Die-Baby\" (also known as \"Night of the Full Moon\") in which he performed music with his band Moon. During the 1970s and 1980s, he had guest roles on \"The Mod Squad\", \"Mannix\", \"The Highwayman\", he also starred in the 1978 feature film \"Laserblast\" and appeared in \"Corvette Summer\" alongside Mark Hamill. He also had a recurring role as Tommy on the soap opera \"The Secret Storm\".\nMusic.\nMilford briefly became vocalist for Beck, Bogert &amp; Appice, billed as The Jeff Beck Group, for six performances between July 24 to August 8, 1972. It was billed as the Jeff Beck Group, because, at the time, the band also included holdover Max Middleton on piano. Following Middleton's departure and Milford's firing, the trio was known as Beck, Bogert &amp; Appice (Middleton joined the British band Hummingbird). Milford was also the front man for his own band Moon who were co-writers on songs such as \"Lovin' Lady\", \"Jo Anna\" and \"She's Puttin' Me Through Changes\". According to an interview in \"Viva\", Milford recorded an album \"Chain Your Lovers to the Bedposts\" and a single \"Help Is on the Way, Rozea\" released in 1974. He recorded the single \"Muddy River Water\" for (Decca Records), the \"Sunset\" soundtrack and appeared on the Roxy cast album of \"Rocky Horror Show\".\nMilford composed the music for \"Salome\", based on the Oscar Wilde play and starred in it at Mark Taper Forum in Los Angeles in 1979. He wrote and performed \"My Love Is a Rebel\" on the soundtrack of \"Limbo\", starring Barry Bostwick. His song \"Justice\" appeared on the \"Ciao! Manhattan\" soundtrack.\nDeath.\nMilford was born with several congenital heart defects that required surgery throughout his life. On June 16, 1988, he died of complications following open heart surgery several weeks earlier. He was 37 years old.\nDiscography.\nAlbums.\nRocky Horror Show\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17257", "revid": "21678789", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17257", "title": "Ken Kesey", "text": "American writer and countercultural figure (1935\u20132001)\nKenneth Elton Kesey (; September 17, 1935\u00a0\u2013 November 10, 2001) was an American novelist, essayist and countercultural figure. He considered himself a link between the Beat Generation of the 1950s and the hippies of the 1960s.\nKesey was born in La Junta, Colorado, and grew up in Springfield, Oregon, graduating from the University of Oregon in 1957. He began writing \"One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest\" in 1960 after completing a graduate fellowship in creative writing at Stanford University; the novel was an immediate commercial and critical success when published two years later. During this period, Kesey was used by the CIA (supposedly without his knowledge) in the Project MKULTRA involving hallucinogenic drugs (including mescaline and LSD), which was done to try to make people insane to put them under the control of interrogators.\nAfter \"One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest\" was published, Kesey moved to nearby La Honda, California, and began hosting \"happenings\" with former colleagues from Stanford, bohemian and literary figures including Neal Cassady and other friends, who became collectively known as the Merry Pranksters. As documented in Tom Wolfe's 1968 New Journalism book \"The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test\", some of the parties were promoted to the public as Acid Tests, and integrated the consumption of LSD with multimedia performances. He mentored the Grateful Dead, who were the Acid Tests' house band, and continued to exert a profound influence upon the group throughout their career.\nKesey's second novel, \"Sometimes a Great Notion\", was a commercial success that polarized some critics and readers upon its release in 1964. An epic account of the vicissitudes of an Oregon logging family that aspired to the modernist grandeur of William Faulkner's Yoknapatawpha saga, Kesey regarded it as his magnum opus.\nIn 1965, after being arrested for marijuana possession and faking suicide, Kesey was imprisoned for five months. Shortly thereafter, he returned home to the Willamette Valley and settled in Pleasant Hill, Oregon, where he maintained a secluded, family-oriented lifestyle for the rest of his life. In addition to teaching at the University of Oregon\u2014an experience that culminated in \"Caverns\" (1989), a collaborative novel by Kesey and his graduate workshop students under the pseudonym \"O.U. Levon\"\u2014he continued to regularly contribute fiction and reportage to such publications as \"Esquire\", \"Rolling Stone\", \"Oui\", \"Running\", and \"The Whole Earth Catalog\"; various iterations of these pieces were collected in \"Kesey's Garage Sale\" (1973) and \"Demon Box\" (1986).\nBetween 1974 and 1980, Kesey published six issues of \"Spit in the Ocean\", a literary magazine that featured excerpts from an unfinished novel (\"Seven Prayers by Grandma Whittier\", an account of Kesey's grandmother's struggle with Alzheimer's disease) and contributions from writers including Margo St. James, Kate Millett, Stewart Brand, Saul-Paul Sirag, Jack Sarfatti, Paul Krassner and William S. Burroughs. After a third novel (\"Sailor Song\") was released to lukewarm reviews in 1992, he reunited with the Merry Pranksters and began publishing works on the Internet until ill health (including a stroke) curtailed his activities.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nKesey was born in 1935 in La Junta, Colorado, to dairy farmers Geneva (n\u00e9e Smith) and Frederick A. Kesey. When Kesey was 10 years old, the family moved to Springfield, Oregon in 1946. Kesey was a champion wrestler in high school and college in the weight division. During high school, Kesey almost qualified to be on the Olympic team; however, a serious shoulder injury halted his wrestling career. He graduated from Springfield High School in 1953. An avid reader and filmgoer, the young Kesey took John Wayne, Edgar Rice Burroughs, and Zane Grey as his role models (later naming a son Zane) and toyed with magic, ventriloquism and hypnotism.\nWhile attending the University of Oregon School of Journalism and Communication in neighboring Eugene in 1956, Kesey eloped with his high-school sweetheart, Oregon State College student Norma \"Faye\" Haxby, whom he had met in seventh grade. According to Kesey, \"Without Faye, I would have been swept overboard by notoriety and weird, dope-fueled ideas and flower-child girls with beamy eyes and bulbous breasts.\" Married until his death, they had three children: Jed, Zane and Shannon. Additionally, with Faye's approval, Kesey fathered a daughter, Sunshine Kesey, with fellow Merry Prankster Carolyn \"Mountain Girl\" Adams. Born in 1966, Sunshine was raised by Adams and her stepfather, Jerry Garcia.\nKesey had a football scholarship for his first year, but switched to the University of Oregon wrestling team as a better fit for his build. After posting a .885 winning percentage in the 1956\u201357 season, he received the Fred Low Scholarship for outstanding Northwest wrestler. In 1957, Kesey was second in his weight class at the Pacific Coast intercollegiate competition. He remains in the top 10 of Oregon Wrestling's all-time winning percentage.\nA member of Beta Theta Pi throughout his studies, Kesey graduated from the University of Oregon with a BA in speech and communication in 1957. Increasingly disengaged by the playwriting and screenwriting courses that comprised much of his major, he began to take literature classes in the second half of his collegiate career with James B. Hall, a cosmopolitan alumnus of the Iowa Writers' Workshop who had previously taught at Cornell University and later served as provost of College V at the University of California, Santa Cruz. Hall took on Kesey as his prot\u00e9g\u00e9 and cultivated his interest in literary fiction, introducing Kesey (whose reading interests were hitherto confined to science fiction) to the works of Ernest Hemingway and other paragons of literary modernism. After the last of several brief summer sojourns as a struggling actor in Los Angeles, Kesey published his first short story (\"First Sunday of September\") in the \"Northwest Review\" and successfully applied to the highly selective Woodrow Wilson National Fellowship for the 1958\u201359 academic year.\nUnbeknownst to Kesey, who applied at Hall's request, the maverick literary critic Leslie Fiedler (then based at the University of Montana) successfully importuned the regional fellowship committee to select the \"rough-hewn\" Kesey alongside more traditional fellows from Reed College and other elite institutions. Because he lacked the prerequisites to work toward a traditional master's degree in English as a communications major, Kesey elected to enroll in the non-degree program at Stanford University's Creative Writing Center that fall. While studying and working in the Stanford milieu over the next five years, most of them spent as a resident of Perry Lane (a historically bohemian enclave next to the university golf course), he developed intimate lifelong friendships with fellow writers Ken Babbs, Larry McMurtry, Wendell Berry, Ed McClanahan, Gurney Norman and Robert Stone.\nDuring his initial fellowship year, Kesey frequently clashed with center director Wallace Stegner, who regarded him as \"a sort of highly talented illiterate\" and rejected Kesey's application for a departmental Stegner Fellowship before permitting his attendance as a Woodrow Wilson Fellow. Reinforcing these perceptions, Stegner's deputy Richard Scowcroft later recalled that \"neither Wally nor I thought he had a particularly important talent.\" According to Stone, Stegner \"saw Kesey... as a threat to civilization and intellectualism and sobriety\" and continued to reject Kesey's Stegner Fellowship applications for the 1959\u201360 and 1960\u201361 terms.\nNevertheless, Kesey received the prestigious $2,000 Harper-Saxton Prize for his first novel in progress (the oft-rejected \"Zoo\") and audited the graduate writing seminar\u2014a courtesy nominally accorded to former Stegner Fellows, although Kesey only secured his place by falsely claiming to Scowcroft that his colleague (on sabbatical through 1960) \"had said that he could attend classes for free\"\u2014through the 1960\u201361 term. The course was initially taught that year by Viking Press editorial consultant and Lost Generation \"eminence grise\" Malcolm Cowley, who was \"always glad to see\" Kesey and fellow auditor Tillie Olsen. Cowley was succeeded the following quarter by the Irish short-story specialist Frank O'Connor; frequent spats between O'Connor and Kesey ultimately precipitated his departure from the class. While under Cowley's tutelage, he began to draft and workshop a manuscript that evolved into \"One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest\".\nReflecting upon this period in a 1999 interview with Robert K. Elder, Kesey recalled, \"I was too young to be a beatnik, and too old to be a hippie.\"\nExperimentation with psychedelic drugs.\nAt the invitation of Perry Lane neighbor and Stanford psychology graduate student Vic Lovell, Kesey was tricked into volunteering to take part in what turned out to be a CIA-financed study under the aegis of Project MKULTRA, a highly secret military program, at the Menlo Park Veterans' Hospital, where he worked as a night aide. The project studied the effects of hallucinogens and other psychoactive drugs, particularly LSD, psilocybin, mescaline, cocaine, AMT, and DMT. Kesey wrote many detailed accounts of his experiences with these drugs, both during the study and in the years of private drug use that followed.\nKesey's role as a medical guinea pig, as well as his stint working at the Veterans' Administration hospital, inspired \"One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest\". The book's success, as well as the demolition of the Perry Lane cabins in August 1963, allowed him to move to a log house in La Honda, California, a rustic hamlet in the Santa Cruz Mountains 15 miles southwest of Stanford University. He frequently entertained friends and many others with parties he called \"Acid Tests\", involving music (including Kesey's favorite band, the Grateful Dead), black lights, fluorescent paint, strobe lights, LSD, and other psychedelic effects. These parties were described in some of Allen Ginsberg's poems and served as the basis for Tom Wolfe's \"The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test\", an early exemplar of the nonfiction novel. Other firsthand accounts of the Acid Tests appear in \"Living with the Dead\" by Rock Scully and David Dalton, \"\" by Hunter S. Thompson and the 1967 Hells Angels memoir \"Freewheelin Frank: Secretary of the Angels\" (Frank Reynolds; ghostwritten by Michael McClure).\n\"One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest\".\nWhile enrolled at the University of Oregon in 1957, Kesey wrote \"End of Autumn\"; according to Rick Dogson, the novel \"focused on the exploitation of college athletes by telling the tale of a football lineman who was having second thoughts about the game\". Kesey came to regard the unpublished work as juvenilia, but an excerpt served as his Stanford Creative Writing Center application sample.\nDuring his Woodrow Wilson Fellowship year, Kesey wrote \"Zoo\", a novel about beatniks living in the North Beach community of San Francisco, but it was never published.\nThe inspiration for \"One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest\" came while Kesey was working the night shift with Gordon Lish at the Menlo Park Veterans' Hospital. There, Kesey often spent time talking to the patients, sometimes under the influence of the hallucinogenic drugs he had volunteered to experiment with. He did not believe these patients were insane, but rather that society had pushed them out because they did not fit conventional ideas of how people were supposed to act and behave. Published under Cowley's guidance in 1962, the novel was an immediate success; in 1963, it was adapted into a successful stage play by Dale Wasserman, and in 1975, Milo\u0161 Forman directed a screen adaptation, which won the \"Big Five\" Academy Awards: Best Picture, Best Actor (Jack Nicholson), Best Actress (Louise Fletcher), Best Director (Forman) and Best Adapted Screenplay (Lawrence Hauben and Bo Goldman).\nKesey originally was involved in the film, but left two weeks into production. He claimed never to have seen the movie because of a dispute over the $20,000 he was initially paid for the film rights. Kesey loathed that, unlike the book, the film was not narrated by Chief Bromden, and he disagreed with Jack Nicholson's casting as Randle McMurphy (he wanted Gene Hackman). Despite this, Faye Kesey has said that her husband was generally supportive of the film and pleased that it was made.\nMerry Pranksters.\nWhen the 1964 publication of his second novel, \"Sometimes a Great Notion\", required his presence in New York, Kesey, Neal Cassady, and others in a group of friends they called the Merry Pranksters took a cross-country trip in a school bus nicknamed \"Furthur\". This trip, described in Tom Wolfe's \"The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test\" (and later in Kesey's unproduced screenplay, \"The Furthur Inquiry\"), was the group's attempt to create art out of everyday life and to experience roadway America while high on LSD. In an interview after arriving in New York, Kesey said, \"The sense of communication in this country has damn near atrophied. But we found as we went along it got easier to make contact with people. If people could just understand it is possible to be different without being a threat.\" A huge amount of footage was filmed on 16 mm film during the trip, which remained largely unseen until the release of Alex Gibney and Alison Elwood's 2011 film \"Magic Trip\".\nAfter the bus trip, the Pranksters threw parties they called Acid Tests around the San Francisco Bay Area from 1965 to 1966. Many of the Pranksters lived at Kesey's residence in La Honda. In New York, Cassady introduced Kesey to Jack Kerouac and Allen Ginsberg, who turned them on to Timothy Leary. \"Sometimes a Great Notion\" inspired a 1970 film starring and directed by Paul Newman; it was nominated for two Academy Awards, and in 1972 was the first film shown by the new television network HBO, in Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania.\nIn 1965, Kesey was arrested in La Honda for marijuana possession. In an attempt to mislead police, he faked suicide by having friends leave his truck on a cliffside road near Eureka, along with an elaborate suicide note written by the Pranksters. Kesey fled to Mexico in the back of a friend's car. He returned to the U.S. eight months later. On January 17, 1966, Kesey was sentenced to six months at the San Mateo County jail in Redwood City, California. Two nights later, he was arrested again, this time with Carolyn Adams, while smoking marijuana on the rooftop of Stewart Brand's Telegraph Hill home in San Francisco. On his release, he moved back to the family farm in Pleasant Hill, Oregon, in the Willamette Valley, where he spent the rest of his life. He wrote many articles, books (mostly collections of his articles), and short stories during that time.\nDeath of son.\nOn January 23, 1984, Kesey's 20-year-old son Jed, a wrestler for the University of Oregon, suffered severe head injuries on the way to Pullman, Washington, when the team's loaned van crashed after sliding off an icy highway. Two days later at Deaconess Hospital in Spokane, he was declared brain dead and his parents gave permission for his organs to be donated.\nJed's death deeply affected Kesey, who later called Jed a victim of policies that had starved the team of funding. He wrote to Senator Mark Hatfield: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And I began to get mad, Senator. I had finally found where the blame must be laid: that the money we are spending for national defense is not defending us from the villains real and near, the awful villains of ignorance, and cancer, and heart disease and highway death. How many school buses could be outfitted with seatbelts with the money spent for one of those 16-inch shells?\nAt a Grateful Dead concert soon after the death of promoter Bill Graham, Kesey delivered a eulogy, mentioning that Graham had donated $1,000 toward a memorial to Jed atop Mount Pisgah, near the Kesey home in Pleasant Hill. In 1988, Kesey donated $33,395 toward the purchase of a proper bus for the school's wrestling team.\nFinal years.\nKesey was diagnosed with diabetes in 1992. In 1994, he toured with members of the Merry Pranksters, performing a musical play he wrote about the millennium called \"Twister: A Ritual Reality\". Many old and new friends and family showed up to support the Pranksters on this tour, which took them from Seattle's Bumbershoot all along the West Coast, including a sold-out two-night run at The Fillmore in San Francisco to Boulder, Colorado, where they coaxed the Beat Generation poet Allen Ginsberg into performing with them.\nKesey mainly kept to his home life in Pleasant Hill, preferring to make artistic contributions on the Internet or holding ritualistic revivals in the spirit of the Acid Test. In the Grateful Dead DVD \"The Closing of Winterland\" (2003) documenting the New Year's 1978/1979 concert at the Winterland Arena in San Francisco, Kesey is featured in a between-set interview.\nOn August 14, 1997, Kesey and his Pranksters attended a Phish concert in Darien Lake, New York. Kesey and the Pranksters appeared onstage with the band and performed a dance-trance-jam session involving several characters from \"The Wizard of Oz\" and \"Frankenstein\".\nIn June 2001, Kesey was the keynote speaker at The Evergreen State College's commencement ceremony. His last major work was an essay for \"Rolling Stone\" magazine calling for peace in the aftermath of the September 11 attacks.\nDeath.\nIn 1997, health problems began to weaken Kesey, starting with a stroke that year. On October 25, 2001, Kesey had surgery at Sacred Heart Medical Center in Eugene on his liver to remove a tumor; he did not recover and died of complications several weeks later on November 10 at age 66. After a public service in Eugene, his body was brought back to his farm and buried next to his son Jed.\nLegacy.\nThe film \"Gerry\" (2002) is dedicated to Kesey.\nKesey Square is in downtown Eugene, Oregon.\nWorks.\nThis is a selected list of Kesey's better-known works.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17258", "revid": "1559905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17258", "title": "Kite history", "text": ""}
