{"id": "14446", "revid": "26350496", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14446", "title": "Harold Alexander, 1st Earl Alexander of Tunis", "text": "British field marshal; Governor General of Canada (1891\u20131969)\nField Marshal Harold Rupert Leofric George Alexander, 1st Earl Alexander of Tunis (10 December 1891 \u2013 16 June 1969), was a senior and highly decorated British Army officer who served in both of the world wars. \nAlexander was born in London and was educated at Harrow school before moving on to the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, for training as an army officer of the Irish Guards. \nHe rose to military prominence through his service in the First World War, and continued his career through various British campaigns across Europe and Asia during the interwar period. \nIn the Second World War, Alexander, initially in command of a division, oversaw the final stages of the Allied evacuation from Dunkirk and subsequently held field commands in Britain, Burma, North Africa and Italy, including serving as Commander-in-Chief Middle East and commanding the 18th Army Group in Tunisia. He then commanded the 15th Army Group for the capture of Sicily and again in Italy before being promoted to field marshal and being made Supreme Allied Commander Mediterranean in late 1944.\nIn 1946 he was appointed as Governor General of Canada by King George VI, on the recommendation of the Prime Minister of Canada, William Lyon Mackenzie King, to replace the Earl of Athlone as viceroy, and he occupied the post until he was succeeded by Vincent Massey in 1952. Alexander proved to be enthusiastic about the Canadian wilderness and popular with Canadians. He was the last Governor General who was born in the United Kingdom as well as the last Governor General to be a peer.\nAfter the end of his viceregal tenure, Alexander was sworn into the Queen's Privy Council for Canada and thereafter, in order to serve as the British Minister of Defence in the Cabinet of Winston Churchill, into the Imperial Privy Council. Alexander retired in 1954 and died in 1969.\nEarly life and military career.\nAlexander was born in London into an aristocratic family from County Tyrone of Anglo-Irish descent. He was the third son of James Alexander, 4th Earl of Caledon, and Lady Elizabeth Graham-Toler, Countess of Caledon, a daughter of the 3rd Earl of Norbury. Alexander was educated at Hawtreys and Harrow School, there participating as the 11th batsman in the sensational Fowler's Match against Eton College in 1910. Though Alexander toyed with the notion of becoming an artist, he went instead on to the Royal Military College, Sandhurst in 1910.\nAfter passing out from Sandhurst he was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the Irish Guards on 23 September 1911. He was promoted to lieutenant on 5 December 1912.\nFirst World War.\nAlexander spent most of the First World War on the Western Front. As a 22-year-old platoon commander in the 1st Battalion, Irish Guards, he served with the British Expeditionary Force (BEF) in 1914. He took part in the retreat from Mons and was wounded at First Ypres and invalided home. He was promoted to temporary captain on 15 November 1914 and permanent captain in the newly raised 2nd Battalion on 7 February the following year.\nAlexander returned to the Western Front in August 1915, fought at the Battle of Loos and was, for ten days in October 1915, an acting major and acting Commanding Officer (CO) of the 1st Battalion, Irish Guards, as a \"Battle Casualty Replacement\". He then returned to the 2nd Battalion as a company officer and, in January 1916, received the Military Cross for his bravery at Loos. For service in the Battle of the Somme on 15 September 1916, he was, in October, appointed to the Distinguished Service Order (DSO), the citation for which read:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn the same month, Alexander was further honoured with induction into the French L\u00e9gion d'honneur.\nOn 10 December 1916, his twenty-fifth birthday, Alexander became second-in-command (2-i-c) of the 1st Battalion, Irish Guards, as an acting major. By May, he was briefly acting CO of the 1st Battalion, as an acting lieutenant colonel, while still only a substantive captain. He became a permanent major on 1 August 1917, and was again promoted acting lieutenant colonel, this time confirmed as CO of the 2nd Battalion, Irish Guards, on 15 October. Alexander commanded his battalion at Third Ypres, where he was slightly wounded, then at Bourlon Wood (part of the battle of Cambrai), where his battalion suffered 320 casualties out of 400 men. Alexander, between 23 and 30 March 1918, had to assume command of the 4th Guards Brigade, during the British retreat from the German Army's Spring Offensive. He once again commanded the 2nd Battalion, Irish Guards, at Hazebrouck in April 1918, where it took such severe casualties that it saw no further action. Still an acting lieutenant colonel, he then commanded a corps infantry school in October 1918, a month before the war ended on 11 November 1918.\nRudyard Kipling, who wrote a history of the Irish Guards, in which his own son, Jack Kipling, fought and was killed in action, noted that, \"it is undeniable that Colonel Alexander had the gift of handling the men on the lines to which they most readily responded\u00a0... His subordinates loved him, even when he fell upon them blisteringly for their shortcomings; and his men were all his own.\"\nBetween the wars.\nAlexander in 1919 served with the Allied Control Commission in Poland. As a temporary lieutenant-colonel, he led the Baltic German Landeswehr in the Latvian War of Independence, commanding units loyal to Latvia in the successful drive to eject the Bolsheviks from Latgalia. During service there, he was accidentally wounded by one of his own sentries on 9 October 1919.\nAlexander returned to Britain in May 1920 as a major, second in command of the 1st Battalion, Irish Guards; in May 1922, he was promoted substantive lieutenant-colonel and appointed commanding officer. He commanded the battalion at Constantinople (a sensitive posting in the runup to the Chanak Crisis), then Gibraltar from October 1922, then in London from April 1923 until January 1926, when he was released from that role to attend the Staff College at Camberley, England, from 1926 to 1927. By now Alexander had gained an excellent reputation for himself. In addition, he was older than many of his fellow students\u2014and even some of his instructors\u2014at the college. Among his many fellow students were Douglas Wimberley, who would later become a major-general and command the 51st (Highland) Division from 1941\u20141943, including at the Second Battle of El Alamein, who formed a high opinion of Alexander, who, despite his outstanding war record, showed little sign of being overly pleased with himself. Instead, he showed \"simplicity, directness and kindness\" and gained the respect of all at the college, with two notable exceptions\u2014the future field marshals Alan Brooke and Bernard Montgomery\u2014who did not come away with a particularly favourable impression of him.\nAfter graduating from the Staff College, Alexander was then, in February 1928, promoted to colonel (backdated to 14 May 1926) and was the next month appointed Officer Commanding the Irish Guards Regimental District and 140th (4th London) Infantry Brigade, part of the 47th (1/2nd London) Division, in the Territorial Army (TA), a post he held until January 1930, when he again returned to study, attending the Imperial Defence College in London for one year.\nAlexander then held staff appointments as (from January 1931) GSO2 in the Directorate of Military Training at the War Office and (1932\u20131934) GSO1 at HQ Northern Command in York, before being made in October 1934 a temporary brigadier and given command of the Nowshera Brigade, on the Northwest Frontier in India. For his service there, and in particular for his actions in the Loe-Agra operations against the Pathans in Malakand between February and April 1935, Alexander was that year made a Companion of the Order of the Star of India and was mentioned in dispatches. He was mentioned once more for his service during the Second Mohmand Campaign in Northwest Frontier Province from August to October of the same year, serving under Brigadier Claude Auchinleck. Alexander had a reputation for leading from the front and for reaching mountain crests with or even ahead of his troops.\nIn March 1937, Alexander was appointed as one of the aides-de-camp to the recently acceded King George VI and in May returned to the United Kingdom to take part in this capacity in the state procession through London during the King's coronation. Alexander would have been seen in this event by two of his Canadian viceregal successors: Vincent Massey, who was then the Canadian high commissioner to the United Kingdom, and Massey's secretary, Georges Vanier, who watched the procession from the roof of Canada House on Trafalgar Square. Following the coronation celebration, Alexander returned to India, where he was made the honorary colonel of the 3rd Battalion, 2nd Punjab Regiment, and then in October 1937 was promoted to the rank of major-general, making Alexander the youngest general in the British Army. He relinquished command of his brigade in January 1938, and in February returned to the United Kingdom to take command of the 1st Infantry Division. In June 1938 he was appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath.\nSecond World War.\nBelgium and France 1939\u22121940.\nFollowing the outbreak of the Second World War, in September 1939, Alexander brought the 1st Division to France, where it became part of the British Expeditionary Force (BEF) and served there for the next eight months. In May 1940, when the German Army invaded France, he successfully led the division's withdrawal to Dunkirk, where it was evacuated to England, along with the rest of the BEF. Shortly after Major-General Bernard Montgomery had been appointed to command II Corps (and before that the 3rd Division), Alexander was, while still on the beachhead, placed in command of I\u00a0Corps, and left the eastern mole on the destroyer \"Venomous\" late on 2 June after ensuring that all British troops had been evacuated. In recognition of his services in the field from March to June 1940, Alexander was again mentioned in despatches.\nUnited Kingdom 1940\u22121942.\nAfter Dunkirk, Alexander returned to the United Kingdom and continued to command I Corps, now guarding the coasts of Yorkshire and Lincolnshire as part of Northern Command. He was promoted acting lieutenant-general in July 1940, and in December 1940 he was appointed to succeed Claude Auchinleck as General Officer Commanding-in-Chief (GOC-in-C) of Southern Command, which was responsible for the defence of south-west England. His rank of lieutenant-general was made permanent in December 1940. While he was here he came into contact with Lieutenant-General Bernard Montgomery, who was then serving under his command as GOC of V Corps. Montgomery and Auchinleck had never seen eye-to-eye on much but Alexander, believing Montgomery, who had been one of Alexander's instructors at the Staff College in the mid-1920s, knew what he was doing, simply allowed Montgomery (or \"Monty\") to continue with what he was doing. The two men got along well and their relationship would continue in a similar manner later on in the war.\nIt was during this period and most of 1941 where Alexander came to the attention of his superiors, the most notable among them being General Sir Alan Brooke, then the Commander-in-Chief, Home Forces (and in December 1941 succeeding John Dill as Chief of the Imperial General Staff), and Winston Churchill, the Prime Minister. Churchill in particular became a great admirer of Alexander and visited him numerous times throughout 1941, nominating him as the commander of Force 110. Created on paper as the first expeditionary force since the BEF's evacuation from France the year before, Force 110 was considered for several projects throughout the year of 1941, such as landings in the Azores, the Canary Islands and Sicily, but these were, perhaps fortunately, all ultimately abandoned.\nBurma and India 1942.\nOn 1 January 1942 he was knighted and appointed a Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath, and in February, after the Japanese invasion of Burma, was sent to India to become GOC-in-C of British Forces in Burma as a full general. Alexander was unable to fulfil his orders to hold Rangoon, which was abandoned on 6\u20137 March. He took personal charge of some small local engagements, and was encircled by the Japanese troops in the Battle of Yenangyaung. Rescued by Chinese troops commanded by General Sun Li-jen, Alexander was able to escape. Following that, Alexander increasingly left much of the tactical conduct of the campaign to his corps commander, Lieutenant-General William Slim, while he himself handled the more political aspects of relations with Joseph Stilwell, the nominal commander of the Chinese forces. Alexander was promoted to Commander-in-Chief (C-in-C) of Allied Land Forces in Burma, March 1942, and ordered Slim to abandon Mandalay and retreat to India.\nThe Middle East and North Africa 1942\u22121943.\nBy July 1942, the British and Indian forces in Burma had completed their fighting retreat into India, and Alexander, having yet again been mentioned in despatches for his Burma service, was recalled to the United Kingdom. He was at first selected to command the British First Army, which was to take part in Operation Torch, the Anglo-American invasion of French North Africa. However, following a visit in early August to Egypt by the British Prime Minister, Winston Churchill, and the Chief of the Imperial General Staff (CIGS), General Sir Alan Brooke, Alexander flew to Cairo on 8 August to replace General Claude Auchinleck, Alexander's predecessor at Southern Command in the United Kingdom, as C-in-C of Middle East Command, the post responsible for the overall conduct of the campaign in the desert of North Africa. At the same time, Lieutenant-General Montgomery replaced Auchinleck as GOC of the British Eighth Army. Alexander presided over Montgomery's victory at the Second Battle of El Alamein and the advance of the Eighth Army to Tripoli, for which Alexander was elevated to a Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath, and, after the Anglo-American forces of the First Army (under Lieutenant-General Kenneth Anderson) from Operation Torch and the Eighth Army converged in Tunisia in February 1943, they were brought under the unified command of a newly formed 18th Army Group headquarters, commanded by Alexander and reporting to General Dwight D. Eisenhower, the Supreme Allied Commander in the Mediterranean theatre at Allied Forces Headquarters (AFHQ). The American General Omar Bradley, who fought in the Tunisian campaign, then commanding the U.S. II Corps, credited Alexander's patience and experience with helping an inexperienced United States \"field command mature and eventually come of age\".\nThe Axis forces in Tunisia surrendered by May 1943, with some 250,000 Axis troops surrendering, the largest surrender yet in the war. Alexander telegraphed Churchill in response, stating:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Sir, it is my duty to report that the Tunisian campaign is over. All enemy resistance has ceased. We are masters of the North African shores.\nSicily and Italy 1943\u22121945.\nAfter the Tunisian campaign, Alexander's command became the 15th Army Group, which became responsible (under General Eisenhower) for mounting the July 1943 Allied invasion of Sicily (codenamed Operation Husky). Once again, Alexander directed two field armies, both commanded by strong-willed characters who were not easy to control: General Montgomery's British Eighth Army and Lieutenant General George S. Patton's U.S. Seventh Army. The campaign did not portray Alexander at his best and he failed to grip his two commanders. Montgomery's Eighth Army found itself in a slogging match against typically skilful German opposition on the Catanian plain and on the slopes of Mount Etna. Patton, resentful in his belief that he and his Seventh Army had been given a secondary role in the campaign, confronted Alexander and successfully argued for his army to be allowed to drive to the northwest and to capture Palermo. Although initially reluctant to allow Patton such a role, Alexander eventually, but reluctantly, allowed the Seventh Army commander to have his way, although Palermo did not appear to have much strategic significance. Despite this, it turned out to be the key to unlocking the Axis forces' defences and gave the Americans an easier route towards Messina. The brief campaign in Sicily proved largely successful, but some (with Montgomery among the loudest of the critics) believed that the campaign lacked direction - and blamed Alexander. Furthermore, although the Axis forces had been forced to withdraw from Sicily, they had managed to do so in relatively good order, crossing the Straits of Messina into Italy.\nAfter Sicily, planning began for the Allied invasion of Italy, which began on 3 September 1943 (the fourth anniversary of Britain's entry into the war). Montgomery's Eighth Army launched Operation Baytown, crossing over into Calabria but initially facing little real opposition and slowly making its way up the Italian peninsula. Six days later the U.S. Fifth Army (which, despite its name, included the British X Corps under Lieutenant-General Richard McCreery, under its command) under Lieutenant General Mark W. Clark landed at Salerno as part of Operation Avalanche, which, initially at least, started off well, before encountering heavy resistance and almost being thrown back into the sea. He supported McCreery when he refused to consider evacuation plans that Clark had been considering. Alexander was also instrumental in convincing Clark to replace the U.S. VI Corps commander, Major General Ernest J. Dawley - who had not performed well and whom Alexander described as \"a broken reed\" - with Major General John P. Lucas. Despite the heavy casualties sustained at Salerno, the Allies managed to force the Axis forces back and, with both the Fifth and Eighth Armies now united at last, began pursuing the retreating enemy. By December 1943 progress had virtually ground to a halt as the Axis had Alexander's 15th Army Group held up at the Winter Line (also known as the Gustav Line) and ground was gained only at the expense of heavy casualties. At around this time there were numerous Allied command changes, with Montgomery handing over the Eighth Army to Lieutenant-General Sir Oliver Leese and departing for the United Kingdom to take up command of the 21st Army Group, which controlled all Allied land forces for the planned invasion of Normandy, whilst General Sir Henry Wilson replaced Eisenhower as the Supreme Allied Commander in the Mediterranean in January 1944.\nThe fighting in Italy would continue to prove even more difficult for Alexander's forces over the following few months. Between January and May 1944, numerous Allied attacks were repulsed at Monte Cassino (which was also bombed in February 1944, with Alexander taking responsibility for the decision to bomb it) and the Anzio landings of January 1944 by Lucas's U.S. VI Corps began well but did not live up to expectations and eventually ended up in a stalemate, like the rest of the Italian fighting so far. Alexander had a large part in planning the landings (code-named \"Operation Shingle\"), and intended to draw German strength away from the Winter Line and to cut their lines of communication. The scheme was supported by Prime Minister Churchill, who had very high expectations for Shingle. However, the operation was flawed in many ways. In particular, Alexander's plan of seizing the Alban Hills might possibly have led to the entire Allied force (comprising only two infantry divisions, elements of the U.S. 1st Armored Division, and other smaller units in support) being wiped out. Despite Churchill's and Alexander's intentions, the Allied forces at Anzio did not achieve the somewhat unrealistic expectations, and were essentially cut off from any support, although they did manage to lure German reserves from elsewhere, which might otherwise have been available for service on the Eastern Front or during the impending Allied invasion of Normandy.\nWhen Eisenhower was appointed in December 1943 as Supreme Allied Commander for the planned Normandy landings, he suggested that Alexander become ground-forces commander, as he was popular with both British and American officers. Omar Bradley (who had commanded U.S. II Corps in Sicily, and later the U.S. First Army and then the U.S. 12th Army Group) remarked that he would have preferred to work with Alexander rather than Montgomery, as he regarded the former as \"a restrained, self-effacive and punctilious soldier\". Of the problems that subsequently surfaced with Montgomery's command of the Anglo-Canadian 21st Army Group, Bradley suspected they would not have occurred with Alexander in command. Brooke, however, applied pressure to keep Alexander in Italy, considering him unfit for the assignment in France. Thus Alexander remained in command of the 15th Army Group, and, with the support of numerous Allied commanders, controversially authorised the bombing of the historic abbey at Monte Cassino (February 1944), which resulted in little advance on the German Winter Line defences, which had managed to halt the Allied advance in Italy. It was not until the fourth attempt that the Winter Line was breached by the Allies, and Alexander's forces moved on to capture Rome in June 1944, thereby achieving one of the strategic goals of the Italian campaign. However, the U.S. VI Corps, now under Major General Lucian Truscott, in the Anzio beachhead, under U.S. Fifth Army commander Clark's orders, failed to follow their original break-out plan that would have trapped the German 10th Army escaping northwards in the aftermath of the Battle of Monte Cassino, instead favouring an early and highly publicised entry into Rome two days before the Allied landings in Normandy. Although Alexander was angry at Clark for deliberately disobeying his specific orders in order to reach Rome first, he chose to say nothing, believing that it would do nothing for the Allied cause if he were to do so.\nAlexander remained in command of the 15th Army Group, as well as of its successor, the Allied Armies in Italy (AAI), for most of the Italian campaign, until December 1944, when he relinquished his command to Clark and took over as the Supreme Commander of the Allied Forces Headquarters, responsible for all military operations in the Mediterranean theatre. Alexander was concurrently promoted to the rank of field marshal, though this was backdated to the fall of Rome on 4 June 1944, so that Alexander would once again be senior to Montgomery, who had himself been made a field marshal on 1 September 1944, after the end of the Battle of Normandy.\nAlexander received the German surrender in Italy on 29 April 1945. As a reward for his leadership in North Africa and Italy, Alexander, along with a number of other prominent British Second World War military leaders, was elevated to the peerage on 1 March 1946 by King George VI; he was created Viscount Alexander of Tunis and of Errigal in the County of Donegal.\nBrooke felt that Alexander needed an able chief of staff \"to think for him\", while Montgomery (Alexander's subordinate in North Africa, Sicily and Italy) claimed to think of Alexander as \"incompetent\" and believed that success was attained in Tunisia only because Montgomery lent Lieutenant-General Brian Horrocks, the commander of IX Corps of Anderson's First Army, to organise the \"coup de grace\". However, Harold Macmillan (British Minister Resident in the Mediterranean from 1942 to 1945) was impressed by Alexander's calm and style - the general conducted dinners in his mess like those at an Oxbridge high table, discussing architecture and the campaigns of Belisarius, rather than the current war. Macmillan thought Alexander's urbane manner and willingness to discuss and compromise were a sensible way to maintain inter-Allied cooperation, but Alexander's reserve was such that some thought him empty of strategic ideas and unable to make decisions. Graham and Bidwell, however, wrote that Alexander's impenetrable reserve made it hard to judge whether or not he had any military ideas. They state that he was \"unable or unwilling\" to assert his will over his army commanders, and that Mark Clark, who often referred to Alexander scornfully as a \"peanut\" and a \"feather duster\", exploited this weakness.\nGovernor General of Canada.\nWith the cessation of hostilities, Alexander was under serious consideration for appointment to the post of Chief of the Imperial General Staff, the British Army's most senior position beneath the sovereign. He was invited, though, by Canadian prime minister William Lyon Mackenzie King to be his recommendation to the King for the post of Governor General of Canada. Alexander thus chose to retire from the army and take up the new position, in anticipation of which he was on 26 January 1946 appointed Knight Grand Cross of the Order of Saint Michael and Saint George and created Viscount Alexander of Tunis, of Errigal in the County of Donegal, on 1 March. On 21 March 1946, the commission under the royal sign-manual and signet appointing Alexander was issued. Alexander was subsequently sworn in during a ceremony in the Senate chamber on 12 April that year.\nAlexander took his duties as the viceroy quite seriously, feeling that as governor general, he acted as a connection between Canadians and their King, and spent considerable time travelling Canada during his term; he eventually logged no less than 294,500\u00a0km (184,000\u00a0mi) during his five years as governor general. On these trips, he sought to engage with Canadians through various ceremonies and events; he was keenly interested in his role as Chief Scout of Canada and, in preparation for his kicking of the opening ball in the 1946 Grey Cup final, practised frequently on the grounds of the royal and viceregal residence, Rideau Hall. Also, in commemoration of Alexander being named the first non-aboriginal chief of the Kwakiutl tribe, he was given a totem pole on 13 July 1946; crafted by Mungo Martin, it remains on the grounds of Rideau Hall today. By the end of the year, Alexander was also distinguished with his induction as a Knight Companion of the Order of the Garter.\nIn 1947, the King issued letters patent granting his Canadian governor general permission to exercise all those powers belonging to the monarch in respect of Canada and, at the Commonwealth Prime Ministers Conference of 1949, the decision was reached to use the term \"member of the Commonwealth\" instead of \"Dominion\" to refer to the non-British member states of the Commonwealth of Nations. That same year, Alexander oversaw the admission of the Newfoundland (a dominion by name but not self-governing) into the Canadian Confederation and toured the new province that summer. Then, during a later visit to Alberta, the Governor General was admitted to the Blackfoot tribe as Chief Eagle Head. However, though the post-war period saw a boom in prosperity for Canada, the country was again at war by 1950, with Alexander, in his role as acting commander-in-chief, deploying to the Korean War soldiers, sailors, and airmen, whom he would visit prior to their departure for north-east Asia. In May 1951, as Commander-in-Chief of Canada, he was deemed a fitting inaugural recipient of the Canadian Forces' Decoration, starting a long tradition of every governor general accepting the CD, usually shortly after their installation as the Sovereign's personal representative in Canada. \nAlexander travelled abroad on official trips\u2014in 1947 visiting US president Harry S. Truman and in June 1948 Brazilian president Eurico Gaspar Dutra\u2014as well as hosting a number of dignitaries. The visit of the Irish Taoiseach, John A. Costello, in 1948 caused Alexander some embarrassment when Costello chose the occasion to announce that the state of Ireland, which controlled most of the Island of Ireland, would become the Republic of Ireland and would therefore leave the Commonwealth (Northern Ireland was not a part of the Irish state, but was rather a constituent part of the United Kingdom, and would thus remain in the Commonwealth). Although the decision had been taken in principle earlier, the sudden announcement caused a diplomatic storm and Costello, to deflect criticism, claimed that he had been provoked into making the announcement by a series of diplomatic snubs by Lord Alexander. In his memoirs, Costello was to admit that Alexander's behaviour had in fact been perfectly civil and could have had no bearing on a decision which had already been made to declare the Republic of Ireland.\nThe Alexanders' relatively informal lifestyle at Rideau Hall was demonstrated when during the Canadian tour of Princess Elizabeth and her husband, the Duke of Edinburgh, the Viscount and Viscountess hosted a square dance in the palace's ballroom. Alexander painted (creating a personal studio in the former dairy at Rideau Hall and mounting classes in art at the National Gallery of Canada), partook in a number of sports (including golf, ice hockey, and rugby), and enjoyed the outdoors, particularly during Ontario and Quebec's maple syrup harvest, himself overseeing the process on Rideau Hall's grounds. The Viscount was known to escape from official duties to partake in his most favourite pastime of fishing, once departing from the 1951 royal tour of Princess Elizabeth to take in a day's fishing at Griffin Island, in Georgian Bay, and granting a day off for students in the town of Drayton, Ontario, where his train briefly stopped. He presented the Alexander Cup to the Canadian Amateur Hockey Association in November 1950; the cup became the championship trophy of the Major Series of senior ice hockey.\nAmong Canadians, Alexander proved to be a popular viceroy, despite the calls for a Canadian-born governor general that had preceded his appointment. He not only had a much praised military reputation (he was considered to be the best military strategist since the 1st Duke of Wellington) but also was a charismatic figure, with an easy ability to communicate with people. Others, however, did not fully approve of Alexander; editor Hugh Templin, from Fergus, Ontario, met with Alexander during Templin's time as a special correspondent with the Canadian Press during the Second World War, and he said of the encounter: \"Lord Alexander impressed us considerably, if not too favourably. He was an aristocratic type, who didn't like newspaper men.\"\nBritish Minister of Defence.\nLord Alexander gave up the office of Governor General of Canada officially on 28 January 1952 after Churchill asked him to return to London to take the post of Minister of Defence in the British government. The aging Churchill had found it increasingly difficult to cope with holding that portfolio concurrently with that of prime minister, although he still took many major decisions himself, leaving Alexander with little real power. George VI died on the night of 5\u20136 February and Alexander, in respect of the King's mourning, departed quietly for the United Kingdom, leaving Chief Justice of Canada Thibaudeau Rinfret as administrator of the government in his place. After his return to the UK, Alexander was on 14 March 1952 elevated in the peerage by Queen Elizabeth II, becoming Earl Alexander of Tunis, Baron Rideau of Ottawa and Castle Derg. He was also appointed to the organising committee for the Queen's coronation and was charged with carrying the Sovereign's Orb in the state procession on that occasion in 1953.\nRetirement.\nAlexander served as British defence minister until 1954, when he retired from politics. In 1959 the Queen appointed Alexander to the Order of Merit. From 1960 to 1965, he served as Constable of the Tower of London. Alexander was an active freemason.\nCanada remained a favourite second home for the Alexanders and they returned frequently to visit family and friends until Alexander died on 16 June 1969 of a perforated aorta. His funeral was held on 24 June 1969, at St. George's Chapel, in Windsor Castle, and he was buried in St Margaret's churchyard at Ridge, near Tyttenhanger, his family's Hertfordshire home.\nMarriage and children.\nAlexander married Lady Margaret Bingham, daughter of George Bingham, 5th Earl of Lucan, on 14 October 1931. They had three children together and adopted a fourth:\nTitles, styles, honours and arms.\nUnofficial.\n Alberta\nHonorific eponyms.\nGeographic locations\nSchools\nHonours and decorations.\nSource:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "14449", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14449", "title": "Hubbles constant", "text": ""}
{"id": "14452", "revid": "79741", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14452", "title": "Holy book", "text": ""}
{"id": "14453", "revid": "122", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14453", "title": "H.R. Morgenstern", "text": ""}
{"id": "14454", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14454", "title": "Henry Moseley", "text": "English physicist (1887\u20131915)\nHenry Gwyn Jeffreys Moseley (; 23 November 1887 \u2013 10 August 1915) was an English physicist, whose contribution to the science of physics was the justification from physical laws of the previous empirical and chemical concept of the atomic number. This stemmed from his development of Moseley's law in X-ray spectra.\nMoseley's law advanced atomic physics, nuclear physics and quantum physics by providing the first experimental evidence in favour of Niels Bohr's theory, aside from the hydrogen atom spectrum which the Bohr theory was designed to reproduce. That theory refined Ernest Rutherford's and Antonius van den Broek's model, which proposed that the atom contains in its nucleus a number of positive nuclear charges that is equal to its (atomic) number in the periodic table.\nWhen World War I broke out in Western Europe, Moseley left his research work at the University of Oxford behind to volunteer for the Royal Engineers of the British Army. Moseley was assigned to the force of British Empire soldiers that invaded the region of Gallipoli, Turkey, in April 1915, as a telecommunications officer. Moseley was shot and killed during the Battle of Gallipoli on 10 August 1915, at the age of 27. Experts have speculated that Moseley could otherwise have been awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1916.\nEducation and early life.\nHenry G. J. Moseley, known to his friends as Harry, was born in Weymouth in Dorset in 1887. His father Henry Nottidge Moseley (1844\u20131891), who died when Moseley was quite young, was a biologist and also a professor of anatomy and physiology at the University of Oxford, who had been a member of the \"Challenger\" Expedition. Moseley's mother was Amabel Gwyn Jeffreys, the daughter of the Welsh biologist and conchologist John Gwyn Jeffreys. She was also the British women's champion of chess in 1913.\nMoseley had been a very promising schoolboy at Summer Fields School (where one of the four \"leagues\" is named after him), and he was awarded a King's scholarship to attend Eton College. In 1906 he won the chemistry and physics prizes at Eton. In 1906, Moseley enrolled at the University of Oxford as an undergraduate student of Trinity College, Oxford, where he earned his Bachelor of Arts (BA) degree. While an undergraduate at Oxford, Moseley became a Freemason by joining the Apollo University Lodge. Immediately after graduation from Oxford in 1910, Moseley became a demonstrator in physics at the University of Manchester, was elected to membership of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society on 9 May 1911, and was under the supervision of Ernest Rutherford. During Moseley's first year at Manchester, he had a teaching load as a graduate teaching assistant (TA), but following that first year, he was reassigned from his teaching duties to work as a graduate research assistant (RA). He declined a fellowship offered by Rutherford, preferring to move back to Oxford, in November 1913, where he was given laboratory facilities but no support.\nCareer and research.\nExperimenting with the energy of beta particles in 1912, Moseley showed that high potentials were attainable from a radioactive source of radium, thereby inventing the first atomic battery, though he was unable to produce the 1MV necessary to stop the particles.\nIn 1913, Moseley observed and measured the X-ray spectra of various chemical elements (mostly metals) that were found by the method of diffraction through crystals. This was a pioneering use of the method of X-ray spectroscopy in physics, using Bragg's diffraction law to determine the X-ray wavelengths. Moseley discovered a systematic mathematical relationship between the wavelengths of the X-rays produced and the atomic numbers of the metals that were used as the targets in X-ray tubes. This has become known as Moseley's law.\nBefore Moseley's discovery, the atomic numbers (or elemental number) of an element had been thought of as a semi-arbitrary sequential number, based on the sequence of atomic masses, but modified somewhat where chemists found this modification to be desirable, such as by the Russian chemist, Dmitri Ivanovich Mendeleev. In his invention of the Periodic Table of the Elements, Mendeleev had interchanged the orders of a few pairs of elements to put them in more appropriate places in this table of the elements. For example, the metals cobalt and nickel had been assigned the atomic numbers 27 and 28, respectively, based on their known chemical and physical properties, even though they have nearly the same atomic masses. In fact, the atomic mass of cobalt is slightly larger than that of nickel, so nickel would be placed in the Periodic Table before cobalt if they were placed purely according to atomic mass. However Moseley's experiments in X-ray spectroscopy showed directly from their physics that cobalt and nickel have the different atomic numbers, 27 and 28, and that they are placed in the Periodic Table correctly by Moseley's objective measurements of their atomic numbers. Hence, Moseley's discovery demonstrated that the atomic numbers of elements are not just rather arbitrary numbers based on chemistry and the intuition of chemists, but rather, they have a firm experimental basis from the physics of their X-ray spectra.\nIn addition, Moseley showed that there were gaps in the atomic number sequence at numbers 43, 61, 72, and 75. These spaces are now known, respectively, to be the places of the radioactive synthetic elements technetium and promethium, and also the last two quite rare naturally occurring stable elements hafnium (discovered 1923) and rhenium (discovered 1925). Nothing was known about these four elements in Moseley's lifetime, not even their very existence. Based on the intuition of a very experienced chemist, Dmitri Mendeleev had predicted the existence of a missing element in the Periodic Table, which was later found to be filled by technetium, and Bohuslav Brauner had predicted the existence of another missing element in this Table, which was later found to be filled by promethium. Henry Moseley's experiments confirmed these predictions, by showing exactly what the missing atomic numbers were, 43 and 61. In addition, Moseley predicted the existence of two more undiscovered elements, those with the atomic numbers 72 and 75, and gave very strong evidence that there were no other gaps in the Periodic Table between the elements aluminium (atomic number 13) and gold (atomic number 79).\nThis latter question about the possibility of more undiscovered (\"missing\") elements had been a standing problem among the chemists of the world, particularly given the existence of the large family of the lanthanide series of rare earth elements. Moseley was able to demonstrate that these lanthanide elements, i.e. lanthanum through lutetium, must have exactly 15 members \u2013 no more and no less. The number of elements in the lanthanides had been a question that was very far from being settled by the chemists of the early 20th Century. They could not yet produce pure samples of all the rare-earth elements, even in the form of their salts, and in some cases they were unable to distinguish between mixtures of two very similar (adjacent) rare-earth elements from the nearby pure metals in the Periodic Table. For example, there was a so-called \"element\" that was even given the chemical name of \"didymium\". \"Didymium\" was found some years later to be simply a mixture of two genuine rare-earth elements, and these were given the names neodymium and praseodymium, meaning \"new twin\" and \"green twin\". Also, the method of separating the rare-earth elements by the method of ion exchange had not been invented yet in Moseley's time.\nMoseley's method in early X-ray spectroscopy was able to sort out the above chemical problems promptly, some of which had occupied chemists for a number of years. Moseley also predicted the existence of element 61, a lanthanide whose existence was previously unsuspected. Quite a few years later, this element 61 was created artificially in nuclear reactors and was named promethium.\nContribution to understanding of the atom.\nBefore Moseley and his law, atomic numbers had been thought of as a semi-arbitrary ordering number, vaguely increasing with atomic weight but not strictly defined by it. Moseley's discovery showed that atomic numbers were not arbitrarily assigned, but rather, they have a definite physical basis. Moseley postulated that each successive element has a nuclear charge exactly one unit greater than its predecessor. Moseley redefined the idea of atomic numbers from its previous status as an \"ad hoc\" numerical tag to help sorting the elements into an exact sequence of ascending atomic numbers that made the Periodic Table exact. (This was later to be the basis of the Aufbau principle in atomic studies.) As noted by Bohr, Moseley's law provided a reasonably complete experimental set of data that supported the (new from 1911) conception by Ernest Rutherford and Antonius van den Broek of the atom, with a positively charged nucleus surrounded by negatively charged electrons in which the atomic number is understood to be the exact physical number of positive charges (later discovered and called protons) in the central atomic nuclei of the elements. Moseley mentioned the two scientists above in his research paper, but he did not actually mention Bohr, who was rather new on the scene then. Simple modifications of Rydberg's and Bohr's formulas were found to give a theoretical justification for Moseley's empirically derived law for determining atomic numbers.\nUse of X-ray spectrometer.\nX-ray spectrometers are the foundation-stones of X-ray crystallography. The X-ray spectrometers as Moseley knew them worked as follows. A glass-bulb electron tube was used, similar to that held by Moseley in the photo here. Inside the evacuated tube, electrons were fired at a metallic substance (i.e. a sample of pure element in Moseley's work), causing the ionization of electrons from the inner electron shells of the element. The rebound of electrons into these holes in the inner shells next causes the emission of X-ray photons that were led out of the tube in a semi-beam, through an opening in the external X-ray shielding. These are next diffracted by a standardized salt crystal, with angular results read out as photographic lines by the exposure of an X-ray film fixed at the outside the vacuum tube at a known distance. Application of Bragg's law (after some initial guesswork of the mean distances between atoms in the metallic crystal, based on its density) next allowed the wavelength of the emitted X-rays to be calculated.\nMoseley participated in the design and development of early X-ray spectrometry equipment, learning some techniques from William Henry Bragg and William Lawrence Bragg at the University of Leeds, and developing others himself. Many of the techniques of X-ray spectroscopy were inspired by the methods that are used with visible light spectroscopes and spectrograms, by substituting crystals, ionization chambers, and photographic plates for their analogs in light spectroscopy. In some cases, Moseley found it necessary to modify his equipment to detect particularly soft (lower frequency) X-rays that could not penetrate either air or paper, by working with his instruments in a vacuum chamber.\nDeath and aftermath.\nSometime in the first half of 1914, Moseley resigned from his position at Manchester, with plans to return to Oxford and continue his physics research there. However, World War I broke out in August 1914, and Moseley turned down this job offer to instead enlist with the Royal Engineers of the British Army. His family and friends tried to persuade him not to join, but he thought it was his duty. Moseley served as a technical officer in communications during the Battle of Gallipoli, in Turkey, beginning in April 1915, where he was killed by a sniper on 10 August 1915.\nOnly twenty-seven years old at the time of his death, Moseley could, in the opinion of some scientists, have contributed much to the knowledge of atomic structure had he survived. Niels Bohr said in 1962 that Rutherford's work \"was not taken seriously at all\" and that the \"great change came from Moseley.\"\nRobert Millikan wrote, \"In a research which is destined to rank as one of the dozen most brilliant in conception, skillful in execution, and illuminating in results in the history of science, a young man twenty-six years old threw open the windows through which we can glimpse the sub-atomic world with a definiteness and certainty never dreamed of before. Had the European War had no other result than the snuffing out of this young life, that alone would make it one of the most hideous and most irreparable crimes in history.\"\nGeorge Sarton wrote, \"His fame was already established on such a secure foundation that his memory will be green forever. He is one of the immortals of science, and though he would have made many other additions to our knowledge if his life had been spared, the contributions already credited to him were of such fundamental significance, that the probability of his surpassing himself was extremely small. It is very probable that however long his life, he would have been chiefly remembered because of the 'Moseley law' which he published at the age of twenty-six.\"\nIsaac Asimov wrote, \"In view of what he [Moseley] might still have accomplished \u2026 his death might well have been the most costly single death of the War to mankind generally.\"\nRutherford believed that Moseley's work would have earned him the Nobel Prize. Before his death, Moseley was nominated for the 1915 chemistry prize by Svante Arrhenius; the Nobel Foundation statutes at the time allowed the prize to be awarded posthumously to a person who died after nomination, so 1915 would be the only chance to award the prize to Moseley. Despite this, the Nobel committee instead awarded the 1915 chemistry prize to Richard Willst\u00e4tter. The 1917 Nobel Prize in physics was awarded to C.G. Barkla \"for his discovery of the characteristic Rontgen radiation of the elements\", work that built strongly on Moseley's.\nMemorial plaques to Moseley were installed at Manchester and Eton, and a Royal Society scholarship, established by his will, had as its second recipient the physicist P. M. S. Blackett, who later became president of the Society.\nThe Institute of Physics Henry Moseley Medal and Prize is named in his honour.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14457", "revid": "6488475", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14457", "title": "Prince Harry, Duke of Sussex", "text": "British prince (born 1984)\nPrince Harry, Duke of Sussex (Henry Charles Albert David; born 15 September 1984), is a member of the British royal family. As the younger son of King Charles\u00a0III and Diana, Princess of Wales, he is fifth in the line of succession to the British throne.\nEducated at Wetherby School, Ludgrove School, and Eton College, Harry completed officer training at the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst. He was commissioned as a cornet into the Blues and Royals and served briefly alongside his older brother, William. Harry was deployed twice on active duty to Afghanistan; first for 10 weeks in Helmand Province during 2007\u20132008, and then for 20 weeks with the Army Air Corps in 2012\u20132013.\nInspired by the Warrior Games in the United States, Harry launched the Invictus Games in 2014 as founding patron and remains involved. Two years later, alongside his brother William and sister-in-law Catherine, Harry jointly initiated the mental health awareness campaign \"Heads Together\".\nIn 2018 Harry was made Duke of Sussex prior to his wedding to American actress Meghan Markle. They have two children: Archie and Lilibet. Harry and Meghan stepped down as working royals in January 2020, moved to Meghan's native Southern California, and launched Archewell Inc., a Beverly Hills-based mix of for-profit and not-for-profit business organisations. In March 2021, Harry sat for \"Oprah with Meghan and Harry\", a much-publicised American television interview with his wife and Oprah Winfrey. The couple filmed \"Harry &amp; Meghan\", a Netflix docuseries, which was released in December 2022. In 2023, Harry released his memoir, \"Spare\".\nEarly life.\nHarry was born at 4:20pm on 15 September 1984 in the Lindo Wing of St Mary's Hospital in Paddington, London, as the second child of Charles, Prince of Wales (later King Charles\u00a0III), and his first wife, Diana, Princess of Wales, during the reign of his paternal grandmother Queen Elizabeth\u00a0II. He was christened Henry Charles Albert David on 21 December 1984 at St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle, by Robert Runcie, the then archbishop of Canterbury. Growing up, he was referred to as \"Harry\" by family, friends, and the public, and was nicknamed \"Harold\" by his brother. Harry and his elder brother, William, were raised at Kensington Palace in London, and Highgrove House in Gloucestershire. Diana wanted her sons to have a broader range of experiences and a better understanding of ordinary life than previous royal children. She took them to venues that ranged from Walt Disney World and McDonald's to AIDS clinics and homeless shelters. Harry began accompanying his parents on official visits at an early age; his first overseas tour was with his parents to Italy in 1985. He also travelled with his family to Canada in 1991 and 1998.\nHarry's parents divorced in 1996. His mother died in a car crash in Paris the following year while he and William were staying with their father at Balmoral Castle. Their father informed them about their mother's death. At his mother's funeral, Harry, then aged 12, accompanied his father, brother, paternal grandfather Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, and maternal uncle Charles Spencer, 9th Earl Spencer, in walking behind the funeral cort\u00e8ge from Kensington Palace to Westminster Abbey. Harry and his brother William inherited the \"bulk\" of the \u00a312.9 million left by their mother on their respective 30th birthdays, a figure that had grown since her 1997 death to \u00a310 million each in 2014. In 2014 Harry and William inherited their mother's wedding dress along with many of her other personal possessions, including dresses, diamond tiaras, jewels, letters, and paintings. The brothers also received the original lyrics and score of \"Candle in the Wind\", by Bernie Taupin and Elton John, as performed by John at Diana's funeral. In 2002 \"The Times\" reported that Harry would also share with his brother a disbursement of \u00a34.9 million from trust funds established by their great-grandmother, Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother, on their respective 21st birthdays and would share a disbursement of \u00a38 million upon their respective 40th birthdays. It was reported that Harry would inherit the bulk of the money left by the Queen Mother for the two brothers, as William is set to ascend to the throne, which will bring him additional financial benefits.\nEducation.\nLike his father and brother, Harry was educated at private schools. He started at London's Jane Mynors' nursery school and the pre-preparatory Wetherby School. Following this, he attended Ludgrove School in Berkshire. After passing entrance exams, he was admitted to Eton College. The decision to place Harry at Eton went against the past practice of the Mountbatten-Windsors to send children to Gordonstoun, which his grandfather, father, two uncles, and two cousins had attended. It did, however, see Harry follow in his elder brother's footsteps and the Spencer family's, as both his mother's father and her brother attended Eton. As was the case with his brother, the royal family and the tabloid press agreed Harry would be allowed to study free from intrusion in exchange for occasional photograph opportunities in what became known as the \"pressure cooker agreement\".\nIn June 2003, Harry completed his education at Eton with two A-Levels, achieving a grade B in art and D in geography, having decided to drop history of art after AS level. He has been described as \"a top tier athlete\", having played competitive polo and rugby union. One of his former teachers, Sarah Forsyth, has asserted that he was a \"weak student\" and that staff at Eton conspired to help him cheat on examinations. Both Eton and Harry denied the claims. While a tribunal made no ruling on the cheating claim, it \"accepted the prince had received help in preparing his A-level 'expressive' project, which he needed to pass to secure his place at Sandhurst.\" Harry also joined the Combined Cadet Force while studying at Eton and was made cadet officer in his final year, leading the corps' annual parade at the Eton tattoo.\nAfter school, Harry took a gap year, during which he spent time in Australia working as a jackaroo on a cattle station, and participating in the Young England vs Young Australia Polo Test match. He also travelled to Lesotho, where he worked with orphaned children and produced the documentary film \"The Forgotten Kingdom: Prince Harry in Lesotho\".\nMilitary career.\nSandhurst; Blues and Royals; deployment to Afghanistan.\nHarry passed the Regular Commissions Board (RCB) in September 2004 and entered the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst on 8 May 2005, where he was known as Officer Cadet Wales, and joined Alamein Company. His entry into the academy had to be delayed for 4 months as he recovered from an injury to his left knee. In April 2006, Harry completed his officer training and was commissioned as a Cornet (second lieutenant) in the Blues and Royals, a regiment of the Household Cavalry in the British Army. On 13 April 2008, when he reached two years' seniority, Harry was promoted to lieutenant.\nIn 2006 it was announced that Harry's unit was scheduled to be deployed in Iraq the following year. A public debate ensued as to whether he should serve there. In April 2006, the Ministry of Defence announced that Harry would be shielded from the front line if his unit was sent to war, with a spokeswoman stating that he was expected to \"undertake the fullest range of deployments\", but his role needed to be monitored as \"his overt presence might attract additional attention\" that would put him or those he commanded at risk. Defence Secretary John Reid said that he should be allowed to serve on the front line of battle zones. Harry agreed saying, \"If they said 'no, you can't go front line' then I wouldn't drag my sorry ass through Sandhurst and I wouldn't be where I am now.\" Harry completed the Troop Leaders' Course in October 2006 and rejoined his regiment in Windsor, where he was put in charge of a troop of 11 soldiers and four Scimitar reconnaissance vehicles. The Ministry of Defence and Clarence House made a joint announcement on 22 February 2007 that Harry would be deployed with his regiment to Iraq, as part of the 1st Mechanised Brigade of the 3rd Mechanised Division\u00a0\u2013 a move supported by Harry, who had stated that he would leave the army if he was told to remain in safety while his regiment went to war.\nThe head of the British army at the time, General Sir Richard Dannatt, said on 30 April 2007 that he had personally decided that Harry would serve with his unit in Iraq as a troop commander, and Harry was scheduled for deployment in May or June 2007 to patrol the Maysan Governorate. By 16 May, however, Dannatt announced that Harry would not serve in Iraq; concerns included Harry being a high-value target (as several threats by various groups had already been made against him) and the dangers the soldiers around him would face should any attempt be made on his life or if he were captured. Clarence House made public Harry's disappointment with the decision, though he said he would abide by it.\nIn the summer of 2007 Harry was trained as a joint terminal attack controller at RAF Leeming. In early June 2007, it was reported that Harry had arrived in Canada to train alongside soldiers of the Canadian Forces and British Army, at CFB Suffield near Medicine Hat, Alberta. It was said that this was in preparation for a tour of duty in Afghanistan, where Canadian and British forces were participating in the NATO-led Afghan War. This was confirmed in February of the following year when the British Ministry of Defence revealed that Harry had been secretly deployed as a joint terminal attack controller to Helmand Province in Afghanistan for the previous ten weeks. The revelation came after the media\u00a0\u2013 notably, German newspaper \"Bild\" and Australian magazine \"New Idea\"\u00a0\u2013 breached the blackout placed over the information by the Canadian and British authorities. He was immediately pulled out due to the fear that the media coverage would put his security and the security of fellow soldiers at risk. It was later reported that Harry helped Gurkha troops repel an attack from Taliban insurgents, and performed patrol duty in hostile areas while in Afghanistan.\nHarry's tour made him the first member of the British royal family to serve in a war zone since his uncle Prince Andrew, who flew helicopters during the Falklands War. For Harry's service, his aunt Princess Anne presented him with an Operational Service Medal for Afghanistan at the Combermere Barracks in May 2008.\nArmy Air Corps and second deployment to Afghanistan.\nIn October 2008, it was announced that Harry would follow his brother, father and uncle in learning to fly military helicopters. Harry attended the Defence Helicopter Flying School at RAF Shawbury, where he joined his brother. He initially failed his pilot's theory test in February 2009. Prince Charles presented him with his flying brevet (wings) on 7 May 2010 at a ceremony at the Army Air Corps Base (AAC), Middle Wallop. Harry was awarded his Apache Flying Badge on 14 April 2011. On 16 April 2011, it was announced that Harry had been promoted to captain. In June 2011, Clarence House announced that Harry would be available for deployment in current operations in Afghanistan as an Apache helicopter pilot. The final decision rested with the Ministry of Defence's senior commanders, including principally the Chief of the Defence Staff in consultation with the wishes of Harry, the Prince of Wales, and the Queen. In October, he was transferred to a US military base in California to complete his helicopter gunship training. This final phase included live-fire training and \"environmental and judgment training\" at naval and air force facilities in California and Arizona. In the same month, it was reported that Harry was top of his class in extensive training undertaken at the Naval Air Facility, El Centro, California. While training in Southern California, he spent time in San Diego. In November 2011, Harry returned to England. He went to Wattisham Airfield in Suffolk, in the east of England, to complete his training to fly Apache helicopters.\nOn 7 September 2012, Harry arrived at Camp Bastion in southern Afghanistan as part of the 100-strong 662 Squadron, 3 Regiment, Army Air Corps, to begin a four-month combat tour as a co-pilot and gunner for an Apache helicopter. On 10 September, within days of arriving in Afghanistan, it was reported that the Taliban had threatened his life. On 18 September 2012, it was reported that Harry had been moved to a safe location after an attack by the Taliban on Camp Bastion that killed two US marines. Defence Secretary Philip Hammond stated that \"additional security arrangements\" were put in place, for Harry could be a potential target, but added that he would face \"the same risk as any other Apache pilot\" while in combat. In files obtained on the incident, Major General Gregg A. Sturdevant was quoted as saying \"The night of the attack, he slept through the entire thing. We didn't do anything special for him. He came and went, and you never would have known he was there\" and \"the only thing special we did for him was we had a place identified as a safe house in case the base came under attack.\" On 21 January 2013, it was announced that Harry was returning from a 20-week deployment in Afghanistan. On 8 July 2013, the Ministry of Defence announced that Harry had successfully qualified as an Apache aircraft commander. Harry compared operating the Apache's weapons systems in Afghanistan to playing video games.\nHarry later revealed in his 2023 memoir \"Spare\" that he flew on six missions that resulted in him killing 25 Taliban members, writing that he felt he was trained to not view them as \"people\" but instead as \"chess pieces\" that had been taken off the board. He added that \"It's not a number that gave me any satisfaction. But neither was it a number that made me feel ashamed.\" Following the publishing of Harry's claims, Pen Farthing, a British former Royal Marines commando and founder of the Nowzad Dogs charity, was evacuated from Kabul on 6 January 2023 to avoid \"potential reprisal attacks on ex-forces people\". Harry's revelations prompted backlash from both Taliban members and British politicians and military figures.\nHQ London District and Invictus Games.\nOn 17 January 2014, the Ministry of Defence announced that Harry had completed his attachment to 3 Regiment Army Air Corps, and would take up a staff officer role, SO3 (Defence Engagement) in HQ London District. His responsibilities would include helping to coordinate significant projects and commemorative events involving the Army in London. He was based at Horse Guards in central London.\nOn 6 March 2014, Harry launched Invictus Games, a Paralympic-style sporting event for injured servicemen and women, which was held on 10\u201314 September 2014. Harry met British hopefuls for the Invictus Games at Tedworth House in Wiltshire for the start of the selection process on 29 April 2014. On 15 May 2014, Harry attended a ticket sale launch for Invictus Games at BT Tower, from where he tweeted on the Invictus Games' official Twitter account as the president of the Games. To promote the Games, he was interviewed by BBC Radio 2's Chris Evans along with two Invictus Games hopefuls. He said: \"[The Invictus Games] is basically my full-time job at the moment, making sure that we pull this off.\" The show aired on 31 July 2014. Harry later wrote an article in \"The Sunday Times\" about his experiences in Afghanistan: how they had inspired him to help injured personnel and how, after the trip to the Warrior Games, he had vowed to create the Invictus Games. Harry and officials attended the British Armed Forces Team announcement for Invictus Games at Potters Field Park in August 2014. As president of the Invictus Games, he attended all events related to the Games from 8 to 14 September 2014.\nIn January 2015, it was reported that Harry would take on a new role in supporting wounded service personnel by working alongside members of the London District's Personal Recovery Unit for the MOD's Defence Recovery Capability scheme to ensure that wounded personnel have adequate recovery plans. The palace confirmed weeks later that the scheme was established in partnership with Help for Heroes and the Royal British Legion. In late January 2015, Harry visited The Battle Back Centre set up by the Royal British Legion, and Fisher House UK at the Queen Elizabeth Hospital Birmingham. A partnership between Help for Heroes, the Fisher House Foundation and the Queen Elizabeth Hospital Birmingham (QEHB) Charity created the Centre. Fisher House Foundation is one of the Invictus Games' sponsors. In February and March 2015, Harry visited Phoenix House in Catterick Garrison, North Yorkshire, a recovery centre run by Help for Heroes. He also visited Merville Barracks in Colchester, where Chavasse VC House Personnel Recovery Centre is located, run by Help for Heroes in partnership with the Ministry of Defence and Royal British Legion.\nSecondment to Australian Defence Force.\nOn 17 March 2015, Kensington Palace announced that Harry would leave the Armed Forces in June. Before then, he would spend four weeks throughout April and May at army barracks in Darwin, Perth and Sydney whilst seconded to the Australian Defence Force (ADF). After leaving the Army, while considering his future, he would return to work in a voluntary capacity with the Ministry of Defence, supporting Case Officers in the Ministry's Recovery Capability Programme. He would be working with both those who administer and receive physical and mental care within the London District area.\nOn 6 April 2015, Harry reported for duty to Australia's Chief of the Defence Force, Air Chief Marshal Mark Binskin at the Royal Military College, Duntroon in Canberra, Australia. Harry flew to Darwin later that day to begin his month-long secondment to the ADF's 1st Brigade. His visit included detachments to NORFORCE as well as to an aviation unit. While in Perth, he trained with Special Air Service Regiment (SASR), participating in the SASR selection course, including a fitness test and a physical training session with SASR selection candidates. He also joined SASR members in Perth for live-fire shooting exercises with numerous Special Forces weapons at a variety of ranges. Harry completed an insertion training exercise using a rigid-hull inflatable boat. In Sydney, he undertook urban operations training with the 2nd Commando Regiment. Training activities included remotely detonating an Improvised Explosive Device (IED) and rappelling from a building. He also spent time flying over Sydney as co-pilot of an Army Black Hawk helicopter and participated in counter-terrorism training in Sydney Harbour with Royal Australian Navy clearance divers.\nHarry's attachment with the ADF ended on 8 May 2015, and on 19 June 2015 he resigned his short service commission.\nPost-military service.\nIn 2021, Harry described his 10 years (2005\u20132015) in the army as \"the happiest times in my life\". Since leaving the army, he has been closely involved with the armed forces through the Invictus Games, honorary military appointments and other official engagements. On 19 December 2017, he succeeded his grandfather Prince Philip as the Captain General Royal Marines. In May 2018, he was promoted to the substantive ranks of Lieutenant Commander of the Royal Navy, Major of the British Army and Squadron Leader of the Royal Air Force.\nOn 18 January 2020, Buckingham Palace announced that an agreement had been reached for Harry \"to step back from Royal duties, including official military appointments\". In February 2021, the Palace confirmed that the Duke would give up his position as Captain General Royal Marines and hand back all the other honorary military appointments.\nPersonal life.\nBachelorhood.\nChelsy Davy, the daughter of Zimbabwean South Africa-based businessman Charles Davy, was referred to as Harry's girlfriend in an interview conducted for his 21st birthday, and Harry said he \"would love to tell everyone how amazing she is but once I start talking about that, I have left myself open... There is truth and there is lies and unfortunately I cannot get the truth across.\" Davy was present when Harry received his Operational Service Medal for Afghanistan and also attended his graduation ceremony when he received his flying wings from his father. In early 2009, it was reported the pair had parted ways after a relationship that had lasted for five years.\nIn his 2023 memoir, Harry states that months after breaking up with Davy he was introduced to Caroline Flack, whom he described as \"funny\", \"sweet\", and \"cool\". The two saw each other for a while before press intrusion \"tainted\" their relationship \"irredeemably\" according to Harry. Flack had discussed the relationship in her own autobiography as well.\nIn May 2012, Harry's cousin Princess Eugenie introduced him to Cressida Bonas, an actress and model who is the granddaughter of Edward Curzon, 6th Earl Howe. On 30 April 2014, it was reported that the couple had parted amicably.\nMarriage and family.\nIn mid-2016, Harry began a relationship with American actress Meghan Markle. According to the couple, they first connected with each other via Instagram, though they have also said that they were set up on a blind date by a mutual friend in July 2016. On 8 November, eight days after the relationship was made public by the press, Harry directed his communications secretary to release a statement on his behalf to express personal concern about pejorative and false comments made about his girlfriend by mainstream media and internet trolls. In September 2017, Harry and Markle first appeared together in public at the Invictus Games in Toronto. Their engagement was announced on 27 November 2017 by Harry's father. The announcement prompted generally positive comments about having a mixed-race person as a member of the royal family, especially in regard to Commonwealth countries with populations of blended or native ancestry. On the morning of the wedding, Queen Elizabeth II conferred the title of Duke of Sussex upon Harry; Markle became Duchess of Sussex through her marriage to him later that day. The marriage ceremony was held at St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle on 19 May 2018. The couple later revealed in the 2021 television interview \"Oprah with Meghan and Harry\" that, three days prior to the ceremony, they had privately exchanged vows in their garden, in the presence of the Archbishop of Canterbury. However, this earlier exchange of vows was not an official religious or legally recognised marriage.\nThe Duke and Duchess initially lived at Nottingham Cottage in London, in the grounds of Kensington Palace. In May 2018, it was reported that they had signed a two-year lease on WestfieldLarge, located on the Great Tew Estate in the Cotswolds. They gave up the lease after photos of the house and its interior were published by a paparazzi agency. The couple considered settling at the 21-room Apartment 1 within Kensington Palace, but moved to Frogmore Cottage in the Home Park of Windsor Castle which Queen Elizabeth II had recently gifted to them instead. The Crown Estate refurbished the cottage at a cost of \u00a32.4 million, paid out of the Sovereign Grant, with the Duke later reimbursing expenses beyond restoration and ordinary maintenance, a part of which was offset against rental payments that were due at the time. On 6 May 2019, the Duke and Duchess's son, Archie, was born. Their office was moved to Buckingham Palace and officially closed on 31 March 2020 when the Sussexes ceased \"undertaking official engagements in support of the Queen\". After some months in Canada and the United States, the couple bought a house in June 2020 on the former estate of Riven Rock in Montecito, California. The next month, the Duchess suffered a miscarriage. On 4 June 2021, their daughter, Lilibet, was born. The Duke and Duchess have owned a Labrador named Pula, and two Beagles named Guy and Mamma Mia.\nIn 2017, Harry stated that he had \"five or six\" godchildren, some of whom later attended his wedding.\nHealth.\nIn May 1988, Harry underwent a surgery for a minor hernia. In November 2000, he broke his thumb while playing football at Eton and underwent a minor operation. In his memoir, \"Spare\", Harry admits that he took cocaine at the age of 17. In 2002, it was reported that, with Charles's encouragement, Harry had paid a visit to a drug rehabilitation unit to talk to drug addicts after it had emerged that he had been smoking cannabis and drinking at his father's Highgrove House and at a local pub in the summer of 2001. He adds in his memoir that he smoked cannabis at Eton and in Kensington Palace gardens, but he later told a court that \"he never smoked in [his] father's house\". In the memoir, he also detailed taking magic mushrooms at a party at Courteney Cox's house in January 2016.\nIn 2017 and during an appearance on Bryony Gordon's podcast \"Mad World\", Harry acknowledged that with the support of his brother he had sought counselling years after his mother's death. He added that he had struggled with aggression, had suffered from anxiety during royal engagements, and had been \"very close to a complete breakdown on numerous occasions\". He later added that he had taken up boxing as a way of coping with mental stress and \"letting out aggression\". In other interviews he stated that besides therapy he took alcohol to cope and used experimental drugs recreationally, including \"psychedelics, Ayahuasca, psilocybin, mushrooms.\" He also stated that what he experienced after his mother's death \"was very much\" post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).\nIn his mental-health television documentary, \"The Me You Can't See\", which premiered in 2021, he added that he had undergone four years of therapy to address his mental health issues, having been encouraged to do so by his future wife after they had started dating. He also mentioned that he had suffered from \"panic attacks [and] severe anxiety\" in his late 20s and that the heavy load of official visits and functions had eventually \"led to burnout\". In an episode of \"Armchair Expert\", Harry attributed his mental health issues to the ineffective parenting style of previous generations and to the \"genetic pain and suffering\" passed down in his family, adding that he believed his issues stemmed from \"the pain or suffering that perhaps my father or my parents had suffered\". In his 2023 memoir, Harry described himself as an agoraphobe.\nPolitical views.\nIn September 2020, Harry and his wife released a video addressing American voters to \"reject hate speech, misinformation and online negativity\" in the 2020 United States presidential election, which was seen by some as an implicit endorsement of Joe Biden. Harry was the subject of a prank by the Russian comedy duo Vovan and Lexus, who posed as climate activist Greta Thunberg and her father during two phone calls on New Year's Eve and 22 January 2020. During the conversations, Harry described his decision to leave the monarchy as \"not easy\" and criticised Donald Trump's stance on climate change and his support of the coal industry.\nIn May 2021, Harry was a guest on Dax Shepard and Monica Padman's podcast \"Armchair Expert\" during which he talked about the freedom of speech and laws related to it in the United States, stating \"I've got so much I want to say about the First Amendment as I sort of understand it, but it is bonkers.\" He added that it was \"a huge subject and one which [he didn't] understand\", emphasising that one could \"capitalise or exploit what's not said rather than uphold what is said.\" The comments were met by backlash from conservative Americans and Britons, prompting figures such as Ted Cruz, Dan Crenshaw, Nigel Farage, Candace Owens, Jack Posobiec, and Laura Ingraham to criticise him publicly.\nIn November 2021, in a panel at \"Wired\"'s Re:Wired Conference, Harry claimed that a day before the January 6 United States Capitol attack he emailed Jack Dorsey, CEO of Twitter, and 'warned' of potential civil unrest, but had not received a response. In the same month, Conservative politician and MP Johnny Mercer, who was leading the efforts to waive visa fees for foreign-born UK veterans and their families, announced in the Commons that the Duke of Sussex was supportive of their proposal and viewed it as \"morally right\" and not as \"a political intervention\".\nIn June 2022, in an interview with Jessica Yellin for \"Vogue\", Meghan described Harry's reaction to the Supreme Court of the United States's decision that abortion is not a protected constitutional right as \"guttural\". Harry later condemned the decision as \"rolling back of constitutional rights\" in his address to the United Nations on Mandela Day in July 2022. Associate justice of the Supreme Court Samuel Alito, who wrote the majority decision for the case, criticised foreign figures including Harry for their comments on \"American law\" during a speech.\nIn June 2023, Harry broke royal protocol by criticising the UK government in his witness statement to a court. He argued that both the British press and the government were \"at rock bottom\" and instead of scrutinising the government the press got \"into bed with them so they can ensure the status quo\".\nDrug use and U.S. visa application.\nIn March 2023, the Heritage Foundation (HF) sent a dossier on Harry's drug use to different government entities, asking whether he had admitted to past drug use on his U.S. visa application. The following month, they filed a lawsuit against the U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS) demanding his immigration records.\nIn March 2024, the U.S. government was ordered to hand over Harry's visa application details to a D.C. court. The move followed an initial failed freedom of information request that was asked for by the HF from DHS a year earlier. In September 2024, the case brought forward by the HF was closed due to the filing of two sealed orders and a sealed \"memorandum opinion\". The HF subsequently filed a request to \"vacate\" the ruling and release confidential correspondence between the judge and DHS. Judge Carl Nichols ordered for the redacted versions of the court documents to be released by 18 March 2025. 82 pages across seven exhibits that were heavily redacted and did not include the visa application itself were released, though his immigration status was withheld and it was not revealed whether he disclosed his drug use on his visa application. Immigration officials argued in the case that HF could \"not point to any evidence of government misconduct\" while Harry's team stated that he was \"truthful\" and the documents suggested that he did not receive preferential treatment.\nIn February 2025, new U.S. President Donald Trump ruled out deporting Harry from the US, telling the New York Post: \"I'll leave him alone.\"\nPublic life.\nAt the age of 21, Harry was appointed a Counsellor of State and began his duties in that capacity. The Queen granted Harry and William their own royal household on 6 January 2009. Previously, William and Harry's affairs had been handled by their father's office at Clarence House in central London. The new household released a statement announcing they had established their own office at nearby St James's Palace to look after their public, military and charitable activities. In March 2012, Harry led an official visit to Belize as part of the Queen's Diamond Jubilee celebrations. He continued to the Bahamas and Jamaica, where the Prime Minister, Portia Simpson-Miller, was considering initiating a process of turning Jamaica into a republic. He then visited Brazil to attend the GREAT Campaign. Harry also played tambourine and took part in the music video for the song \"Sing\", which was released in May 2012 to commemorate the Diamond Jubilee.\nBetween 9 and 15 May 2013, he made an official visit to the United States. The tour promoted the rehabilitation of injured American and UK troops, publicised his own charities and supported British interests. It included engagements in Washington, DC, Colorado, New York, New Jersey, and Connecticut. He met survivors of Hurricane Sandy in New Jersey. In October 2013, he undertook his first official tour of Australia, attending the International Fleet Review at Sydney Harbour. He also paid a visit to the Australian SAS HQ in Perth. In May 2014, he visited Estonia and Italy. In Estonia, he visited Freedom Square in the capital Tallinn to honour fallen Estonian soldiers. He also attended a reception at the Estonian Parliament and a NATO military exercise. In Italy, Harry attended commemorations of the 70th anniversary of the Monte Cassino battles, in which Polish, Commonwealth and British troops fought. He opened the Field of Remembrance at Westminster Abbey on 6 November 2014, a task usually performed by Prince Philip.\nBefore reporting for duty to the Australian Defence Force (ADF), Harry visited the Australian War Memorial in Canberra on 6 April 2015. He made a farewell walkabout at the Sydney Opera House on 7 May 2015 and visited Macquarie University Hospital. He joined his father in Turkey to attend commemorations of the centenary of the Gallipoli Campaign in April 2015. In October 2015, Harry carried out a day of engagements in the US. He launched the Invictus Games Orlando 2016 with First Lady Michelle Obama and Second Lady Jill Biden at Fort Belvoir. He later attended an Invictus Games board meeting and a reception to celebrate the launch at the British Ambassador's Residence. Harry, as patron of Sentebale, travelled to Lesotho to attend the opening of the Mamohato Children's Centre in November 2015. From 30 November to 3 December 2015, he made an official visit to South Africa. He visited Cape Town, where he presented the insignia of the Order of the Companions of Honour to the Archbishop on behalf of the Queen. Harry also played the Sentebale Royal Salute Polo Cup, at Val de Vie Estate in Cape Town, fundraising for Sentebale. He visited Nepal 19\u201323 March 2016. He stayed until the end of March 2016 to help rebuild a secondary school with Team Rubicon UK, and visited a Hydropower Project in Central Nepal.\nIn April 2018, he was appointed Commonwealth youth ambassador, a position which he held until March 2020. Also in that month, Harry became a patron of Walk of America, a campaign which brings together a number of veterans who will take part in a 1,000-mile expedition across the US in mid-2018. The Prince was appointed the president of The Queen's Commonwealth Trust, which focuses on projects involving children and welfare of prisoners, in April. Periodically, online QCT chat sessions were conducted and uploaded to YouTube for general public viewing. He remained the charity's president until February 2021. In July 2018, Harry travelled to Dublin, Ireland, alongside his wife Meghan, which marked their first overseas visit as a couple. In October 2018, the Duke and Duchess of Sussex travelled to Sydney, for the 2018 Invictus Games. This formed part of a Pacific tour that included Australia, Fiji, Tonga and New Zealand.\nHarry identifies as a feminist. During their visit to Morocco in February 2019, the Duke and Duchess focused on projects centred on \"women's empowerment, girls' education, inclusivity and encouragement of social entrepreneurship\". As part of establishing a separate office from that of the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge in 2019, the Duke and Duchess created an Instagram social media account, which broke the record for the fastest account at the time to reach a million followers. During his trip to Angola in 2019, the Duke visited the Born Free to Shine project in Luanda, an initiative by First Lady Ana Dias Louren\u00e7o which aims to \"prevent HIV transmission from mothers to babies\" through education, medical testing and treatment. He also met HIV+ youth and teenagers during his visit. During his visit to the Luengue-Luiana National Park, the Duke unveiled an initiative by the Queen's Commonwealth Canopy to help with protecting \"an ancient elephant migration route\" by providing safe passage for them in the forest. In September and October 2019, a Southern African tour included Malawi, Angola, South Africa and Botswana. Because infant son Archie travelled with the Sussexes, this was \"their first official tour as a family\". Harry completed 1,190 engagements between 2006 and 2019.\nStepping back and subsequent public appearances.\nIn January 2020, the Duke and Duchess announced that they were stepping back from their role as senior members of the royal family, and would balance their time between the United Kingdom and North America. A statement released by the Palace confirmed that the Duke and Duchess were to become financially independent and cease to represent the Queen. At the time of the announcement of Harry and Meghan's decision to \"step back\" as senior members of the royal family in 2020, 95% of the couple's income derived from the \u00a32.3 million given to them annually by Harry's father, Charles, as part of his income from the Duchy of Cornwall. The couple retain their HRH stylings but are not permitted to use them. The formal role of the Duke and Duchess was subject to a twelve-month review period, ending in March 2021. In March 2020, Harry attended the opening of the Silverstone Experience in Silverstone Circuit together with racing driver Lewis Hamilton. Harry's appearance at the museum was his final solo engagement as a senior royal. He and Meghan attended the Commonwealth Day service at Westminster Abbey on 9 March 2020, which was their last engagement as a couple before they officially stepped down on 31 March. Harry's personal wealth was estimated at \u00a330 million by \"The Daily Telegraph\" in 2020. In April 2021, Harry returned to the UK to attend the funeral of his grandfather, Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh. Meghan did not attend due to her pregnancy. The following year, they made their first official appearance in the UK in June 2022 while attending the Platinum Jubilee National Service of Thanksgiving.\nThe Sussexes visited the UK and Germany in September 2022 for a number of charity events in Manchester and D\u00fcsseldorf. On 8 September 2022, while Harry and Meghan were in London preparing to attend a charity event, Queen Elizabeth II died at Balmoral Castle in Scotland, and they remained in the United Kingdom for her funeral.\nHarry and Meghan visited Nigeria in May 2024 to honour the work of the Invictus Games. According to CNN, their trip focused on \"sports rehabilitation, mental health, and women's empowerment\". On 3 November 2025, Harry's office announced that he would travel to Toronto, Canada, for a series of events ahead of Remembrance Day.\nPublicly funded police security.\nHarry faced difficulties with obtaining and maintaining publicly funded security, both in Canada and the United Kingdom, after he and Meghan announced their self-demotion within the royal family. While the couple resided on Vancouver Island, the Canadian Taxpayers Federation launched a petition calling for the Royal Canadian Mounted Police to cease providing security to the Sussexes. The Government of Canada announced RCMP security would not be provided after March 2020 when the couple's status changed. A similar petition circulated in the UK in mid-March 2020. The backlash in the two countries led President Donald Trump to preemptively assert that the United States would not pay either; though, the couple never intended to ask for it while in the US.\nIn January 2022, it was reported that Harry had been in a legal fight since September 2021 over the Home Office's refusal to allow him to pay for police protection. He had made the offer to pay during the Sandringham Summit and \"self-evidently believed\" that it would be passed on to the government. Following the first court hearing of the case by the High Court, it was revealed that Harry had 'exceptional status' and the Royal and VIP Executive Committee (RAVEC) still determined his personal protective security on a case-by-case basis. After receiving applications by the Duke and the Home Office to keep parts of the case private, the High Court ruled in March 2022 that some parts of it would remain confidential. Mr Justice Swift also reacted to the Duke's legal team sending a copy of the ruling to someone who was not a lawyer, describing it as \"entirely unacceptable\". In July 2022, Mr Justice Swift granted permission for part of Harry's claim to proceed for a judicial review.\nHarry filed a lawsuit against the Home Office and the Metropolitan Police in August 2022, challenging the decision by RAVEC from January 2022 which stated that State security could not be made available to private individuals even if they wished to pay for it themselves. In February 2023, a High Court judge ruled that the second case should be thrown out; however, the decision was later appealed by Harry's legal team. He lost the legal challenge in May 2023, meaning that he will not be allowed to make private payments for police protection. In June 2023, a Freedom of Information request revealed that Harry's legal fight with the Home Office had cost \u00a3502,236, with \u00a3492,000 covered by the state and the remaining \u00a310,000 covered by Harry. In February 2024, the High Court ruled against Harry in his case against the Home Office and upheld the decision by RAVEC, stating that there had been no unlawfulness in the decision-making process for his security arrangements. In April 2024, he lost an initial attempt to appeal against the ruling. Despite his lawyers' attempts to have him pay no more than 50% of the Home Office's legal costs of defending his challenge, the judge held him liable for 90% of the costs. It was also revealed that during the proceedings Harry had leaked information via email to \"a partner of Schillings\" and to Johnny Mercer, for which he apologised to the court. In May 2024, he was given permission by the Court of Appeal to challenge the High Court's decision. His appeal was rejected by three senior judges in May 2025 and he was likely to be held liable for the UK government's legal fees.\nCivilian career and investments.\nIn summer 2019, before announcing their decision to step back in January 2020, Harry and his wife were involved in talks with Jeffrey Katzenberg, the founder of the now-defunct streaming platform Quibi, over a possible role in the service without gaining personal profits, but they eventually decided against joining the project. In September 2019, it was reported that the couple had hired New York-based PR firm Sunshine Sachs, which represented them until 2022. The couple has also been associated with Adam Lilling's Plus Capital, a venture capital fund designed to connect early stage companies with influencers and investors. Between 2019 and 2020, Harry and Meghan contributed to the book \"Finding Freedom\" through a third-party source. Despite initially denying their involvement with the book, their contributions to the book became apparent during Meghan's court case against Associated Newspapers who were trying to use the book in their defense.\nIn June 2020, they signed with the Harry Walker Agency, owned by media company Endeavor, to conduct paid public speaking engagements. In September 2020, the Sussexes signed a five-year private commercial deal with Netflix. In December 2020, the Duke and Duchess signed a multi-year deal with Spotify to produce and host their own programs through their audio producing company, Archewell Audio. A holiday special was released by the couple on the service in December 2020. In June 2023, Spotify announced they would not proceed with the deal, cancelling \"Archetypes\" which had run for a single season of 12 episodes. \"Harry &amp; Meghan\", a docuseries about the Sussexes, was produced by Netflix and the couple's Archewell Productions and premiered on 8 December 2022. It is directed by Liz Garbus. The series received mixed reviews. In April 2024, it was announced that Archewell Productions is working with Netflix to produce two new shows \u2013 on lifestyle and on polo \u2013 for the streaming platform. The \"Polo\" docuseries was released in December 2024 and was a critical and commercial disappointment. In August 2025, Archewell Productions renewed its partnership with Netflix under a multi-year first-look deal, which included plans for other documentary and scripted projects.\nIn March 2021, San Francisco-based mental health start-up BetterUp, a company that helps people get in contact with coaches or counsellors, said that Harry would become its first chief impact officer. In the same month, Harry was appointed as a commissioner for the Aspen Institute's Commission on Information Disorder to carry out a six-month study on the state of misinformation and disinformation in the United States. The study was published in November 2021 as a report with 15 recommendations. In the following month, in his capacity as BetterUp's chief impact officer, Harry was interviewed by \"Fast Company\", stating that the recent trend of people leaving their jobs (known as the Great Resignation) was something that needed to be celebrated, though his remarks were criticised for coming from a position of privilege. In April 2022, reports emerged of criticism by the company's coaches over the new metrics placed for evaluating their services and over the opacity surrounding Harry's actual role in the firm.\nIn April 2019, it was announced that Harry was working as co-creator and executive producer on a documentary series about mental health together with Oprah Winfrey, which was initially set to air in 2020 on Apple TV+. It was later announced that the series, titled \"The Me You Can't See\", would be released on 21 May 2021. In the following month, UCAS reported an increase in the percentage of students declaring mental health issues on their university applications, citing self-help books and Harry's statements on his struggles with \"panic attacks and anxiety\" as contributing factors. In October 2021, Harry and Meghan announced their partnership with Ethic, a sustainable investment firm based in New York City, which also manages the couple's investments. According to state filings from Delaware, where the couple's Archewell foundation is registered, Harry and Meghan incorporated 11 companies and a trust beginning in early 2020 which include Orinoco Publishing LLC and Peca Publishing LLC to hold the rights for their books as well as Cobblestone Lane LLC and IPHW LLC which are holders of their foundation's logos.\nIn July 2021, it was announced that Harry was set to publish his memoir \"Spare\" via Penguin Random House, with Harry reportedly earning an advance of at least $20 million. \"Spare\" was ghostwritten by novelist J. R. Moehringer. The memoir is reportedly the first of a four-book publishing deal that is set to include a second book by Harry and a wellness guide by Meghan. \"Spare\" was officially published on 10 January 2023 in 16 languages, and it has since become the UK's fastest selling non-fiction book with 400,000 confirmed sales in all formats on publication day. Harry announced that $1.5 million of the proceeds from the memoir were pledged to the charity Sentebale, while \u00a3300,000 would be given to WellChild.\nCharity work.\nHumanitarian and environmental activities.\nHarry has granted his patronage to organisations including WellChild, Dolen Cymru, MapAction and the London Marathon Charitable Trust; he stepped down from MapAction in 2019 and the London Marathon Charitable Trust in 2021. In 2007 he and William organised the Concert for Diana, in memory of their mother, which benefited the charities and patronages of Diana, William, and Harry. In October 2008, Harry and his brother embarked on the 1,000 mile eight-day Enduro Africa motorbike ride across South Africa to raise money for Sentebale, UNICEF and the Nelson Mandela Children's Fund. In September 2009, William and Harry set up The Foundation of Prince William and Prince Harry to enable them to take forward their charitable ambitions. Harry left the charity in June 2019.\nAfter taking part in an unfinished trip to the North Pole with Walking With The Wounded in 2011, Harry joined the charity's 200-mile expedition to the South Pole in Antarctica during December 2013, accompanying twelve injured servicemen and women from the UK, the US and the Commonwealth. As patron of Walk of Britain, he walked with the team on 30 September and 20 October 2015. To raise awareness for HIV testing, Harry took a test live on the royal family Facebook page on 14 July 2016. He later attended the 21st International AIDS Conference in Durban, South Africa, on 21 July 2016. On World AIDS Day, Harry and Rihanna helped publicise HIV testing by taking the test themselves. Since 2016 Harry has been working with Terrence Higgins Trust to raise awareness about HIV and sexual health. In November 2019, to mark the National HIV Testing Week, the Duke interviewed HIV+ Rugby player Gareth Thomas on behalf of the trust.\nIn December 2017, Harry guest edited BBC Radio 4's \"Today\" programme, conducting interviews with his father, then Prince of Wales, former US president Barack Obama, and others on issues such as youth violence, the Armed Forces, mental health, the Commonwealth, conservation and the environment. Harry was officially appointed the new president of African Parks (a conservation NGO) on 27 December 2017, a position which he held until 2023 when he was appointed a member of its board of directors. He had previously spent three weeks in Malawi with African Parks where he joined a team of volunteers and professionals to carry out one of the largest elephant translocations in history. The effort to repopulate areas decimated due to poaching and habitat loss moved 500 elephants from Liwonde and Majete National Parks to Nkhotakota Wildlife Reserve. Harry had previously helped with relocating rhinos in the Okavango Delta and later became patron of the Rhino Conservation Botswana. Accusations of abuse by the charity surfaced publicly in 2022 and 2024, when reports claimed that rangers managed by African Parks had been torturing, beating, raping, and forcibly displacing members of the indigenous Baka community.\nIn July 2018, the Elton John AIDS Foundation announced that the Duke of Sussex and British singer Elton John were about to launch a global coalition called MenStar that would focus \"on treating HIV infections in men\". In May 2019, the Duke and Duchess of Sussex together with Harry's brother and sister-in-law launched Shout, the UK's first 24/7 text messaging service for those who suffer from mental issues. In September 2019, the Duke launched Travalyst during his visit to the Netherlands after two years of development. The initiative is set \"to encourage sustainable practices in the travel industry\" and \"tackle climate change and environmental damage\", in collaboration with a number of companies, including Tripadvisor, Booking.com, Ctrip, Skyscanner, and Visa Inc. The organisation later announced a partnership with Google in 2021. In October 2019, along with other members of the royal family, Harry voiced a Public Health England announcement, for the \"Every Mind Matters\" mental health program.\nIn February 2020, Harry recorded a new version of the song \"Unbroken\" with Jon Bon Jovi. The new version features backing vocals from members of the Invictus Choir. The song was released on 27 March 2020, the proceeds of which were donated to the Invictus Games Foundation. In April 2020, Harry launched a new initiative named HeadFIT, a platform designed to provide mental support for members of the armed forces. The initiative was developed mutually by the Royal Foundation's Heads Together campaign, the Ministry of Defence, and King's College London. In June 2020, the Duke and Duchess backed the Stop Hate for Profit campaign and encouraged CEOs of different companies to join the movement.\nIn April 2021, Harry and Meghan were announced as campaign chairs for Vax Live: The Concert to Reunite the World, an event organised by Global Citizen to increase access to COVID-19 vaccinations. They also announced their support for a vaccine equity fundraiser initiated by the same organisation, and penned an open letter to the pharmaceutical industry CEOs urging them to address the vaccine equity crisis. Later that month, he narrated \"Hope Starts Here\", a special video rereleased by African Parks to mark the Earth Day in which he urged organisations and communities to preserve biodiversity and paid tribute to his grandfather Prince Philip for his efforts as a conservationist. He helped with the establishment of Peak State, a mental fitness programme aimed at providing tools and resources for managing mental health, to which he publicly lent his support in May 2021.\nLike his mother, Harry has worked with the HALO Trust, an organisation that removes debris\u2014particularly landmines\u2014left behind by war. He had previously visited a minefield in Mozambique with the charity and spent two days learning about their work and mine-clearing techniques. In 2013 he was named as patron of the charity's 25th Anniversary Appeal. In April 2017, he hosted the Landmine Free 2025 reception at Kensington Palace, during which the UK government announced an increase in its financial support for de-mining efforts. In September 2019, he walked through a de-mining site in Angola, the same country visited by his mother 22 years earlier. In June 2021, after ten members of the trust were killed by an armed group at a mine clearance camp in Afghanistan, Harry issued a statement saying the attack \"was nothing less than an act of barbarism\".\nIn September 2021, together with First Lady Jill Biden, he hosted a virtual event for the Warrior Games, which were cancelled due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In October 2021, he spoke against oil drilling in the Okavango River in an op-ed for \"The Washington Post\". In the same month and ahead of the 2021 G20 Rome summit, Harry and his wife penned an open letter together with the Director-General of the World Health Organization Tedros Adhanom, asking the G20 leaders to expedite efforts for the global distribution of COVID-19 vaccines. In March 2022, they were among more than a hundred people who signed an open letter published by the People's Vaccine Alliance, asking for free global access to COVID-19 vaccines and calling out the UK, EU and Switzerland for opposing a waiver that would allow vaccine intellectual property protections to be lifted. In April 2022 and in a video featuring Rhys Darby and Dave Fane on M\u0101ori Television, Harry launched an eco-travel campaign through his non-profit Travalyst, encouraging people to travel sustainably. In November 2023, he was named global ambassador for Scotty's Little Soldiers, one of the seven charities which he and his wife had invited people to support in lieu of giving them wedding presents.\nIn September 2025, Harry announced that he had personally donated \u00a31.1 million to BBC Children in Need in December 2024, describing it as a \"significant investment\" in grassroots organisations in Nottingham supporting young people affected by violence. In the following month, he and Meghan joined a coalition of public figures, scientists, and tech experts in signing an open letter calling for a global ban on the development of artificial superintelligence until there is strong scientific consensus and public support ensuring it can be created safely and ethically, emphasising the existential risks such unchecked AI could pose to humanity.\nSport.\nHarry has enjoyed playing sports, such as competitive polo, skiing, and motocross. Like his brother and father, he has participated in polo matches to raise money for charitable causes. Harry is also a keen Rugby football fan and supported England's bid to host rugby union's 2015 Rugby World Cup, and presented the trophy at rugby league's 2019 Challenge Cup finals. In 2004 Harry trained as a Rugby Development Officer for the Rugby Football Union and coached students in schools to encourage them to learn the sport. He, along with former rugby player Brian Moore, both argued that in response to Black Lives Matter, the song \"Swing Low, Sweet Chariot\" should no longer be sung in rugby context. Between December 2016 and February 2021, he was patron of both the Rugby Football Union (RFU) and Rugby Football League (RFL), Rugby League's governing body in England. He had served as the RFU's vice-royal patron since 2010, supporting the Queen as patron.\nIn 2012 Harry launched Coach Core alongside his brother and sister-in-law, the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge. The program was set up following the 2012 Olympics and provides apprenticeship opportunities for people who desire to pursue a career as a professional coach. In January 2017, Harry visited the Running Charity and its partner Depaul UK to highlight the role of sport in helping homeless and vulnerable people. In June 2019, the Duke was present at the launch of Made by Sport, a charity coalition set to raise money to boost sport in disadvantaged communities. In his statement, he lent his support to the charity by arguing that its role in bringing sport into the life of disadvantaged people would save \"hundreds of millions of pounds\" towards treating the issues among young people.\nSussex Royal and Archewell.\nIn June 2019, it was announced that the Duke and Duchess of Sussex would split from The Royal Foundation and establish their own charity foundation by the end of 2019. Nevertheless, the couple would collaborate with Harry's brother and his wife on mutual projects, such as the mental health initiative Heads Together. In July 2019, Harry and Meghan's new charity was registered in England and Wales under the title \"Sussex Royal The Foundation of The Duke and Duchess of Sussex\". It was confirmed on 21 February 2020 that \"Sussex Royal\" would not be used as a brand name for the couple following their withdrawal from public life. Sussex Royal Foundation was renamed \"MWX Foundation\" on 5 August 2020 and dissolved the same day.\nIn March 2021, it was reported that the Charity Commission for England and Wales was conducting a review of the Sussex Royal organisation in a \"regulatory and compliance case\" regarding its conduct under charity law during dissolution. Representatives for the couple claimed that Sussex Royal was \"managed by a board of trustees\" and that \"suggestion of mismanagement\" directed exclusively at the Duke and Duchess would be incorrect. The commission later concluded that the foundation did not act unlawfully, but criticised the board of directors for expending a \"substantial proportion of funds\" to setting up and closing the charity.\nIn April 2020, Meghan and Harry confirmed their new foundation (in lieu of Sussex Royal) would be called \"Archewell\". The name stems from the Greek word \"arche\", which means \"source of action\"; the same word that inspired the name of their son. Archewell was registered in the United States. Its website was officially launched in October 2020.\nSentebale.\nIn 2006 Harry visited Mants'ase Children's Home near Mohale's Hoek in Lesotho, which he had first toured in 2004, and alongside Prince Seeiso of Lesotho, he launched Sentebale: The Princes' Fund for Lesotho, a charity to assist children orphaned by HIV/AIDS. In March 2025, Harry and Prince Seeiso of Lesotho resigned from their roles as patrons of Sentebale following a dispute between the charity's trustees and the chair of the board, Sophie Chandauka. Chandauka reported the charity to the Charity Commission due to what she described as \"poor governance, weak executive management, abuse of power, bullying, harassment, misogyny, misogynoir \u2013 and the coverup that ensued\". Chandauka later accused Harry of \"harassment and bullying at scale\" by authorising \"the release of a damaging piece of news to the outside world\", adding that his \"toxic\" brand was \"the number one risk\" for the organisation. There were also allegations that through his contacts Harry had asked Chandauka to issue a statement in support of his wife following an awkward interaction between the two women during a polo match in Miami, and had later demanded that she \"explain herself\" in a note that was described as \"unpleasant\" in tone and reportedly used \"imperious\" language. In August 2025 the Charity Commission announced it found no evidence of \"widespread or systemic bullying or harassment, including misogyny or misogynoir\" or \"over-reach\" by either Chandauka or Harry but acknowledged a \"strong perception of ill treatment felt by a number of parties\" and stated that deciding on specific allegations of bullying was outside the purview of its regulatory authority. It also criticised all sides for allowing the conflict \"to play out publicly\" and cited poor internal governance and a \"failure to resolve disputes internally\" as factors that impacted the charity's reputation.\nPublic image.\nIn his youth, Harry earned a reputation for being rebellious, leading the tabloid press to label him a \"wild child\". At the age of 17, he was seen smoking cannabis, drinking underage with friends, and clashing physically with paparazzi outside nightclubs. In early 2005, he was photographed at a \"Colonial and Native\"-themed birthday party in Wiltshire wearing a Nazi German Afrika Korps uniform with a swastika armband. His choice sparked a backlash from the media, politicians, and religious figures. Clarence House later issued a public statement in which Harry apologised for his behaviour. In an interview for his 21st birthday he stated that it \"was a very stupid thing to do and I've learnt my lesson\".\nIn January 2005, in response to an inquiry about his Zimbabwean girlfriend Chelsy Davy, Harry responded \"She's not black or anything, you know\". In January 2009, the British tabloid, the \"News of the World\", revealed a video made by Harry three years earlier in which he referred to a Pakistani fellow officer cadet as \"our little Paki friend\" and called a soldier wearing a camouflage hood a \"raghead\". These terms were described by the Leader of the Opposition at the time David Cameron as \"unacceptable\", and by \"The Daily Telegraph\" as \"racist\". A British Muslim youth organisation called Harry a \"thug\". Further extracts showed him telling a comrade \"I love you\" before giving him a kiss on the cheek and licking his face, and asking another whether he felt gay, queer, or on the side. Clarence House immediately issued an apology from Harry, who stated that no malice was intended in his remarks. Subsequently, it was reported that the military had instructed Harry to attend a diversity course. In the same year, British stand-up comedian Stephen K. Amos alleged that after a stand-up show for Charles's 60th birthday celebrations in November 2008 Harry had commented on his performance by saying, \"You don't sound like a black chap\", though he hoped that the remarks were made in jest.\nIn October 2007, a video from Harry's trip to Namibia with his friends surfaced, which showed him snorting vodka and licking a male friend's nipples. While on holiday in Las Vegas in August 2012, Harry and an unknown young woman were photographed naked in a Wynn Las Vegas hotel room, reportedly during a game of strip billiards. The pictures were leaked by American celebrity website TMZ on 21 August 2012, and reported worldwide by mainstream media on 22 August 2012. The photographs were shown by the American media, but British media were reluctant to publish them. Royal aides suggested Clarence House would contact the Press Complaints Commission (PCC) if British publications used the pictures. St James's Palace confirmed that Harry was in the photographs, saying that he was essentially a victim whose privacy had been invaded and contacted the PCC upon hearing that a number of British newspapers were considering publishing the photographs. On 24 August 2012, \"The Sun\" newspaper published the photographs. At a 2014 event in England, Foo Fighters drummer Taylor Hawkins was slapped by Harry after he had told him \"I can't wake up, so tired\", with Harry subsequently stating \"You awake now?\" Hawkins added \"I got slapped in the face by the prince. That's OK really, if you think about it. But in the moment, I was like, 'You fucking slapped me, dude.'\"\nIn December 2021, reports emerged about Harry's meetings with Saudi businessman Mahfouz Marei Mubarak bin Mahfouz, whose receipt of a CBE became the subject of an investigation by the Scottish Charity Regulator. Mahfouz had met Harry in 2013 and 2014 and donated \u00a350,000 to his charity Sentebale and \u00a310,000 to Walking With The Wounded, of which Harry is patron. \"The Sunday Times\" claimed that the meetings with Harry opened the way for Mahfouz to get access to the Prince of Wales. Harry referred to the incident as the \"CBE scandal\" in December 2021 and stated that he severed ties with Mahfouz in 2015 after expressing \"growing concerns\" about his motives, though aides from his father's household denied having any discussions with him regarding Mahfouz. A spokesperson for Sentebale defended the meetings and added that there was not any impropriety regarding the donations.\nIn March 2024, Harry was named in a lawsuit against P. Diddy who was facing allegations of sexual trafficking. He was mentioned as a well-known celebrity associate of Combs, whom he would use among other famous figures to draw guests to his parties.\nPublic opinion.\nIn view of their environmental activism, Harry and Meghan were criticised in August 2019 for reportedly taking four private jet journeys in 11 days, including one to Elton John's home in Nice, France. The criticism was in line with the reactions the royal family faced in June 2019, after it was revealed that they \"had doubled [their] carbon footprint from business travel\". Harry received backlash again in August 2021 and 2022 for taking a two-hour flight on private jets between California and Aspen, Colorado, to participate in an annual charity polo tournament. In June 2022 and on their way to California after the Queen's Platinum Jubilee, Harry and Meghan boarded a private jet that was estimated to have emitted \"ten times more carbon than flying commercial\".\nAfter his marriage, Harry's popularity skyrocketed above all the other royals as he was deemed likable by 77 per cent of respondents in a poll of 3,600 Britons conducted by statistics and polling company YouGov. However, his popularity fell after stepping back from royal duties, and it plummeted after the release of his controversial interview with Oprah Winfrey, his Netflix docuseries, and his memoir. In December 2022, Harry was found to be the third most disliked member of the British royal family by YouGov, preceded by his uncle Prince Andrew and his wife Meghan. Writing for \"The New York Times\", Sarah Lyall noted that following the release of his memoir Harry and his wife lost support within segments of the American public and press. It has been suggested by critics that this fall from public esteem is due to Harry and Meghan's frequent attempts to achieve ongoing relevancy, and their perceived hypocrisy and selfishness. Harry and Meghan's exit from the royal family was satirized in a 2023 episode of \"South Park\".\nIn 2018 and 2021, Harry was selected as one of the 100 Most Influential People in the World by \"Time\" magazine. In 2019, the magazine named Harry and his wife as among the 25 Most Influential People on the Internet. In 2021, the couple was featured on one of the magazine's seven worldwide \"Time 100\" covers. In 2023, \"People\" named him as one of the \"25 Most Intriguing People of the Year\". In the same year, James Hibberd of \"The Hollywood Reporter\" named Harry and Meghan among the Hollywood losers of 2023.\nFollowing Harry and Meghan's trip to Nigeria in May 2024, Lucia Stein of the ABC argued that the couple could have been used by the royal family, and added that \"perhaps how helpful they would have been\" had an agreement on a \"hybrid working model\" been achieved. Media editor, Tina Brown commented in relation to the visit, they are \"enormously appealing to the public, and very good at [public engagement].\" In the same year Harry's role as founder of Travalyst was recognised in the second edition of the \"Time\" 100 Climate list which ranked the most influential climate action leaders.\nIn January 2025, Harry and Meghan's appearance at a food bank during the Southern California wildfires in the Pacific Palisades drew mixed reactions from segments of the media and public figures, who labeled it \"disaster tourism\". In October 2025, Ranker rated him the third most disliked celebrity in the United States, in its poll of 48,000 people.\nPrivacy and the media.\nLegal issues and incidents.\nAssociated Newspapers.\nIn January 2020, the Independent Press Standards Organisation (IPSO) sided with the \"Mail on Sunday\" over a dispute between the Duke and the newspaper regarding an Instagram photo involving Harry in which, according to the newspaper, elephants were in fact \"tranquilised\" and \"tethered\" during a relocating process. The IPSO rejected Harry's claim that the paper's description was \"inaccurate\" or \"misleading\".\nIn December 2020, Harry's legal team sued Associated Newspapers Limited (ANL) for publishing a story in the \"Mail on Sunday\" claiming his working relationship with the Royal Marines had suffered post-royal departure. The newspaper subsequently accepted the claims were false and issued an apology. The prince's lawyer said the \"substantial damages\" paid by the publisher would be donated to the Invictus Games Foundation.\nIn February 2022, Harry filed a libel suit in the High Court against ANL for a \"Mail on Sunday\" article which alleged he was trying to keep his legal battle against the Home Office to restore his police protection secret from the public through requesting a confidentiality order on the case and that he offered to pay for police protection only after filing a lawsuit against the government. In June 2022, Mr Justice Nicklin ruled that parts of the article were potentially defamatory, though Nicklin rejected claims by Harry's lawyers that the article portrayed him as a liar. Harry attempted to have the publisher's defence thrown out, but the judge rejected his motion in December 2023 and decided that the case should proceed to trial. He later ordered Harry to pay \"Mail on Sunday\" \u00a348,447 in legal costs. Harry withdrew the libel claim in January 2024 and became liable for the publisher's \u00a3250,000 legal costs.\nIn October 2022, the Duke of Sussex joined Doreen Lawrence, Sir Elton John, David Furnish, Sadie Frost, and Elizabeth Hurley in launching a legal action against ANL for their alleged \"abhorrent criminal activity\", which was said to involve listening to and recording people's phone calls and daily activities, obtaining sensitive information and medical records, and accessing bank accounts and financial transactions. In a statement, ANL described the allegations as \"preposterous smears\", and Gavin Burrows, the private investigator whose alleged 2021 statement was used as a key element in the case, said that the statement was not signed by him and was \"a cut and paste from my evidence\" of other publishers targeting individuals. In November 2023, Mr Justice Nicklin ruled that the case brought by Harry and the other claimants could proceed but unpublished material provided to the Leveson Inquiry was inadmissible as proof in this case.\nNews Group and Mirror Group newspapers.\nIn October 2019, it was announced that Harry had sued the \"Daily Mirror\", \"The Sun\" and the now-defunct \"News of the World\" \"in relation to alleged phone-hacking\". Former \"News of the World\" royal editor Clive Goodman had previously stated that he had hacked Harry's phone on nine occasions. Andy Coulson, the editor of the \"News of the World\", apologised to Harry and his brother for invading their privacy, accepting \"ultimate responsibility\" for the actions of Goodman. In his lawsuit, Harry sought damages in excess of \u00a3200,000 from the publisher of the \"News of the World\" and \"The Sun\" and alleged an earlier agreement between News Group Newspapers (NGN) and the royal family which would see he and William not take legal action in return for an apology had not been honoured. Both brothers brought a claim privately through their mutual attorneys, but Harry decided to pursue his case separately with a new solicitor in 2019. In July 2023, the judge ruled that part of Harry's case involving allegations of illegal information gathering would go to trial but his phone-hacking claims were dismissed for being made too late. In May 2024, Mr Justice Fancourt refused Harry the permission to include claims against Rupert Murdoch, expand his case's scope back to 1994 and 1995 to cover allegations involving his mother or to add new allegations from 2016 involving his then-girlfriend Meghan. In October 2024, the judge announced that the two sides should either settle or go to trial in January 2025 and refused to let Harry's team include allegations that bugs were placed in rooms and cars, and trackers placed on vehicles as \"no particulars whatsoever of such allegations\" were provided. In January 2025, the two parties settled with NGN paying more than \u00a310 million in pay outs and legal fees in the settlements involving both Harry and former Labour deputy leader Tom Watson. NGN made a \"full and unequivocal apology\" for \"serious intrusion\" by \"The Sun\" between 1996 and 2011, for \"phone hacking, surveillance and misuse of private information by journalists and private investigators instructed by them at the \"News of the World\"\" and the intrusion into the life of his mother, and admitted \"incidents of unlawful activity\" were carried out by private investigators working for the newspaper, but \"not by journalists\". The BBC reported on the \"scrapped case\", highlighting NGN's statement which said that the settlement agreement \"drew a line under the past\" and that they rejected the claims that would have been made in court about a corporate cover-up.\nLawyers for the \"Mirror\" denied accessing Harry's voicemail messages and other allegations, but admitted to instructing \"private investigators to unlawfully obtain private information\" about Harry on a single occasion that involved him visiting Chinawhite. In January 2023, a High Court judge ruled that Harry's lawsuit against Mirror Group Newspapers (MGN) as well as other similar lawsuits against the publisher would go to trial in May 2023. At the beginning of trial, MGN apologised for one instance of unlawful information gathering against Harry and added that his legal challenge \"warrants compensation\". In June 2023, Harry testified in the court case accusing former \"Daily Mirror\" editor Piers Morgan of horrific personal attacks and claimed that his phone had been hacked dating back to when he was still at Eton. His appearance marked the first time a member of the royal family had been cross-examined in court since Albert Edward, Prince of Wales, appeared as a witness in court in 1891. In December 2023, the High Court ruled in favour of Harry for 15 of the 33 sample stories used in his claims of phone hacking against MGN and awarded him \u00a3140,600 of the \u00a3440,000 he sought in damages. Mr Justice Fancourt concluded Piers Morgan and other editors knew about the phone hacking at their publications and were involved in it. Harry through his lawyer David Sherborne called the ruling \"vindicating and affirming\" and urged the authorities to further investigate and prosecute the company. An additional 115 articles from Harry's claim might have been the focus of two further trials, but in February 2024 he settled his claim with MGN. The publisher agreed to cover Harry's legal costs and pay damages reported to be in the region of \u00a3300,000.\nOther cases.\nIn October 2013, Jo Brand appeared on \"Have I Got News for You\" and while talking about Prince George's christening she said: \"George's godparents include Hugh van Cutsem ... I presume that's a nickname as in Hugh van cuts 'em and Harry then snorts 'em.\" Representatives of Kensington Palace contacted the BBC after the programme aired, pointing out the error and the implications of the joke. The BBC wrote to Kensington Palace apologising for the \"factual inaccuracy\" as George's godfather was William van Cutsem, but it did not apologise for the comment itself as it was part of the show's \"irreverent humor\".\nIn February 2014, a judge sentenced the convicted criminal Ashraf Islam to three years in prison, as he had plotted to murder Harry and had given it \"considerable thought\" due to his belief that Harry had \"a moral guilt\" since he was in the army. In June 2019, two members of the neo-Nazi group Sonnenkrieg Division were jailed for eighteen months and four years, respectively, for sharing propaganda posters among which was one that labelled Harry as a \"race traitor\" with a gun pointed at his head.\nIn May 2019, Splash News issued a formal apology to the Sussexes for sending photographers to their Cotswolds residence, which put their privacy at risk. The agency also agreed to pay damages and legal costs associated with the case. In December 2019, PA Media retracted the publishing of a Christmas card photograph of Harry, Meghan, and their son Archie. The agency said that the photo was retracted because they had been advised that the photograph was \"not representative of the Christmas card sent by the Duke and Duchess of Sussex\". In January 2020, lawyers issued a legal warning to the press after paparazzi photographs were published in the media. In March 2020, the couple took Splash UK to court after the Duchess and their son were photographed without permission during a \"private family outing\" while staying in Canada. The case was settled later that year with Splash UK agreeing to no longer take unauthorised photos of the family. In April 2020, the Duke and Duchess announced that they would no longer cooperate with the \"Daily Mail\", the \"Sun\", the \"Mirror\" and the \"Express\". They won an apology in October that year from American news agency X17 for taking photographs of their son at their home using drones.\nIn June 2020, it was reported that Harry's lawyers had issued a 'letter before action', threatening to sue the \"Sun\" and Dan Wootton, based on the allegations that they had paid money to associates of palace officials to secure their stories. It was alleged that the \"Sun\" had made two payments amounting to \u00a34,000 to the partner of a royal official in relation to stories published in June and July 2019 which detailed the nannying and god-parenting arrangements for Harry and Meghan's son Archie. News Group Newspapers, publisher of the \"Sun\", emphasised that they had done nothing \"unlawful\" in sourcing the stories and no illegal payments were made. Wootton's lawyers denied that any payments were made unlawfully to a public official or a proxy and described the claims as \"a smear campaign by unknown bad actors.\" Wootton has been credited with breaking the story about Megxit and Harry and Meghan's initial plans for moving to Canada in the \"Sun\" on 8 January 2020, which prompted the couple to issue an announcement within hours, confirming their plans for stepping back from their royal duties. Sources close to the couple later spoke to \"The New York Times\", stating that they \"felt forced to disclose their plans prematurely\" as they learned about the \"Sun\"'s intentions to publish the story. Wootton disputed the claim as \"They released the statement after we had published the story and had so much notice.\"\nA September 2020 article by \"The Times\" claiming an Invictus Games fundraiser had been cancelled due to its affiliation with a competitor of Netflix, Harry's business partner, became the subject of a legal complaint issued by the Duke. In January 2022, the couple mutually filed a legal complaint against \"The Times\" for an article reporting on Archewell raising less than $50,000 in 2020.\nDespite the palace congratulating the Duke and Duchess on the birth of their daughter Lilibet in June 2021, a few days later the BBC reported that Harry and Meghan had not sought the permission of the Queen before naming their daughter with her personal family nickname. Lawyers for the couple subsequently accused the BBC of defamation and sent letters out to various media organisations saying the report was false and defamatory, and the allegations should not be repeated as Harry had spoken to the Queen before announcing their daughter's name.\nIn January 2024, two neo-Nazis, Christopher Gibbons and Tyrone Patten-Walsh, were given prison sentences between 8 and 11 years for terrorism, which included calling for the deaths of Harry and his son Archie on their podcast.\nInterviews.\nHarry and his wife were interviewed by Oprah Winfrey in a television special for CBS, broadcast on 7 March 2021. Meghan spoke about marriage, motherhood, and the pressures of public life. Harry joined her later, and the pair talked about the initial difficulties associated with their move to the United States in 2020 and their plans for the future. During the interview, Harry criticised his father's parenting style, mentioned his father did not answer his calls and had cut him off financially, and he had no relationship with his brother. There was a wide and polarised reaction to the interview.\nIn April 2022, Harry sat down for an interview with \"Today\"'s Hoda Kotb during the Invictus Games, during which he claimed that he had visited his grandmother the Queen earlier to make sure that she was \"protected and got the right people around her.\" In January 2023 and ahead of the release of his memoir \"Spare\", Harry sat down for a series of interviews, including an interview by Anderson Cooper on \"60 Minutes\", another one by Tom Bradby titled \"\" on ITV1, and a third interview by Michael Strahan on \"Good Morning America\", titled \"Prince Harry: In His Own Words\". In the interview with Bradby, Harry said that he \"would like to get my father back, I would like to have my brother back\". Referring to the press as \"the devil\", he also alleged that \"certain members\" of his family were \"in the bed\" with them to \"rehabilitate their image\".\nIn a live-streamed interview with Harry in March 2023, physician Gabor Mat\u00e9 suggested publicly that he could be suffering from PTSD, ADD, anxiety, and depression based on his conversation with him and having read his autobiography \"Spare\".\nIn May 2025, Harry was interviewed by Nada Tawfik of the BBC, during which he reflected on his loss of taxpayer-funded security and his ongoing estrangement from his family. Writing for \"The Guardian\", Stephen Bates stated that Harry's \"megaphone diplomacy isn't working\" and \"his private security needs are probably not near the top of anybody's priorities\".\nOn Social media and other platforms.\nIn October 2021, Twitter analytics service Bot Sentinel alleged that 83 accounts with a combined number of 187,631 followers were responsible for approximately 70% of the negative content posted about Harry and Meghan. The report prompted an investigation by Twitter. Twitter stated that it found no evidence of \"widespread coordination\" between the accounts, and said that it had taken action against users who violated Twitter's conduct policy. Bot Sentinel released three more reports in the following months. In January 2022, the BBC named Harry and Meghan among people whose photos and videos were used in fake instant profits advertisements and bitcoin-related investment schemes.\nTitles, styles, honours and arms.\nTitles and styles.\nHarry was originally styled \"His Royal Highness Prince Henry of Wales\". He used Wales as his surname for military purposes and was known as \"Captain Harry Wales\" in such contexts.\nOn the morning of his wedding, Elizabeth II granted him the Dukedom of Sussex, the Earldom of Dumbarton and Barony of Kilkeel. He thus became known as \"His Royal Highness The Duke of Sussex\". He uses the earldom in Scotland and the barony in Northern Ireland.\nOn 18 January 2020, Buckingham Palace announced that, following their decision to step back from royal duties, from 31 March 2020 the Duke and Duchess would not use their Royal Highness styles in practice or publicly. They are still referred to as \"His/Her Royal Highness\" in legal and private settings.\nWhile on his gap year in Lesotho in 2003, Harry was given the nickname \"Mohale\" (transl.\u2009'the warrior'), a name that belonged to the younger brother of Moshoeshoe I.\nHonours.\nWear of orders, decorations, and medals.\nThe ribbons worn regularly by Harry in undress uniform are as follows:\nFormer honorary military appointments.\nThe honorary military appointments above were returned to Elizabeth II in February 2021.\nAwards.\nIn December 2010, the German charity (\"A Heart for Children\") awarded him its Golden Heart Award, in recognition of his \"charitable and humanitarian efforts\". On 7 May 2012, the Atlantic Council awarded him its Distinguished Humanitarian Leadership Award. In August 2018, the Royal Canadian Legion granted him the 2018 Founders Award for his role in founding the Invictus Games. In October 2018, he was presented with the RSA Badge in Gold, the organisation's highest honour, for his work with injured veterans. In July 2021, Harry and Meghan were among people who were selected by UK-based charity Population Matters to receive the Change Champions Award for their decision to have only two children and help with maintaining a smaller and more sustainable population. In February 2022, Harry and Meghan were selected to receive the NAACP's President's Award for their work on causes related to social justice and equity. In October 2022, the couple were named as Ripple of Hope Award laureates for their work on racial justice, mental health, and other social initiatives through their foundation Archewell. Harry was inducted into the Living Legends of Aviation in January 2024. He received the Pat Tillman Award for Service during the 2024 ESPY Awards ceremony, recognising his service in the British Armed Forces and work with the Invictus Games, despite Tillman's mother believing that the award should have gone to \"more fitting\" recipients. In October 2025, he and his wife received the Humanitarians of the Year award at Project Healthy Minds' annual gala in New York City in recognition of their commitment to mental health support.\nAncestry.\nAgnatically, Harry is a member of the House of Gl\u00fccksburg, a cadet branch of the House of Oldenburg, one of Europe's oldest royal houses. Harry's paternal grandmother, Elizabeth II, issued letters patent on 8 February 1960 declaring his father to be a member of the House of Windsor.\nAncestors on Harry's father's side include most of the royal families of Europe, and on his mother's side, the earls Spencer\u2014a cadet branch of the Spencer family descended from the earls of Sunderland; the senior branch are now also dukes of Marlborough; the Barons Fermoy; and more anciently from Henry FitzRoy, 1st Duke of Grafton; and Charles Lennox, 1st Duke of Richmond\u2014two illegitimate sons of King Charles II.\nHarry and his brother William descend matrilineally from Eliza Kewark (18th-century), who is variously described in contemporary documents as \"a dark-skinned native woman\", \"an Armenian woman from Bombay\", and \"Mrs. Forbesian\". Genealogist William Addams Reitwiesner assumed Kewark was Armenian. In June 2013, BritainsDNA announced that genealogical DNA tests on two of Harry and William's distant matrilineal cousins confirm Kewark was matrilineally of Indian descent.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14458", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14458", "title": "Hail", "text": "Form of solid precipitation\nHail is a form of solid precipitation. It is distinct from ice pellets (American English \"sleet\"), though the two are often confused. It consists of balls or irregular lumps of ice, each of which is called a hailstone. Ice pellets generally fall in cold weather, while hail growth is greatly inhibited during low surface temperatures.\nUnlike other forms of water ice precipitation, such as graupel (which is made of rime ice), ice pellets (which are smaller and translucent), and snow (which consists of tiny, delicately crystalline flakes or needles), hailstones usually measure between and in diameter. The METAR reporting code for hail or greater is GR, while smaller hailstones and graupel are coded GS.\nHail is possible during most thunderstorms (as it is produced by cumulonimbus), as well as within of the parent storm. Hail formation requires environments of strong, upward motion of air within the parent thunderstorm (similar to tornadoes) and lowered heights of the freezing level. In the mid-latitudes, hail forms near the interiors of continents, while, in the tropics, it tends to be confined to high elevations.\nThere are methods available to detect hail-producing thunderstorms using weather satellites and weather radar imagery. Hailstones generally fall at higher speeds as they grow in size, though complicating factors such as melting, friction with air, wind, and interaction with rain and other hailstones can slow their descent through Earth's atmosphere. Severe weather warnings are issued for hail when the stones reach a damaging size, as it can cause serious damage to human-made structures, and, most commonly, farmers' crops.\nDefinition.\nAny thunderstorm which produces hail that reaches the ground is known as a hailstorm. An ice crystal with a diameter of &gt; is considered a hailstone. Hailstones can grow to and weigh more than .\nUnlike ice pellets, hailstones are often layered and can be irregular and clumped together. Hail is composed of transparent ice or alternating layers of transparent and translucent ice at least thick, which are deposited upon the hailstone as it travels through the cloud, suspended aloft by air with strong upward motion until its weight overcomes the updraft and falls to the ground. Although the diameter of hail is varied, in the United States, the average observation of damaging hail is between and golf-ball-sized .\nStones larger than are usually considered large enough to cause damage. The Meteorological Service of Canada issues severe thunderstorm warnings when hail that size or above is expected. The US National Weather Service has a diameter threshold, effective January 2010, an increase over the previous threshold of hail. Other countries have different thresholds according to local sensitivity to hail; for instance, grape-growing areas could be adversely impacted by smaller hailstones. Hailstones can be very large or very small, depending on how strong the updraft is: weaker hailstorms produce smaller hailstones than stronger hailstorms (such as supercells), as the more powerful updrafts in a stronger storm can keep larger hailstones aloft.\nFormation.\nHail forms in strong thunderstorm clouds, particularly those with intense updrafts, high liquid-water content, great vertical extent, large water droplets, and where a good portion of the cloud layer is below freezing (). These types of strong updrafts can also indicate the presence of a tornado. The growth rate of hailstones is impacted by factors such as higher elevation, lower freezing zones, and wind shear.\nLayer nature of the hailstones.\nLike other precipitation in cumulonimbus clouds, hail begins as water droplets. As the droplets rise and the temperature goes below freezing, they become supercooled water and will freeze on contact with condensation nuclei. A cross-section through a large hailstone shows an onion-like structure. This means that the hailstone is made of thick and translucent layers, alternating with layers that are thin, white and opaque. Former theory suggested that hailstones were subjected to multiple descents and ascents, falling into a zone of humidity and refreezing as they were uplifted. This up and down motion was thought to be responsible for the successive layers of the hailstone. New research, based on theory as well as field study, has shown this is not necessarily true.\nThe storm's updraft, with upwardly directed wind speeds as high as , blows the forming hailstones up the cloud. As the hailstone ascends, it passes into areas of the cloud where the concentration of humidity and supercooled water droplets varies. The hailstone's growth rate changes depending on the variation in humidity and supercooled water droplets that it encounters. The accretion rate of these water droplets is another factor in the hailstone's growth. When the hailstone moves into an area with a high concentration of water droplets, it captures the latter and acquires a translucent layer. Should the hailstone move into an area where mostly water vapor is available, it acquires a layer of opaque white ice.\nFurthermore, the hailstone's speed depends on its position in the cloud's updraft and its mass. This determines the varying thicknesses of the layers of the hailstone. The accretion rate of supercooled water droplets onto the hailstone depends on the relative velocities between these water droplets and the hailstone itself. This means that generally the larger hailstones will form some distance from the stronger updraft, where they can pass more time growing. As the hailstone grows, it releases latent heat, which keeps its exterior in a liquid phase. Because it undergoes \"wet growth\", the outer layer is \"sticky\" (i.e. more adhesive), so a single hailstone may grow by collision with other smaller hailstones, forming a larger entity with an irregular shape.\nHail can also undergo \"dry growth\", in which the latent heat release through freezing is not enough to keep the outer layer in a liquid state. Hail forming in this manner appears opaque due to small air bubbles that become trapped in the stone during rapid freezing. These bubbles coalesce and escape during the \"wet growth\" mode, and the hailstone is more clear. The mode of growth for a hailstone can change throughout its development, and this can result in distinct layers in a hailstone's cross-section.\nThe hailstone will keep rising in the thunderstorm until its mass can no longer be supported by the updraft. This may take at least 30\u00a0minutes, based on the force of the updrafts in the hail-producing thunderstorm, whose top is usually greater than 10\u00a0km high. It then falls toward the ground while continuing to grow, based on the same processes, until it leaves the cloud. It will later begin to melt as it passes into air above freezing temperature.\nThus, a unique trajectory in the thunderstorm is sufficient to explain the layer-like structure of the hailstone. The only case in which multiple trajectories can be discussed is in a multicellular thunderstorm, where the hailstone may be ejected from the top of the \"mother\" cell and captured in the updraft of a more intense \"daughter\" cell. This, however, is an exceptional case.\nFactors favoring hail.\nHail is most common within continental interiors of the mid-latitudes, as hail formation is considerably more likely when the freezing level is below the altitude of . Movement of dry air into strong thunderstorms over continents can increase the frequency of hail by promoting evaporational cooling, which lowers the freezing level of thunderstorm clouds, giving hail a larger volume to grow in. Accordingly, hail is less common in the tropics despite a much higher frequency of thunderstorms than in the mid-latitudes because the atmosphere over the tropics tends to be warmer over a much greater altitude. Hail in the tropics occurs mainly at higher elevations.\nHail growth becomes vanishingly small when air temperatures fall below , as supercooled water droplets become rare at these temperatures. Around thunderstorms, hail is most likely within the cloud at elevations above . Between and , 60% of hail is still within the thunderstorm, though 40% now lies within the clear air under the anvil. Below , hail is equally distributed in and around a thunderstorm to a distance of .\nScientific study.\nBeginning in Spring 2025, scientists in the United States engaged in a field study known as the \"In-situ Collaborative Experiment for Collection of Hail In the Plains\" (ICECHIP). The project, which is studying hail processes in thunderstorms in two areas known as \"hail alleys\"\u2013the Great Plains and along Colorado and Wyoming's Front Range of the Rocky Mountains\u2013is the world's largest field campaign ever devoted to studying hail, involving 100 scientists from four countries and 11 states. It is expected to shed light on many unanswered questions about hail formation and growth.\nClimatology.\nHail occurs most frequently within continental interiors at mid-latitudes and is less common in the tropics, despite a much higher frequency of thunderstorms than in the mid-latitudes. Hail is also much more common along mountain ranges because mountains force horizontal winds upwards (known as orographic lifting), thereby intensifying the updrafts within thunderstorms and making hail more likely. The higher elevations also result in there being less time available for hail to melt before reaching the ground. One of the more common regions for large hail is across mountainous northern India, which reported one of the highest hail-related death tolls on record in 1888. China also experiences significant hailstorms. Central Europe and southern Australia also experience a lot of hailstorms. Regions where hailstorms frequently occur are southern and western Germany, northern and eastern France, southern and eastern Benelux, and northern Italy. In southeastern Europe, Croatia and Serbia experience frequent occurrences of hail. Some mediterranean countries register the maximum frequency of hail during the Fall season.\nIn North America, hail is most common in the area where Colorado, Nebraska, and Wyoming meet, known as \"Hail Alley\". Hail in this region occurs between the months of March and October during the afternoon and evening hours, with the bulk of the occurrences from May through September. Cheyenne, Wyoming is North America's most hail-prone city with an average of nine to ten hailstorms per season. To the north of this area and also just downwind of the Rocky Mountains is the Hailstorm Alley region of Alberta, which also experiences an increased incidence of significant hail events.\nHailstorms are also common in several regions of South America, particularly in the temperate latitudes. The central region of Argentina, extending from the Mendoza region eastward towards C\u00f3rdoba, experiences some of the most frequent hailstorms in the world, with 10\u201330 storms per year on average. The Patagonia region of southern Argentina also sees frequent hailstorms, though this may be partially due to graupel (small hail) being counted as hail in this colder region. The triple border region between the Brazilian states of Paran\u00e1, Santa Catarina, and Argentina, in southern Brazil is another area known for damaging hailstorms. Hailstorms are also common in parts of Paraguay, Uruguay, and Bolivia that border the high-frequency hail regions of northern Argentina. The high frequency of hailstorms in these areas of South America is attributed to the region's orographic forcing of convection, combined with moisture transport from the Amazon and instability created by temperature contrasts between the surface and upper atmosphere. In Colombia, the cities of Bogot\u00e1 and Medell\u00edn also see frequent hailstorms due to their high elevation. Southern Chile also sees persistent hail from mid April through October. \nShort-term detection.\nWeather radar is a very useful tool to detect the presence of hail-producing thunderstorms. However, radar data has to be complemented by a knowledge of current atmospheric conditions which can allow one to determine if the current atmosphere is conducive to hail development.\nModern radar scans many angles around the site. Reflectivity values at multiple angles above ground level in a storm are proportional to the precipitation rate at those levels. Summing reflectivities in the Vertically Integrated Liquid or VIL, gives the liquid water content in the cloud. Research shows that hail development in the upper levels of the storm is related to the evolution of VIL. VIL divided by the vertical extent of the storm, called VIL density, has a relationship with hail size, although this varies with atmospheric conditions and therefore is not highly accurate. Traditionally, hail size and probability can be estimated from radar data by computer using algorithms based on this research. Some algorithms include the height of the freezing level to estimate the melting of the hailstone and what would be left on the ground.\nCertain patterns of reflectivity are important clues for the meteorologist as well. The three body scatter spike is an example. This is the result of energy from the radar hitting hail and being deflected to the ground, where they deflect back to the hail and then to the radar. The energy took more time to go from the hail to the ground and back, as opposed to the energy that went directly from the hail to the radar, and the echo is further away from the radar than the actual location of the hail on the same radial path, forming a cone of weaker reflectivities.\nMore recently, the polarization properties of weather radar returns have been analyzed to differentiate between hail and heavy rain. The use of differential reflectivity (formula_1), in combination with horizontal reflectivity (formula_2) has led to a variety of hail classification algorithms. Visible satellite imagery is beginning to be used to detect hail, but false alarm rates remain high using this method.\nSize and terminal velocity.\nThe size of hailstones is best determined by measuring their diameter with a ruler. In the absence of a ruler, hailstone size is often visually estimated by comparing its size to that of known objects, such as coins. Using objects such as hen's eggs, peas, and marbles for comparing hailstone sizes is imprecise, due to their varied dimensions. The UK organisation, TORRO, also scales for both hailstones and hailstorms.\nWhen observed at an airport, METAR code is used within a surface weather observation which relates to the size of the hailstone. Within METAR code, GR is used to indicate larger hail, of a diameter of at least . GR is derived from the French word \"gr\u00eale\". Smaller-sized hail, as well as snow pellets, use the coding of GS, which is short for the French word \"gr\u00e9sil\".\nTerminal velocity of hail, or the speed at which hail is falling when it strikes the ground, varies. It is estimated that a hailstone of in diameter falls at a rate of , while stones the size of in diameter fall at a rate of . Hailstone velocity is dependent on the size of the stone, its drag coefficient, the motion of wind it is falling through, collisions with raindrops or other hailstones, and melting as the stones fall through a warmer atmosphere. As hailstones are not perfect spheres, it is difficult to accurately calculate their drag coefficient - and, thus, their speed.\nSize comparisons to objects.\nIn the United States, the National Weather Service reports hail size as a comparison to everyday objects. Hailstones larger than 1 inch in diameter are denoted as \"severe.\"\nHail records.\nMegacryometeors, large rocks of ice that are not associated with thunderstorms, are not officially recognized by the World Meteorological Organization as \"hail\", which are aggregations of ice associated with thunderstorms, and therefore records of extreme characteristics of megacryometeors are not given as hail records.\nHazards.\nHail can cause serious damage, notably to automobiles, aircraft, skylights, glass-roofed structures, livestock, and most commonly, crops. Hail damage to roofs often goes unnoticed until further structural damage is seen, such as leaks or cracks. It is hardest to recognize hail damage on shingled roofs and flat roofs, but all roofs have their own hail damage detection problems. Metal roofs are fairly resistant to hail damage, but may accumulate cosmetic damage in the form of dents and damaged coatings. In 2023, hailstorms cost the United States $46 billion in damage to cars, roofs, and crops, according to the Insurance Institute for Business &amp; Home Safety (IBHS).\nHail is one of the most significant thunderstorm hazards to aircraft. When hailstones exceed in diameter, planes can be seriously damaged within seconds. The hailstones accumulating on the ground can also be hazardous to landing aircraft. Hail is a common nuisance to drivers of automobiles, severely denting the vehicle and cracking or even shattering windshields and windows unless parked in a garage or covered with a shielding material. Wheat, corn, soybeans, and tobacco are the most sensitive crops to hail damage. Hail is one of Canada's most expensive hazards.\nMassive hailstones have been known to cause concussions or fatal head trauma to people caught outside without shelter. Hailstorms have been the cause of costly and deadly events throughout history. Some researchers have suggested that a hail storm was the cause of the deaths of several hundred nomads around the 9th century in Roopkund, Uttarakhand, India, though this has been disputed. On April 30, 1888 a severe hailstorm killed more than 200 people in the Moradabad district of India. Fatal injuries are more rare in the modern era; in the US for example, despite hail causing billions of dollars in damage every year and large hail (&gt; diameter) being fairly common, only three people have been known to be struck and killed by hail since modern records have been kept.\nAccumulations.\nNarrow zones where hail accumulates on the ground in association with thunderstorm activity are known as hail streaks or hail swaths, which can be detectable by satellite after the storms pass by. Hailstorms normally last from a few minutes up to 15 minutes in duration. Accumulating hail storms can blanket the ground with over of hail, cause thousands to lose power, and bring down many trees. Flash flooding and mudslides within areas of steep terrain can be a concern with accumulating hail.\nDepths of up to have been reported. A landscape covered in accumulated hail generally resembles one covered in accumulated snow and any significant accumulation of hail has the same restrictive effects as snow accumulation, albeit over a smaller area, on transport and infrastructure. Accumulated hail can also cause flooding by blocking drains, and hail can be carried in the floodwater, turning into a snow-like slush which is deposited at lower elevations.\nOn somewhat rare occasions, a thunderstorm can become stationary or nearly so while prolifically producing hail and significant depths of accumulation do occur; this tends to happen in mountainous areas, such as the July 29, 2010 case of a foot of hail accumulation in Boulder County, Colorado. On June 5, 2015, hail up to four feet deep fell on one city block in Denver, Colorado. The hailstones, described as between the size of bumble bees and ping pong balls, were accompanied by rain and high winds. The hail fell in only the one area, leaving the surrounding area untouched. It fell for one and a half hours between 10:00 pm and 11:30\u00a0pm. A meteorologist for the National Weather Service in Boulder said, \"It's a very interesting phenomenon. We saw the storm stall. It produced copious amounts of hail in one small area. It's a meteorological thing.\" Tractors used to clear the area filled more than 30 dump truck loads of hail.\nResearch focused on four individual days that accumulated more than of hail in 30 minutes on the Colorado front range has shown that these events share similar patterns in observed synoptic weather, radar, and lightning characteristics, suggesting the possibility of predicting these events prior to their occurrence. A fundamental problem in continuing research in this area is that, unlike hail diameter, hail depth is not commonly reported. The lack of data leaves researchers and forecasters in the dark when trying to verify operational methods. A cooperative effort between the University of Colorado and the National Weather Service is in progress. The joint project's goal is to enlist the help of the general public to develop a database of hail accumulation depths.\nSuppression and prevention.\nDuring the Middle Ages, people in Europe used to ring church bells and fire cannons to try to prevent hail, and the subsequent damage to crops. Updated versions of this approach are available as modern hail cannons. Cloud seeding after World War II was done to attempt to eliminate the hail threat, particularly across the Soviet Union, where it was claimed a 70\u201398% reduction in crop damage from hail storms was achieved by deploying silver iodide in clouds using rockets and artillery shells. But these effects have not been replicated in randomized trials conducted in the West. Hail suppression programs have been undertaken by 15 countries between 1965 and 2005.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14459", "revid": "1358022", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14459", "title": "Hypnotherapy", "text": "Type of complementary and alternative medicine\nHypnotherapy, also known as hypnotic medicine, is the use of hypnosis in psychotherapy. Hypnosis is a state of deep focus and openness to suggestion that usually begins with relaxation and guided instructions. Some people respond more strongly than others, and researchers explain that hypnosis is not a magical trance but a form of concentrated attention and expectation (Heap &amp; Naish, 2012). Hypnotherapy is generally not considered to be based on scientific evidence, and is rarely recommended in clinical practice guidelines. However, several psychological reviews and meta-analyses suggest that hypnotherapy can be effective as an adjunctive treatment for a number of disorders, including chronic and acute pain, irritable bowel syndrome, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), phobias, and some eating disorders.\nDefinition.\nThe United States Department of Labor's \"Dictionary of Occupational Titles\" (DOT) describes the job of the hypnotherapist:\"Induces hypnotic state in client to increase motivation or alter behavior patterns: Consults with client to determine nature of problem. Prepares client to enter hypnotic state by explaining how hypnosis works and what client will experience. Tests subject to determine degree of physical and emotional suggestibility. Induces hypnotic state in client, using individualized methods and techniques of hypnosis based on interpretation of test results and analysis of client's problem. May train client in self-hypnosis conditioning.\"\nTraditional.\nThe form of hypnotherapy practiced by most Victorian hypnotists, including James Braid and Hippolyte Bernheim, mainly employed direct suggestion of symptom removal, with some use of therapeutic relaxation and occasionally aversion to alcohol, drugs, etc.\nEricksonian.\nIn the 1950s, Milton H. Erickson developed a radically different approach to hypnotism, which has subsequently become known as \"Ericksonian hypnotherapy\" or \"Neo-Ericksonian hypnotherapy.\" Based on his belief that dysfunctional behaviors were defined by social tension, Erickson coopted the subject's behavior to establish rapport, a strategy he termed \"utilization.\" Once rapport was established, he made use of an informal conversational approach to direct awareness. His methods included complex language patterns and client-specific therapeutic strategies (reflecting the nature of utilization). He claimed to have developed ways to suggest behavior changes during apparently ordinary conversations.\nThis divergence from tradition led some, including Andre Weitzenhoffer, to dispute whether Erickson was right to label his approach \"hypnosis\" at all. Erickson's foundational paper, however, considers hypnosis as a mental state in which specific types of \"work\" may be done, rather than a technique of induction.\nThe founders of neuro-linguistic programming (NLP), a method somewhat similar in some regards to some versions of hypnotherapy, claimed that they had modelled the work of Erickson extensively and assimilated it into their approach. Weitzenhoffer disputed whether NLP bears any genuine resemblance to Erickson's work.\nSolution-focused.\nIn the 2000s, hypnotherapists began to combine aspects of solution-focused brief therapy (SFBT) with Ericksonian hypnotherapy to produce therapy that was goal-focused (what the client wanted to achieve) rather than the more traditional problem-focused approach (spending time discussing the issues that brought the client to seek help). A solution-focused hypnotherapy session may include techniques from NLP.\nCognitive/behavioral.\nCognitive behavioral hypnotherapy (CBH) is an integrated psychological therapy employing clinical hypnosis and cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT). The use of CBT in conjunction with hypnotherapy may result in greater treatment effectiveness. A meta-analysis of eight different types of research revealed \"a 70% greater improvement\" for patients undergoing an integrated treatment than those using CBT only.\nIn 1974, Theodore X. Barber and his colleagues published a review of the research which argued, following the earlier social psychology of Theodore R. Sarbin, that hypnotism was better understood not as a \"special state\" but as the result of normal psychological variables, such as active imagination, expectation, appropriate attitudes, and motivation. Barber introduced the term \"cognitive-behavioral\" to describe the nonstate theory of hypnotism, and discussed its application to behavior therapy.\nThe growing application of cognitive and behavioral psychological theories and concepts to the explanation of hypnosis paved the way for closer integration of hypnotherapy with various cognitive and behavioral therapies.\nMany cognitive and behavioral therapies were themselves originally influenced by older hypnotherapy techniques, e.g., the systematic desensitisation of Joseph Wolpe, the cardinal technique of early behavior therapy, was originally called \"hypnotic desensitisation\" and derived from the \"Medical Hypnosis\" (1948) of Lewis Wolberg.\nCurative.\nPeter Marshall, author of \"A Handbook of Hypnotherapy\", devised the Trance Theory of Mental Illness, which asserts that people suffering from depression, or certain other kinds of neuroses, are already living in a trance. He states that this means the hypnotherapist does not need to induce trance, but instead to make them understand this and lead them out of it.\nMindful.\nMindful hypnotherapy is a therapy that incorporates mindfulness and hypnotherapy. A pilot study was made at Baylor University, Texas, and published in the \"International Journal of Clinical and Experimental Hypnosis\". Gary Elkins, director of the Mind-Body Medicine Research Laboratory at Baylor University, called it \"a valuable option for treating anxiety and stress reduction\" and \"an innovative mind-body therapy\". The study showed a decrease in stress and an increase in mindfulness.\nRelationship to scientific medicine.\nHypnotherapy practitioners occasionally attract the attention of mainstream medicine. Attempts to instill academic rigor have been frustrated by the complexity of client suggestibility, which has social and cultural aspects, including the practitioner's reputation. Results achieved in one time and center of study have not been reliably transmitted to future generations.\nIn the 1700s, Anton Mesmer offered pseudoscientific justification for his practices, but a commission that included Benjamin Franklin debunked his rationalizations.\nEffectiveness.\nAccording to the Royal College of Psychiatrists, \"studies have shown that hypnotherapy can help to treat a range of physical and mental health conditions\" and \"In many cases, hypnotherapy and other uses of suggestion can provide fast, effective treatment\".\nMenopause.\nHypnosis may be useful for treating some symptoms of menopause, such as hot flashes and night sweats. In 2023, the North American Menopause Society recommended using hypnosis for the nonhormonal management of menopause-associated vasomotor symptoms. A 2024 review indicated that hypnosis has potential benefit for treating some symptoms of menopause.\nIrritable bowel syndrome.\nThe use of hypnotherapy in treating the symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome is supported by research, including randomized controlled trials. Gut-directed hypnotherapy is recommended in the treatment of irritable bowel syndrome by the American College of Gastroenterology clinical guideline for the management of IBS.\nChildbirth.\nHypnotherapy is often applied in the birthing process and the post-natal period, but there is insufficient evidence to determine if it alleviates pain during childbirth and no evidence that it is effective against post-natal depression.\nBulimia nervosa.\nLiterature shows that a wide variety of hypnotic interventions have been investigated for the treatment of bulimia nervosa, with inconclusive effects. Similar studies have shown that groups suffering from bulimia nervosa, undergoing hypnotherapy, were more exceptional to no treatment, placebos, or other alternative treatments.\nAnxiety.\nHypnotherapy is shown to be comparable in effectiveness to other forms of therapy, such as cognitive behavioral therapy, that utilize relaxation techniques and imagery. It has also shown to be successful when used to reduce anxiety in those with dental anxiety and phobias.\nPTSD.\nPost-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and its symptoms have been shown to improve due to the implementation of hypnotherapy, in both the long and short term. As research continues, hypnotherapy is being more openly considered as an effective intervention for those with PTSD.\nDepression.\nHypnotherapy is effective when used to treat long-term depressive symptoms. It is comparable to the efficacy of cognitive behavioral therapy, and when used in tandem, efficacy seems to increase.\nOther uses.\nHistorically hypnotism was used therapeutically by some psychiatrists in the Victorian era, to treat the condition then known as hysteria.\nModern hypnotherapy has been used to treat certain habit disorders and control irrational fears, and addiction.\nOccupational accreditation.\nUnited States.\nThe laws regarding hypnosis and hypnotherapy vary by state and municipality. Some states, like Colorado, Connecticut, and Washington, have mandatory licensing and registration requirements, while many other states have no specific regulations governing the practice of hypnotherapy.\nUnited Kingdom.\nUK National Occupational Standards.\nIn 2002, the Department for Education and Skills developed National Occupational Standards for hypnotherapy linked to National Vocational Qualifications based on the then National Qualifications Framework under the Qualifications and Curriculum Authority. https://, a national awarding body, issues a level four national vocational qualification diploma in hypnotherapy. Currently, AIM Awards offers a Level 3 Certificate in Hypnotherapy and Counselling Skills at level 3 of the Regulated Qualifications Framework.\nUK Confederation of Hypnotherapy Organisations (UKCHO).\nThe regulation of the hypnotherapy profession in the UK is at present the main focus of https://, a non-profit umbrella body for hypnotherapy organisations. Founded in 1998 to provide a non-political arena to discuss and implement changes to the profession of hypnotherapy, UKCHO currently represents 9 of the UK's professional hypnotherapy organisations and has developed standards of training for hypnotherapists, along with codes of conduct and practice that all UKCHO-registered hypnotherapists are governed by. As a step towards the regulation of the profession, UKCHO's website now includes a National Public Register of Hypnotherapists who have been registered by UKCHO's Member Organisations and are therefore subject to UKCHO's professional standards. Further steps to regulate the hypnotherapy profession will be taken in consultation with the Prince's Foundation for Integrated Health.\nThe National Council for Hypnotherapy (NCH).\nThe National Council for Hypnotherapy is a Professional Association, established in 1973 to create a National Membership Organisation for independent Hypnotherapy Practitioners.\nThe organisation is not for profit with a Board of 12-15 people composed of Executives and Directors, the latter usually 'in practice' Hypnotherapists and trainers of Hypnotherapy. The current Chair, Tracey Grist, has been in the position since 2016.\nThe NCH is a VO (Verifying organisation) for the CNHC, which means that NCH members meet the criteria to become CNHC registrants.\nThe NCH membership meets the national hypnotherapy training standards via the externally verified Hypnotherapy Practitioner Diploma (HPD) through the NCFE.\nMembers agree to follow the CECP; the NCH's ethical code of practice. All members are expected to be insured to practice, meet supervision requirements, and meet annual CPD expectations.\nAustralia.\nThe Australian government does not regulate professional hypnotherapy and the use of the occupational titles \"hypnotherapist\" or \"clinical hypnotherapist.\"\nIn 1996, as a result of a three-year research project led by Lindsay B. Yeates, the https:// (founded in 1949), the oldest hypnotism-oriented professional organization in Australia, instituted a peer-group accreditation system for full-time Australian professional hypnotherapists, the first of its kind in the world, which \"accredit[ed] specific individuals on the basis of their actual demonstrated knowledge and clinical performance; instead of approving particular 'courses' or approving particular 'teaching institutions'\" (Yeates, 1996, p.iv; 1999, p.xiv). The system was further revised in 1999.\nAustralian hypnotism/hypnotherapy organizations (including the Australian Hypnotherapists Association) are seeking government regulation similar to other mental health professions. However, currently, hypnotherapy is not subject to government regulation through the Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency (AHPRA).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14462", "revid": "11104410", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14462", "title": "Hangman (game)", "text": "Word game\nHangman is a guessing game for two or more players. One player thinks of a word, phrase, or sentence and the other(s) tries to guess it by suggesting letters or numbers within a certain number of guesses. Originally a paper-and-pencil game, there are now electronic versions.\nHistory.\nThough the origins of the game are unknown, a variant is mentioned in a book of children's games assembled by Alice Gomme in 1894 called Birds, Beasts, and Fishes. This version lacks the image of a hanged man, instead relying on keeping score as to the number of attempts it took each player to fill in the blanks.\nA version which incorporated hanging imagery was described in a 1902 article in \"The Philadelphia Inquirer\", which stated that it was popular at \"White Cap\" parties where guests would wear \"white peaked caps with masks\".\nOverview.\nThe word to guess is represented by a row of dashes representing each letter or number of the word. Rules may permit or forbid proper nouns (such as names, places, or brands) or other types of words (such as slang). If the guessing player suggests a letter which occurs in the word, the other player writes it in all its correct positions. If the suggested letter does not occur in the word, the other player adds (or alternatively, removes) one element of a hanged stick figure as a tally mark. Generally, the game ends once the word is guessed, or if the stick figure is complete\u2014signifying that all guesses have been used. \nThe player guessing the word may, at any time, attempt to guess the whole word. If the word is correct, the game is over and the guesser wins. Otherwise, the other player may choose to penalize the guesser by adding an element to the diagram. If the guesser makes enough incorrect guesses to allow the other player to complete the diagram, the guesser loses. However, the guesser can also win by guessing all the letters that appear in the word, thereby completing the word, before the diagram is completed.\nVariants.\nAs the name of the game suggests, the diagram is designed to look like a hanging man. This has led to some controversy. In situations where drawing a public execution may not be advisable, alternative methods to keep track of the number of incorrect guesses can be used, such as crossing apples off of a tree or removing slices of a pie.\nSome modifications to game play (house rules) to increase the difficulty level are sometimes implemented, such as limiting guesses on high-frequency consonants and vowels. Another alternative is to give the definition of the word; this can be used to facilitate the learning of a foreign language.\nHow many incorrect guesses are allowed in the game can also be modified. This can be done by adding extra elements to the stick figure, like a face or shoes, or by first drawing elements of the gallows for every mistake before starting to draw the stick figure.\nStrategy.\nThe fact that the twelve most commonly occurring letters in the English language are e-t-a-o-i-n-s-h-r-d-l-u (from most to least), along with other letter-frequency lists, are used by the guessing player to increase the odds when it is their turn to guess. On the other hand, the same lists can be used by the puzzle setter to stump their opponent by choosing a word that deliberately avoids common letters (e.g., \"rhythm\", \"zephyr\", \"qi\", \"nth\") or one that contains rare letters (e.g., \"jazz\").\nAnother common strategy is to guess vowels first, as English only has five vowels (a, e, i, o, and u, while y may sometimes, but rarely, be used as a vowel) and almost every word has at least one.\nAccording to a 2010 study conducted by Jon McLoone for Wolfram Research, the most difficult words to guess include \"jazz\", \"buzz\", \"hajj\", \"faff\", \"fizz\", \"fuzz\" and variations of these.\nDerivations.\nThe American game show \"Wheel of Fortune\" was inspired by hangman. Merv Griffin conceived of the show after recalling long car trips as a child, on which he and his sister played the game.\nBrazil also had a show in the 1960s and again from 2012 to 2013 called \"Let's Play Hangman\", hosted by Silvio Santos. Brazil would later get its own version of \"Wheel of Fortune\", running from 1980 to 1993, again from 2003 to 2012 (during which the new \"Let's Play Hangman\" aired), and again since 2013 to the present. These shows were also hosted by Santos.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14463", "revid": "50805448", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14463", "title": "Harmonic mean", "text": "Inverse of the average of the inverses of a set of numbers\nIn mathematics, the harmonic mean is a kind of average, one of the Pythagorean means.\nIt is the most appropriate average for ratios and rates such as speeds, and is normally only used for positive arguments.\nThe harmonic mean is the reciprocal of the arithmetic mean of the reciprocals of the numbers, that is, the generalized f-mean with formula_1. For example, the harmonic mean of 1, 4, and 4 is\nformula_2\nDefinition.\nThe harmonic mean \"H\" of the positive real numbers formula_3 is\nformula_4\nIt is the reciprocal of the arithmetic mean of the reciprocals, and vice versa:\nformula_5\nwhere the arithmetic mean is formula_6\nThe harmonic mean is a Schur-concave function, and is greater than or equal to the minimum of its arguments: for positive arguments, formula_7. Thus, the harmonic mean cannot be made arbitrarily large by changing some values to bigger ones (while having at least one value unchanged). \nThe harmonic mean is also concave for positive arguments, an even stronger property than Schur-concavity.\nRelationship with other means.\nFor all \"positive\" data sets \"containing at least one pair of nonequal values\", the harmonic mean is always the least of the three Pythagorean means, while the arithmetic mean is always the greatest of the three and the geometric mean is always in between. (If all values in a nonempty data set are equal, the three means are always equal.)\nIt is the special case \"M\"\u22121 of the power mean:\nformula_8\nSince the harmonic mean of a list of numbers tends strongly toward the least elements of the list, it tends (compared to the arithmetic mean) to mitigate the impact of large outliers and aggravate the impact of small ones.\nThe arithmetic mean is often mistakenly used in places calling for the harmonic mean. In the speed example below for instance, the arithmetic mean of 40 is incorrect, and too big.\nThe harmonic mean is related to the other Pythagorean means, as seen in the equation below. This can be seen by interpreting the denominator to be the arithmetic mean of the product of numbers \"n\" times but each time omitting the \"j\"-th term. That is, for the first term, we multiply all \"n\" numbers except the first; for the second, we multiply all \"n\" numbers except the second; and so on. The numerator, excluding the \"n\", which goes with the arithmetic mean, is the geometric mean to the power\u00a0\"n\". Thus the \"n\"-th harmonic mean is related to the \"n\"-th geometric and arithmetic means. The general formula is\nformula_9\nIf a set of non-identical numbers is subjected to a mean-preserving spread \u2014 that is, two or more elements of the set are \"spread apart\" from each other while leaving the arithmetic mean unchanged \u2014 then the harmonic mean always decreases.\nHarmonic mean of two or three numbers.\nTwo numbers.\nFor the special case of just two numbers, formula_10 and formula_11, the harmonic mean can be written as:\nformula_12 or formula_13\nIn this special case, the harmonic mean is related to the arithmetic mean formula_16 and the geometric mean formula_17 by\nformula_18\nSince formula_19 by the inequality of arithmetic and geometric means, this shows for the \"n\" = 2 case that \"H\" \u2264 \"G\" (a property that in fact holds for all \"n\"). It also follows that formula_20, meaning the two numbers' geometric mean equals the geometric mean of their arithmetic and harmonic means.\nThree numbers.\nFor the special case of three numbers, formula_10, formula_11 and formula_23, the harmonic mean can be written as:\nformula_24\nThree positive numbers \"H\", \"G\", and \"A\" are respectively the harmonic, geometric, and arithmetic means of three positive numbers if and only if the following inequality holds\nformula_25\nWeighted harmonic mean.\nIf a set of weights formula_26, ..., formula_27 is associated to the data set formula_10, ..., formula_29, the weighted harmonic mean is defined by \nformula_30\nThe unweighted harmonic mean can be regarded as the special case where all of the weights are equal.\nExamples.\nIn analytic number theory.\nPrime number theory.\nThe prime number theorem states that the number of primes less than or equal to formula_31 is asymptotically equal to the harmonic mean of the first formula_31 natural numbers.\nIn physics.\nAverage speed.\nIn many situations involving rates and ratios, the harmonic mean provides the correct average. For instance, if a vehicle travels a certain distance \"s\" outbound at a speed \"v\"1 (e.g. 60\u00a0km/h) and returns the same distance at a speed \"v\"2 (e.g. 20\u00a0km/h), then its average speed is the harmonic mean of \"v\"1 and \"v\"2 (30\u00a0km/h), not the arithmetic mean (40\u00a0km/h). The total travel time is the same as if it had traveled the whole distance at that average speed. This can be proven as follows:\nAverage speed for the entire journey\nHowever, if the vehicle travels for a certain amount of \"time\" at a speed \"v\"1 and then the same amount of time at a speed \"v\"2, then its average speed is the arithmetic mean of \"v\"1 and \"v\"2, which in the above example is 40\u00a0km/h.\nAverage speed for the entire journey\nThe same principle applies to more than two segments: given a series of sub-trips at different speeds, if each sub-trip covers the same \"distance\", then the average speed is the \"harmonic\" mean of all the sub-trip speeds; and if each sub-trip takes the same amount of \"time\", then the average speed is the \"arithmetic\" mean of all the sub-trip speeds. (If neither is the case, then a weighted harmonic mean or weighted arithmetic mean is needed. For the arithmetic mean, the speed of each portion of the trip is weighted by the duration of that portion, while for the harmonic mean, the corresponding weight is the distance. In both cases, the resulting formula reduces to dividing the total distance by the total time.)\nHowever, one may avoid the use of the harmonic mean for the case of \"weighting by distance\". Pose the problem as finding the \"pace\" of the trip where \"pace\" (in hours per kilometer) is the inverse of speed. When trip \"pace\" is found, invert it so as to find the \"true\" average trip speed. For each trip segment i, the \"pace\" pi = 1/speedi. Then take the weighted arithmetic mean of the pi's weighted by their respective distances (optionally with the weights normalized so they sum to 1 by dividing them by trip length). This gives the true average \"pace\" (in time per kilometer). It turns out that this procedure, which can be done with no knowledge of the harmonic mean, amounts to the same mathematical operations as one would use in solving this problem by using the harmonic mean. Thus it illustrates why the harmonic mean works in this case.\nDensity.\nSimilarly, if one wishes to estimate the density of an alloy given the densities of its constituent elements and their mass fractions (or, equivalently, percentages by mass), then the predicted density of the alloy (exclusive of typically minor volume changes due to atom packing effects) is the weighted harmonic mean of the individual densities, weighted by mass, rather than the weighted arithmetic mean as one might at first expect. To use the weighted arithmetic mean, the densities would have to be weighted by volume. Applying dimensional analysis to the problem while labeling the mass units by element and making sure that only like element-masses cancel makes this clear.\nElectricity.\nIf one connects two electrical resistors in parallel, one having resistance \"R\"1 (e.g., 60\u00a0\u03a9) and one having resistance \"R\"2 (e.g., 40\u00a0\u03a9), then the effect is the same as if one had used two resistors with the same resistance, both equal to the harmonic mean of \"R\"1 and \"R\"2 (48\u00a0\u03a9); the equivalent resistance, in either case, is 24\u00a0\u03a9 (one-half of the harmonic mean). This same principle applies to capacitors in series or to inductors in parallel.\nAverage resistance for both resistors in parallel\nHowever, if one connects the resistors in series, then the average resistance is the arithmetic mean of \"R\"1 and \"R\"2 (50\u00a0\u03a9), with total resistance equal to twice this, the sum of \"R\"1 and \"R\"2 (100\u00a0\u03a9). This principle applies to capacitors in parallel or to inductors in series.\nAverage resistance for both resistors in series\nAs with the previous example, the same principle applies when more than two resistors, capacitors or inductors are connected, provided that all are in parallel or all are in series.\nThe \"conductivity effective mass\" of a semiconductor is also defined as the harmonic mean of the effective masses along the three crystallographic directions.\nOptics.\nAs for other optic equations, the thin lens equation = + can be rewritten such that the focal length \"f\" is one-half of the harmonic mean of the distances of the subject \"u\" and object \"v\" from the lens.\nTwo thin lenses of focal length \"f\"1 and \"f\"2 in series is equivalent to two thin lenses of focal length \"f\"hm, their harmonic mean, in series. Expressed as optical power, two thin lenses of optical powers \"P\"1 and \"P\"2 in series is equivalent to two thin lenses of optical power \"P\"am, their arithmetic mean, in series.\nIn finance.\nThe weighted harmonic mean is the preferable method for averaging multiples, such as the price\u2013earnings ratio (P/E). If these ratios are averaged using a weighted arithmetic mean, high data points are given greater weights than low data points. The weighted harmonic mean, on the other hand, correctly weights each data point. The simple weighted arithmetic mean when applied to non-price normalized ratios such as the P/E is biased upwards and cannot be numerically justified, since it is based on equalized earnings; just as vehicles speeds cannot be averaged for a roundtrip journey (see above).\nIn geometry.\nIn any triangle, the radius of the incircle is one-third of the harmonic mean of the altitudes.\nFor any point P on the minor arc BC of the circumcircle of an equilateral triangle ABC, with distances \"q\" and \"t\" from B and C respectively, and with the intersection of PA and BC being at a distance \"y\" from point P, we have that \"y\" is half the harmonic mean of \"q\" and \"t\".\nIn a right triangle with legs \"a\" and \"b\" and altitude \"h\" from the hypotenuse to the right angle, \"h\"2 is half the harmonic mean of \"a\"2 and \"b\"2.\nLet \"t\" and \"s\" (\"t\" &gt; \"s\") be the sides of the two inscribed squares in a right triangle with hypotenuse \"c\". Then \"s\"2 equals half the harmonic mean of \"c\"2 and \"t\"2.\nLet a trapezoid have vertices A, B, C, and D in sequence and have parallel sides AB and CD. Let E be the intersection of the diagonals, and let F be on side DA and G be on side BC such that FEG is parallel to AB and CD. Then FG is the harmonic mean of AB and DC. (This is provable using similar triangles.)\nOne application of this trapezoid result is in the crossed ladders problem, where two ladders lie oppositely across an alley, each with feet at the base of one sidewall, with one leaning against a wall at height \"A\" and the other leaning against the opposite wall at height \"B\", as shown. The ladders cross at a height of \"h\" above the alley floor. Then \"h\" is half the harmonic mean of \"A\" and \"B\". This result still holds if the walls are slanted but still parallel and the \"heights\" \"A\", \"B\", and \"h\" are measured as distances from the floor along lines parallel to the walls. This can be proved easily using the area formula of a trapezoid and area addition formula.\nIn an ellipse, the semi-latus rectum (the distance from a focus to the ellipse along a line parallel to the minor axis) is the harmonic mean of the maximum and minimum distances of the ellipse from a focus.\nIn other sciences.\nIn computer science, specifically information retrieval and machine learning, the harmonic mean of the precision (true positives per predicted positive) and the recall (true positives per real positive) is often used as an aggregated performance score for the evaluation of algorithms and systems: the F-score (or F-measure). This is used in information retrieval because only the positive class is of relevance, while number of negatives, in general, is large and unknown. It is thus a trade-off as to whether the correct positive predictions should be measured in relation to the number of predicted positives or the number of real positives, so it is measured versus a putative number of positives that is an arithmetic mean of the two possible denominators.\nA consequence arises from basic algebra in problems where people or systems work together. As an example, if a gas-powered pump can drain a pool in 4 hours and a battery-powered pump can drain the same pool in 6 hours, then it will take both pumps , which is equal to 2.4 hours, to drain the pool together. This is one-half of the harmonic mean of 6 and 4: \n 4.8. That is, the appropriate average for the two types of pump is the harmonic mean, and with one pair of pumps (two pumps), it takes half this harmonic mean time, while with two pairs of pumps (four pumps) it would take a quarter of this harmonic mean time.\nIn hydrology, the harmonic mean is similarly used to average hydraulic conductivity values for a flow that is perpendicular to layers (e.g., geologic or soil) - flow parallel to layers uses the arithmetic mean. This apparent difference in averaging is explained by the fact that hydrology uses conductivity, which is the inverse of resistivity.\nIn sabermetrics, a baseball player's Power\u2013speed number is the harmonic mean of their home run and stolen base totals.\nIn population genetics, the harmonic mean is used when calculating the effects of fluctuations in the census population size on the effective population size. The harmonic mean takes into account the fact that events such as population bottleneck increase the rate genetic drift and reduce the amount of genetic variation in the population. This is a result of the fact that following a bottleneck very few individuals contribute to the gene pool limiting the genetic variation present in the population for many generations to come.\nWhen considering fuel economy in automobiles two measures are commonly used \u2013 miles per gallon (mpg), and litres per 100\u00a0km. As the dimensions of these quantities are the inverse of each other (one is distance per volume, the other volume per distance) when taking the mean value of the fuel economy of a range of cars one measure will produce the harmonic mean of the other \u2013 i.e., converting the mean value of fuel economy expressed in litres per 100\u00a0km to miles per gallon will produce the harmonic mean of the fuel economy expressed in miles per gallon. For calculating the average fuel consumption of a fleet of vehicles from the individual fuel consumptions, the harmonic mean should be used if the fleet uses miles per gallon, whereas the arithmetic mean should be used if the fleet uses litres per 100\u00a0km. In the USA the CAFE standards (the federal automobile fuel consumption standards) make use of the harmonic mean.\nIn chemistry and nuclear physics the average mass per particle of a mixture consisting of different species (e.g., molecules or isotopes) is given by the harmonic mean of the individual species' masses weighted by their respective mass fraction.\nBeta distribution.\nThe harmonic mean of a beta distribution with shape parameters \"\u03b1\" and \"\u03b2\" is:\nformula_33\nThe harmonic mean with \"\u03b1\" &lt; 1 is undefined because its defining expression is not bounded in [0, 1].\nLetting \"\u03b1\" = \"\u03b2\"\n formula_34\nshowing that for \"\u03b1\" = \"\u03b2\" the harmonic mean ranges from 0 for \"\u03b1\" = \"\u03b2\" = 1, to 1/2 for \"\u03b1\" = \"\u03b2\" \u2192 \u221e.\nThe following are the limits with one parameter finite (non-zero) and the other parameter approaching these limits:\nformula_35\nWith the geometric mean the harmonic mean may be useful in maximum likelihood estimation in the four parameter case.\nA second harmonic mean (\"H\"1 \u2212 X) also exists for this distribution\nformula_36\nThis harmonic mean with \"\u03b2\" &lt; 1 is undefined because its defining expression is not bounded in [ 0, 1 ].\nLetting \"\u03b1\" = \"\u03b2\" in the above expression\nformula_37\nshowing that for \"\u03b1\" = \"\u03b2\" the harmonic mean ranges from 0, for \"\u03b1\" = \"\u03b2\" = 1, to 1/2, for \"\u03b1\" = \"\u03b2\" \u2192 \u221e.\nThe following are the limits with one parameter finite (non zero) and the other approaching these limits:\n formula_38\nAlthough both harmonic means are asymmetric, when \"\u03b1\" = \"\u03b2\" the two means are equal.\nLognormal distribution.\nThe harmonic mean ( \"H\" ) of the lognormal distribution of a random variable \"X\" is\n formula_39\nwhere \"\u03bc\" and \"\u03c3\"2 are the parameters of the distribution, i.e. the mean and variance of the distribution of the natural logarithm of \"X\".\nThe harmonic and arithmetic means of the distribution are related by\n formula_40\nwhere \"C\"v and \"\u03bc\"* are the coefficient of variation and the mean of the distribution respectively..\nThe geometric (\"G\"), arithmetic and harmonic means of the distribution are related by\n formula_41\nPareto distribution.\nThe harmonic mean of type 1 Pareto distribution is\n formula_42\nwhere \"k\" is the scale parameter and \"\u03b1\" is the shape parameter.\nStatistics.\nFor a random sample, the harmonic mean is calculated as above. Both the mean and the variance may be infinite (if it includes at least one term of the form 1/0).\nSample distributions of mean and variance.\nThe mean of the sample \"m\" is asymptotically distributed normally with variance \"s\"2.\nformula_43\nThe variance of the mean itself is\n formula_44\nwhere \"m\" is the arithmetic mean of the reciprocals, \"x\" are the variates, \"n\" is the population size and \"E\" is the expectation operator.\nDelta method.\nAssuming that the variance is not infinite and that the central limit theorem applies to the sample then using the delta method, the variance is\n formula_45\nwhere \"H\" is the harmonic mean, \"m\" is the arithmetic mean of the reciprocals\n formula_46\n\"s\"2 is the variance of the reciprocals of the data\n formula_47\nand \"n\" is the number of data points in the sample.\nJackknife method.\nA jackknife method of estimating the variance is possible if the mean is known. This method is the usual 'delete 1' rather than the 'delete m' version.\nThis method first requires the computation of the mean of the sample (\"m\")\n formula_48\nwhere \"x\" are the sample values.\nA series of value \"wi\" is then computed where\n formula_49\nThe mean (\"h\") of the \"w\"i is then taken:\n formula_50\nThe variance of the mean is\n formula_51\nSignificance testing and confidence intervals for the mean can then be estimated with the t test.\nSize biased sampling.\nAssume a random variate has a distribution \"f\"( \"x\" ). Assume also that the likelihood of a variate being chosen is proportional to its value. This is known as length based or size biased sampling.\nLet \"\u03bc\" be the mean of the population. Then the probability density function \"f\"*( \"x\" ) of the size biased population is\n formula_52\nThe expectation of this length biased distribution E*( \"x\" ) is\n formula_53\nwhere \"\u03c3\"2 is the variance.\nThe expectation of the harmonic mean is the same as the non-length biased version E( \"x\" )\n formula_54\nThe problem of length biased sampling arises in a number of areas including textile manufacture pedigree analysis and survival analysis\nAkman \"et al.\" have developed a test for the detection of length based bias in samples.\nShifted variables.\nIf \"X\" is a positive random variable and \"q\" &gt; 0 then for all \"\u03b5\" &gt; 0\n formula_55\nMoments.\nAssuming that \"X\" and E(\"X\") are &gt; 0 then\n formula_56\nThis follows from Jensen's inequality.\nGurland has shown that for a distribution that takes only positive values, for any \"n\" &gt; 0\n formula_57\nUnder some conditions\n formula_58\nwhere ~ means approximately equal to.\nSampling properties.\nAssuming that the variates (\"x\") are drawn from a lognormal distribution there are several possible estimators for \"H\":\n formula_59\nwhere\n formula_60\n formula_61\nOf these \"H\"3 is probably the best estimator for samples of 25 or more.\nBias and variance estimators.\nA first order approximation to the bias and variance of \"H\"1 are\n formula_62\nwhere \"C\"v is the coefficient of variation.\nSimilarly a first order approximation to the bias and variance of \"H\"3 are\n formula_63\nIn numerical experiments \"H\"3 is generally a superior estimator of the harmonic mean than \"H\"1. \"H\"2 produces estimates that are largely similar to \"H\"1.\nNotes.\nThe Environmental Protection Agency recommends the use of the harmonic mean in setting maximum toxin levels in water.\nIn geophysical reservoir engineering studies, the harmonic mean is widely used.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14465", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14465", "title": "Hellbender", "text": "Species of amphibian\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe hellbender (Cryptobranchus alleganiensis), also known as the hellbender salamander, is a species of aquatic giant salamander endemic to the eastern and central United States. It is the largest salamander in North America. A member of the family Cryptobranchidae, the hellbender is the only extant member of the genus \"Cryptobranchus\". Other closely related salamanders in the same family are in the genus \"Andrias\", which contains the Japanese and Chinese giant salamanders. The hellbender is much larger than any other salamander in its geographic range, and employs an unusual adaption for respiration through cutaneous gas exchange via capillaries found in its lateral skin folds. It fills a particular niche\u2014both as a predator and prey\u2014in its ecosystem, which either it or its ancestors have occupied for around 65\u00a0million years. The species is listed as Vulnerable on the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species due to the impacts of disease and widespread habitat loss and degradation throughout much of its range.\nEtymology.\nThe origin of the name \"hellbender\" is unclear. The Missouri Department of Conservation says:\nThe name 'hellbender' probably comes from the animal's odd look. One theory claims the hellbender was named by settlers who thought \"it was a creature from hell where it's bent on returning.\" Another rendition says the undulating skin of a hellbender reminded observers of \"horrible tortures of the infernal regions.\" In reality, it's a harmless aquatic salamander.\nIn a study conducted in Indiana, informing the public about the rarity and locality of the hellbender resulted in more positive attitudes toward this species than were previously held. Other vernacular names include snot otter, lasagna lizard, devil dog, mud-devil, mud dog, water dog, grampus, Allegheny alligator, and leverian water newt.\nThe generic name, \"Cryptobranchus\", is derived from the Ancient Greek (hidden) and (gill). The subspecies name \"bishopi\" honors the American herpetologist Sherman C. Bishop.\nDescription.\n\"Cryptobranchus alleganiensis\" has a flat body and head, with beady dorsal eyes and slimy skin. Like most salamanders, it has short legs with four toes on the front legs and five on its back limbs, and its tail is keeled for propulsion. Its tail is shaped like a rudder, but it is rarely used for swimming; these salamanders instead use pads on their toes to grip rocks and walk up and down streams instead of swimming. The hellbender has working lungs, but gill slits are often retained, although only immature specimens have true gills; the hellbender absorbs oxygen from the water through capillaries of its side frills. The frills run from their neck down to the base of their tail on each side of their body. The frills' function is to increase the surface area of the hellbender and to help the hellbender breathe. Only occasionally leaving the water, the hellbender makes little use of these lungs and the juveniles lose their external gills after around 18 months or about in length. It is blotchy brown or red-brown in color, with a paler underbelly. Hellbenders can also be described as having a gray, or yellowish-brown, to even black coloration.\nBoth males and females grow to an adult length of from snout to vent, with a total length of , making them the fourth-largest aquatic salamander species in the world (after the South China giant salamander, the Chinese giant salamander and the Japanese giant salamander, respectively) and the largest amphibian in North America, although this length is rivaled by the reticulated siren of the southeastern United States (although the siren is much leaner in build). While males and females grow at similar rates, the females tend to live longer and therefore grow larger. Adults weigh , making them the fifth heaviest living amphibian in the world after their South China, Chinese and Japanese cousins and the goliath frog, while the largest cane toads may also weigh as much as a hellbender. Hellbenders reach sexual maturity at about five years of age, and may live 30 years in captivity.\nThe hellbender has a few characteristics that make it distinguishable from other native salamanders, including a gigantic, dorsoventrally flattened body with thick folds travelling down the sides, a single open gill slit on each side, and hind feet with five toes each. Easily distinguished from most other endemic salamander species simply by their size, hellbenders average up to in length; the only species requiring further distinction (due to an overlap in distribution and size range) is the common mudpuppy (\"Necturus maculosus\"). This demarcation can be made by noting the presence of external gills in the mudpuppy, which are lacking in the hellbender, as well as the presence of four toes on each hind foot of the mudpuppy (in contrast with the hellbender's five). Furthermore, the average size of \"C.\u00a0a.\u00a0alleganiensis\" has been reported to be (with some reported as reaching up to ), while \"N.\u00a0m.\u00a0maculosus\" has a reported average size of in length, which means that hellbender adults will still generally be notably larger than even the biggest mudpuppies.\nTaxonomy.\nThe genus \"Cryptobranchus\" has historically been considered to contain only one species, \"C.\u00a0alleganiensis\", with two subspecies, \"C.\u00a0a. alleganiensis\" and \"C.\u00a0a. bishopi\". A recent decline in population size of the Ozark subspecies \"C.\u00a0a. bishopi\" has led to further research into populations of this subspecies, including genetic analysis to determine the best method for conservation.\nCrowhurst et al., for instance, found that the \"Ozark subspecies\" denomination is insufficient for describing genetic (and therefore evolutionary) divergence within the genus \"Cryptobranchus\" in the Ozark region. They found three equally divergent genetic units within the genus: \"C.\u00a0a. alleganiensis\", and two distinct eastern and western populations of \"C.\u00a0a. bishopi\". These three groups were shown to be isolated, and are considered to most likely be \"diverging on different evolutionary paths\".\nDistribution.\nHellbenders are present in a number of Eastern US states, from southern New York to northern Georgia, including parts of Ohio, Pennsylvania, Maryland, West Virginia, Virginia, Kentucky, Illinois, Indiana, Tennessee, North Carolina, South Carolina, Alabama, Mississippi, Arkansas, Missouri, and extending into Oklahoma and Kansas. However, only one documented sighting has been recorded in South Carolina. The subspecies (or species, depending on the source) \"C.\u00a0a. bishopi\" is confined to the Ozarks of northern Arkansas and southern Missouri, while \"C.\u00a0a. alleganiensis\" is found in the rest of these states.\nSome hellbender populations\u2014namely a few in Missouri, Pennsylvania, and Tennessee\u2014have historically been noted to be quite abundant, but several man-made threats have converged on the species such that it has seen a serious population decline throughout its range. In Missouri, it is estimated that the populations have declined by 77% since the 1980s. Hellbender populations were listed in 1981 as already extirpated or endangered in Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, and Maryland, decreasing in Arkansas and Kentucky, and generally threatened as a species throughout their range by various human activities and developments.\nEcology.\nHellbenders are found in clear, clean water, and their presence is an indicator that the water is of good quality. The hellbender salamander, considered a \"habitat specialist\", has adapted to fill a specific niche within a very specific environment, and is labeled as such \"because its success is dependent on a constancy of dissolved oxygen, temperature and flow found in swift water areas\", which in turn limits it to a narrow spectrum of stream/river choices. As a result of this specialization, hellbenders are generally found in areas with large, irregularly shaped, and intermittent rocks and swiftly moving water, while they tend to avoid wider, slow-moving waters with muddy banks and/or slab rock bottoms. This specialization likely contributed to the decline in their populations, as collectors could easily identify their specific habitats. One collector noted, at one time, \"one could find a specimen under almost every suitable rock\", but after years of collecting, the population had declined significantly. The same collector noted, he \"never found two specimens under the same rock\", corroborating the account given by other researchers that hellbenders are generally solitary; they are thought to gather only during the mating season. If rocks are lacking, hellbenders have been known to use holes in stream banks as habitat. On average, their home range is estimated to be 198 square meters as of 2005. The ideal habitat for a hellbender has a large amount of gravel, low pH, cool water temperatures, and low specific conductivity. The large amounts of gravel enable the hellbender to hide, cool water temperatures allow for more efficient cutaneous gas exchange, and low specific conductivity may indicate an undisturbed stream. Hellbender communities may be more concentrated in undisturbed areas.\nBoth subspecies, \"C.\u00a0a. alleganiensis\" and \"C.\u00a0a. bishopi\" undergo a metamorphosis after around a year and a half of life. At this point, when they are roughly long, they lose the gills present during their larval stage. Until then, they are easily confused with mudpuppies, and can be differentiated often only through toe number. After this metamorphosis, hellbenders must be able to absorb oxygen through the folds in their skin, which is largely behind the need for fast-moving, oxygenated water. If a hellbender ends up in an area of slow-moving water, not enough of it will pass over its skin in a given time, making it difficult to garner enough oxygen to support necessary respiratory functions. A below-favorable oxygen content can make life equally difficult.\nHellbenders are preyed upon by diverse predators, including various fish and reptiles (including both snakes and turtles). Particularly, largemouth bass is a predator that can consume a hellbender 1\u20133 years old. Cannibalism of eggs is also considered a common occurrence. One study found that in areas with increased deforestation, the likelihood of filial cannibalism increases.\nIn another study by Kenison &amp; Wilson (2018), researchers found that young, captive hellbenders showed altered behavior in response to predatory fish nearby. Because of their altered behavior, it was observed and concluded that hellbenders are capable of detecting kairomones, which are chemical cues emitted by predatory species. This suggests that hellbenders can recognize kairomones as stressful stimuli and identify potential predators.\nLife history and behavior.\nBehavior.\nOnce a hellbender finds a favorable location, it generally does not stray too far from it\u2014except occasionally for breeding and hunting\u2014and will protect it from other hellbenders both in and out of the breeding season. While the range of two hellbenders may overlap, they are noted as rarely being present in the overlapping area when the other salamander is in the area. The species is at least somewhat nocturnal, with peak activity being reported by one source as occurring around \"two hours after dark\" and again at dawn (although the dawn peak was recorded in the lab and could be misleading as a result). Nocturnal activity has been found to be most prevalent in early summer, perhaps coinciding with highest water depths. Adult hellbenders can live up to 25\u201330 years.\nDiet.\n\"C. alleganiensis\" feeds primarily on crayfish and small fish, but also insects, worms, molluscs, tadpoles and smaller salamanders. A study conducted in 2017 found that larval hellbenders eat mayfly and caddisfly nymphs. One report, written by a commercial collector in the 1940s, noted a trend of more crayfish predation in the summer during times of higher prey activity, whereas fish made up a larger part of the winter diet, when crayfish are less active. There seems to be a specific temperature range in which hellbenders feed, as well: between . Cannibalism\u2014mainly on eggs\u2014has been known to occur within hellbender populations. One researcher claimed perhaps density is maintained, and density dependence in turn created, in part by intraspecific predation. When feeding on large prey items relative to themselves, it has been found that they use suction feeding.\nReproduction.\nThe hellbenders' breeding season begins in late August or early- to mid-September and can continue as late as the end of November, depending on region. They exhibit no sexual dimorphism, except during the fall mating season, when males have a bulging ring around their cloacal glands. Unlike most salamanders, the hellbender performs external fertilization. Before mating, each male excavates a brood site, a saucer-shaped depression under a rock or log, with its entrance positioned out of the direct current, usually pointing downstream. The male remains in the brood site awaiting a female. Males will combat for nest sites, often biting to defend the nest rock of their choice. When a female approaches, the male guides or drives her into his burrow and prevents her from leaving until she oviposits.\nFemale hellbenders lay 150\u2013200 eggs over a two- to three-day period; the eggs are in diameter, connected by five to ten cords. As the female lays eggs, the male positions himself alongside or slightly above them, spraying the eggs with sperm while swaying his tail and moving his hind limbs, which disperses the sperm uniformly. The male often tempts other females to lay eggs in his nest, and as many as 1,946 eggs have been counted in a single nest. Males also exhibit mate and shelter guarding. Mortality rate is high for hellbender eggs. Studies have found that until the female successfully reproduces, the male hellbender will guard her in his territory until the reproduction is complete. Cannibalism, however, leads to a much lower number of eggs in hellbender nests than would be predicted by egg counts. Adult males are more likely to cannibalize their own offspring in degraded sites with limited food availability.\nAfter oviposition, the male drives the female away from the nest and guards the eggs. Incubating males rock back and forth and undulate their lateral skin folds, which circulates the water, increasing oxygen supply to both eggs and adult. Incubation lasts from 45 to 75 days, depending on region. Males are known to show solitary parental care for the eggs and larvae for at least 7\u20138 months.\nHatchling hellbenders are long, have a yolk sac as a source of energy for the first few months of life, and lack functional limbs.\nAdaptations.\nHellbenders are superbly adapted to the shallow, fast-flowing, rocky streams in which they live. Their flattened shape offers little resistance to the flowing water, allowing them to work their way upstream and also to crawl into narrow spaces under rocks. The wrinkles and folds along their skin are used to expand surface area for cutaneous respiration. Their skin also has a secretion that is important for innate immunity against chytrid activity. Although their eyesight is relatively poor, they have light-sensitive cells all over their bodies. Those on their tails are especially finely tuned and may help them position safely under rocks without their tails poking out to give themselves away. They have a good sense of smell and move upstream in search of food such as dead fish, following the trail of scent molecules. Smell is possibly their most important sense when hunting. They also have a lateral line similar to those of fish, with which they can detect vibrations in the water.\nConservation status.\nResearch throughout the range of the hellbender has shown a dramatic decline in populations in the majority of locations. As of 2022, the species is classified as Vulnerable by the IUCN. Many different anthropogenic sources have contributed to this decline, including the siltation and sedimentation, blocking of dispersal/migration routes, and destruction of riverine habitats created by dams and other development, as well as pollution, disease and overharvesting for commercial and scientific purposes. As many of these detrimental effects have irreversibly damaged hellbender populations, it is important to conserve the remaining populations through protecting habitats and\u2014perhaps in places where the species was once endemic and has been extirpated\u2014by augmenting numbers through reintroduction.\nDue to sharp decreases seen in the Ozark subspecies, researchers have been trying to differentiate \"C.\u00a0a. alleganiensis\" and \"C.\u00a0a. bishopi\" into two management units. Indeed, researchers found significant genetic divergence between the two groups, as well as between them and another isolated population of \"C.\u00a0a. alleganiensis\". This could be reason enough to ensure work is done on both subspecies, as preserving extant genetic diversity is of crucial ecological importance.\nThe Ozark hellbender has been listed as an endangered species under the Endangered Species Act by the US Fish and Wildlife Service since October 5, 2011. This hellbender subspecies inhabits the White River and Spring River systems in southern Missouri and northern Arkansas, and its population has declined an estimated 75% since the 1980s, with only about 590 individuals remaining in the wild. Degraded water quality, habitat loss resulting from impoundments, ore and gravel mining, sedimentation, and collection for the pet trade are thought to be the main factors resulting in the amphibian's decline. When chytridiomycosis killed 75% of the St. Louis Zoo's captive hellbender population between March 2006 and April 2007, tests began to be conducted on wild populations. The disease has been detected in all Missouri populations of the Ozark hellbender. NatureServe treats \"C.\u00a0a. alleganiensis\" as an \"Imperiled Subspecies\", \"C.\u00a0a. bishopi\" as a \"Critically Imperiled Subspecies\", and the species as a whole as \"Vulnerable\".\nThe Ozark hellbender was successfully bred in captivity for the first time at the St. Louis Zoo, in a joint project with the Missouri Department of Conservation, hatching on November 15, 2011.\nApart from the Ozark efforts, head-starting programs, in which eggs are collected from the wild and raised in captivity for re-release at a less vulnerable stage, have been initiated in Indiana, New York, and Ohio.\nMembers of the Pennsylvania State Senate have voted to approve the eastern hellbender as the official state amphibian in an effort to raise awareness about its endangered status. The legislation has been mired in controversy due to a dispute by House members who argue that Wehrle's salamander should be given the honor. The legislation did not pass in 2018, but was reintroduced in 2019. On April 23, 2019, Pennsylvania Governor Tom Wolf signed legislation making the eastern hellbender Pennsylvania's official state amphibian. Youth members of the Chesapeake Bay Foundation's Pennsylvania Student Leadership Council were heavily involved writing and advocating on behalf of this legislation. They hope that the success of the hellbender bill in the Pennsylvania Senate will contribute to clean water efforts and raise awareness for the hellbender's struggling population.\nIn 2024, Hurricane Helene caused significant damage to the environment of hellbenders in Appalachia by polluting waterways with large amounts of sediment and debris. In January 2025, the city of Boone, North Carolina passed a resolution supporting the inclusion of the hellbender in the Endangered Species Act of 1973. Buncombe County, North Carolina passed a similar resolution the next month.\nThreats.\nThe hellbender faces an array of challenges that jeopardize its habitat and overall well-being. These challenges include habitat degradation, habitat modifications, pollution, and the looming threat of emerging diseases. The conservation of this species is of paramount importance to ensure its continued existence in the wild.\nThe hellbender faces a significant threat due to habitat degradation, primarily caused by activities like dam construction, which disrupts water flow and submerges vital riffle habitats. Logging, mining, and road construction contribute to sedimentation, covering essential nesting and shelter sites. Chemical pollutants and misconceptions about the species have led to declines. Over-collection for sale and deliberate eradication efforts have also been detrimental.\nThe salamander's habitat is further jeopardized by habitat modifications stemming from industrialization and urbanization, including increased stream channelization and pollution from agricultural runoff, mining, and thermal pollution. Diseases such as \"Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis\" (Bd) and \"Ranavirus\" infections have been detected in hellbender populations, contributing to population declines.\nAn emerging disease threat is the salamander chytrid fungus (\"Batrachochytrium salamandrivorans\", or \"Bsal\"), which has caused severe declines in other salamander species. Although not confirmed in the Americas, Bsal's potential introduction poses a substantial risk. If introduced, the impacts on hellbender populations could be swift and severe, necessitating immediate mitigation measures.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nKarel \u010capek\nWar with the Newts (V\u00e1lka s Mloky in the original Czech), also translated as Salamander Wars, is a 1936 satirical science fiction novel by Czech author Karel \u010capek"}
{"id": "14466", "revid": "41995454", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14466", "title": "Doc Edgerton", "text": "American engineer and inventor (1903-1990)\nHarold Eugene \"Doc\" Edgerton (April 6, 1903 \u2013 January 4, 1990), also known as Papa Flash, was an American scientist and researcher, a professor of electrical engineering at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He is largely credited with transforming the stroboscope from an obscure laboratory instrument into a common device. He also was deeply involved with the development of sonar and deep-sea photography, and his equipment was used in collaboration with Jacques Cousteau in searches for shipwrecks and even the Loch Ness Monster.\nBiography.\nEarly years.\nEdgerton was born in Fremont, Nebraska, on April 6, 1903, the son of Mary Nettie Coe and Frank Eugene Edgerton, a descendant of Samuel Edgerton, the son of Richard Edgerton, one of the founders of Norwich, Connecticut, and Alice Ripley, a great-granddaughter of Governor William Bradford (1590\u20131657) of the Plymouth Colony and a passenger on the Mayflower. His father was a lawyer, journalist, author and orator and served as the assistant attorney general of Nebraska from 1911 to 1915. Edgerton grew up in Aurora, Nebraska. He also spent some of his childhood years in Washington, DC, and Lincoln, Nebraska.\nEducation.\nIn 1925 Edgerton received a bachelor's degree in electrical engineering from the University of Nebraska where he became a member of Acacia fraternity. He earned an SM in electrical engineering from MIT in 1927. Edgerton used stroboscopes to study synchronous motors for his ScD thesis in electrical engineering at MIT, awarded in 1931. He credited Charles Stark Draper with inspiring him to photograph everyday objects using electronic flash; the first was a stream of water from a faucet.\nIn 1936 Edgerton visited hummingbird expert May Rogers Webster. He was able to illustrate with her help that it was possible to take photographs of the birds beating their wings 60 times a second using an exposure of one hundred thousandth of a second. A picture of her with the birds flying around her appeared in National Geographic.\nCareer.\nIn 1937 Edgerton began a lifelong association with photographer Gjon Mili, who used stroboscopic equipment, in particular, multiple studio electronic flash units, to produce photographs, many of which appeared in \"Life\" magazine. When taking multiflash photographs this strobe light equipment could flash up to 120 times a second. Edgerton was a pioneer in using short duration electronic flash in photographing fast events photography, subsequently using the technique to capture images of balloons at different stages of their bursting, a bullet during its impact with an apple, or using multiflash to track the motion of a devil stick, for example.\nHe was awarded a bronze medal by the Royal Photographic Society in 1934, the Howard N. Potts Medal from the Franklin Institute in 1941, the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement in 1966, the David Richardson Medal by the Optical Society of America in 1968, the Albert A. Michelson Medal from the same Franklin Institute in 1969, and the National Medal of Science in 1973.\nEdgerton partnered with Kenneth J. Germeshausen to do consulting for industrial clients. Later Herbert Grier joined them. The company name \"Edgerton, Germeshausen, and Grier\" was changed to EG&amp;G in 1947. EG&amp;G became a prime contractor for the Atomic Energy Commission and had a major role in photographing and recording nuclear tests for the US through the fifties and sixties. For this role Edgerton and Charles Wykoff and others at EG&amp;G developed and manufactured the Rapatronic camera.\nHis work was instrumental in the development of side-scan sonar technology, used to scan the sea floor for wrecks. Edgerton worked with undersea explorer Jacques Cousteau, by first providing him with custom-designed underwater photographic equipment featuring electronic flash, and then by developing sonar techniques used to discover the \"Britannic\". Edgerton participated in the discovery of the American Civil War battleship USS \"Monitor\". While working with Cousteau, he acquired the nickname \"Papa Flash\". In 1988 Doc Edgerton worked with Paul Kronfield in Greece on a sonar search for the lost city of Helike, believed to be the basis for the legend of Atlantis.\nEdgerton co-founded EG&amp;G, Inc., which manufactured advanced electronic equipment including side-scan sonars and sub-bottom profiling equipment. EG&amp;G also invented and manufactured the Krytron, the detonation trigger for the hydrogen bomb, and an EG&amp;G division supervised many of America's nuclear tests.\nIn addition to having the scientific and engineering acumen to perfect strobe lighting commercially, Edgerton is equally recognized for his visual aesthetic: many of the striking images he created in illuminating phenomena that occurred too fast for the naked eye now adorn art museums worldwide. In 1940, his high speed stroboscopic short film \"Quicker'n a Wink\" won an Oscar.\nEdgerton was appointed a professor of electrical engineering at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in 1934. At MIT Edgerton created a technology lab nicknamed Strobe Alley, considered by author Pagan Kennedy as a forerunner of the Hackerspace. This lab and its encouragement of tinkering and invention influenced the careers of MIT students such as Martin Klein, who contributed to the development of side scan sonar.\nIn 1956, Edgerton was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. He became a member of the United States National Academy of Sciences in 1964 and a member of the American Philosophical Society in 1972. He was especially loved by MIT students for his willingness to teach and his kindness: \"The trick to education\", he said, \"is to teach people in such a way that they don't realize they're learning until it's too late\". His last undergraduate class, taught during fall semester 1977, was a freshman seminar titled \"Bird and Insect Photography\". One of the graduate student dormitories at MIT carries his name.\nIn 1962, Edgerton appeared on \"I've Got a Secret\", where he demonstrated strobe flash photography by shooting a bullet into a playing card and photographing the result.\nEdgerton's work was featured in an October 1987 \"National Geographic Magazine\" article entitled \"Doc Edgerton: the man who made time stand still\".\nFamily.\nAfter graduating from the University of Nebraska, Edgerton married Esther May Garrett in 1928. She was born in Aurora, Nebraska, on September 8, 1903, and died on March 9, 2002, in Charleston, South Carolina. She received a bachelor's degree in mathematics, music and education from the University of Nebraska. A skilled pianist and singer, she attended the New England Conservatory of Music and taught in public schools in Aurora, Nebraska and Boston. During their marriage they had three children: Mary Louise (April 21, 1931), William Eugene (8/9/1933), Robert Frank (5/10/1935). His sister, Mary Ellen Edgerton, was the wife of L. Welch Pogue (1899\u20132003) a pioneering aviation attorney and Chairman of the old Civil Aeronautics Board. The technology writer, journalist, and commentator David Pogue is his great nephew.\nDeath.\nEdgerton remained active throughout his later years, and was seen on the MIT campus many times after his official retirement. He died suddenly on January 4, 1990, at the MIT Faculty Club at the age of 86, and is buried in Mount Auburn Cemetery, Cambridge, Massachusetts.\nLegacy.\nOn July 3, 1990, in an effort to memorialize Edgerton's accomplishments, several community members in Aurora, Nebraska, decided to construct a \"Hands-On\" science center. It was designated as a \"teaching museum\", that would preserve Doc's work and artifacts, as well as feature the \"Explorit Zone\" where people of all ages could participate in hands-on exhibits and interact with live science demonstrations. After five years of private and community-wide fund-raising, as well as individual investments by Doc's surviving family members, the Edgerton Explorit Center was officially dedicated on September 9, 1995, in Aurora.\nAt MIT, the Edgerton Center, founded in 1992, is a hands-on laboratory resource for undergraduate and graduate students, and also conducts educational outreach programs for high school students and teachers.\nWorks.\nPhotographs.\nSome of Edgerton's noted photographs are :\nCollections.\nEdgerton's work is held in the following public collection:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14467", "revid": "48181213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14467", "title": "Harry Kroto", "text": "English chemist (1939\u20132016)\nSir Harold Walter Kroto (born Harold Walter Krotoschiner; 7 October 1939 \u2013 30 April 2016) was an English chemist. He shared the 1996 Nobel Prize in Chemistry with Robert Curl and Richard Smalley for their discovery of fullerenes. He was the recipient of many other honors and awards.\nKroto ended his career as the Francis Eppes Professor of Chemistry at Florida State University, which he joined in 2004. Prior to this, he spent approximately 40 years at the University of Sussex.\nKroto promoted science education and was a critic of religious faith.\nEarly years.\nKroto was born in Wisbech, Isle of Ely, Cambridgeshire, England, to Edith and Heinz Krotoschiner, his name being of Silesian origin. His father's family came from Bojanowo, Poland, and his mother's from Berlin. Both of his parents were born in Berlin and fled to Great Britain in the 1930s as refugees from Nazi Germany; his father was Jewish. Harry was raised in Bolton while the British authorities interned his father on the Isle of Man as an enemy alien during World War II. Kroto attended Bolton School, where he was a contemporary of the actor Ian McKellen. In 1955, Harold's father shortened the family name to Kroto.\nAs a child, he became fascinated by a Meccano set. Kroto credited Meccano, as well as his aiding his father in the latter's balloon factory after World War II \u2013 amongst other things \u2013 with developing skills useful in scientific research. He developed an interest in chemistry, physics, and mathematics in secondary school, and because his sixth form chemistry teacher (Harry Heaney \u2013 who subsequently became a university professor) felt that the University of Sheffield had the best chemistry department in the United Kingdom, he went to Sheffield.\nAlthough raised Jewish, Kroto stated that religion never made any sense to him. He was a humanist who claimed to have three religions: Amnesty Internationalism, atheism, and humour. He was a distinguished supporter of the British Humanist Association. In 2003 he was one of 22 Nobel Laureates who signed the Humanist Manifesto.\nIn 2015, Kroto signed the Mainau Declaration 2015 on Climate Change on the final day of the 65th Lindau Nobel Laureate Meeting. The declaration was signed by a total of 76 Nobel Laureates and handed to then-President of the French Republic, Fran\u00e7ois Hollande, as part of the successful COP21 climate summit in Paris.\nEducation and academic career.\nEducation.\nKroto was educated at Bolton School and went to the University of Sheffield in 1958, where he obtained a first-class honours BSc degree in Chemistry (1961) and a PhD in Molecular Spectroscopy (1964). During his time at Sheffield he also was the art editor of \"Arrows\" \u2013 the university student magazine, played tennis for the university team (reaching the UAU finals twice) and was President of the Student Athletics Council (1963\u201364). Among other things such as making the first phosphaalkenes (compounds with carbon phosphorus double bonds), his doctoral studies included unpublished research on carbon suboxide, O=C=C=C=O, and this led to a general interest in molecules containing chains of carbon atoms with numerous multiple bonds. He started his work with an interest in organic chemistry, but when he learned about spectroscopy it inclined him towards quantum chemistry; he later developed an interest in astrochemistry.\nAfter obtaining his PhD, Kroto spent two-years as a postdoctoral fellow in the molecular spectroscopy group of Gerhard Herzberg at the National Research Council in Ottawa, Canada, and the subsequent year (1966\u20131967) at Bell Laboratories in New Jersey carrying out Raman studies of liquid phase interactions and worked on quantum chemistry.\nResearch at the University of Sussex.\nIn 1967, Kroto began teaching and research at the University of Sussex in England. During his time at Sussex from 1967 to 1985, he carried out research mainly focused on the spectroscopic studies of new and novel unstable and semi-stable species. This work resulted in the birth of the various fields of new chemistry involving carbon multiply bonded to second and third row elements e.g. S, Se and P. A particularly important breakthrough (with Sussex colleague John Nixon) was the creation of several new phosphorus species detected by microwave spectroscopy. This work resulted in the birth of the field(s) of phosphaalkene and phosphaalkyne chemistry. These species contain carbon double and triple bonded to phosphorus (C=P and C\u2261P) such as cyanophosphaethyne.\nIn 1975, he became a full professor of Chemistry. This coincided with laboratory microwave measurements with Sussex colleague David Walton on long linear carbon chain molecules, leading to radio astronomy observations with Canadian astronomers surprisingly revealing that these unusual carbonaceous species exist in relatively large abundances in interstellar space as well as the outer atmospheres of certain stars \u2013 the carbon-rich red giants.\nDiscovery of buckminsterfullerene.\nIn 1985, on the basis of the Sussex studies and the stellar discoveries, laboratory experiments (with co-workers James R. Heath, Sean C. O'Brien, Yuan Liu, Robert Curl and Richard Smalley at Rice University) which simulated the chemical reactions in the atmospheres of the red giant stars demonstrated that stable C60 molecules could form spontaneously from a condensing carbon vapour. The co-investigators directed lasers at graphite and examined the results. The C60 molecule is a molecule with the same symmetry pattern as a football, consisting of 12 pentagons and 20 hexagons of carbon atoms. Kroto named the molecule buckminsterfullerene, after Buckminster Fuller who had conceived of the geodesic domes, as the dome concept had provided a clue to the likely structure of the new species.\nIn 1985, the C60 discovery caused Kroto to shift the focus of his research from spectroscopy in order to probe the consequences of the C60 structural concept (and prove it correct) and to exploit the implications for chemistry and material science.\nThis research is significant for the discovery of a new allotrope of carbon known as a fullerene. Other allotropes of carbon include graphite, diamond and graphene. Kroto's 1985 paper entitled \"C60: Buckminsterfullerene\", published with colleagues J. R. Heath, S. C. O'Brien, R. F. Curl, and R. E. Smalley, was honored by a Citation for Chemical Breakthrough Award from the Division of History of Chemistry of the American Chemical Society, presented to Rice University in 2015. The discovery of fullerenes was recognized in 2010 by the designation of a National Historic Chemical Landmark by the American Chemical Society at the Richard E. Smalley Institute for Nanoscale Science and Technology at Rice University in Houston, Texas.\nResearch at Florida State University.\nIn 2004, Kroto left the University of Sussex to take up a new position as Francis Eppes Professor of Chemistry at Florida State University. At FSU he carried out fundamental research on: Carbon vapour with Professor Alan Marshall; Open framework condensed phase systems with strategically important electrical and magnetic behaviour with Professors Naresh Dalal (FSU) and Tony Cheetham (Cambridge); and the mechanism of formation and properties of nano-structured systems. In addition, he participated in research initiatives at FSU that probed the astrochemistry of fullerenes, metallofullerenes, and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in stellar/circumstellar space, as well as their relevance to stardust.\nEducational outreach and public service.\nIn 1995, he jointly set up the Vega Science Trust, a UK educational charity that created high quality science films including lectures and interviews with Nobel Laureates, discussion programmes, careers and teaching resources for TV and Internet Broadcast. Vega produced over 280 programmes, that streamed for free from the Vega website which acted as a TV science channel. The trust closed in 2012.\nIn 2009, Kroto spearheaded the development of a second science education initiative, Geoset. Short for the Global Educational Outreach for Science, Engineering and Technology, GEOSET is an ever-growing online cache of recorded teaching modules that are freely downloadable to educators and the public. The program aims to increase knowledge of the sciences by creating a global repository of educational videos and presentations from leading universities and institutions.\nIn 2003, prior to the Blair/Bush invasion of Iraq on the pretext that Iraq had weapons of mass destruction, Kroto initiated and organised the publication of a letter to be signed by a dozen UK Nobel Laureates and published in \"The Times\". It was composed by his friend the Nobel Peace Prize Laureate the late Sir Joseph Rotblat and published in \"The Times\" on 15 February 2003.\nHe wrote a set of articles, mostly opinion pieces, from 2002 to 2003 for the Times Higher Education Supplement, a weekly UK publication.\nFrom 2002 to 2004, Kroto served as president of the Royal Society of Chemistry. In 2004, he was appointed to the Francis Eppes Professorship in the chemistry department at Florida State University, carrying out research in nanoscience and nanotechnology.\nHe spoke at Auburn University on 29 April 2010, and at the James A. Baker III Institute for Public Policy at Rice University with Robert Curl on 13 October 2010.\nIn October 2010 Kroto participated in the USA Science and Engineering Festival's Lunch with a Laureate program where middle and high school students had the opportunity to engage in an informal conversation with a Nobel Prize\u2013winning scientist.\nHe spoke at Mahatma Gandhi University, at Kottayam, in Kerala, India in January 2011, where he was an 'Erudite' special invited lecturer of the Government of Kerala, from 5 to 11 January 2011.\nKroto spoke at CSICon 2011, a convention \"dedicated to scientific inquiry and critical thinking\" organized by the Committee for Skeptical Inquiry in association with \"Skeptical Inquirer\" magazine and the Center for Inquiry.\nHe also delivered the IPhO 2012 lecture at the International Physics Olympiad held in Estonia.\nIn 2014, Kroto spoke at the Starmus Festival in the Canary Islands, delivering a lecture about his life in science, chemistry, and design.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1963, Kroto married Margaret Henrietta Hunter, also a student of the University of Sheffield at the time. The couple had two sons. Throughout his life, Kroto was a lover of film, theatre, art, and music and published his own artwork.\nPersonal beliefs.\nKroto was a \"devout atheist\" who thought that beliefs in immortality derive from lack of the courage to accept human mortality. He was a patron of the British Humanist Association. He was a supporter of Amnesty International. He referred to his view that religious dogma causes people to accept unethical or inhumane actions: \"The only mistake Bernie Madoff made was to promise returns in \"this\" life.\" He held that scientists had a responsibility to work for the benefit of the entire species. On 15 September 2010, Kroto, along with 54 other public figures, signed an open letter published in \"The Guardian\", stating their opposition to Pope Benedict XVI's state visit to the UK.\nKroto was an early Signatory of Asteroid Day.\nIn 2008, Kroto was critical of Michael Reiss for directing the teaching of creationism alongside evolution.\nKroto praised the increase of organized online information as an \"Educational Revolution\" and named it as the \"GooYouWiki\" world referring to Google, YouTube and Wikipedia.\nGraphic design.\nThe discovery of buckminsterfullerene caused Kroto to postpone his dream of setting up an art and graphic design studio \u2013 he had been doing graphics semi-professionally for years. However, Kroto's graphic design work resulted in numerous posters, letterheads, logos, book/journal covers, medal design, etc. He produced artwork after receiving graphic awards in the Sunday Times Book Jacket Design competition (1964) and the Moet Hennesy/Louis Vuitton Science pour l'Art Prize (1994). Other notable graphical works include the design of the Nobel UK Stamp for Chemistry (2001) and features at the Royal Academy (London) Summer Exhibition (2004).\nDeath and reactions.\nKroto died on 30 April 2016 in Lewes, East Sussex, from complications of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis at the age of 76.\nRichard Dawkins wrote a memorial for Kroto in which he mentioned Kroto's \"passionate hatred of religion.\" \"The Wall Street Journal\" described him as \"(spending much of his later life) jetting around the world to extol scientific education in a world he saw as blinded by religion.\" Slate's Zack Kopplin related a story about how Kroto gave him advice and support to fight Louisiana's creationism law, a law that allows public school science teachers to attack evolution and how Kroto defended the scientific findings of global warming. In an obituary published in the journal \"Nature\", Robert Curl and James R. Heath described Kroto as having an \"impish sense of humour similar to that of the British comedy group Monty Python\".\nHonours and awards.\nKroto won numerous awards, individually and with others:\nMajor awards.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nKroto was made a Knight Bachelor in the 1996 New Year Honours list.\nThe University of Sheffield North Campus contains two buildings named after Kroto: The Kroto Innovation Centre and the Kroto Research Institute.\nHonorary degrees.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14468", "revid": "45118224", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14468", "title": "Heimskringla", "text": "Old Norse kings' sagas\n () is the best known of the Old Norwegian kings' sagas. It was written in Old Norse in Iceland. While authorship of \"Heimskringla\" is nowhere attributed, some scholars assume it is written by the Icelandic knight, poet and historian, Snorri Sturluson (1178/79\u20131241) c. 1230. The title was first used in the 17th century, derived from the first two words of one of the manuscripts (\"kringla heimsins\", \"the circle of the world\").\n is a collection of sagas about Swedish and Norwegian kings, beginning with the saga of the legendary Swedish-Norwegian dynasty of the Ynglings, followed by accounts of historical Norwegian rulers from Harald Fairhair of the 9th century up to the death of the pretender Eystein Meyla in 1177.\nSome of the exact sources of \"Heimskringla\" are disputed, but they include earlier kings' sagas, such as Morkinskinna, Fagrskinna and the 12th-century Norwegian synoptic histories and oral traditions, notably many skaldic poems. The author or authors explicitly name the now lost work \"Hryggjarstykki\" as their source for the events of the mid-12th century.\nAuthorship.\nNo known manuscript attributes authorship to \"Heimskringla\". The matter is summarized as follows by Anthony Faulkes:\nThe authorship of Heimskringla is not referred to within the text or in any surviving manuscript\u2014as is usually the case for a medieval work\u2014and its attribution to Snorri has been questioned. The first surviving works in which he is credited as author are the sixteenth-century translations of \"Heimskringla\" into Danish by the Norwegians Peder Clauss\u00f8n Friis and Laurents Hanss\u00f8n ... who are generally believed to have used at least one now lost manuscript of \"Heimskringla\" that gave authority for their naming of Snorri.\nTitle.\nThe title comes from the first words of the first saga in the compilation (\"Ynglinga saga\"), \"Kringla heimsins\", \"the orb of the Earth\".\nManuscript history.\nThe earliest parchment copy of the work is \"Kringla\", now in the National and University Library of Iceland, catalogued as Lbs fragm 82. It is a single vellum leaf from c. 1260, a part of the Saga of St. Olaf; the rest of the manuscript was lost to fire in 1728.\nSummary.\n consists of several sagas, often thought of as falling into three groups, giving the overall work the character of a triptych. The saga narrates the contests of the kings, the establishment of the kingdom of Norway, Norse expeditions to various European countries, ranging as far afield as Palestine in the saga of Sigurd the Crusader, where the Norwegian fleet is attacked by Arab Muslim pirates, referred to as Vikings. The stories are told with energy, giving a picture of human life in all its dimensions. The saga is a prose epic, relevant to the history of not only Scandinavia but the regions included in the wider medieval Scandinavian diaspora. The first part of the is rooted in Norse mythology; as the collection proceeds, fable and fact intermingle, but the accounts become increasingly historically reliable.\nThe first saga tells of the mythological prehistory of the Swedish and Norwegian royal dynasty, the Ynglings, tracing their lineage to Freyr (Yngve) of the Vanaland people, who arrived in Scandinavia with Odin from the legendary Asgard. The subsequent sagas are (with few exceptions) devoted to individual rulers, starting with Halfdan the Black.\nA version of \"\u00d3l\u00e1fs saga helga\", about the saint Olaf II of Norway, is the main and central part of the collection: Olaf's 15-year-long reign takes up about one third of the entire work.\nThereafter, the saga of Harald Hardrada narrates Harald's expedition to the East, his brilliant exploits in Constantinople, Syria, and Sicily, his skaldic accomplishments, and his battles in England against Harold Godwinson, the son of Godwin, Earl of Wessex, where he fell at the Battle of Stamford Bridge in 1066, only a few days before Harold fell at the Battle of Hastings. After presenting a series of other kings, the saga ends with Magnus V of Norway.\nContents.\n contains the following sagas (see also List of Norwegian monarchs):\nSources.\n\"Heimskringla\" explicitly mentions a few prose sources, now mostly lost in then-contemporary forms: \"Hryggjarstykki\" ('spine pieces') by Eir\u00edkr Oddsson (covering events 1130\u201361), \"Skj\u01ebldunga saga\", an unidentified saga about Kn\u00fatr inn gamli, and a text called \"Jarlas\u01ebgurnar\" ('sagas of the jarls', which seems to correspond to the saga now known as \"Orkneyinga saga\").\nThe author may have had access to a wide range of the early Scandinavian historical texts known today as the 'synoptic histories', but made most use of:\nThe author also made extensive use of skaldic verse which he believed to have been composed at the time of the events portrayed and transmitted orally from that time onwards, and clearly made use of other oral accounts, though it is uncertain to what extent.\nHistorical reliability.\nUp until the mid-19th century, historians put great trust in the factual truth of Snorri's narrative, as well as other old Norse sagas. In the early 20th century, this trust was largely abandoned with the advent of \"saga criticism\", pioneered by the Swedish historians Lauritz and Curt Weibull. These historians pointed out that Snorri's work had been written several centuries after most of the events it describes. In Norway, the historian Edvard Bull famously proclaimed that \"we have to give up all illusions that Snorri's mighty epic bears any deeper resemblance to what actually happened\" in the time it describes. A school of historians has come to believe that the motives Snorri and the other saga writers give to their characters owe more to conditions in the 13th century than in earlier times.\n\"Heimskringla\" has, however, continued to be used as a historical source, though with more caution. It is not common to believe in the detailed accuracy of the historical narrative and historians tend to see little to no historical truth behind the first few sagas, however, they are still seen by many as a valuable source of knowledge about the society and politics of medieval Norway. The factual content of the work tends to be deemed more credible where it discusses more recent times, as the distance in time between the events described and the composition of the saga was shorter, allowing traditions to be retained in a largely accurate form, and because in the twelfth century the first contemporary written sources begin to emerge in Norway.\nInfluence.\nWhereas prior to \"Heimskringla\" there seems to have been a diversity of efforts to write histories of kings, \"Heimskringla\" seems thereafter to have been the basis for Icelandic writing about Scandinavian kings, and was expanded by scribes rather than entirely revised. \"Flateyjarb\u00f3k\", from the end of the fourteenth century, is the most extreme example of expansion, interweaving \"Heimskringla\" text with many \"\u00fe\u00e6ttir\" and other whole sagas, prominently \"Orkneyinga saga\", \"F\u00e6reyinga saga\", and \"F\u00f3stbr\u0153\u00f0ra saga\".\nThe text is also referenced in \"Journey to the Center of the Earth\" by Jules Verne; the work is the one Professor Liedenbrock finds Arne Saknussem's note in.\nEditions and translations.\nHistory of translations.\nBy the mid-16th century, the Old Norse language was unintelligible to Norwegian, Swedish or Danish readers. At that time several translations of extracts were made in Norway into the Danish language, which was the literary language of Norway at the time. The first complete translation was made around 1600 by Peder Clauss\u00f8n Friis, and printed in 1633. This was based on a manuscript known as \"Jofraskinna\".\nSubsequently, the Stockholm manuscript was translated into Swedish and Latin by Johan Peringski\u00f6ld (by order of Charles XI) and published in 1697 at Stockholm under the title \"Heimskringla\", which is the first known use of the name. This edition also included the first printing of the text in Old Norse. A new Danish translation with the text in Old Norse and a Latin translation came out in 1777\u201383 (by order of Frederick VI as crown prince). An English translation by Samuel Laing was finally published in 1844, with a second edition in 1889. Starting in the 1960s English-language revisions of Laing appeared, as well as fresh English translations.\nIn the 19th century, as Norway was achieving independence after centuries of union with Denmark and Sweden, the stories of the independent Norwegian medieval kingdom won great popularity in Norway. \"Heimskringla\", although written by an Icelander, became an important national symbol for Norway during the period of romantic nationalism. In 1900, the Norwegian parliament, the Storting, subsidized the publication of new translations of \"Heimskringla\" into both Norwegian written forms, landsm\u00e5l and riksm\u00e5l, \"in order that the work may achieve wide distribution at a low price\".\nTranslations.\nThe most recent English translation of \"Heimskringla\" is by Alison Finlay and Anthony Faulkes and is available open-access.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14469", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14469", "title": "HAM", "text": ""}
{"id": "14470", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14470", "title": "Hamar", "text": "Town in Innlandet, Norway\nHamar is a town in Hamar Municipality in Innlandet county, Norway. Hamar is the administrative centre of Hamar Municipality. It is located in the traditional region of Hedmarken. The town is located on the shores of Mj\u00f8sa, Norway's largest lake. Historically, it was the principal city of the former Hedmark county, now part of the larger Innlandet county.\nThe town of Hamar lies in the southwestern part of Hamar Municipality. The town has a population (2024) of 30,030 and a population density of . The urban area of the town actually extends over the municipal borders into both Ringsaker Municipality and Stange Municipality. About and 2,438 residents within the town are actually located in Ringsaker Municipality and another and 332 residents of the town are located within Stange Municipality.\nGeneral information.\nName.\nThe municipality (originally the town) is named after the old farm (). The medieval market was first built on this farm, and that market eventually became a kj\u00f8pstad which in turn became a self-governing municipality. The name is identical with the word \"hamarr\" which means \"rocky hill\".\nCoat of arms.\nThe coat of arms was granted on 2 June 1896. The arms show a Black Grouse sitting in the top of a pine tree on a white background. An older version of the arms had been used for a long time. The old version was first described in the anonymous Hamar Chronicle, written in 1553.\nHistory.\nBetween 500 and 1000 AD, the \u00c5ker farm was one of the most important power centres in Norway, located just a few kilometres away from today's town of Hamar. Three coins found in Ringerike in 1895 have been dated to the time of Harald Hardr\u00e5de and are inscribed .\nMiddle Ages.\nAt some point, presumably after 1030 but clearly before 1152, the centre was moved from \u00c5ker to the peninsula near Rosenlundvika (today Domkirkeodden) in what is now the town of Hamar. There are some indications that Harald Hardr\u00e5de initiated this move because he had property at the new site.\nMuch of the information about medieval Hamar is derived from the Hamar Chronicle, dated to about 1550. The town is said to have reached its apex in the early 14th century, dominated by the Hamar Cathedral, the bishop's manor, and a fortress, plus the surrounding urbanization. The town was known for its fragrant apple orchards, but there were also merchants, craftsmen, and fishermen in the town.\nAfter the Christianization of Norway in 1030, Hamar began to gain influence as a centre for trade and religion. In 1152, the episcopal representative Nikolaus Breakspear founded Hamar Kaupangen as one of five dioceses in medieval Norway. This diocese included all of Hedemarkens Amt and Christians Amt, which were both separated from the Diocese of Oslo in 1152. The first bishop of Hamar was Arnold, Bishop of Gardar, Greenland (1124\u20131152). He began to build the (now ruined) Cathedral of Christ Church, which was completed about the time of Bishop Paul (1232\u20131252). Bishop Thorfinn (1278\u20131282) was exiled and died at Ter Doest abbey in Flanders, and was later canonised. Bishop J\u00f6rund (1285\u20131286) was transferred to Trondheim. A provincial council was held in 1380. Hamar remained an important religious and political centre in Norway, organized around the cathedral and the bishop's manor until the Reformation that took place in 1536\u20131537. At this time, Hamar lost its status as the seat of the Diocese after the last Catholic bishop, Mogens Lauritss\u00f8n (1513\u20131537), was taken prisoner in his castle at Hamar by Truid Ulfstand, a Danish noble, and then sent to Antvorskov in Denmark, where he was mildly treated until he died in 1542. At Hamar's peak, there was a Cathedral chapter with ten canons, a school, a Dominican Priory of St. Olaf, and a monastery of the Canons Regular of St. Anthony of Vienna.\nHamar, like most of Norway, was severely diminished by the Black Plague in 1349, and by all accounts continued this decline until the Reformation, after which it disappeared.\nThe Reformation in Norway took less than ten years to complete, from 1526 to 1536. During this time, the fortress in Hamar was made into the residence of the sheriff and renamed Hamarhus fortress. The cathedral was still used as a regular church, but it fell into disrepair, culminating with the Swedish army's siege and attempted demolition in 1567, during the Northern Seven Years' War. The old bishop's manor was also devastated during this siege.\nReformation and decline.\nBy 1587, merchants in Christiania had succeeded in moving all of Hamar's market activities to Christiania such that Hamar lost its status as a market town (kj\u00f8pstad). Though some regional and seasonal trade persisted into the 17th century, Hamar as a town ceased to exist by then. In its place, the area was used for agriculture under the Storhamar farm, though the ruins of the cathedral, fortress, and lesser buildings became landmarks for centuries since then.\nThe King made Hamarhus a feudal seat until 1649, when Frederick III transferred the property known as Hammer to Hannibal Sehested, making it private property. In 1716, the estate was sold to Jens Gr\u00f8nbech (1666\u20131734). With this, a series of construction projects started, and the farm became known as Storhamar, passing through several owners until Norwegian nobility was abolished in 1831, when Erik Anker took over the farm.\nThe founding of modern Hamar.\nAs early as 1755, the Danish government in Copenhagen expressed an interest in establishing a trading center on the shores of the lake Mj\u00f8sa. Elverum was considered a frontier town with frequent unrest, and there was even talk of encouraging the dissenting Hans Nielsen Hauge to settle in the area. Bishop Fredrik Julius Bech, one of the most prominent officials of his time, proposed establishing a town at or near Storhamar, at the foot of Furuberget.\nIn 1812, negotiations started in earnest when the regional governor of Christians Amt proposed establishing a market on Mj\u00f8sa. A four-person commission was named on 26 July 1814, with the mandate of determining a suitable site for a new town along the shore. On 8 June 1815, the commission recommended establishing such a town at Lillehammer, then also a farm, part of the prestegjeld of Faaberg.\nActing on objections to this recommendation, the Department of the Interior asked two professors, Ludvig Stoud Platou and Gregers Fougner Lundh, to survey the area and develop an alternative recommendation. It appears that Lundh, in particular, put great effort into this assignment, and in 1824 he presented to the Storting a lengthy report that included maps and plans for the new town.\nLundh's premise was that the national economic interest reigned supreme, so he based his recommendation on the proposed town's ability to quickly achieve self-sustaining growth. He proposed that the name of the new town be called \"Carlshammer\" and proposed it be built along the shore just north of Storhamar and eastward. His plans were detailed, calling for streets that were wide, rectangular blocks with 12 buildings in each, separating each of them. He also proposed tax relief for 20 years for the town's first residents, that the state relinquish property taxes in favor of the town, and that the town be given monopoly rights to certain trade. He even proposed that certain types of foreigners be allowed to settle in the town to promote trade, in particular, the Quakers.\nHis recommendation was accepted in principle by the government, but the parliamentary committee equivocated on the location. It left the determination of the actual site to the king so as not to slow down things further. Another commission was named in June 1825, consisting of Herman Wedel-Jarlsberg, Professor Lundh, and other prominent Norwegians. After surveying the entire lake, it submitted another report that considered eleven different locations, including sites near today's Eidsvoll, Minnesund, Tangen (in Stange), \u00c5ker, Storhamar, Brumunddal, Nes, Moelven, Lillehammer, Gj\u00f8vik, and Toten. Each was presented with pros and cons. The commission itself was split between Lillehammer and Storhamar. The parliament finally decided on Lillehammer, relegating Hamar once more, it seemed, to be a sleepy agricultural area.\nAs steamboats were introduced on the lake, the urban elite developed an interest in the medieval Hamar, and in 1841, editorials appeared advocating the re-establishment of a town at Storhamar. By then, the limitations of Lillehammer's location had also become apparent, in particular those of its shallow harbor. After a few more years of discussions and negotiations, both regionally and nationally, Member of Parliament Frederik Stang put on the table once more the possibility of a town in or near Storhamar. The governor at the time, Frederik Hartvig Johan Heidmann, presented a thorough deliberation of possible specific locations and ended up proposing the current site, at Gammelhusbukten.\nOn 26 April 1848, the king signed into law the establishment of Hamar as a kj\u00f8pstad on the grounds of the farms of Storhamar and Holset, along the shores of the lake Mj\u00f8sa. The law stated that the town would be founded on the date its borders are settled, which turned out to be 21 March 1849. Hamar was given a trading zone up to from its border. The new town was separated from Vang Municipality and established as Hamar Municipality under the formannskapsdistrikt law that was passed in 1838.\nBuilding a city.\nThe area of the new town and municipality covered an area measuring \"400 m\u00e5l\", which is the equivalent of today's . An army engineer, R\u00f8yem, drafted the initial plan. There would be three thoroughfares, at Strandgata, Torggata, and Gr\u00f8nnegate (the latter the name of a medieval road), and a grid system of streets between them. The orientation of the town was toward the shore. R\u00f8yem set aside space for three parks and a public square, and also room for a church just outside the town border.\nThere were critics of the plan, pointing out that the terrain was hilly and not suitable for the proposed rigid grid. Some adjustments were made, but the plan was largely accepted and is evident in today's Hamar. There were also lingering concerns about the town's vulnerability to flooding.\nConstruction began as soon as the law passed, in the spring of 1849. The first buildings were much like sheds, but there was great enthusiasm, and by the end of 1849, ten buildings were insured in the new town. None of these are standing today; the last two were adjacent buildings on Skappelsgate. By 1850, there were 31 insured houses; in 1852, there were 42; and in 1853, 56. Building slowed down for a few years and then picked up again in 1858, and by the end of 1860, there were a hundred insured houses in the town. The shore-side properties were obliged to grow gardens, setting the stage for a leafy urban landscape.\nRoads quickly became a challenge \u2013 in some places, it was necessary to ford creeks in the middle of town. The road inspector found himself under considerable stress, and it took until 1869 to settle on street names. Highways in and out of the city also caused considerable debate, especially regarding how to finance them.\nThe first passenger terminal in Hamar was in fact a crag in the lake, from which travelers were rowed into the city. In 1850, another pier was built with a two-storey terminal building. All this was complicated by the significant seasonal variations in water levels. In 1857, a canal was built around a basin that would allow freight ships to access a large warehouse. Although the canal and basin still were not deep enough to accommodate passenger steamships, the area became one of the busiest areas in the town and the point around which the harbor was further developed.\nThe Diocese of Hamar was established in 1864, and the Hamar Cathedral was consecrated in 1866 and remains a central point in the city.\nA promenade came into being from the harbor area, past the gardens on the shore, and north toward the site of the old town.\nEstablishment of government.\nThe first executive of Hamar was Johannes Bay, who arrived in October 1849 to facilitate an election of a board of supervisors and representatives. The town's royal charter called for the election of three supervisors and nine representatives. Elections were announced in the paper and through the town crier. Of the ten eligible town citizens, three supervisors were elected, and the remaining six were elected by consent to be representatives, resulting in a shortfall of three on the board. The first mayor of Hamar was Christian Borchgrevink.\nThe first order of business was the allocation of liquor licenses and the upper limit of alcohol that could be sold within the town limits. The board quickly decided to award licenses to both applicants and set the upper limit to 12,000 \"pots\" of liquor, an amount that was, for all intents and purposes, limitless.\nThe electorate increased in 1849 to 26, including merchants and various craftsmen, and the empty representative posts were filled in November. In 1850, the board allowed for unlimited exercise of any craft for which no citizenship had been taken out, which led to much unregulated craftsmanship. Part-time policemen were hired, and the town started setting taxes and a budget by the end of 1849. In 1850, a new election was held for the town board.\nThe painter Jakobsen had early on offered the use of his home for public meetings and assembly, and upon buying a set of solid locks, his basement also became the town prison. One merchant was designated as the town's firefighter and was given two buckets with equipment, and later a simple hose. By 1852, a full-time fire chief was named. There was also some controversy around the watchman who loudly reported the time to all the town's inhabitants every half-hour, every night. Hamar also had a scrupulously enforced ordinance against smoking (pipe) without a lid in public or private.\nIn Hamar's early days, the entire population consisted of young entrepreneurs, and little was needed in the way of social services. After a few years, a small number of indigent people needed support, and a poorhouse was erected.\nOn 1 January 1878, the town/municipality of Hamar was enlarged by annexing about of land and 138 people from the neighboring Vang Municipality to Hamar.\nFires, floods, and other disasters.\nIn 1860, concerns about flooding were vindicated when a late and sudden spring caused the lake to flood, peaking around 24 June, when the street-level floor of the front properties was completely inundated. This was the worst flood recorded since 1789. By 9 July, the flooding had receded. In August, massive rainfall led to flash flooding in the area, putting several streets under water. This was immediately followed by unseasonably cold weather, freezing the potato crops and inconveniencing Hamar's residents. Then mild weather set in, and melted all the ice and accumulated snow, which led to another round of flooding. By the time a particularly cold and snow-filled winter set in, there was mostly relief about getting some stability.\nIn 1876, the town was scandalized by the apprehension of one Kristoffer Svartb\u00e6kken, arrested for the cold-blooded murder of 19-year-old Even Nilsen D\u00e6hlin. Svartb\u00e6kken was convicted of the murder and executed the following year in the neighboring rural community of L\u00f8ten, with an audience of 3,000 locals, presumably the majority of Hamar's population at the time.\nIn 1878, as the firefighting capabilities of the young town were upgraded, a fire broke out in a bakery. The fire was put out without doing too much damage. In February 1879, at 2:00 in the morning, another fire broke out after festivities, burning down an entire building that housed many historical items from the town. This was followed by a series of fires that left entire blocks in ashes. The fires kept happening until 1881, when a professional fire corps was hired.\nIn 1889, there were riots in Hamar over the arrest of one of their own constables, one Sergeant Huse, who had been insubordinate while on a military drill at the cavalry camp at Gardermoen. In an act of poor judgment, Huse's superior sent him to Hamar's prison in place of military stockades. Partly led and partly tolerated by other constables, the town's population engaged in demonstrations, marches, and other unlawful but non-violent acts that were effectively ended when a company of soldiers arrived from the camp at Terningmoen near Elverum.\nComposer Fredrikke Waaler founded and directed the first orchestra in Hamar in 1893. She also directed a choir and wrote a song for the city.\nModern era.\nIn 1946, a large area in Vang that surrounded the town of Hamar (population: 4,087) was transferred out of Vang and merged into Hamar. The following year, a part of the neighboring Furnes Municipality (population: 821) was also merged into Hamar. On 1 January 1965, a part of Ringsaker Municipality with a population of about 100 people was transferred to Hamar.\nIn 1975, Storhamar Church was built to serve Hamar's growing population.\nOn 1 January 1992, all of Vang Municipality (population: 9,103) was merged with the town of Hamar (population: 16,351) and parts of the Stensby, Hanstad, Viker, and Stammerud areas of Ringsaker Municipality (population: 224) to form a new, larger Hamar Municipality.\nCityscape.\nThe Hedmark museum, located on Domkirkeodden, is an important historical landmark in Hamar, an outdoor museum with remains of the medieval church, in a protective glass housing, the episcopal fortress, and a collection of old farmhouses. The institution is a combined medieval, ethnological, and archaeological museum, and has received architectural prizes for its approach to conservation and exhibition. It also houses a vast photographic archive for the Hedmark region.\nAdditionally, Hamar is known for its indoor long track speed skating and bandy arena, the \"Olympia Hall\", better known as Vikingskipet (\"The Viking ship\") for its shape. It was built to host the speed skating competitions of the 1994 Winter Olympics that were held in nearby Lillehammer. Already in 1993 it hosted the Bandy World Championship. The Vikingskipet Olympic Arena was later used in the winter of 2007 as the service park for Rally Norway, the second round of the 2007 World Rally Championship season. It has been the host for the world's second largest computer party The Gathering starting on the Wednesday in Easter each year, for the last 13 years.\nAlso situated in Hamar is the Hamar Olympic Amphitheatre, which hosted the figure skating and short track speed skating events of the 1994 Winter Olympics. The figure skating competition was highly anticipated. It featured Nancy Kerrigan and Tonya Harding, who drew most of the media attention; however, the gold medal was won by Oksana Baiul of Ukraine.\nThe centre of Hamar is the pedestrian walkway in the middle of town, with the library, cinema, and farmer's market on Stortorget (the big square) on the western side, and \u00d8stre Torg (the eastern square), which sits on top of an underground multi-story carpark, on the eastern side.\nTransport.\nHamar is an important railway junction between two different lines from Oslo to Trondheim. R\u00f8rosbanen, the old railway line, branches off from the mainline Dovre Line. The Norwegian Railway Museum (\"Norsk Jernbanemuseum\") is also in Hamar. Hamar Airport, Stafsberg caters to general aviation. The nearest passenger airport is Oslo Airport, located south of Hamar, it's easily accessible by road through the E6 and also by train, which is a 44-minute journey from Hamar Station.\nClimate.\nHamar has a humid continental climate (Dfb) with fairly dry and cold winters, and comfortably warm summers. The Hamar II weather station, at an elevation of , started recording in 1968. The all-time high was recorded in July 2018, which was the warmest month on record with average daily high and mean . The all-time low is from December 2010, which was a very cold month with a mean and an average daily low . A previous weather station (Hamar I, at an elevation of 139 m) recorded the coldest month on record with a mean in January 1917. In August 1975, the weather station \"Staur Fors\u00f8ksg\u00e5rd\" in nearby Stange recorded .\nSport.\nTeam sports.\nHamar boasts several teams at the Norwegian top level in various sports:\nIndividual sports.\nHamar is known for its speed skating history, both for its skaters and the championships that have been hosted by the city. Already in 1894, Hamar hosted its first European championship, and the first World Championship the following year. After the Vikingskipet was built, Hamar has hosted international championships regularly.\nThe most notable skaters from Hamar are Dag Forn\u00e6ss and Even Wetten, both former World champions, allround and 1000m respectively. Amund Sj\u00f8brend, \u00c5dne S\u00f8ndr\u00e5l and Eskil Ervik have all been members of the local club Hamar IL, although they were not born in Hamar.\nIn Hamar on 17 July 1993, Scottish cyclist Graeme Obree set a world record for the longest distance covered in an hour. His 51,596 metres broke the 51,151 set at altitude nine years earlier. The record lasted only six days before Chris Boardman beat it in Bordeaux, France.\nMotorcycle speedway has had a long association with Hamar, covering three venues. The Norwegian Championship was held at Hamar Idrettsplassen in 1939 and at the Briskebyen Utstillingsplassen in 1954. The Speedway Grand Prix of Norway was held at the Vikingskipet from 2002 to 2004.\nEvents.\nHamar was the venue of three sports during the 1994 Winter Olympics, figure skating, short track and speed skating.\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns \u2013 Sister cities.\nThe following cities, both in Scandinavia and around the world, are twinned with Hamar:\nIn literature and popular culture.\nPart of the plot of \"The Axe\", the first volume of Sigrid Undset's \"The Master of Hestviken\", is set in Medieval Hamar. The book's young lovers, denied the right to marry by malicious relatives, come to the town to try to get the help of the kindly and compassionate Bishop Thorfinn of Hamar.\nJorma Kaukonen, former guitarist of Jefferson Airplane, celebrated his love of speed-skating in the song Hamar Promenade on his 1974 album \"Quah\".\nNorwegian jazz-pop singer/songwriter Silje Nergaard dedicated her album Hamar Railway Station, released in December 2020, to Hamar's railway junction.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14472", "revid": "915833", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14472", "title": "Book of Helaman", "text": "Book of the Book of Mormon\nThe Book of Helaman ( ) is one of the books that make up the Book of Mormon, a text held sacred by churches within the Latter Day Saint movement, including the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church). The book continues the history of the Nephites and the Lamanites from approximately 50 BC to 1 BC. It discusses political unrest among the Nephites and the formation of a group of secret dissenters called the Gadianton Robbers. Helaman, son of Helaman leads the Nephites for a time, and his sons Nephi and Lehi go on a successful mission to the Lamanites. When Nephi returns home, he correctly identifies the murderer of the chief judge using his prophetic powers, and sends a famine to the Nephite which lasts three years. After a digression from Mormon, the book of Helaman ends with Samuel the Lamanite's prophecy of the signs that will precede Christ's birth and death. Helaman deals with themes of external and internal conflict, hidden information, Nephite racism, and Mormon's views of history as deduced by his redaction of it.\nSummary.\nAccording to the narrative in the Book of Mormon, the Book of Helaman is set in 50\u20131 BC. Helaman is named for Alma's grandson, Helaman. The actions of the first three chapters center around him. Helaman's son Nephi is central to the rest of the record. The book of Helaman as a whole is edited and compiled by Mormon, who is the author of chapter 12. Events are related episodically. The miraculous incidents in Helaman 5 describe a significant conversion of many Lamanites to Book of Mormon Christianity.\nIn the first part of Helaman, a secret society, commonly called a secret combination, spurs political unrest among the Nephites. Pahoran's son, also named Pahoran, wins the election to be the new chief judge. Paanchi and his followers make an oath of secrecy and murder son Pahoran. A few months later, a Lamanite army captures the Nephite capital until the Nephites reclaim it. Helaman, son of Helaman is elected as the new chief judge. The same group who murdered Pahoran tries to murder Helaman, but a spy kills the assassin before he succeeds. The group retreats to the wilderness and they are referred to as a \"band of robbers\". (Chapters 1\u20132.)\nThe second part of Helaman covers a period of Nephite technological growth, war with the Lamanites, and proselyting to the Lamanites. Helaman reigns over the Nephites, who develop shipping, expand northward, and become wealthy and prideful. Helaman dies and his son Nephi becomes chief judge. Disagreements in the land of the Nephites lead to war with the Lamanites, where Moronihah conquers half of their land. After stepping down as chief judge, Nephi goes with his brother Lehi to preach to the Nephites and the Lamanites. Lamanites in Nephites lands imprison them. Angels and a pillar of fire manifest and their presence sparks the conversion of onlookers, who in turn convert the Lamanites, who peaceably leave the Nephite lands they were occupying. The Gadianton robbers return and murder Cezoram, who filled in for Nephi in the judgement seat. Meanwhile, the Lamanites' righteousness increases. (Chapters 3\u20136.)\nIn the third part of Helaman, Nephi prophesies about the Nephites and their future. Nephi comes home after his six-year mission to find that the Nephites have become wicked in his absence. He says that the Nephites' destruction is nigh. He prophesies that the chief judge has been murdered by his brother, and this prophecy is confirmed. He prophesies that the brother will deny murdering the chief judge, but that the blood on the skirts of his cloak will give him away. The Nephites are divided. God grants Nephi the power to do \"all things\" \"according to [his] word\". Nephi sends a famine into the land for three years, when many people return to their faith and Nephi prays the rain back. The Gadianton robbers become more powerful. (Chapters 7\u201311.)\nIn the last part of Helaman, Samuel the Lamanite prophesies that the Nephites will be destroyed in 400 years. He promises that their attempts to secure their future using money will fail. He says that unless the Nephites repent, their women and children will suffer and die. He foretells of the signs and wonders of Jesus' birth and death. The Nephites reject his prophecies. (Chapters 13\u201316)\nThemes.\nWar and contention.\nThe short preface to the Book of Helaman is written by Mormon, the editor of the books following Omni according to the Book of Mormon narrative. Mormon describes the book of Helaman as being about \"wars and contentions\". According to Brant Gardner, author of a six-volume commentary that grew out of his work for the Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies, the goal of Mormon's compilation is theological, not historical. \"Contentions\" refers to internal conflicts, while \"wars\" refers to external ones. Mormon may have chosen to focus on contentions to fulfill Nephi's vision when Nephi sees \"wars, and rumors of wars\" as well as \"wars and contentions in the land\". For Gardner, Mormon isn't just trying to fulfill Nephi's vision, but also to show that Christ's coming is a type, and that it was and will be preceded by war and contention.\nIn Helaman, the Gadianton robbers are mentioned for the first time in the text of the Book of Mormon, a recurring instance of Nephite secret combinations important to the rest of the Book of Mormon narrative. According to Maxwell Institute scholar Kim Matheson, Helaman's contrasts show how the Nephites are constantly noticing the wrong things. Instead of noticing their own spiritual decay, they increase their wealth and military power. Important aspects of the plot are covert, like the secret combinations, assassins, and spiritual alignment with God.\nFormer dean of religious education at Brigham Young University, Robert J. Matthews, noticed that within the Nephite culture, because the majority of the people chose evil, the government became corrupt, even though it was a form of free government. People in government started to ignore the poor and there was a general disdain of the law. In the \"Book of Mormon Reference Companion\", published by LDS Church publisher Deseret Book, John Tanner also highlights the passage in Helaman about how \"they who chose evil were more numerous than they who chose good.\"\nNephite racism.\nHelaman ends with Samuel prophesying of Christ and the Nephites rejecting Samuel's prophecy. Samuel does not mention Christ's resurrection, but focuses on the signs of his birth and death. For Grant Hardy, in his \"The Annotated Book of Mormon\", since Samuel is a Lamanite, it is possible that Nephite racism contributed to their rejection of him. For Matheson, Nephite racism causes them to reject Samuel, and their interest in comparing themselves to the Lamanites prevents them from honestly repenting of their misdeeds.\nPride cycle.\nIn Mormon's digression in Helaman 12, he describes the cycle of righteousness and unrighteousness. He reveals his assumption that the righteousness of a people is the most important historical question to consider, relegating factors such as economic growth to their influence on the righteousness of the people. For Tanner, Mormon draws attention to his commentary with the phrase \"thus we see,\" and his \"fullest articulation of the cyclical pattern\" is found in Helaman 12. Hardy describes this \"pride cycle\" as one of the main features of Helaman. Prosperous Nephites become prideful and forget God, which leads to their downfall. Humbled, they return to worshipping God and become prosperous again. Hardy draws a parallel to a similar cycle in the Biblical Book of Judges, noting that in Helaman, communal repentance plays a larger role. In the larger narrative of the Book of Mormon, this cycle is broken for 200 years after Jesus visits the land.\nTextual variants.\nIn the 1830 edition of the Book of Mormon, Joseph Smith originally gave his scribes an arrangement of five chapters that were larger than the chapters in modern editions of the Book of Mormon. \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14474", "revid": "912918452", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14474", "title": "Harry Potter and the Sorcerers Stone", "text": ""}
{"id": "14475", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14475", "title": "IrishTraditionalMusic", "text": ""}
{"id": "14478", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14478", "title": "IsLam", "text": ""}
{"id": "14480", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14480", "title": "IslandS", "text": ""}
{"id": "14482", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14482", "title": "ItalY", "text": ""}
{"id": "14483", "revid": "42316941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14483", "title": "IntegerNumbers", "text": ""}
{"id": "14485", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14485", "title": "IndoIranianLanguages", "text": ""}
{"id": "14491", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14491", "title": "Isaac Asimov/TheFoundationSeries", "text": ""}
{"id": "14505", "revid": "82835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14505", "title": "IsaacAsimov/PreludeToFoundation", "text": ""}
{"id": "14507", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14507", "title": "IsaacAsimov/TrantoR", "text": ""}
{"id": "14513", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14513", "title": "IntelliGence", "text": ""}
{"id": "14514", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14514", "title": "IndianapolisColts", "text": ""}
{"id": "14515", "revid": "43729757", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14515", "title": "IndependentS", "text": ""}
{"id": "14516", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14516", "title": "InterpretingStatisticalData", "text": ""}
{"id": "14518", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14518", "title": "IndustrY", "text": ""}
{"id": "14519", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14519", "title": "IndustrY/TertiarySector", "text": ""}
{"id": "14520", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14520", "title": "IndustrY/PrimarySector", "text": ""}
{"id": "14521", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14521", "title": "IndustrY/SecondarySector", "text": ""}
{"id": "14523", "revid": "247097", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14523", "title": "Isolated physical system", "text": ""}
{"id": "14524", "revid": "8517170", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14524", "title": "Inflation (economics)", "text": ""}
{"id": "14525", "revid": "43729757", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14525", "title": "Independents", "text": ""}
{"id": "14526", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14526", "title": "Irina Krush", "text": "American chess grandmaster (born 1983)\nIrina Borisivna Krush (; born December 24, 1983) is an American chess Grandmaster. She is the only woman to earn the GM title while playing for the United States. Krush is an eight-time U.S. Women's Champion and a two-time Women's American Cup Champion.\nEarly life.\nIrina Krush was born into a Jewish family in Odesa, USSR (now Ukraine), and emigrated with her parents to Brooklyn in 1989. Her father, a college chess player, taught Irina the game. When she was 6, she won her first tournament, and at the age of 7 she represented the U.S. at the World Youth Championships for girls under 10 in Poland.\nChess career.\nAt age 14, Krush won the 1998 U.S. Women's Chess Championship to become the youngest U.S. women's champion ever. She has won the championship on seven other occasions, in 2007, 2010, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015, and 2020.\nIn 1999, Krush took part in the \"Kasparov versus the World\" chess competition. Garry Kasparov played the white pieces and the Internet public, via a Microsoft host website, voted on moves for the black pieces, guided by the recommendations of Krush and three of her contemporaries, \u00c9tienne Bacrot, Elisabeth P\u00e4htz and Florin Felecan. On the tenth move, Krush suggested a &lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;novelty&lt;/dfn&gt;, for which the World team voted. Kasparov said later that he lost control of the game at that point, and wasn't sure whether he was winning or losing.\nKrush played in the Group C of the 2008 Corus Chess Tournament, a 14-player round-robin tournament held in Wijk aan Zee, the Netherlands. She finished in joint fifth place having scored 7/13 points after five wins (including the one against the eventual winner, Fabiano Caruana), four draws and four losses.\nIn 2013, she was awarded the Grandmaster title due to her results at the NYC Mayor's Cup International GM Tournament in 2001, Women's World Team Chess Championship 2013 and Baku Open 2013.\nIn 2022, she won the 2022 American Cup (Women's field) in a double-elimination format. She tied with Jennifer Yu in the 2022 U.S. Women's Chess Championship but lost the playoff.\nTeam competitions.\nKrush has played on the U.S. national team in the Women's Chess Olympiad since 1998. The U.S. team won the silver medal in 2004 and bronze in 2008. In 2022, Krush was a member of the U.S. women's team at the 44th Chess Olympiad, where the team placed fourth. She also competed as part of the US team in the Women's World Team Chess Championship in 2009 and 2013.\nShe played for the team Manhattan Applesauce in the U.S. Chess League in 2015; she previously played for the New York Knights (2005\u20132011, 2013). Krush and her ex-husband, Canadian Grandmaster Pascal Charbonneau, have played in the United Kingdom league for Guildford-ADC.\nIn May 2020, Krush played for the USA team in the FIDE Online Nations Cup.\nWriting.\nKrush frequently contributes articles to \"Chess Life\" magazine and \"uschess.org.\" Her article on earning her grandmaster title in 2013 was honored as the \"Best of US Chess\" that year.\nPersonal life.\nKrush attended Edward R. Murrow High School in Brooklyn. She graduated in International Relations from New York University in 2006.\nKrush identifies as a \"Christian Jew\", embracing both her Jewish heritage and Christian faith since her conversion in 2011.\nIn March 2016, Krush appeared on the talk show \"Steve Harvey\" along with two actresses impersonating Krush. The trio answered questions from host Steve Harvey and guest Hillary Clinton regarding her life and chess career. Harvey successfully identified the real Irina Krush.\nIn March 2020, she was hospitalized and treated for a \"moderate\" COVID-19 infection, then released to recover under quarantine at home. While quarantined, she played in the Isolated Queens Swiss, an online women's blitz chess tournament. She scored 7.5/10 in the tournament, putting her in joint second place, a half point behind tournament winner GM Alexandra Kosteniuk.\nOn January 18, 2023, Krush (and her former chess opponent Carissa Yip) appeared on a primetime special of \"The Price Is Right\". Krush won the Clock Game, but she failed to advance to the Showcases.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14527", "revid": "14462949", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14527", "title": "Institut des Hautes \u00c9tudes Scientifiques", "text": "French institute for mathematics and theoretical physics\nThe Institut des hautes \u00e9tudes scientifiques (IH\u00c9S; English: Institute of Advanced Scientific Studies) is a French research institute supporting advanced research in mathematics and theoretical physics (also with a small theoretical biology group). It is located in Bures-sur-Yvette, just south of Paris. It is an independently governed research institute and a founding member of the University of Paris-Saclay.\nHistory.\nThe IH\u00c9S was founded in 1958 by businessman and mathematical physicist L\u00e9on Motchane with the help of Robert Oppenheimer and Jean Dieudonn\u00e9 as a research centre in France, modeled on the renowned Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, United States.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;IH\u00c9S explicitly draws inspiration from the model of the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton (IAS). ... IH\u00c9S adopted its basic characteristics \u2013 the intellectual ones \u2013 as a high level institute dedicated to basic research \u2013 and certain practical ones \u2013 such as the tradition of tea being served daily, conducive to exchanges of views. Of equal importance was the relationship between Oppenheimer and L\u00e9on Motchane (1900\u20131990), the founder and first director of IH\u00c9S. As life member of the scientific committee, advisor to the director, frequent visitor and regular correspondent, Oppenheimer played a major role in the crucial early years at IH\u00c9S. ... Oppenheimer and Motchane ... exchanged long letters and short telegrams on all aspects of life at IH\u00c9S. ... Visits by Oppenheimer were cleverly orchestrated by L\u00e9on Motchane and reported in the press. Oppenheimer's presence was an event in itself and his coming to lH\u00c9S gave the Institute important official recognition. Oppenheimer was to come to IH\u00c9S three times: from 16 to 19 September 1959, on 17 and 18 October 1961 (in Bures, although the Institute had not moved there yet), and from 14 to 17 May 1963. His last visit, planned for 1965, was cancelled for health reasons.\nThe strong personality of Alexander Grothendieck and the broad sweep of his revolutionizing theories were a dominating feature of the first ten years at the IH\u00c9S. Ren\u00e9 Thom received an invitation from IH\u00c9S in 1963 and after his appointment remained there until his death in 2002. Dennis Sullivan is remembered as one who had a special talent for encouraging fruitful exchanges among visitors and provoking a new and deeper insight into their ideas.\nThe IH\u00c9S runs a highly regarded mathematical journal, \"Publications Math\u00e9matiques de l'IH\u00c9S\".\nIH\u00c9S celebrated its 40th anniversary in 1998 and its 50th in 2008.\nScientists associated with the IHES.\nAlain Connes (Fields Medal 1982) has held the L\u00e9on Motchane Chair since 1979. Several CNRS researchers are also based at the IHES: Ahmed Abbes, Thierry Baudineau, Ofer Gabber, Fanny Kassel and Christophe Soul\u00e9 in mathematics and Cl\u00e9ment Delcamp in physics. Yilin Wang is a junior professor.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14529", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14529", "title": "Interpreting statistical data", "text": ""}
{"id": "14531", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14531", "title": "Iceland", "text": "Island country in the Atlantic Ocean\nIceland is a Nordic island country between the Arctic Ocean and the North Atlantic Ocean, located on the Mid-Atlantic Ridge between Europe and North America. It is culturally and politically linked with Europe and is the region's westernmost and most sparsely populated country. Its capital and largest city is Reykjav\u00edk, which is home to about 36% of the country's roughly 390,000 residents (excluding nearby towns/suburbs, which are separate municipalities). The official language of the country is Icelandic. Iceland is on a rift between tectonic plates, and its geologic activity includes geysers and frequent volcanic eruptions. The interior consists of a volcanic plateau with sand and lava fields, mountains and glaciers, and many glacial rivers flow to the sea through the lowlands. Iceland is warmed by the Gulf Stream and has a temperate climate, despite being at a latitude just south of the Arctic Circle. Its latitude and marine influence keep summers chilly, and most of its islands have a polar climate.\nAccording to the , an ancient manuscript, the settlement of Iceland began in 874 AD, when the Norwegian chieftain Ing\u00f3lfr Arnarson became the island's first permanent settler. In following centuries, Norwegians and to a lesser extent other Scandinavians, immigrated to Iceland, bringing with them thralls (i.e., slaves or serfs) of Gaelic origin. The island was governed as an independent commonwealth under the native parliament, the Althing, one of the world's oldest functioning legislative assemblies. After a period of civil strife, Iceland acceded to Norwegian rule in the 13th century. In 1397, Iceland followed Norway's integration into the Kalmar Union along with the kingdoms of Denmark and Sweden, coming under \"de facto\" Danish rule upon its dissolution in 1523. The Danish kingdom introduced Lutheranism by force in 1550, and the Treaty of Kiel formally ceded Iceland to Denmark in 1814.\nInfluenced by ideals of nationalism after the French Revolution, Iceland's struggle for independence took form culminating with the Danish\u2013Icelandic Act of Union in 1918, with the establishment of the Kingdom of Iceland, sharing through a personal union the incumbent monarch of Denmark. During the occupation of Denmark in World War II, Iceland voted overwhelmingly to become a republic in 1944, ending the remaining formal ties to Denmark. Although the Althing was suspended from 1799 to 1845, Iceland nevertheless has a claim to sustaining one of the world's longest-running parliaments. Until the 20th century, Iceland relied largely on subsistence fishing and agriculture. Industrialization of the fisheries and Marshall Plan aid after World War II brought prosperity, and Iceland became one of the world's wealthiest and most developed nations. In 1950, Iceland joined the Council of Europe. In 1994 it became a part of the European Economic Area, further diversifying its economy into sectors such as finance, biotechnology, and manufacturing.\nIceland has a market economy with relatively low taxes, compared to other OECD countries, as well as the highest trade union membership in the world. It maintains a Nordic social welfare system that provides universal health care and tertiary education. Iceland ranks highly in international comparisons of national performance, such as quality of life, education, protection of civil liberties, government transparency, and economic freedom. It has the smallest population of any NATO member and is the only one with no standing army, possessing only a lightly armed coast guard.\nEtymology.\nThe \"Landn\u00e1mab\u00f3k\" names Naddodd () as the first Norseman to reach Iceland in the ninth century, having gotten lost while sailing from Norway to the Faroe Islands. He gave the island its first name of \"Sn\u00e6land\" (). The second explorer to arrive was the Swedish Gar\u00f0ar Svavarsson, who circumnavigated the island and named it \"Gar\u00f0arsh\u00f3lmur\" () after himself.\nThe island's present name originated from Fl\u00f3ki Vilger\u00f0arson, the first Norseman to intentionally travel to Iceland. According to the Sagas of Icelanders, Fl\u00f3ki coined the name after he climbed a mountain, despondent after a harsh winter in present-day Vatnsfj\u00f6r\u00f0ur, and saw an ice cap. The notion that Iceland's settlers chose that name to discourage competing settlements is most likely a myth.\nHistory.\n874\u20131262: settlement and Commonwealth.\nAccording to both and , monks known as the Papar lived in Iceland before Scandinavian settlers arrived, possibly members of a Hiberno-Scottish mission. An archaeological excavation has revealed the ruins of a cabin in Hafnir on the Reykjanes peninsula. Carbon dating indicates that it was abandoned sometime between 770 and 880. In 2016, archaeologists uncovered a longhouse in St\u00f6\u00f0varfj\u00f6r\u00f0ur that may date to as early as 800.\nSwedish Viking explorer Gar\u00f0ar Svavarsson was the first to circumnavigate Iceland in 870 and establish that it was an island. He stayed during the winter and built a house in H\u00fasav\u00edk. Gar\u00f0ar departed the following summer, but one of his men, N\u00e1ttfari, decided to stay behind with two slaves. N\u00e1ttfari settled in what is now known as N\u00e1ttfarav\u00edk, and he and his slaves became the first documented permanent residents of Iceland.\nThe Norwegian-Norse chieftain Ing\u00f3lfr Arnarson built his homestead in present-day Reykjav\u00edk in 874. Ing\u00f3lfr was followed by many other emigrant settlers, largely Scandinavians and their thralls, many of whom were Irish or Scottish. By 930, most arable land on the island had been claimed; the Althing, a legislative and judicial assembly was initiated to regulate the Icelandic Commonwealth. The lack of arable land also served as an impetus to the settlement of Greenland starting in 986. The period of these early settlements coincided with the Medieval Warm Period, when temperatures were similar to those of the early 20th century. At this time, about 25% of Iceland was covered with forest, compared to 1% in the present day. Christianity was adopted by consensus around 999\u20131000, although Norse paganism persisted among segments of the population for some years afterward.\nIceland as a possession.\nMiddle Ages.\nThe Icelandic Commonwealth, established in the 10th century, faced internal strife during the Age of the Sturlungs (c. 1220\u20131264). This period was marked by violent conflicts among chieftains, notably the Sturlung family, leading to the weakening of the Commonwealth's political structure. The culmination of the struggles resulted in the signing of the Old Covenant (Gamli s\u00e1ttm\u00e1li) in 1262\u20131264, bringing Iceland under Norwegian rule.\nEnvironmental challenges further impacted medieval Icelandic society. Upon settlement, approximately 25\u201340% of Iceland was forested. However, extensive deforestation occurred as forests were cleared for timber, firewood, and to create grazing land for livestock. This led to significant soil erosion and a decline in arable land, exacerbating the difficulties of sustaining agriculture in Iceland's harsh climate. Agriculture during this period was predominantly pastoral, focusing on livestock such as sheep, cattle, and horses. While early settlers cultivated barley, the cooling climate from the 12th century onwards made grain cultivation increasingly difficult. The Little Ice Age began around 1300 bringing colder and more unpredictable weather, further shortening growing seasons and making farming more challenging.\nThe Black Death reached Iceland in 1402\u20131404 and again in 1494\u20131495, with devastating effects. The first outbreak is estimated to have killed 50\u201360% of the population, while the second resulted in a 30\u201350% mortality rate. These pandemics significantly reduced the population, leading to social and economic disruptions.\nIn 1380, Olaf II of Denmark became King of Norway on his father's death. Denmark and Norway were thus united in personal union and ruled from Denmark; this was further solidified with the formation of the Kalmar Union in 1397. Through it Iceland, as a Norwegian possession, came to be ruled by Denmark.\nReformation and the Early Modern period.\nAround the middle of the 16th century, as part of the Protestant Reformation, King Christian III of Denmark began to impose Lutheranism on all his subjects. J\u00f3n Arason, the last Icelandic Catholic bishop, and two of his sons were beheaded in 1550. Iceland then became officially Lutheran, and Lutheranism has since remained the dominant religion.\nIn the 17th and 18th centuries, Denmark imposed harsh trade restrictions on Iceland. Natural disasters, including volcanic eruptions and disease, contributed to a decreasing population. In the summer of 1627, Barbary Pirates committed the events known locally as the Turkish Abductions, in which hundreds of residents were taken into slavery in North Africa and dozens killed; this was the only invasion in Icelandic history to have casualties. The 1707\u201308 Iceland smallpox epidemic is estimated to have killed a quarter to a third of the population. In 1783 the Laki volcano erupted, with devastating effects. In the years following the eruption, known as the Mist Hardships (), over half of all livestock in the country died. Around a quarter of the population starved to death in the ensuing famine.\n1814\u20131918: independence movement.\nAfter the Napoleonic Wars in 1814, Denmark-Norway broke up into two separate kingdoms via the Treaty of Kiel, but Iceland remained a Danish dependency. Throughout the 19th century, the country's climate continued to grow colder, resulting in mass emigration to the New World, particularly to the region of Gimli, Manitoba in Canada, which was sometimes referred to as New Iceland. About 15,000 people emigrated out of a total population of 70,000.\nA national consciousness arose in the first half of the 19th century, inspired by romantic and nationalist ideas from mainland Europe. An Icelandic independence movement took shape in the 1850s under the leadership of J\u00f3n Sigur\u00f0sson, based on the burgeoning Icelandic nationalism inspired by the \"Fj\u00f6lnismenn\" and other Danish-educated Icelandic intellectuals. In 1874, poet and clergyman Matth\u00edas Jochumsson wrote the lyrics of \"Lofs\u00f6ngur,\" which became the Icelandic national anthem. Composer Sveinbj\u00f6rn Sveinbj\u00f6rnsson wrote the music.\nIn 1874, Denmark granted Iceland a constitution and limited home rule. That was expanded in 1904, and Hannes Hafstein served as the first Minister for Iceland in the Danish cabinet.\n1918\u20131944: independence and the Kingdom of Iceland.\nThe Danish\u2013Icelandic Act of Union, an agreement with Denmark signed on 1 December 1918 and valid for 25\u00a0years, recognized Iceland as a fully sovereign and independent state in a personal union with Denmark. The Government of Iceland established an embassy in Copenhagen and requested that Denmark carry out on its behalf certain defence and foreign affairs matters, subject to consultation with the Althing. Danish embassies around the world displayed two coats of arms and two flags: those of the Kingdom of Denmark and those of the Kingdom of Iceland. Iceland's legal position became comparable to those of countries belonging to the Commonwealth of Nations, such as Canada, whose sovereign is King Charles III.\nDuring World War II, Iceland joined Denmark in asserting neutrality. After the German occupation of Denmark on 9 April 1940, the Althing replaced the King with a regent and declared that the Icelandic government would take control of its own defence and foreign affairs. A month later, British armed forces conducted Operation Fork, the invasion and occupation of the country, violating Icelandic neutrality. In 1941, the Government of Iceland, friendly to Britain, invited the then-neutral United States to take over its defence so that Britain could use its troops elsewhere.\n1944\u2013present: Republic of Iceland.\nOn 31 December 1943, the Danish\u2013Icelandic Act of Union expired after 25 years. Beginning on 20 May 1944, Icelanders voted in a four-day plebiscite on whether to terminate the personal union with Denmark, abolish the monarchy, and establish a republic. The vote was 97% to end the union, and 95% in favor of the new republican constitution. Iceland formally became a republic on 17 June 1944, with Sveinn Bj\u00f6rnsson as its first president.\nIn 1946, the U.S. Defense Force left Iceland. The nation formally became a member of NATO on 30 March 1949, amid domestic controversy and riots. On 5 May 1951, a defense agreement was signed with the United States. American troops returned to Iceland as the Iceland Defence Force and remained throughout the Cold War. The U.S. withdrew the last of its forces on 30 September 2006.\nIceland prospered during the Second World War. The immediate post-war period was followed by substantial economic growth, driven by the industrialization of the fishing industry and the U.S. Marshall Plan program, through which Icelanders received the most aid per capita of any European country (at US$209, with war-ravaged Netherlands a distant second at US$109). Vigd\u00eds Finnbogad\u00f3ttir assumed Iceland's presidency on 1 August 1980, making her the first elected female head of state in the world.\nThe 1970s were marked by the Cod Wars, which were several disputes with the United Kingdom over Iceland's extension of its fishing limits to offshore. Iceland hosted a summit in Reykjav\u00edk in 1986 between United States President Ronald Reagan and Soviet Premier Mikhail Gorbachev, during which they took significant steps towards nuclear disarmament. A few years later, Iceland became the first country to recognize the independence of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania as they broke away from the USSR. Throughout the 1990s, the country expanded its international role and developed a foreign policy oriented towards humanitarian and peacekeeping causes. To that end, Iceland provided aid and expertise to various NATO-led interventions in Bosnia, Kosovo, and Iraq.\nIceland joined the European Economic Area in 1994, after which the economy was greatly diversified and liberalised. International economic relations increased further after 2001 when Iceland's newly deregulated banks began to raise great amounts of external debt, contributing to a 32 percent increase in Iceland's gross national income between 2002 and 2007.\nEconomic boom and crisis.\nIn 2003\u20132007, after the privatization of the banking sector under the government of Dav\u00ed\u00f0 Oddsson, Iceland moved towards having an economy based on international investment banking and financial services. It was quickly becoming one of the most prosperous countries in the world, but was hit hard by a major financial crisis. The crisis resulted in the greatest migration from Iceland since 1887, with a net emigration of 5,000 people in 2009.\nSince 2012.\nIceland's economy stabilized under the government of J\u00f3hanna Sigur\u00f0ard\u00f3ttir growing by 1.6% in 2012. The centre-right Independence Party was returned to power in coalition with the Progressive Party in the 2013 election. In the following years, Iceland benefited from a surge in tourism as the country became a popular holiday destination. In 2016, Prime Minister Sigmundur Dav\u00ed\u00f0 Gunnlaugsson resigned after being implicated in the Panama Papers scandal. Early elections in 2016 resulted in a right-wing coalition government of the Independence Party, Vi\u00f0reisn and Bright Future. This government fell when Bright Future quit the coalition due to a scandal involving then-Prime Minister Bjarni Benediktsson's father's letter of support for a convicted child sex offender. Snap elections in October 2017 brought to power a new coalition consisting of the Independence Party, the Progressive Party, and the Left-Green Movement, headed by Katr\u00edn Jakobsd\u00f3ttir.\nAfter the 2021 parliamentary election, the new government was, just like the previous government, a tri-party coalition of the Independence Party, the Progressive Party, and the Left-Green Movement, headed by Prime Minister Katr\u00edn Jakobsd\u00f3ttir. In April 2024, Bjarni Benediktsson of the Independence party succeeded Katr\u00edn Jakobsd\u00f3ttir as prime minister. In November 2024, centre-left Social Democratic Alliance became the biggest party in a snap election, meaning Social Democratic Kristrun Frostadottir became the next Prime Minister of Iceland.\nGeography.\nIceland is at the juncture of the Arctic Ocean and the North Atlantic Ocean. The main island is entirely south of the Arctic Circle, which passes through the small Icelandic island of Gr\u00edmsey off the main island's northern coast. The country lies between latitudes 63 and 68\u00b0N, and longitudes 25 and 13\u00b0W.\nIceland is closer to continental Europe than to mainland North America, although it is closest to Greenland (), an island of North America. Iceland is generally included in Europe for geographical, historical, political, cultural, linguistic, and practical reasons. Geologically, the island includes parts of both continental plates. The closest bodies of land in Europe are the Faroe Islands (); Jan Mayen Island (); Shetland and the Outer Hebrides, both about ; and the Scottish mainland and Orkney, both about . The nearest part of Continental Europe is mainland Norway, about away, while mainland North America is away, at the northern tip of Labrador.\nIceland is the 18th-largest island in the world, and the second-largest island in Europe, smaller than Great Britain and bigger than Ireland. The main island covers , but the entire country is in size, of which 62.7% is tundra. Iceland contains about 30 minor islands, including the lightly populated Gr\u00edmsey and the Vestmannaeyjar archipelago. Lakes and glaciers cover 14.3% of its surface; only 23% is vegetated. The largest lakes are \u00de\u00f3risvatn reservoir: and \u00deingvallavatn: ; other important lakes include Lagarflj\u00f3t and M\u00fdvatn. J\u00f6kuls\u00e1rl\u00f3n is the deepest lake, at . Geologically, Iceland is a part of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, a ridge along which the oceanic crust spreads and forms new crust. This part of the mid-ocean ridge is located above a mantle plume, causing Iceland to be subaerial (above the surface of the sea). The ridge marks the boundary between the Eurasian Plate and the North American Plate, and Iceland was created by rifting and accretion through volcanism along the ridge.\nMany fjords punctuate Iceland's coastline, which is also where most settlements are situated. The island's interior, the Highlands of Iceland, is a cold and uninhabitable combination of sand, mountains, and lava fields. The major towns are the capital city of Reykjav\u00edk, along with its outlying towns of K\u00f3pavogur, Hafnarfj\u00f6r\u00f0ur, and Gar\u00f0ab\u00e6r, nearby Reykjanesb\u00e6r where the international airport is located, and the town of Akureyri in northern Iceland. The island of Gr\u00edmsey on the Arctic Circle contains the northernmost habitation of Iceland, whereas Kolbeinsey contains the northernmost point of Iceland. Iceland has three national parks: Vatnaj\u00f6kull National Park, Sn\u00e6fellsj\u00f6kull National Park, and \u00deingvellir National Park. The country is considered a \"strong performer\" in environmental protection.\nGeology.\nIceland is the only large insular landmass in the world which is located on a mid-ocean ridge above sea level. It is probably the only place in the world where the effects of two major tectonic plates drifting apart can easily be observed above sea level. The island sits directly on the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, where the Eurasian Plate and the North American Plate are moving away from each other.\nA geologically young land at 16 to 18 million years old, Iceland is the surface expression of the Iceland Plateau, a large igneous province forming as a result of volcanism from the Iceland hotspot and along the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, the latter of which runs right through it. This means that the island is highly geologically active with many volcanoes including Hekla, Eldgj\u00e1, Her\u00f0ubrei\u00f0, and Eldfell. The volcanic eruption of Laki in 1783\u20131784 caused a famine that killed nearly a quarter of the island's population. In addition, the eruption caused dust clouds and haze to appear over most of Europe and parts of Africa and Asia for several months afterwards, and affected climates in other areas.\nIceland has many geysers, including Geysir, from which the English word is derived, and the famous Strokkur, which erupts every 8\u201310 minutes. After a phase of inactivity, Geysir started erupting again after a series of earthquakes in 2000. Geysir has since grown quieter and does not erupt often.\nWith the widespread availability of geothermal power and the harnessing of many rivers and waterfalls for hydroelectricity, most residents have access to inexpensive hot water, heating, and electricity. The island is composed primarily of basalt, a low-silica lava associated with effusive volcanism, as has also occurred in Hawaii. Iceland, however, has a variety of volcanic types (composite and fissure), many producing more evolved lavas such as rhyolite and andesite. Iceland has hundreds of volcanoes with about 30 active volcanic systems.\nSurtsey, one of the youngest islands in the world, is part of Iceland. Named after Surtr, it rose above the ocean in a series of volcanic eruptions between 8 November 1963 and 5 June 1968. Only scientists researching the growth of new life are allowed to visit the island. The country has approximately 30 active volcanic systems. Within each are volcano-tectonic fissure systems, and many, but not all of them, also have at least one central volcano (mostly in the form of a stratovolcano, sometimes of a shield volcano with a magma chamber underneath). Several classifications of the systems exist, for example there is one of 30 systems, and one of 34 systems, with the later currently being used in Iceland itself.\nClimate.\nThe climate of Iceland's coast is subarctic. The warm North Atlantic Current ensures generally higher annual temperatures than in most places of similar latitude in the world. Regions in the world with similar climates include the Aleutian Islands, the Alaska Peninsula, and Tierra del Fuego, although these regions are closer to the equator. Despite its proximity to the Arctic, the island's coasts remain ice-free through the winter. Ice incursions are rare, with the last having occurred on the north coast in 1969.\nThe climate varies between different parts of the island. Generally speaking, the south coast is warmer, wetter, and windier than the north. The Central Highlands are the coldest part of the country. Low-lying inland areas in the north are the aridest. Snowfall in winter is more common in the north than in the south. The highest air temperature recorded was on 22 June 1939 at Teigarhorn on the southeastern coast. The lowest was on 22 January 1918 at Gr\u00edmssta\u00f0ir and M\u00f6\u00f0rudalur in the northeastern hinterland. The temperature records for Reykjav\u00edk are on 30 July 2008, and on 21 January 1918.\nDue to climate change, Iceland is experiencing faster glacial retreat, changing vegetation patterns, and shifting marine ecosystems. Iceland's retreating glaciers have global and local consequences. Melting of Iceland's glaciers could raise sea levels by , which could lead to erosion and flooding worldwide.\nWildlife.\nThe entire country is in a single ecoregion, the Iceland boreal birch forests and alpine tundra. Some areas are covered by glaciers.\nPlants.\nPhytogeographically, Iceland belongs to the Arctic province of the Circumboreal Region within the Boreal Kingdom. Plantlife consists mainly of grassland, which is regularly grazed by livestock. The most common tree native to Iceland is the northern birch (\"Betula pubescens\"), which formerly formed forests over much of Iceland, along with aspens (\"Populus tremula\"), rowans (\"Sorbus aucuparia\"), common junipers (\"Juniperus communis\"), and other smaller trees, mainly willows.\nWhen the island was first settled, it was extensively forested, with around 30% of the land covered in trees. In the late 12th century, Ari the Wise described it in the \u00cdslendingab\u00f3k as \"forested from mountain to sea shore\". Permanent human settlement greatly disturbed the isolated ecosystem of thin, volcanic soils and limited species diversity. The forests were heavily exploited over the centuries for firewood and timber. Deforestation, climatic deterioration during the Little Ice Age, and overgrazing by sheep imported by settlers caused a loss of critical topsoil due to erosion. Today, many farms have been abandoned. Three-quarters of Iceland's is affected by soil erosion; is affected to a degree serious enough to make the land useless. Only a few small birch stands now exist in isolated reserves. The Icelandic Forest Service and other forestry groups promote large-scale reforestation in the country. Due to the reforestation efforts, the forest cover of Iceland has increased sixfold since the 1990s. That helps to offset carbon emissions, prevent sandstorms, and increase the productivity of farms. The planting of new forests has increased the number of trees, but the result does not compare to the original forests. Some of the planted forests include introduced species. The tallest tree in Iceland is a sitka spruce planted in 1949 in Kirkjub\u00e6jarklaustur; it was measured at in 2013. Algae including \"Chondrus crispus\", \"Phyllphora truncata\", \"Phyllophora crispa\", and others have been recorded from Iceland.\nAnimals.\nThe only native land mammal when humans arrived was the Arctic fox, which came to the island at the end of the ice age, walking over the frozen sea. On rare occasions, bats have been carried to the island with the winds, but they are not able to breed there. No native or free-living reptiles or amphibians are on the island.\nThe animals of Iceland include the Icelandic sheep, cattle, chickens, goats, the sturdy Icelandic horse, and the Icelandic Sheepdog, all descendants of animals imported by Europeans. Wild mammals include the Arctic fox, mink, mice, rats, rabbits, and reindeer. Polar bears occasionally visit the island, travelling from Greenland on icebergs, but no Icelandic populations exist. In June 2008, two polar bears arrived in the same month. Marine mammals include the grey seal (\"Halichoerus grypus\") and harbour seal (\"Phoca vitulina\"). Many species of fish live in the ocean waters surrounding Iceland, and the fishing industry is a major part of Iceland's economy, accounting for roughly half of the country's total exports. Birds, especially seabirds, are an important part of Iceland's animal life. Atlantic puffins, skuas, and black-legged kittiwakes nest on its sea cliffs.\nCommercial whaling is practised intermittently along with scientific whale hunts. Whale watching has become an important part of Iceland's economy since 1997. Around 1,300 species of insects are known in Iceland. This is low compared with other countries (over one million species have been described worldwide). Iceland was essentially free of mosquitoes until October 2025. \nPolitics.\nIceland is a parliamentary representative democratic republic, whereby the president is the head of state, while the prime minister of Iceland serves as the head of government in a multi-party system. Members of the Icelandic parliament are voted in by proportional representation, by constituency.\nAfter the 2024 parliamentary elections, the Icelandic government is led by a coalition between the Social Democratic Alliance, the centrist Vi\u00f0reisn, and the populist People's Party. The governing coalition's cabinet is led by Kristr\u00fan Frostad\u00f3ttir of the Social Democrats. Other political parties with seats in the Althing (Parliament) are the center-right Independence Party, the right-wing Centre Party, and the agrarian Progressive Party.\nAccording to International IDEA\u2019s Global State of Democracy (GSoD) Indices and Democracy Tracker, Iceland performs in the high range on overall democratic measures, with particular weaknesses in inclusive suffrage. In 2024, Iceland was ranked fourth in the strength of its democratic institutions and 10th in government transparency. The country has a high level of civic participation, with 81.4% voter turnout during the most recent elections, compared to an OECD average of 72%. Iceland scored second in Europe for their trust in legal institutions (police, parliament, and judiciary) at a mean of 73% trust as of 2018. Many political parties remain opposed to EU membership, primarily due to Icelanders' concern about losing control over their natural resources (particularly fisheries).\nWomen's rights.\nWomen in Iceland first gained the right to vote in 1915 (with restrictions) and increased voting rights in 1920. Iceland was the first country in the world to have a political party formed and led entirely by women. Known as the Women's List (\"Kvennalistinn\"), it was founded in 1983 to advance the political, economic, and social needs of women. It left a lasting influence on Iceland's politics: every major party has a 40% quota for women. In the 2021 elections, 48% of members of parliament are female compared to the global average of 16% in 2009. Vigd\u00eds Finnbogad\u00f3ttir was the world's first democratically elected female head of state. In 2009, J\u00f3hanna Sigur\u00f0ard\u00f3ttir became the world's first openly LGBT head of government.\nGovernment.\nIceland is a representative democracy and a parliamentary republic. The modern parliament, (English: Althing), was founded in 1845 as an advisory body to the Danish monarch. It was widely seen as a re-establishment of the assembly founded in 930 in the Commonwealth period and temporarily suspended from 1799 to 1845. Consequently, \"it is arguably the world's oldest parliamentary democracy.\" It has 63 members, elected for a maximum period of four years. The head of government is the prime minister, who with the cabinet, is responsible for executive government.\nThe president of Iceland, in contrast, is a largely ceremonial head of state and serves as a diplomat, but may veto laws voted by the parliament and put them to a national referendum. They are elected by popular vote for a term of four years with no term limit. The current president is Halla T\u00f3masd\u00f3ttir, having been in office since 1 August 2024. The elections for the president, the Althing, and local municipal councils are all held separately every four years.\nThe cabinet in the country's government is typically appointed by the president after a general election to the Althing. However, the appointment is usually negotiated by the leaders of the political parties, who decide amongst themselves which parties can form the cabinet and how to distribute its seats, as long as it has majority support in the Althing. If the party leaders are unable to come to an agreement within a reasonable period of time, the president will personally appoint the cabinet. That has not happened since the republic was founded in 1944, although in 1942 the regent, Sveinn Bj\u00f6rnsson, appointed a non-parliamentary government. Sveinn held the practical position of president at the time and later became the country's first official president in 1944.\nThe governments of Iceland have always been coalition governments, with two or more parties involved, as no single political party has ever received a majority of seats in the Althing throughout the republican period. There is no legal consensus on the extent of the political power possessed by the office of the president; several provisions of the constitution appear to give the president some important powers, but other provisions and traditions suggest otherwise. In 1980, Icelanders elected Vigd\u00eds Finnbogad\u00f3ttir as president, the world's first directly elected female head of state. She retired from office in 1996. In 2009, Iceland became the first country with an openly gay head of government when J\u00f3hanna Sigur\u00f0ard\u00f3ttir became prime minister.\nAdministrative divisions.\nIceland is divided into regions, constituencies, and municipalities. The eight regions are primarily used for statistical purposes. District court jurisdictions also use an older version of this division. Until 2003, the constituencies for the parliamentary elections were the same as the regions, but by an amendment to the constitution, they were changed to the current six constituencies:\nThe redistricting change was made to balance the weight of different districts of the country, since previously a vote cast in the sparsely populated areas around the country would count much more than a vote cast in the Reykjav\u00edk city area. The imbalance between districts has been reduced by the new system, but it still exists.\nSixty-two municipalities in Iceland govern local matters like schools, transport, and zoning. These are the actual second-level subdivisions of Iceland, as the constituencies have no relevance except in elections and for statistical purposes. Reykjav\u00edk is by far the most populous municipality, about four times more populous than K\u00f3pavogur, the second largest.\nForeign relations.\nIceland, which is a member of the UN, NATO, EFTA, Council of Europe, and OECD, maintains diplomatic and commercial relations with practically all nations, but its ties with the Nordic countries, Germany, the United States, Canada, and the other NATO nations are particularly close. Historically, due to cultural, economic, and linguistic similarities, Iceland is a Nordic country, and it participates in intergovernmental cooperation through the Nordic Council.\nIceland is a member of the European Economic Area (EEA), which allows the country access to the single market of the European Union (EU). It was not a member of the EU, but in July 2009, the Icelandic parliament, the Althing, voted in favour of the application for EU membership and officially applied on 17 July 2009. However, in 2013, opinion polls showed that many Icelanders were now against joining the EU; after the 2013 Icelandic parliamentary election the two parties which formed the island's new government\u2014the centrist Progressive Party and the right-wing Independence Party\u2014announced that they would hold a referendum on EU membership. In 2015, Minister for Foreign Affairs Gunnar Bragi Sveinsson informed the EU that Iceland would no longer pursue membership, but the application was not formally withdrawn and there have been subsequent calls for a referendum on the issue.\nMilitary.\nIceland has no standing army but has the Icelandic Coast Guard, which also maintains the Iceland Air Defence System and an Iceland Crisis Response Unit to support peacekeeping missions and perform paramilitary functions.\nThe Iceland Defense Force (IDF) was a military command of the United States Armed Forces from 1951 to 2006. The IDF, created at the request of NATO, came into existence when the United States signed an agreement to provide for the defense of Iceland. The IDF also consisted of civilian Icelanders and military members of other NATO nations. The IDF was downsized after the end of the Cold War, and the United States Air Force maintained four to six interceptor aircraft at the Naval Air Station Keflavik until they were withdrawn on 30 September 2006. Since May 2008, NATO nations have periodically deployed fighters to patrol Icelandic airspace under the Icelandic Air Policing mission. Iceland supported the 2003 invasion of Iraq despite much domestic controversy, deploying a Coast Guard EOD team to Iraq, which was replaced later by members of the Iceland Crisis Response Unit. Iceland has also participated in the conflict in Afghanistan and the 1999 NATO bombing of Yugoslavia. Despite the ongoing financial crisis the first new patrol ship in decades was launched on 29 April 2009.\nIceland was the neutral host of the historic 1986 Reagan\u2013Gorbachev summit in Reykjav\u00edk, which set the stage for the end of the Cold War. Iceland's principal historical international disputes involved disagreements over exclusive economic zones. Conflict with the United Kingdom led to a series of so-called Cod Wars, which included confrontations between the Icelandic Coast Guard and the Royal Navy regarding British fishermen: in 1952\u20131956 due to the extension of Iceland's fishing zone from , in 1958\u20131961 following a further extension to , in 1972\u20131973 with another extension to , and in 1975\u20131976 after another extension to .\nAccording to the 2024 Global Peace Index, Iceland is the most peaceful country in the world, due to its lack of armed forces, low crime rate, and high level of socio-political stability. Iceland is listed in \"Guinness World Records\" as the \"country ranked most at peace\" and the \"lowest military spending per capita\".\nEconomy.\nIn 2022, Iceland was the eighth-most productive country in the world per capita (US$78,837), and the thirteenth-most productive by GDP at purchasing power parity ($69,833). About 85 percent of the total primary energy supply in Iceland is derived from domestically produced renewable energy sources. Use of abundant hydroelectric and geothermal power has made Iceland the world's largest electricity producer per capita.\nHistorically, Iceland's economy depended heavily on fishing, which still provides ~20% of export earnings and employs 7% of the workforce. The economy is now more dependent on tourism, but important sectors continue to be fish and fish products, aluminium, and ferrosilicon. Iceland's economic dependence on fishing is diminishing, from an export share of 90% in the 1960s to 20% in 2020.\nUntil the 20th century, Iceland was a fairly poor country. Whaling in Iceland was historically significant. It is now one of the most developed countries in the world. Strong economic growth led Iceland to be ranked third in the United Nations' Human Development Index report for 2021/2022. According to the Economist Intelligence Index of 2011, Iceland had the second-highest quality of life in the world. Based on the Gini coefficient, Iceland also has one of the lowest rates of income inequality in the world, and when adjusted for inequality, its HDI ranking is sixth. Iceland's unemployment rate has declined consistently since the crisis, with 4.8% of the labour force being unemployed as of June\u00a02012[ [update]], compared to 6% in 2011 and 8.1% in 2010.\nThe national currency of Iceland is the Icelandic kr\u00f3na (ISK). Iceland is the only country in the world to have a population under two million yet still have a floating exchange rate and an independent monetary policy. A poll released on 5 March 2010 by Capacent Gallup showed that 31% of respondents were in favor of adopting the euro and 69% opposed. Another Capacent Gallup poll conducted in February 2012 discovered that 67.4% of Icelanders would reject EU membership in a referendum.\nIceland's economy has been diversifying into manufacturing and service industries in the last decade, including software production, biotechnology, and finance; industry accounts for around a quarter of economic activity, while services comprise close to 70%. The tourism sector is expanding, especially in ecotourism and whale-watching. On average, Iceland receives around 1.1\u00a0million visitors annually, which is more than three times the native population. 1.7 million people visited Iceland in 2016, 3 times more than the number that came in 2010. Iceland's agriculture industry, accounting for 5.4% of GDP, consists mainly of potatoes, green vegetables (in greenhouses), mutton, and dairy products. The financial center is Borgart\u00fan in Reykjav\u00edk, which hosts a large number of companies and three investment banks. Iceland's stock market, the Iceland Stock Exchange (ISE), was established in 1985. As of 2019[ [update]], Iceland ranks 26th in the World Economic Forum's Global Competitive Index, two places lower than in 2018. According to the Global Innovation Index, Iceland is the 22nd most innovative country in the world in 2024.\nDespite low tax rates, agricultural assistance is the highest among OECD countries and a potential impediment to structural change. Also, health care and education spending have relatively poor returns by OECD measures, though improvements have been made in both areas. The OECD's \"Economic Survey of Iceland 2008\" highlighted Iceland's challenges in currency and macroeconomic policy. There was a currency crisis that started in the spring of 2008, and on 6 October trading in Iceland's banks was suspended as the government battled to save the economy. An assessment by the OECD 2011 determined that Iceland has made progress in many areas, particularly in creating a sustainable fiscal policy and restoring the health of the financial sector; however, challenges remain in making the fishing industry more efficient and sustainable, as well as in improving monetary policy to address inflation. Iceland's public debt has decreased since the economic crisis, and as of 2015[ [update]] is the 31st-highest in the world by proportion of national GDP.\nEconomic contraction.\nIceland was hit especially hard by the Great Recession that began in December 2007 because of the failure of its banking system and a subsequent economic crisis. Before the crash of the country's three largest banks, Glitnir, Landsbanki, and Kaupthing, their combined debt exceeded approximately six times the nation's gross domestic product of \u20ac14\u00a0billion ($19\u00a0billion). In October 2008, the Icelandic parliament passed emergency legislation to minimise the impact of the financial crisis. The Financial Supervisory Authority of Iceland used the permission granted by the emergency legislation to take over the domestic operations of the three largest banks. Icelandic officials, including central bank governor Dav\u00ed\u00f0 Oddsson, stated that the state did not intend to take over any of the banks' foreign debts or assets. Instead, new banks were established to take on the domestic operations of the banks, and the old banks were to be run into bankruptcy.\nOn 28 October 2008, the Icelandic government raised interest rates to 18% (as of August\u00a02019[ [update]], it was 3.5%), a move forced in part by the terms of acquiring a loan from International Monetary Fund (IMF). After the rate hike, trading on the Icelandic kr\u00f3na finally resumed on the open market, with a valuation at around 250 ISK per euro, less than one-third the value of the 1:70 exchange rate during most of 2008, and a significant drop from the 1:150 exchange ratio of the week before. On 20 November 2008, the Nordic countries agreed to lend Iceland $2.5\u00a0billion.\nOn 26 January 2009, the coalition government collapsed due to public dissent over the handling of the financial crisis. A new left-wing government was formed a week later and immediately set about removing Central Bank governor Dav\u00ed\u00f0 Oddsson and his aides from the bank through changes in the law. Dav\u00ed\u00f0 was removed on 26 February 2009 in the wake of protests outside the Central Bank.\nThousands of Icelanders left the country after the collapse, many of them moved to Norway. In 2005, 293 people moved from Iceland to Norway; in 2009, the figure was 1,625. In April 2010, the Icelandic Parliament's Special Investigation Commission published the findings of its investigation, revealing the extent of control fraud in this crisis. By June 2012, Landsbanki managed to repay about half of the Icesave debt. According to Bloomberg in 2014, Iceland was on the trajectory of 2% unemployment as a result of crisis-management decisions made back in 2008, including allowing the banks to fail.\nTransport.\nRoad.\nIceland has a high level of car ownership per capita, with a car for every 1.5 inhabitants; it is the main form of transport. Iceland has of administered roads, of which are paved and are not. The road speed limits are in towns, on gravel country roads and on hard-surfaced roads. A great number of interior roads remain unpaved, mostly little-used rural roads. Many of Iceland's roads can be challenging to navigate during winter, particularly when covered with snow or ice. Using a 4x4 vehicle provides greater flexibility for travel and improves accessibility to remote areas.\nRoute 1, or the Ring Road ( or ), completed in 1974, is the main road that runs around Iceland and connects most inhabited parts of the island. The interior of the island is mostly uninhabitable. The road is paved and is long with one lane in each direction, except between and within larger towns and cities where it has more lanes. On Route 1, there are about 30 single-lane bridges, particularly prevalent in the southeast.\nPublic transport.\nCity buses in Reykjav\u00edk (including the Capital Region) are operated by Str\u00e6t\u00f3 bs. Long-distance public bus services throughout the country are also provided by Str\u00e6t\u00f3 bs. Smaller towns such as Akureyri, Reykjanesb\u00e6r and Selfoss provide local bus services. Public and private bus services are available to and from Keflavik International Airport.\nNo passenger railways have ever operated in Iceland. Previously, temporary freight railways have operated in Iceland.\nAir travel.\nKeflav\u00edk International Airport (KEF) is the largest airport and the main aviation hub for international passenger transport. KEF is in the southwest of the country, from Reykjav\u00edk City Center. Reykjav\u00edk Airport (RKV) is the second-largest airport, located just 1.5\u00a0km from the capital centre. Reykjav\u00edk Airport serves daily regular domestic flights within Iceland, general aviation, private aviation, and medivac traffic.\nAkureyri Airport (AEY) and Egilssta\u00f0ir Airport (EGS) are two other airports with domestic service and limited international service. Akureyri Airport opened an expanded international terminal in 2024. There are a total of 103 registered airports and airfields in Iceland; most of them are unpaved and located in rural areas.\nSea.\nSeveral ferry services provide regular access to various island communities and shorten travel distances. The Smyril Line operates the ship Norr\u00f6na providing an international ferry service from Sey\u00f0isfj\u00f6r\u00f0ur to the Faroe Islands and Denmark. Several companies including Eimskip and Samskip provide maritime transport services to Iceland and Iceland's largest ports are managed by Faxafl\u00f3ahafnir.\nEnergy.\nRenewable sources\u2014geothermal and hydropower\u2014provide effectively all of Iceland's electricity and around 85% of the nation's total primary energy consumption, with most of the remainder consisting of imported oil products used in transportation and in the fishing fleet. Iceland's largest geothermal power plants are Hellishei\u00f0i and Nesjavellir, while K\u00e1rahnj\u00fakar Hydropower Plant is the country's largest hydroelectric power station. When the K\u00e1rahnj\u00fakavirkjun began operating, Iceland became the world's largest electricity producer per capita. In 2023, battery electric vehicles constituted 50.1% of new registrations, and around 18% of the country's vehicle fleet was electrified in 2024. Iceland is one of the few countries that have filling stations dispensing hydrogen fuel for cars powered by fuel cells.\nDespite that, Icelanders emitted 16.9\u00a0tonnes of CO2 per capita in 2016, the highest among EFTA and EU members, mainly resulting from transport and aluminium smelting. Nevertheless, in 2010, Iceland was reported by \"Guinness World Records\" as \"the Greenest Country\", reaching the highest score by the Environmental Sustainability Index, which measures a country's water use, biodiversity and adoption of clean energies, with a score of 93.5/100.\nOn 22 January 2009, Iceland announced its first round of offshore licences for companies wanting to conduct hydrocarbon exploration and production in a region northeast of Iceland, known as the Dreki area. Three exploration licenses were awarded but all were later relinquished.\nIceland's official governmental goal is to cut greenhouse gas emissions by 40% by the year 2030 and reach carbon neutrality by the year 2040. As a result of its commitment to renewable energy, the 2016 Global Green Economy Index ranked Iceland among the top 10 greenest economies in the world.\nEducation and science.\nThe Ministry of Education, Science and Culture is responsible for the policies and methods that schools must use, and they issue the National Curriculum Guidelines. However, playschools, primary schools, and lower secondary schools are funded and administered by the municipalities. The government allows citizens to home educate their children, however, under a very strict set of demands. Students must adhere closely to the government-mandated curriculum, and the parents teaching must acquire a government-approved teaching certificate.\nNursery school, or , is non-compulsory education for children younger than six years and is the first step in the education system. The current legislation concerning playschools was passed in 1994. They are also responsible for ensuring that the curriculum is suitable to make the transition into compulsory education as easy as possible.\nCompulsory education, or , comprises primary and lower secondary education, which is often conducted at the same institution. Education is mandatory by law for children aged from 6 to 16\u00a0years. The school year lasts nine months, beginning between 21 August and 1 September, and ending between 31 May and 10 June. The minimum number of school days was once 170, but after a new teachers' wage contract, it increased to 180. Lessons take place five days a week. All public schools have mandatory education in Christianity, although an exemption may be considered by the Minister of Education.\nUpper secondary education, or , follows lower secondary education. These schools are also known as gymnasia in English. Though not compulsory, everyone who has had a compulsory education has the right to upper secondary education. This stage of education is governed by the Upper Secondary School Act of 1996. All schools in Iceland are mixed-sex schools. The largest seat of higher education is the University of Iceland, which has its main campus in central Reykjav\u00edk. Other schools offering university-level instruction include Reykjav\u00edk University, University of Akureyri, Agricultural University of Iceland, and Bifr\u00f6st University. An OECD assessment found that 64% of Icelanders aged 25\u201364 have earned the equivalent of a high-school degree, which is lower than the OECD average of 73%. Among 25- to 34-year-olds, only 69% have earned the equivalent of a high-school degree, significantly lower than the OECD average of 80%. Nevertheless, Iceland's education system is considered excellent: the Programme for International Student Assessment ranks it as the 16th best performing, above the OECD average. Students were particularly proficient in reading and mathematics.\nAccording to a 2013 Eurostat report by the European Commission, Iceland spends around 3.11% of its GDP on scientific research and development (R&amp;D), over 1 percentage point higher than the EU average of 2.03%, and has set a target of 4% to reach by 2020. Iceland was ranked 24th in the Global Innovation Index in 2025 A 2010 UNESCO report found that out of 72 countries that spend the most on R&amp;D (US$100\u00a0million or more), Iceland ranked ninth by proportion of GDP, tied with Taiwan, Switzerland, and Germany and ahead of France, the United Kingdom and Canada.\nDemographics.\nThe original population of Iceland was of Norse and Gaelic origin which is evident from literary evidence dating from the settlement period as well as from later scientific studies such as blood type and genetic analyses. One such genetic study indicated that the majority of the male settlers were of Nordic origin, while the majority of the women were of Gaelic origin, meaning many settlers of Iceland were Norsemen who brought Gaelic slaves with them.\nIceland has extensive genealogical records dating back to the late 17th century and fragmentary records extending back to the Age of Settlement. The biopharmaceutical company deCODE genetics has funded the creation of a genealogy database that is intended to cover all of Iceland's known inhabitants. It views the database, called , as a valuable tool for conducting research on genetic diseases, given the relative isolation of Iceland's population.\nThe population of the island is believed to have varied from 40,000 to 60,000 in the period ranging from initial settlement until the mid-19th century. During that time, cold winters, ash fall from volcanic eruptions, and bubonic plagues adversely affected the population several times. There were 37 years of famine in Iceland between 1500 and 1804. The first census was carried out in 1703 and revealed that the population was then 50,358. After the destructive volcanic eruptions of the Laki volcano during 1783\u20131784, the population reached a low of about 40,000. Improving living conditions have triggered a rapid increase in population since the mid-19th century, from about 60,000 in 1850 to 320,000 in 2008. Iceland has a relatively young population for a developed country, with one out of five people being 14\u00a0years old or younger. With a fertility rate of 2.1, Iceland is one of only a few European countries with a birth rate sufficient for long-term population growth (see table below).\nIn December 2007, 33,678 people (13.5% of the total population) living in Iceland had been born abroad, including children of Icelandic parents living abroad. Around 19,000 people (6% of the population) held foreign citizenship. Polish people make up the largest minority group by a considerable margin and still form the bulk of the foreign workforce. About 8,000 Poles now live in Iceland, 1,500 of them in Fjar\u00f0abygg\u00f0, where they make up 75% of the workforce who are constructing the Fjar\u00f0ar\u00e1l aluminium plant. Large-scale construction projects in the east of Iceland (see K\u00e1rahnj\u00fakar Hydropower Plant) have also brought in many people whose stay is expected to be temporary. Many Polish immigrants were also considering leaving in 2008 as a result of the Icelandic financial crisis.\nThe southwest corner of Iceland is by far the most densely populated region. It is also the location of the capital Reykjav\u00edk, the northernmost national capital in the world. More than 70 percent of Iceland's population lives in the southwest corner (Greater Reykjav\u00edk and the nearby Southern Peninsula), which covers less than two percent of Iceland's land area. The largest town outside Greater Reykjav\u00edk is Reykjanesb\u00e6r, which is located on the Southern Peninsula, less than from the capital. The largest town outside the southwest corner is Akureyri in northern Iceland. About 500 Icelanders under the leadership of Erik the Red settled Greenland in the late tenth century. The total population reached a high point of perhaps 5,000, and developed independent institutions before disappearing by 1500. People from Greenland attempted to set up a settlement at Vinland in North America, but abandoned it in the face of hostility from the indigenous population.\nEmigration of Icelanders to the United States and Canada began in the 1870s. As of 2021[ [update]], Canada had over 101,000 people of Icelandic descent, while there are more than 40,000 Americans of Icelandic descent, according to the 2000 US census.\nUrbanisation.\nIceland's 10 most populous urban areas:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLanguage.\nIceland's official written and spoken language is Icelandic, a North Germanic language descended from Old Norse. In grammar and vocabulary, it has changed less from Old Norse than the other Nordic languages; Icelandic has preserved more verb and noun inflection, and has to a considerable extent developed new vocabulary based on native roots rather than borrowings from other languages. The puristic tendency in the development of Icelandic vocabulary is, to a large degree, a result of conscious language planning, in addition to centuries of isolation. Icelandic is the only living language to retain the use of the runic letter \u00de in Latin script. The closest living relative of the Icelandic language is Faroese.\nIcelandic Sign Language was officially recognized as a minority language in 2011. In education, its use for Iceland's deaf community is regulated by the \"National Curriculum Guide\".\nEnglish and Danish are compulsory subjects in the school curriculum. English is widely understood and spoken, while basic to moderate knowledge of Danish is common mainly among the older generations. Polish is mostly spoken by the local Polish community (the largest minority of Iceland), and Danish is mostly spoken in a way largely comprehensible to Swedes and Norwegians\u2014it is often referred to as (i.e. \"Scandinavian\") in Iceland. Iceland was a territory ruled by Denmark\u2013Norway, one of whose official languages was Danish; its official status was terminated in 1944.\nRather than using family names, as is the custom in most Western nations, most Icelanders carry patronymic or matronymic surnames, the usage of patronyms being far more practiced. Patronymic last names are based on the first name of the father, while matronymic names are based on the first name of the mother. They follow the person's given name, e.g. (\"El\u00edsabet, J\u00f3n's daughter\" (J\u00f3n being the father)) or (\"\u00d3lafur, Katr\u00edn's son\" (Katr\u00edn being the mother)). Consequently, Icelanders refer to one another by their given name, and the Icelandic telephone directory lists people alphabetically by the first name rather than by surname. All new names must be approved by the Icelandic Naming Committee.\nHealth.\nIceland has a universal health care system that is administered by its Ministry of Welfare () and paid for mostly by taxes (85%) and to a lesser extent by service fees (15%). Unlike most countries, there are no private hospitals, and private insurance is practically nonexistent.\nA considerable portion of the government budget is assigned to health care, and Iceland ranks 11th in health care expenditures as a percentage of GDP and 14th in spending per capita. Overall, the country's health care system is one of the best-performing in the world, ranked 15th by the World Health Organization. According to an OECD report, Iceland devotes far more resources to healthcare than most industrialized nations. As of 2009[ [update]], Iceland had 3.7 doctors per 1,000 people (compared with an average of 3.1 in OECD countries) and 15.3 nurses per 1,000 people (compared with an OECD average of 8.4).\nIcelanders are among the world's healthiest people, with 77% reporting they are in good health, more than the OECD average of 68%. Although it is a growing problem, obesity is not as prevalent as in other developed countries. Iceland has many campaigns for health and wellbeing, including the famous television show \"Lazytown\", starring and created by former gymnastics champion Magnus Scheving. Infant mortality is one of the lowest in the world, and the proportion of the population that smokes is lower than the OECD average. Almost all women choose to terminate pregnancies of children with Down syndrome in Iceland. The average life expectancy is 81.8 (compared to an OECD average of 79.5), the fourth-highest in the world.\nIceland has a very low level of pollution, thanks to an overwhelming reliance on cleaner geothermal energy, a low population density, and a high level of environmental consciousness among citizens. According to an OECD assessment, the amount of toxic materials in the atmosphere is far lower than in any other industrialised country measured. In 2023, the suicide rate in Iceland was 12.4 cases per 100,000. Over the last five years, from 2019\u20132023, there were an average of 41 suicides per year or 11.3 per 100,000 inhabitants. In 2022, the country's consumption of antidepressants was the highest in Europe.\nReligion.\nIcelanders have freedom of religion guaranteed under the Constitution, although the Church of Iceland, a Lutheran body, is the state church:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Evangelical Lutheran Church shall be the State Church in Iceland and, as such, it shall be supported and protected by the State.\u2014\u200a\nApproximately 80 percent of Icelanders legally affiliate with a religious denomination, a process that happens automatically at birth and from which they can choose to opt out. They also pay a church tax (s\u00f3knargjald), which the government directs to help support their registered religion, or, in the case of no religion, the University of Iceland.\nThe Registers Iceland keeps account of the religious affiliation of every Icelandic citizen. In 2017, Icelanders were divided into religious groups as follows:\nOn March 8, 2021, Iceland formally recognized Judaism as a religion for the first time. Iceland's Jews will have the choice to register as such and direct their taxes to their own religion. Among other benefits, the recognition will also allow Jewish marriage, baby-naming, and funeral ceremonies to be civilly recognized.\nIceland is a very secular country; as with other Nordic nations, church attendance is relatively low. The above statistics represent administrative membership of religious organisations, which does not necessarily reflect the belief demographics of the population. According to a study published in 2001, 23% of the inhabitants were either atheist or agnostic. A Gallup poll conducted in 2012 found that 57% of Icelanders considered themselves \"religious\", 31% considered themselves \"non-religious\", while 10% defined themselves as \"convinced atheists\", placing Iceland among the ten countries with the highest proportion of atheists in the world.\nCulture.\nIcelandic culture has its roots in North Germanic traditions. Icelandic literature is popular, in particular the sagas and eddas that were written during the High and Late Middle Ages. Centuries of isolation have helped to insulate the country's Nordic culture from external influence; a prominent example is the preservation of the Icelandic language, which remains the closest to Old Norse of all modern Nordic languages. The country has a strong tradition of upholding human rights such as freedom of expression, freedom of religion and freedom of assembly with legislation for marginalized groups, such as women, immigrants, and the LGBTQ+ community.\nIn contrast to other Nordic countries, Icelanders place relatively great importance on independence and self-sufficiency; in a public opinion analysis conducted by the European Commission, over 85% of Icelanders believe independence is \"very important\", compared to 47% of Norwegians, 49% of Danes, and an average of 53% for the EU25. Icelanders also have a very strong work ethic, working some of the longest hours of any industrialised nation.\nAccording to a poll conducted by the OECD, 66% of Icelanders were satisfied with their lives, while 70% believed that their lives would be satisfying in the future. Similarly, 83% reported having more positive experiences in an average day than negative ones, compared to an OECD average of 72%, which makes Iceland one of the happiest countries in the OECD. A more recent 2012 survey found that around three-quarters of respondents stated they were satisfied with their lives, compared to a global average of about 53%. In 2022, 2023, and 2024 consecutively, Iceland ranked third in the World Happiness Report.\nIcelanders are known for their strong sense of community and lack of social isolation: An OECD survey found that 98% believe they know someone they could rely on in a time of need, higher than in any other industrialized country. Similarly, only 6% reported \"rarely\" or \"never\" socialising with others. This high level of social cohesion is attributed to the small size and homogeneity of the population, as well as to a long history of harsh survival in an isolated environment, which reinforced the importance of unity and cooperation. Egalitarianism is highly valued among the people of Iceland, with income inequality being among the lowest in the world. The constitution explicitly prohibits the enactment of noble privileges, titles, and ranks. Everyone is addressed by their first name. As in other Nordic countries, equality between the sexes is very high; Iceland is consistently ranked among the top three countries in the world for women to live in.\nLiterature.\nIn 2011, Reykjav\u00edk was designated a UNESCO City of Literature.\nIceland's best-known classical works of literature are the Icelanders' sagas, prose epics set in Iceland's age of settlement. The most famous include \"Nj\u00e1ls saga\", about an epic blood feud, and \"Gr\u00e6nlendinga saga\" and \"Eir\u00edks saga\", describing the discovery and settlement of Greenland and Vinland (modern Newfoundland). \"Egils saga\", \"Laxd\u00e6la saga\", \"Grettis saga\", \"G\u00edsla saga\" and \"Gunnlaugs saga ormstungu\" are notable and popular Icelanders' sagas.\nA translation of the Bible was published in the 16th century. Important compositions from the 15th to the 19th century include sacred verse, most famously the Passion Hymns of Hallgr\u00edmur P\u00e9tursson, and \"r\u00edmur\", rhyming epic poems. Originating in the 14th century, \"r\u00edmur\" were popular into the 19th century, when the development of new literary forms was provoked by the influential National-Romantic writer J\u00f3nas Hallgr\u00edmsson. Since then, Iceland has produced many great writers, the best-known of whom is arguably Halld\u00f3r Laxness, who received the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1955 (the only Icelander to win a Nobel Prize thus far). Steinn Steinarr was an influential modernist poet during the early 20th century who remains popular.\nIcelanders are avid consumers of literature, with the highest number of bookstores per capita in the world. For its size, Iceland imports and translates more international literature than any other nation. Iceland also has the highest per capita publication of books and magazines, and around 10% of the population will publish a book in their lifetimes.\nMost books in Iceland are sold between late September to early November, a period known as the Christmas Book Flood (\")\". The Flood begins with the Iceland Publisher's Association distributing \"B\u00f3kat\u00ed\u00f0indi\", a catalogue of all new publications, free to each Icelandic home.\nArt.\nThe distinctive rendition of the Icelandic landscape by its painters can be linked to nationalism and the movement for home rule and independence, which was very active in the mid-19th century.\nContemporary Icelandic painting is typically traced to the work of \u00de\u00f3rarinn \u00deorl\u00e1ksson, who, following formal training in art in the 1890s in Copenhagen, returned to Iceland to paint and exhibit works from 1900 to his death in 1924, almost exclusively portraying the Icelandic landscape. Several other Icelandic men and women artists studied at Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts at that time, including \u00c1sgr\u00edmur J\u00f3nsson, who with \u00de\u00f3rarinn created a distinctive portrayal of Iceland's landscape in a romantic naturalistic style. Other landscape artists quickly followed in the footsteps of \u00de\u00f3rarinn and \u00c1sgr\u00edmur. These included J\u00f3hannes Kjarval and J\u00fal\u00edana Sveinsd\u00f3ttir. Kjarval, in particular, is noted for the distinct techniques in the application of paint that he developed in a concerted effort to render the characteristic volcanic rock that dominates the Icelandic environment. Einar H\u00e1konarson is an expressionistic and figurative painter who, by some, is considered to have brought the figure back into Icelandic painting. In the 1980s, many Icelandic artists worked with the subject of the new painting in their work.\nIn recent years, the artistic practice has multiplied, and the Icelandic art scene has become a setting for many large-scale projects and exhibitions. The artist-run gallery space Kling og Bang, members of which later ran the studio complex and exhibition venue Klink og Bank, has been a significant part of the trend of self-organized spaces, exhibitions, and projects. The Living Art Museum, Reykjav\u00edk Municipal Art Museum, Reykjav\u00edk Art Museum, and the National Gallery of Iceland are the larger, more established institutions, curating shows and festivals.\nMusic.\nMuch Icelandic music is related to Nordic music, and includes folk and pop traditions. Notable Icelandic music acts include medieval music group Voces Thules, alternative and indie rock acts such as The Sugarcubes, S\u00f3ley and Of Monsters and Men, jazz fusion band Mezzoforte, pop singers such as Hafd\u00eds Huld, Emil\u00edana Torrini and Bj\u00f6rk, solo ballad singers like Bubbi Morthens, and post-rock bands such as Amiina and Sigur R\u00f3s. Independent music is strong in Iceland, with bands like m\u00fam and solo artists such as Da\u00f0i Freyr.\nTraditional Icelandic music is strongly religious. Hymns, both religious and secular, are a particularly well-developed form of music, due to the scarcity of musical instruments throughout much of Iceland's history. Hallgr\u00edmur P\u00e9tursson wrote many Protestant hymns in the 17th century. Icelandic music was modernised in the 19th century when Magn\u00fas Stephensen brought pipe organs, which were followed by harmoniums. Other vital traditions of Icelandic music are epic, alliterative, and rhyming ballads called \"r\u00edmur\". \"R\u00edmur\" are epic tales, usually a cappella, which can be traced back to skaldic poetry, using complex metaphors and elaborate rhyme schemes. The best-known r\u00edmur poet of the 19th century was Sigur\u00f0ur Brei\u00f0fj\u00f6r\u00f0 (1798\u20131846). A modern revitalisation of the tradition began in 1929 with the formation of Kv\u00e6\u00f0amannaf\u00e9lagi\u00f0 I\u00f0unn.\nAmong Iceland's best-known classical composers are Dan\u00edel Bjarnason and Anna S. \u00deorvaldsd\u00f3ttir, who in 2012 received the Nordic Council Music Prize and in 2015 was chosen as the New York Philharmonic's Kravis Emerging Composer, an honor which includes a $50,000 cash prize and a commission to write a composition for the orchestra; she is the second recipient.\nThe national anthem of Iceland is \"Lofs\u00f6ngur\", written by Matth\u00edas Jochumsson, with music by Sveinbj\u00f6rn Sveinbj\u00f6rnsson.\nMedia.\nIceland's largest television stations are the state-run Sj\u00f3nvarpi\u00f0 and the privately owned St\u00f6\u00f0 2 and Skj\u00e1rEinn. Smaller stations exist, many of them local. Radio is broadcast throughout the country including in some parts of the interior. The main radio stations are R\u00e1s 1, R\u00e1s 2, X-i\u00f0 977, Bylgjan and FM957. The daily newspapers are \"Morgunbla\u00f0i\u00f0\" and \"Fr\u00e9ttabla\u00f0i\u00f0\". The most popular websites are the news sites V\u00edsir and Mbl.is.\nIceland is home to \"LazyTown\" (Icelandic: \"Latib\u00e6r\"), a children's educational musical comedy programme created by Magn\u00fas Scheving. It has become a very popular programme for children and adults and is shown in over 100 countries, including the Americas, the UK and Sweden. The \"LazyTown\" studios are located in Gar\u00f0ab\u00e6r. The 2015 television crime series \"Trapped\" aired in the UK on BBC4 in February and March 2016, to critical acclaim and according to \"The Guardian\" \"the unlikeliest TV hit of the year\".\nIn 1992, the Icelandic film industry achieved its greatest recognition hitherto, when Fri\u00f0rik \u00de\u00f3r Fri\u00f0riksson was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film for his \"Children of Nature\". It features the story of an old man who is unable to continue running his farm. After being unwelcome in his daughter's and father-in-law's house in town, he is put in a home for the elderly. There, he meets an old girlfriend from his youth, and they both begin a journey through the wilds of Iceland to die together. This is the only Icelandic movie to have ever been nominated for an Academy Award.\nSinger-songwriter Bj\u00f6rk received international acclaim for her starring role in the Danish musical drama \"Dancer in the Dark\", directed by Lars von Trier, in which she plays Selma Je\u017ekov\u00e1, a factory worker who struggles to pay for her son's eye operation. The film premiered at the 2000 Cannes Film Festival, where she won the Best Actress Award. The movie also led Bj\u00f6rk to nominations for Best Original Song at the 73rd Academy Awards, with the song \"I've Seen It All\" and for a Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture - Drama. Gu\u00f0r\u00fan S. G\u00edslad\u00f3ttir, who is Icelandic, played one of the major roles in Russian filmmaker Andrei Tarkovsky's film \"The Sacrifice\" (1986). Anita Briem, known for her performance in Showtime's \"The Tudors\", is also Icelandic. Briem starred in the film \"Journey to the Center of the Earth\" (2008), which shot in Iceland. The James Bond movie \"Die Another Day\" (2002) is set for a large part in Iceland. Christopher Nolan's film \"Interstellar\" (2014) was also filmed in Iceland for some of its scenes, as was Ridley Scott's \"Prometheus\" (2012).\nOn 17 June 2010, the parliament passed the Icelandic Modern Media Initiative, proposing greater protection of free speech rights and the identity of journalists and whistle-blowers\u2014the strongest journalist protection law in the world. According to a 2024 report by Freedom House, Iceland is one of the highest-ranked countries in press freedom.\nCCP Games, developers of the critically acclaimed \"EVE Online\" and \"Dust 514\", are headquartered in Reykjav\u00edk. CCP Games hosts the third-most populated MMO in the world, which also has the largest total game area for an online game, according to \"Guinness World Records\".\nIceland has a highly developed internet culture, with around 99.8% of the population having internet access, the highest proportion in the world. Iceland ranked 16th in the World Economic Forum's 2016 Network Readiness Index, which measures a country's ability to competitively exploit communications technology. The United Nations International Telecommunication Union ranked the country first in its development of information and communications technology in 2017, having moved up one place from 2016. In February 2013 the country (ministry of the interior) was researching possible methods to protect children in regards to Internet pornography, claiming that pornography online is a threat to children as it supports child slavery and abuse. Strong voices within the community expressed concerns with this, stating that it is impossible to block access to pornography without compromising freedom of speech.\nCuisine.\nMuch of Iceland's cuisine is based on fish, lamb, and dairy products, with little to no use of herbs or spices. Due to the island's climate, fruits and vegetables are not generally a component of traditional dishes, although the use of greenhouses has made them more common in contemporary food. \u00deorramatur is a selection of traditional cuisine consisting of many dishes and is usually consumed around the month of \u00deorri, which begins on the first Friday after 19 January. Traditional dishes also include skyr (a yogurt-like cheese), h\u00e1karl (cured shark), cured ram, singed sheep heads, and black pudding, Flatkaka (flatbread), dried fish, and dark rye bread traditionally baked in the ground in geothermal areas. Puffin is considered a local delicacy which is often prepared through broiling.\nBreakfast usually consists of pancakes, cereal, fruit, and coffee, while lunch may take the form of a sm\u00f6rg\u00e5sbord. The main meal of the day for most Icelanders is dinner, which usually involves fish or lamb as the main course. Seafood is central to most Icelandic cooking, particularly cod and haddock but also salmon, herring, and halibut. It is often prepared in a wide variety of ways, either smoked, pickled, boiled, or dried. Lamb is by far the most common meat, and it tends to be either smoke-cured (known as \"hangikj\u00f6t\") or salt-preserved (\"saltkj\u00f6t\"). Many older dishes make use of every part of the sheep, such as \"sl\u00e1tur\", which consists of offal (internal organs and entrails) minced together with blood and served in the sheep's stomach. Additionally, boiled or mashed potatoes, pickled cabbage, green beans, and rye bread are prevalent side dishes.\nCoffee is a popular beverage in Iceland, with the country being third placed by per capita consumption worldwide in 2016, and is drunk at breakfast, after meals, and with a light snack in mid-afternoon. Coca-Cola is also widely consumed, to the extent that the country is said to have one of the highest per capita consumption rates in the world.\nIceland's signature alcoholic beverage is \"brenniv\u00edn\" (literally \"burnt [i.e., distilled] wine\"), which is similar in flavouring to the akvavit variant of Scandinavian br\u00e4nnvin. It is a type of schnapps made from distilled potatoes and flavoured with either caraway seeds or angelica. Its potency has earned it the nickname \"svarti dau\u00f0i\" (\"Black Death\"). Modern distilleries on Iceland produce vodka (Reyka), gin (\u00cdsafold), moss schnapps (Fjallagrasa), and a birch-flavored schnapps and liqueur (Foss Distillery's Birkir and Bj\u00f6rk). Martin Miller blends Icelandic water with its England-distilled gin on the island. Strong beer was banned until 1989, so \"bj\u00f3rl\u00edki\", a mixture of legal, low-alcohol pilsner beer and vodka, became popular. Several strong beers are now made by Icelandic breweries.\nSport.\nSport is an important part of Icelandic culture, as the population is generally quite active. The main traditional sport in Iceland is \"Gl\u00edma\", a form of wrestling thought to have originated in medieval times.\nPopular sports include football, track and field, handball, and basketball. Handball is often referred to as the national sport. The Icelandic national football team qualified for the 2016 UEFA European football championship for the first time. They recorded a draw against later winners Portugal in the group stage, and defeated England 2\u20131 in the round of 16, with goals from Ragnar Sigur\u00f0sson and Kolbeinn Sig\u00fe\u00f3rsson. They then lost to hosts and later finalists France in the quarter-finals. Afterwards, Iceland made its debut at the 2018 FIFA World Cup. For both the European and the world championships, Iceland was the smallest nation in terms of population to qualify at the time.\nIceland is also the smallest country to ever qualify for Eurobasket, having done so in both 2015 and 2017. However, they have not managed to win a single game in the European Basketball final stages.\nIceland has excellent conditions for skiing, fishing, snowboarding, ice climbing and rock climbing, although mountain climbing and hiking are preferred by the general public. Iceland is also a world-class destination for alpine ski touring and Telemark skiing, with the Troll Peninsula in Northern Iceland being the main centre of activity. Although the country's environment is generally ill-suited for golf, nevertheless there are many golf courses throughout the island and Iceland has a greater percentage of the population playing golf than Scotland, with over 17,000 registered golfers out of a population of approximately 300,000. Iceland hosts an annual international golf tournament known as the Arctic Open played through the night during the summer solstice at Akureyri Golf Club. Iceland has won the second most World's Strongest Man competitions of any country with nine titles, including four each by Magn\u00fas Ver Magn\u00fasson and J\u00f3n P\u00e1ll Sigmarsson, and most recently by Haf\u00fe\u00f3r J\u00fal\u00edus Bj\u00f6rnsson in 2018.\nIceland is also one of the leading countries in ocean rowing. Icelandic explorer and endurance athlete Fiann Paul holds the highest number of performance-based \"Guinness World Records\" within a single athletic discipline. As of 2020, he is the first and only person to achieve the Ocean Explorers Grand Slam (performing open-water crossings on each of the five oceans using human-powered vessels) and has claimed overall speed \"Guinness World Records\" for the fastest rowing of all four oceans (Atlantic, Indian, Pacific, and the Arctic) in a human-powered row boat. He had achieved 41 records, including 33 performance based \"Guinness World Records\" by 2020.\nSwimming is popular in Iceland. Geothermally heated outdoor pools are widespread, and swimming courses are a mandatory part of the national curriculum. Horseback riding, which was historically the most prevalent form of transportation on the island, remains a common pursuit for many Icelanders. The oldest sports association in Iceland is the Reykjav\u00edk Shooting Association, founded in 1867. Rifle shooting became very popular in the 19th century with the encouragement of politicians and nationalists who pushed for Icelandic independence. Even now, it remains a significant pastime.\nIceland has produced many chess masters and hosted the historic World Chess Championship 1972 in Reykjav\u00edk during the height of the Cold War. As of 2008[ [update]], there have been nine Icelandic chess grandmasters, a considerable number related to the small size of the population of the country. Bridge is also popular, with Iceland participating in several international tournaments. Iceland won the world bridge championship (the Bermuda Bowl) in Yokohama, Japan in 1991 and came in second place (with Sweden) in Hamilton, Bermuda, in 1950.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt; \nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14532", "revid": "19907598", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14532", "title": "Italy", "text": "Country in Southern and Western Europe\nItaly, officially the Italian Republic, is a country in Southern and Western Europe. It consists of a peninsula that extends into the Mediterranean Sea, with the Alps on its northern land border, as well as nearly 800 islands, notably Sicily and Sardinia. Italy shares land borders with France to the west; Switzerland and Austria to the north; Slovenia to the east; and the two enclaves of Vatican City and San Marino. It is the tenth-largest country in Europe by area, covering , and the third-most populous member state of the European Union, with nearly 59 million inhabitants. Italy's capital and largest city is Rome; other major cities include Milan, Naples, Turin, Palermo, Bologna, Florence, Genoa, and Venice.\nThe history of Italy goes back to numerous Italic peoples \u2013 notably including the ancient Romans, who conquered the Mediterranean world during the Roman Republic and ruled it for centuries during the Roman Empire. With the spread of Christianity, Rome became the seat of the Catholic Church and the Papacy. Barbarian invasions and other factors led to the decline and fall of the Western Roman Empire between late antiquity and the Early Middle Ages. By the 11th century, Italian city-states and maritime republics expanded, bringing renewed prosperity through commerce and laying the groundwork for modern capitalism. The Italian Renaissance flourished during the 15th and 16th centuries and spread to the rest of Europe. Italian explorers discovered new routes to the Far East and the New World, contributing significantly to the Age of Discovery.\nAfter centuries of political and territorial divisions, the Kingdom of Italy was established in 1861, following wars of independence and the Expedition of the Thousand. From the late 19th to the early 20th century, Italy industrialised and acquired a colonial empire, while the south remained largely impoverished, fuelling a large immigrant diaspora to the Americas. From 1915 to 1918, Italy took part in World War I with the Entente against the Central Powers. In 1922, the Italian fascist dictatorship was established. During World War II, Italy was first part of the Axis until an armistice with the Allied powers (1940\u20131943), then a co-belligerent of the Allies during the Italian resistance and liberation of Italy from German occupation and the collaborationist RSI (1943-1945). In 1946, the monarchy was replaced by a republic and the country made a strong recovery.\nA developed country with an advanced economy, Italy has the eighth-largest nominal GDP in the world, the second-largest manufacturing sector in Europe, and plays a significant role in regional and \u2013 to a lesser extent \u2013 global economic, military, cultural, and political affairs. It is a founding and leading member of the European Union, and is part of numerous other international organisations and forums. As a cultural superpower, Italy has long been a renowned global centre of art, music, literature, cuisine, fashion, science and technology, and the source of multiple inventions and discoveries. It has the highest number of World Heritage Sites (61) and is the fifth-most visited country in the world.\nName.\nHypotheses for the etymology of \"Italia\" are numerous. One theory suggests it originated from an Ancient Greek term for the land of the \"Ital\u00f3i\", a tribe that resided in the region now known as Calabria. Originally thought to be named \"Vituli\", some scholars suggest their totemic animal to be the calf (Latin: \"vitulus\"; Umbrian: \"vitlo\"; Oscan: \"V\u00edteli\u00fa\"). Several ancient authors said it was named after a local ruler Italus.\nThe ancient Greek term for Italy initially referred only to the south of the Bruttium peninsula and parts of Catanzaro and Vibo Valentia. The larger concept of Oenotria and \"Italy\" became synonymous, and the name applied to most of Lucania as well. Before the Roman Republic's expansion, the name was used by Greeks for the land between the strait of Messina and the line connecting the gulfs of Salerno and Taranto, corresponding to Calabria. The Greeks came to apply \"Italia\" to a larger region. In addition to the \"Greek Italy\" in the south, historians have suggested the existence of an \"Etruscan Italy\", which consisted of areas of central Italy.\nThe borders of Roman Italy, \"Italia\", are better established. Cato's \"Origines\" describes Italy as the entire peninsula south of the Alps. In 264 BC, Roman Italy extended from the Arno and Rubicon rivers of the centre-north to the entire south. The northern area, Cisalpine Gaul, considered geographically part of Italy, was occupied by Rome in the 220s BC, but remained politically separated. It was legally merged into the administrative unit of Italy in 42 BC. Sardinia, Corsica, Sicily, and Malta were added to Italy by Diocletian in 292 AD, which made late-ancient Italy coterminous with the modern Italian geographical region.\nThe Latin \"Italicus\" was used to describe \"a man of Italy\" as opposed to a \"provincial\", or one from the Roman province. The adjective \"italianus\", from which \"Italian\" was derived, is from medieval Latin and was used alternatively with \"Italicus\" during the early modern period. After the fall of the Western Roman Empire, the Ostrogothic Kingdom of Italy was created. After the Lombard invasions, \"Italia\" was retained as the name for their kingdom, and its successor kingdom within the Holy Roman Empire.\nHistory.\nPrehistory and antiquity.\nLower Paleolithic artefacts, dating back 850,000 years, have been recovered from Monte Poggiolo. Excavations throughout Italy revealed a Neanderthal presence in the Middle Palaeolithic period 200,000 years ago, while modern humans appeared about 40,000 years ago at Riparo Mochi.\nThe ancient peoples of pre-Roman Italy were Indo-European, specifically the Italic peoples. The main historic peoples of possible non-Indo-European or pre-Indo-European heritage include the Etruscans, the Elymians and Sicani of Sicily, and the prehistoric Sardinians, who gave birth to the Nuragic civilisation. Other ancient populations include the Rhaetian people and Camunni, known for their rock drawings in Valcamonica. A natural mummy, \u00d6tzi, dated 3400\u20133100 BC, was discovered in the Similaun glacier in 1991.\nThe first colonisers were the Phoenicians, who established emporiums on the coasts of Sicily and Sardinia. Some became small urban centres and developed parallel to Greek colonies. During the 8th and 7th centuries, Greek colonies were established at Pithecusae, eventually extending along the south of the Italian Peninsula and the coast of Sicily, an area later known as Magna Graecia. Ionians, Doric colonists, Syracusans, and the Achaeans founded various cities. Greek colonisation placed the Italic peoples in contact with democratic forms of government and high artistic and cultural expressions.\nAncient Rome.\nItaly's history goes back to numerous Italic peoples \u2013 notably including the ancient Romans, who conquered the Mediterranean world during the Roman Republic and ruled it for centuries during the Roman Empire.\nAncient Rome, a settlement on the River Tiber in central Italy, founded in 753 BC, was ruled for 244 years by a monarchical system. In 509 BC, the Romans, favouring a government of the Senate and the People (SPQR), expelled the monarchy and established an oligarchic republic.\nThe Italian Peninsula, named \"Italia\", was consolidated into a unified entity during Roman expansion, the conquest of new territories often at the expense of the other Italic tribes, Etruscans, Celts, and Greeks. A permanent association, with most of the local tribes and cities, was formed, and Rome began the conquest of Western Europe, North Africa, and the Middle East. In the wake of Julius Caesar's assassination in 44 BC, Rome grew into a massive empire stretching from Britain to the borders of Persia, engulfing the whole Mediterranean basin, in which Greek, Roman, and other cultures merged into a powerful civilisation. The long reign of the first emperor, Augustus, began an age of peace and prosperity. Roman Italy remained the metropole of the empire, homeland of the Romans and territory of the capital. \nThe first two centuries of the empire saw a period of unprecedented stability known as the Pax Romana (lit.\u2009'Roman Peace'). Rome reached its greatest territorial extent under Trajan (r.\u200998\u00a0\u2013\u00a0117\u00a0AD), but a period of increasing trouble and decline began under Commodus (r.\u2009180\u00a0\u2013\u00a0192). The Migration Period, involving large invasions by Germanic peoples, led to the decline of the Roman Empire.\nThe Roman Empire was among the largest in history, wielding great economical, cultural, political, and military power. At its greatest extent, it had an area of . The Roman legacy has deeply influenced Western civilisation shaping the modern world. The widespread use of Romance languages derived from Latin, numerical system, modern Western alphabet and calendar, and the emergence of Christianity as a world religion, are among the many legacies of Roman dominance.\nMiddle Ages.\nAfter the fall of the Western Roman Empire, Italy fell under the Odoacer's kingdom, and was seized by the Ostrogoths. Invasions resulted in a chaotic succession of kingdoms and the supposed \"Dark Ages\". The invasion of another Germanic tribe in the 6th century, the Lombards, reduced Byzantine presence and ended political unity of the peninsula. The north formed the Lombard kingdom, central-south was also controlled by the Lombards, and other parts remained Byzantine.\nThe Lombard kingdom was absorbed into Francia by Charlemagne in the late 8th century and became the Kingdom of Italy. The Franks helped form the Papal States. Until the 13th century, politics was dominated by relations between the Holy Roman Emperors and the Papacy, with city-states siding with the former (Ghibellines) or with the latter (Guelphs) for momentary advantage. The Germanic emperor and Roman pontiff became the universal powers of medieval Europe. However, conflict over the Investiture Controversy and between Guelphs and Ghibellines ended the imperial-feudal system in the north, where cities gained independence. In 1176, the Lombard League of city-states defeated Holy Roman Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, ensuring their independence.\nCity-states \u2013 e.g. Milan, Florence, Venice \u2013 played a crucially innovative role in financial development by devising banking practices, and enabling new forms of social organisation. In coastal and southern areas, maritime republics dominated the Mediterranean and monopolised trade to the Orient. They were independent thalassocratic city-states, in which merchants had considerable power. Although oligarchical, the relative political freedom they afforded was conducive to academic and artistic advancement. The best-known maritime republics were Venice, Genoa, Pisa, and Amalfi. Each had dominion over overseas lands, islands, lands on the Adriatic, Aegean, and Black seas, and commercial colonies in the Near East and North Africa.\nVenice and Genoa were Europe's gateways to the East, and producers of fine glass, while Florence was a centre of silk, wool, banking, and jewellery. The wealth generated meant large public and private artistic projects could be commissioned. The republics participated in the Crusades, providing support, transport, but mostly taking political and trading opportunities. Italy first felt the economic changes which led to the commercial revolution: Venice was able to sack Byzantine's capital and finance Marco Polo's voyages to Asia; the first universities were formed in Italian cities, and scholars such as Aquinas obtained international fame; capitalism and banking families emerged in Florence, where Dante and Giotto were active around 1300. In the south, Sicily had become an Arab Islamic emirate in the 9th century, thriving until the Italo-Normans conquered it in the late 11th century, together with most of the Lombard and Byzantine principalities of southern Italy. The region was subsequently divided between the Kingdom of Sicily and Kingdom of Naples. The Black Death of 1348 killed perhaps a third of Italy's population.\nEarly modern period.\nDuring the 1400s and 1500s, Italy was the birthplace and heart of the Renaissance. This era marked the transition from the medieval period to the modern age and was fostered by the wealth accumulated by merchant cities and the patronage of dominant families. Italian polities were now regional states effectively ruled by princes, in control of trade and administration, and their courts became centres of the arts and sciences. These princedoms were led by political dynasties and merchant families, such as the Medici of Florence. After the end of the Western Schism, newly elected Pope Martin V returned to the Papal States and restored Italy as the sole centre of Western Christianity. The Medici Bank was made the credit institution of the Papacy, and significant ties were established between the Church and new political dynasties.\nIn 1453, despite activity by Pope Nicholas V to support the Byzantines, the city of Constantinople fell to the Ottomans. This led to the migration of Greek scholars and texts to Italy, fuelling the rediscovery of Greek humanism. Humanist rulers such as Federico da Montefeltro and Pope Pius II worked to establish ideal cities, founding Urbino and Pienza. Pico della Mirandola wrote the \"Oration on the Dignity of Man\", considered the manifesto of the Renaissance. In the arts, the Italian Renaissance exercised a dominant influence on European art for centuries, with artists such as Leonardo da Vinci, Botticelli, Michelangelo, Raphael, Giotto, Donatello, and Titian, and architects such as Filippo Brunelleschi, Andrea Palladio, and Donato Bramante. Italian explorers and navigators from the maritime republics, eager to find an alternative route to the Indies to bypass the Ottomans, offered their services to monarchs of Atlantic countries and played a key role in ushering the Age of Discovery and colonisation of the Americas. The most notable were: Christopher Columbus, who opened the Americas for conquest by Europeans; John Cabot, the first European to explore North America since the Norse; and Amerigo Vespucci, for whom the continent of America is named.\nA defensive alliance known as the Italic League was formed between Venice, Naples, Florence, Milan, and the Papacy. Lorenzo \"the Magnificent\" de Medici was the Renaissance's greatest patron, his support allowed the League to abort invasion by the Turks. The alliance, however, collapsed in the 1490s; the invasion of Charles VIII of France initiated a series of wars in the peninsula. During the High Renaissance, popes such as Julius II (1503\u20131513) fought for control of Italy against foreign monarchs; Paul III (1534\u20131549) preferred to mediate between the European powers to secure peace. In the middle of such conflicts, the Medici popes Leo X (1513\u20131521) and Clement VII (1523\u20131534) faced the Protestant Reformation in Germany, England and elsewhere.\nIn 1559, at the end of the Italian wars between France and the Habsburgs, about half of Italy (the southern Kingdoms of Naples, Sicily, Sardinia, and the Duchy of Milan) was under Spanish rule, while the other half remained independent (many states continued to be formally part of the Holy Roman Empire). The Papacy launched the Counter-Reformation, whose key events include: the Council of Trent (1545\u20131563); adoption of the Gregorian calendar; the Jesuit China mission; the French Wars of Religion; end of the Thirty Years' War (1618\u20131648); and the Great Turkish War. The Italian economy declined in the 1600s and 1700s.\nDuring the War of the Spanish Succession (1700\u20131714), Austria acquired most of the Spanish domains in Italy, namely Milan, Naples and Sardinia; the latter was given to the House of Savoy in exchange for Sicily in 1720. Later, a branch of the Bourbons ascended to the throne of Sicily and Naples. During the Napoleonic Wars, north and central Italy were reorganised as Sister Republics of France and, later, as a Kingdom of Italy. The south was administered by Joachim Murat, Napoleon's brother-in-law. 1814's Congress of Vienna restored the situation of the late 18th century, but the ideals of the French Revolution could not be eradicated, and re-surfaced during the political upheavals that characterised the early 19th century. The first adoption of the Italian tricolour by an Italian state, the Cispadane Republic, occurred during Napoleonic Italy, following the French Revolution, which advocated national self-determination. This event is celebrated by Tricolour Day.\nUnification.\nThe birth of the Kingdom of Italy was the result of efforts of Italian nationalists and monarchists loyal to the House of Savoy to establish a united kingdom encompassing the entire Italian Peninsula. By the mid-19th century, rising Italian nationalism led to revolution. Following the Congress of Vienna in 1815, the political and social Italian unification movement, or Risorgimento, emerged to unite Italy by consolidating the states and liberating them from foreign control. A radical figure was the patriotic journalist Giuseppe Mazzini, founder of the political movement Young Italy in the 1830s, who favoured a unitary republic and advocated a broad nationalist movement. 1847 saw the first public performance of \"Il Canto degli Italiani\", which became the national anthem in 1946.\nThe most famous member of Young Italy was the revolutionary and general Giuseppe Garibaldi who led the republican drive for unification in southern Italy. However, the Italian monarchy of the House of Savoy, in the Kingdom of Sardinia, whose government was led by Camillo Benso, Count of Cavour, also had ambitions of establishing a united Italian state. In the context of the 1848 liberal revolutions that swept Europe, an unsuccessful First Italian War of Independence was declared against Austria. In 1855, Sardinia became an ally of Britain and France in the Crimean War. Sardinia fought the Austrian Empire in the Second Italian War of Independence of 1859, with the aid of France, resulting in liberating Lombardy. On the basis of the Plombi\u00e8res Agreement, the Sardinia ceded Savoy and Nice to France, an event that caused the Ni\u00e7ard exodus.\nIn 1860\u20131861, Garibaldi led the drive for unification in Naples and Sicily. Teano was the site of a famous meeting between Garibaldi and Victor Emmanuel II, the last king of Sardinia, during which Garibaldi shook Victor Emanuel's hand and hailed him as King of Italy. Cavour agreed to include Garibaldi's southern Italy in a union with the Kingdom of Sardinia in 1860. This allowed the Sardinian government to declare a united Italian kingdom on 17 March 1861, with Victor Emmanuel II as its first king. In 1865, the kingdom's capital was moved from Turin to Florence. In 1866, Victor Emmanuel II, allied with Prussia during the Austro-Prussian War, waged the Third Italian War of Independence, which resulted in Italy annexing Venetia. Finally, in 1870, as France abandoned Rome during the Franco-Prussian War, the Italians captured the Papal States, unification was completed, and the capital moved to Rome.\nLiberal period.\nSardinia's constitution was extended to all of Italy in 1861, and provided basic freedoms for the new state; but electoral laws excluded the non-propertied classes. The new kingdom was governed by a parliamentary constitutional monarchy dominated by liberals. As northern Italy quickly industrialised, southern and northern rural areas remained underdeveloped and overpopulated, forcing millions to migrate and fuelling a large and influential diaspora. The Italian Socialist Party increased in strength, challenging the traditional liberal and conservative establishment. In the last two decades of the 19th century, Italy developed into a colonial power by subjugating Eritrea, Somalia, Tripolitania, and Cyrenaica in Africa. In 1913, male universal suffrage was adopted. The pre-World War I period was dominated by Giovanni Giolitti, prime minister five times between 1892 and 1921.\nItaly entered into the First World War in 1915 with the aim of completing national unity, so it is also considered the Fourth Italian War of Independence, from a historiographical perspective, as the conclusion of the unification of Italy. Italy, nominally allied with the German and Austro-Hungarian empires in the Triple Alliance, in 1915 joined the Allies, entering World War I with a promise of substantial territorial gains that included west Inner Carniola, the former Austrian Littoral, and Dalmatia, as well as parts of the Ottoman Empire. The country's contribution to the Allied victory earned it a place as one of the \"Big Four\" powers. Reorganisation of the army and conscription led to Italian victories. In October 1918, the Italians launched a massive offensive, culminating in victory at the Battle of Vittorio Veneto. This marked the end of war on the Italian Front, secured dissolution of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, and was instrumental in ending the war less than two weeks later.\nDuring the war, more than 650,000 Italian soldiers and as many civilians died, and the kingdom was on the brink of bankruptcy. The Treaty of Saint-Germain-en-Laye (1919) and Treaty of Rapallo (1920) allowed for annexation of Trentino Alto-Adige, the Julian March, Istria, the Kvarner Gulf, and the Dalmatian city of Zara. The subsequent Treaty of Rome (1924) led to annexation of Fiume by Italy. Italy did not receive other territories promised by the Treaty of London, so this outcome was denounced as a \"mutilated victory\", by Benito Mussolini, which helped lead to the rise of Italian fascism. Historians regard \"mutilated victory\" as a \"political myth\", used by fascists to fuel Italian imperialism. Italy gained a permanent seat in the League of Nations's executive council.\nFascist regime and World War II.\nThe socialist agitations that followed the devastation of the Great War, inspired by the Russian Revolution, led to counter-revolution and repression throughout Italy. The liberal establishment, fearing a Soviet-style revolution, started to endorse the small National Fascist Party, led by Mussolini. In October 1922, the Blackshirts of the National Fascist Party organised a mass demonstration and the \"March on Rome\" coup. King Victor Emmanuel III appointed Mussolini as prime minister, transferring power to the fascists without armed conflict. \nMussolini banned political parties and curtailed personal liberties, establishing a dictatorship. These actions attracted international attention and inspired similar dictatorships in Nazi Germany and Francoist Spain.\nFascism was based upon Italian nationalism and imperialism, seeking to expand Italian possessions via irredentist claims based on the legacy of the Roman and Venetian empires. \nFor this reason the fascists engaged in interventionist foreign policy. In 1935, Mussolini invaded Ethiopia and founded Italian East Africa, resulting in international isolation. Italy withdrew from the League of Nations. Italy then allied with Nazi Germany and the Empire of Japan, and strongly supported Francisco Franco in the Spanish Civil War. In April 1939, Italy invaded Albania.\nItaly entered World War II on 10 June 1940. At this date, France practically had lost the Battle of France.\nAt different times, Italians advanced in British Somaliland, Egypt, the Balkans, and eastern fronts. They were, however, defeated on the Eastern Front as well as in the East African and North African campaigns, losing their territories in Africa and the Balkans. Italian war crimes included extrajudicial killings and ethnic cleansing by deportation of about 25,000 people \u2013 mainly Yugoslavs \u2013 to Italian concentration camps and elsewhere. Yugoslav Partisans perpetrated their own crimes against the ethnic Italian population during and after the war, including the foibe massacres. An Allied invasion of Sicily began in July 1943, leading to the collapse of the Fascist regime on 25 July. Mussolini was deposed and arrested by order of King Victor Emmanuel III. On 3 September, Italy signed the Armistice of Cassibile, ending its war with UK and USA. The Germans, with the assistance of Italian fascists, succeeded in taking control of north and central Italy (Operation Achse). The country remained a battlefield, with the Allies moving up from the south.\nIn the north, the Germans set up the Italian Social Republic (RSI), a Nazi puppet state and collaborationist regime with Mussolini installed as leader after he was rescued by German paratroopers. What remained of the Italian troops was organised into the Italian Co-belligerent Army, which fought alongside the Allies, while other Italian forces, loyal to Mussolini, opted to fight alongside the Germans in the National Republican Army. German troops, with RSI collaboration, committed massacres and deported thousands of Jews to death camps. The post-armistice period saw the emergence of the Italian Resistance, who fought a guerrilla war against the Nazi German occupiers and collaborators. \nAn aspect of this period was the Italian civil war due to fighting between partisans and fascist RSI forces. In April 1945, with defeat looming, Mussolini attempted to escape north, but was captured and summarily executed by partisans.\nHostilities ended on 29 April 1945, when the German forces in Italy surrendered. Nearly half a million Italians died in the war, society was divided, and the economy all but destroyed \u2013 per capita income in 1944 was at its lowest point since 1900. \nIn the aftermath of the war there was a revival of Italian republicanism, leading to the 1946 Italian institutional referendum.\nRepublican era.\nItaly became a republic after the 1946 referendum held on 2 June, a day celebrated since as \"Festa della Repubblica\". This was the first time women voted nationally. Victor Emmanuel III's son, Umberto II, was forced to abdicate. The Republican Constitution was approved in 1948. Under the Treaty of Paris between Italy and the Allied Powers, areas next to the Adriatic Sea were annexed by Yugoslavia, resulting in the Istrian-Dalmatian exodus, which involved the emigration of around 300,000 Istrian and Dalmatian Italians. Italy lost all colonial possessions, ending the Italian Empire.\nFears of a Communist takeover proved crucial in 1948, when the Christian Democrats, under Alcide De Gasperi, won a landslide victory. Consequently, in 1949 Italy became a member of NATO. The Marshall Plan revived the economy, which, until the late 1960s, enjoyed a period called the Italian economic miracle. In the 1950s, Italy became a founding country of the European Communities, a forerunner of the European Union. From the late 1960s until the early 1980s, the country experienced the \"Years of Lead\", characterised by economic difficulties, especially after the 1973 oil crisis; social conflicts; and terrorist massacres.\nThe economy recovered and Italy became the world's fifth-largest industrial nation after it gained entry into the G7 in the 1970s. However, national debt skyrocketed past 100% of GDP. Between 1992 and 1993, Italy faced terror attacks perpetrated by the Sicilian Mafia as a consequence of new anti-mafia measures by the government. Voters \u2013 disenchanted with political paralysis, massive public debt and extensive corruption uncovered by the Clean Hands investigation \u2013 demanded radical reform. The Christian Democrats, who had ruled for almost 50 years, underwent a crisis and disbanded, splitting into factions. The Communists reorganised as a social-democratic force. During the 1990s and 2000s, centre-right (dominated by media magnate Silvio Berlusconi) and centre-left coalitions (led by professor Romano Prodi) alternately governed.\nIn 2011, amidst the Great Recession, Berlusconi resigned and was replaced by the technocratic cabinet of Mario Monti. In 2014, Matteo Renzi became prime minister and the government started constitutional reform. This was rejected in a 2016 referendum and Paolo Gentiloni became prime minister.\nDuring the European migrant crisis of the 2010s, Italy was the entry point and leading destination for most asylum seekers entering the EU. Between 2013 and 2018, it took in over 700,000 migrants, mainly from sub-Saharan Africa, which put a strain on the public purse and led to a surge in support for far-right or euro-sceptic parties. After the 2018 general election, Giuseppe Conte became prime minister of a populist coalition.\nWith almost 200,000 victims, Italy was one of the countries with the most deaths in the COVID-19 pandemic and one of the most affected economically. In February 2021, after a government crisis, Conte resigned. Mario Draghi, former president of the European Central Bank, formed a national unity government supported by most main parties, pledging to implement an economic stimulus to face the crisis caused by the pandemic. In 2022, Giorgia Meloni was sworn in as Italy's first female prime minister.\nGeography.\nItaly, whose territory largely coincides with the eponymous geographical region, is located in Southern Europe (and is also considered part of Western Europe) between latitudes 35\u00b0 and 47\u00b0 N, and longitudes 6\u00b0 and 19\u00b0 E. To the north, from west to east, Italy borders France, Switzerland, Austria, and Slovenia, and is roughly delimited by the Alpine watershed, enclosing the Po Valley and the Venetian Plain. It consists of the entirety of the Italian Peninsula, Sicily and Sardinia (the biggest islands of the Mediterranean), and many smaller islands. Some of Italy's territory extends beyond the Alpine basin, and some islands are located outside the Eurasian continental shelf.\nThe country's area is , of which is land and is water. Including the islands, Italy has a coastline of on the Mediterranean Sea, the Ligurian and Tyrrhenian seas, the Ionian Sea, and the Adriatic Sea. Its border with France runs for ; Switzerland, ; Austria, ; and Slovenia, . The sovereign states of San Marino and Vatican City (the smallest country in the world and headquarters of the worldwide Catholic Church under the governance of the Holy See) are enclaves within Italy, while Campione d'Italia is an Italian exclave in Switzerland. The border with San Marino is long; that with Vatican City is .\nOver 35% of Italian territory is mountainous. The Apennine Mountains form the peninsula's backbone, and the Alps form most of its northern boundary, where Italy's highest point is located on the summit of Mont Blanc (\"Monte Bianco\") at . Other well-known mountains include the Matterhorn (\"Monte Cervino\") in the western Alps, and the Dolomites in the eastern Alps. Many parts of Italy are of volcanic origin. Most small islands and archipelagos in the south are volcanic islands. There are active volcanoes: Mount Etna in Sicily (the largest in Europe), Vulcano, Stromboli, and Vesuvius.\nMost rivers of Italy drain into the Adriatic or Tyrrhenian Sea. The longest is the Po, which flows from the Alps on the western border, and crosses the Padan plain to the Adriatic. The Po Valley is the largest plain, with , and contains over 70% of the country's lowlands. The largest lakes are, in descending size: Garda (), Maggiore (), and Como ().\nClimate.\nItaly's climate is influenced by the seas that surround the country on every side except the north, which constitute a reservoir of heat and humidity. Within the southern temperate zone, they determine a Mediterranean climate with local differences. Because of the length of the peninsula and the mostly mountainous hinterland, the climate is highly diverse. In most inland northern and central regions, the climate ranges from humid subtropical to humid continental and oceanic. The Po Valley is mostly humid subtropical, with cool winters and hot summers. The coastal areas of Liguria, Tuscany, and most of the south generally fit the Mediterranean climate stereotype, as in the K\u00f6ppen climate classification.\nConditions on the coast are different from those in the interior, particularly during winter when the higher altitudes tend to be cold, wet, and often snowy. The coastal regions have mild winters, and hot and generally dry summers; lowland valleys are hot in summer. Winter temperatures vary from in the Alps to in Sicily; so, average summer temperatures range from to over . Winters can vary widely with lingering cold, foggy, and snowy periods in the north, and milder, sunnier conditions in the south. Summers are hot across the country, except at high altitude, particularly in the south. Northern and central areas can experience strong thunderstorms from spring to autumn.\nBiodiversity.\nItaly's varied geography, including the Alps, Apennines, central Italian woodlands, and southern Italian Garigue and Maquis shrubland, contribute to habitat diversity. As the peninsula is in the centre of the Mediterranean, forming a corridor between Central Europe and North Africa, and having of coastline, Italy has received species from the Balkans, Eurasia, and the Middle East. Italy has probably the highest level of faunal biodiversity in Europe, with over 57,000 species recorded, representing more than a third of all European fauna, and the highest level of biodiversity of animal and plant species within the EU.\nThe fauna of Italy includes 4,777 endemic animal species, which include the Sardinian long-eared bat, Sardinian red deer, spectacled salamander, brown cave salamander, Italian newt, Italian frog, Apennine yellow-bellied toad, Italian wall lizard, and Sicilian pond turtle. There are 119 mammals species, 550 bird species, 69 reptile species, 39 amphibian species, 623 fish species, and 56,213 invertebrate species, of which 37,303 are insect species.\nThe flora of Italy was traditionally estimated to comprise about 5,500 vascular plant species. However, as of 2005[ [update]], 6,759 species are recorded in the \"Data bank of Italian vascular flora\". Italy has 1,371 endemic plant species and subspecies, which include Sicilian fir, Barbaricina columbine, Sea marigold, Lavender cotton, and Ucriana violet. Italy is a signatory to the Berne Convention on the Conservation of European Wildlife and Natural Habitats and the Habitats Directive.\nItaly has many botanical and historic gardens. The Italian garden is stylistically based on symmetry, axial geometry, and the principle of imposing order on nature. It influenced the history of gardening, especially French and English gardens. The Italian garden was influenced by Roman and Italian Renaissance gardens.\nThe Italian wolf is the national animal of Italy, while the national tree is the strawberry tree. The reasons for this are that the Italian wolf, which inhabits the Apennine Mountains and the Western Alps, features prominently in Latin and Italian cultures, such as the legend of the founding of Rome, while the green leaves, white flowers, and red berries of the strawberry tree, native to the Mediterranean, recall the colours of the flag. The national bird is the Italian sparrow, while the national flower is the flower of the strawberry tree.\nEnvironment.\nAfter its quick industrial growth, Italy took time to address its environmental problems. After improvements, Italy now ranks 84th in the world for ecological sustainability. The total area protected by national parks, regional parks, and nature reserves covers about 11% of Italian territory, and 12% of Italy's coastline is protected.\nItaly has been one of the world's leading producers of renewable energy, in 2010 ranking as the fourth largest provider of installed solar energy capacity and sixth largest of wind power capacity. Renewable energy provided approximately 37% Italy's energy consumption in 2020.\nThe country operated nuclear reactors between 1963 and 1990 but, after the Chernobyl disaster and referendums, the nuclear programme was terminated, a decision overturned by the government in 2008, with plans to build up to four nuclear power plants. This was in turn struck down by a referendum following the Fukushima nuclear accident.\nAir pollution remains severe, especially in the industrialised north. Italy is the twelfth-largest carbon dioxide producer. Extensive traffic and congestion in large cities continue to cause environmental and health issues, even if smog levels have decreased since the 1970s and 1980s, with smog becoming an increasingly rare phenomenon and levels of sulphur dioxide decreasing.\nDeforestation, illegal building, and poor land-management policies have led to significant erosion in Italy's mountainous regions, leading to ecological disasters such as the 1963 Vajont Dam flood, the 1998 Sarno, and the 2009 Messina mudslides.\nPolitics.\nItaly has been a unitary parliamentary republic since 1946, when the monarchy was abolished. The president of Italy, Sergio Mattarella since 2015, is Italy's head of state. The president is elected for a single seven-year term by the Italian Parliament and regional voters in joint session. Italy has a written democratic constitution that resulted from a Constituent Assembly formed by representatives of the anti-fascist forces that contributed to the defeat of Nazi and Fascist forces during the liberation of Italy, in World War II.\nItaly plays a major role in several economic, military, cultural, and political affairs, and is one of the EU big three. It is widely considered to be a regional power, while its great power status is a subject of debate among scholars and political analysts.\nAccording to International IDEA's Global State of Democracy (GSoD) Indices and Democracy Tracker, Italy performs in the high range on overall democratic measures, with particular weaknesses in rule of law.\nGovernment.\nItaly has a parliamentary government based on a mixed proportional and majoritarian voting system. The parliament is perfectly bicameral; each house has the same powers. The two houses: the Chamber of Deputies meets in Palazzo Montecitorio, and the Senate of the Republic in Palazzo Madama. A peculiarity of the Italian Parliament is the representation given to Italian citizens permanently living abroad: 8 Deputies and 4 Senators are elected in four distinct overseas constituencies. There are senators for life, appointed by the president \"for outstanding patriotic merits in the social, scientific, artistic or literary field\". Former presidents are \"ex officio\" life senators.\nThe prime minister of Italy is head of government and has executive authority, but must receive a vote of approval from the Council of Ministers to execute most policies. The prime minister and cabinet are appointed by the president, and confirmed by a vote of confidence in parliament. To remain as prime minister, one has to pass votes of confidence. The role of prime minister is similar to most other parliamentary systems, but they are not authorised to dissolve parliament. Another difference is that the political responsibility for intelligence is with the prime minister, who has exclusive power to coordinate intelligence policies, determine financial resources, strengthen cybersecurity, apply and protect State secrets, and authorise agents to carry out operations, in Italy or abroad.\nThe major political parties are the Brothers of Italy, Democratic Party, and Five Star Movement. During the 2022 general election, these three and their coalitions won 357 of the 400 seats in the Chamber of Deputies, and 187 of 200 in the Senate. The centre-right coalition, which included Giorgia Meloni's Brothers of Italy, Matteo Salvini's League, Silvio Berlusconi's , and Maurizio Lupi's Us Moderates, won most seats in parliament. The rest were taken by the centre-left coalition, which included the Democratic Party, the Greens and Left Alliance, Aosta Valley, More Europe, Civic Commitment, the Five Star Movement, Action \u2013 Italia Viva, South Tyrolean People's Party, South calls North, and the Associative Movement of Italians Abroad.\nLaw and criminal justice.\nThe law of Italy has several sources. These are hierarchical: the law or regulation from a lower source cannot conflict with the rule of an upper source (hierarchy of sources). The Constitution of 1948 is the highest source. The Constitutional Court of Italy rules on the conformity of laws with the constitution. The judiciary bases their decisions on Roman law modified by the Napoleonic Code and later statutes. The Supreme Court of Cassation is the highest court for both criminal and civil appeals.\nItaly lags behind other Western European nations in LGBT rights. Italy's law prohibiting torture is considered behind international standards.\nLaw enforcement is complex with multiple police forces. The national policing agencies are the Polizia di Stato ('State Police'), the Carabinieri, the Guardia di Finanza ('Financial Police'), and the Polizia Penitenziaria ('Prison Police'), as well as the Guardia Costiera ('Coast Guard Police'). Although policing is primarily provided on a national basis, there are also the provincial and municipal police.\nSince their appearance in the middle of the 19th century, Italian organised crime and criminal organisations have infiltrated the social and economic life of many regions in southern Italy; the most notorious is the Sicilian Mafia, which expanded into foreign countries, including the US. Mafia receipts may reach 9% of GDP. A 2009 report identified 610 which have a strong Mafia presence, where 13 million Italians live and 15% of GDP is produced. The Calabrian 'Ndrangheta, probably the most powerful crime syndicate of Italy, accounts alone for 3% of GDP.\nAt 0.013 per 1,000 people, Italy has the 47th highest murder rate, compared to 61 countries, and the 43rd highest number of rapes per 1,000 people, compared to 64 countries in the world. These are relatively low figures among developed countries.\nForeign relations.\nItaly is a founding member of the European Economic Community (EEC), now the European Union (EU), and of NATO. Italy was admitted to the United Nations in 1955, and is a member and strong supporter of international organisations, such as the OECD, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade/World Trade Organization (GATT/WTO), the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), the Council of Europe, and the Central European Initiative. Its turns in the rotating presidencies of international organisations include the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe in 2018, G7 in 2017, and the EU Council in 2014. Italy is a recurrent non-permanent member of the UN Security Council.\nItaly strongly supports multilateral international politics, endorsing the UN and its international security activities. In 2013, Italy had 5,296 troops deployed abroad, engaged in 33 UN and NATO missions in 25 countries. Italy deployed troops in support of UN peacekeeping missions in Somalia, Mozambique, and East Timor. Italy provides support for NATO and UN operations in Bosnia, Kosovo, and Albania, and deployed over 2,000 troops to Afghanistan in support of Operation Enduring Freedom (OEF) from 2003.\nItaly supported international efforts to reconstruct and stabilise Iraq, but it had withdrawn its military contingent of 3,200 troops by 2006. In August 2006, Italy deployed about 2,450 troops for the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon. Italy is one of the largest financiers of the Palestinian Authority, contributing \u20ac60 million in 2013 alone.\nMilitary.\nThe military history of Italy chronicles a vast time period, lasting from the military conflicts fought by the ancient peoples of Italy, most notably the conquest of the Mediterranean world by the ancient Romans, through the expansion of the Italian city-states and maritime republics during the medieval period and the involvement of the historical Italian states in the Italian Wars and the wars of succession, to the Napoleonic period, the Italian unification, the campaigns of the colonial empire, the two world wars, and into the modern day, with world peacekeeping operations under the aegis of NATO, the EU or the UN.\nThe Italian Army, Navy, Air Force, and Carabinieri collectively form the Italian Armed Forces, under the command of the High Council of Defence, presided over by the president, per the Constitution of Italy. According to Article 78, the Parliament has the authority to declare a state of war and vest the necessary war-making powers in the government.\nDespite not being a branch of the armed forces, the Guardia di Finanza has military status and is organised along military lines. Since 2005, military service has been voluntary. In 2010, the Italian military had 293,202 personnel on active duty, of which 114,778 are Carabinieri. As part of NATO's nuclear sharing strategy, Italy hosts 90 US B61 nuclear bombs located at the Ghedi and Aviano air bases.\nThe Army is the national ground defence force. It was formed in 1946, when Italy became a republic, from what remained of the \"Royal Italian Army\". Its best-known combat vehicles are the Dardo infantry fighting vehicle, the B1 Centauro tank destroyer, and the Ariete tank, and among its aircraft are the Mangusta attack helicopter, deployed on EU, NATO, and UN missions. It has at its disposal Leopard 1 and M113 armoured vehicles.\nThe Italian Navy is a blue-water navy. It was also formed in 1946 from what remained of the \"Regia Marina\" (the 'Royal Navy'). The Navy, being a member of the EU and NATO, has taken part in coalition peacekeeping operations around the world. In 2014, the Navy operated 154 vessels in service, including minor auxiliary vessels.\nThe Italian Air Force was founded as an independent service arm in 1923 by King Victor Emmanuel III as the \"Regia Aeronautica\" ('Royal Air Force'). After World War II, it was renamed as the \"Regia Aeronautica\". In 2021, the Italian Air Force operated 219 combat jets. A transport capability is guaranteed by a fleet of 27 C-130Js and C-27J Spartan. The acrobatic display team is the \"Frecce Tricolori\" ('Tricolour Arrows').\nAn autonomous corps of the military, the Carabinieri are the gendarmerie and military police of Italy, policing the military and civilian population alongside Italy's other police forces. While different branches of the Carabinieri report to separate ministries, the corps reports to the Ministry of Internal Affairs when maintaining public order and security.\nAdministrative divisions.\nItaly is constituted of 20 regions (\"regioni\"), five of which have special autonomous status which enables them to enact legislation on additional matters.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe \"regioni\" contain 107 provinces (\"province\") or metropolitan cities (\"citt\u00e0 metropolitane\"), and 7,896 municipalities (\"comuni\").\nEconomy.\nItaly has an advanced mixed economy that is the third-largest in the eurozone and 11th-largest in the world by purchasing power parity-adjusted GDP. It possesses the ninth-largest national wealth and ranks third in central bank gold reserves. As a founding member of the G7, the eurozone, and the OECD, it is one of the most industrialised countries and a major trading nation in Europe. A developed country ranked 30th on the Human Development Index, it performs well in life expectancy, healthcare, and education. Italy is well known for its creative and innovative businesses, a competitive agricultural sector, and its influential and high-quality automobile, machinery, food, design, and fashion industries.\nItaly is the world's eight-largest manufacturing country and the second-largest in Europe, characterised by fewer multinational corporations than other economies of comparable size and many dynamic small- and medium-sized enterprises, clustered in industrial districts, which are the backbone of Italian industry. This has produced a niche-markets manufacturing sector often focused on the export of luxury products. While less capable of competing on quantity, it can compete with Asian economies that have lower labour costs through higher-quality products. Italy was the world's 9th-largest exporter in 2023. Its closest trade ties are with other EU countries, and its largest export partners in 2019 were Germany (12%), France (11%), and the US (10%).\nThe Italian automotive industry is a significant part of the country's manufacturing sector, with over 144,000 firms and almost 485,000 employees in 2015, contributing 9% to GDP. The country boasts a wide range of vehicles, from mass market-oriented brands such as Fiat and premium brands like Alfa Romeo and Maserati to luxury supercars such as Pagani, Lamborghini, and Ferrari.\nThe Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena is the world's oldest or second oldest bank in continuous operation, depending on the definition, and the fourth-largest Italian commercial and retail bank. Italy has a strong cooperative sector with the largest share in the EU of the population (4.5%) employed by a cooperative. The Val d'Agri area, Basilicata, hosts the largest onshore hydrocarbon field in Europe. Moderate natural gas reserves, mainly in the Po Valley and offshore under the Adriatic, have been discovered and constitute the country's most important mineral resource. Italy is one of the world's leading producers of pumice, pozzolana, and feldspar. Another notable resource is marble, especially the famous white Carrara marble from Tuscany.\nItaly is part of a monetary union, the eurozone, which represents around 330 million citizens, and of the European single market, which represents more than 500 million consumers. Several domestic commercial policies are determined by agreements among EU members and EU legislation. Italy joined the common European currency, the euro, in 2002. Its monetary policy is set by the European Central Bank.\nItaly was hit by the 2008 financial crisis, which exacerbated structural problems. After strong GDP growth of 5\u20136% per year from the 1950s to the early 1970s, and a progressive slowdown in the 1980\u201390s, the country stagnated in the 2000s. Political efforts to revive growth with massive government spending produced a severe rise in public debt, which stood at over 132% of GDP in 2017; the second highest in the EU, after Greece. The largest portion of Italian public debt is owned by national subjects, a major difference between Italy and Greece, and the level of household debt is much lower than the OECD average.\nA gaping north\u2013south divide is a major factor of socio-economic weakness; there is a huge difference in official income between northern and southern regions and municipalities. The richest province, Alto Adige-South Tyrol, earns 152% of the national GDP per capita, while the poorest region, Calabria, earns 61%. The unemployment rate (11%) is above the eurozone average, but the disaggregated figure is 7% in the north and 19% in the south. The youth unemployment rate (32% in 2018) is extremely high.\nAgriculture.\nAccording to the last agricultural census, there were 1.6 million farms in 2010 (\u221232% since 2000) covering (63% are in south Italy). 99% are family-operated and small, averaging only . Of the area in agricultural use, grain fields take up 31%, olive orchards 8%, vineyards 5%, citrus orchards 4%, sugar beets 2%, and horticulture 2%. The remainder is primarily dedicated to pastures (26%) and feed grains (12%).\nItaly is the world's largest wine producer, and a leading producer of olive oil, fruits (apples, olives, grapes, oranges, lemons, pears, apricots, hazelnuts, peaches, cherries, plums, strawberries, and kiwifruits), and vegetables (especially artichokes and tomatoes). The most famous Italian wines are the Tuscan Chianti and the Piedmontese Barolo. Other famous wines are Barbaresco, Barbera d'Asti, Brunello di Montalcino, Frascati, Montepulciano d'Abruzzo, Morellino di Scansano, and the sparkling wines Franciacorta and Prosecco.\nQuality goods in which Italy specialises, particularly wines and regional cheeses, are often protected under the quality assurance labels DOC/DOP. This geographical indication certificate, accredited by the EU, is considered important to avoid confusion with ersatz goods.\nTransport.\nItaly was the first country to build motorways, the \"autostrade\", reserved for fast traffic and motor vehicles. In 2002 there were of serviceable roads in Italy, including of motorways, state-owned but privately operated by Atlantia. In 2005, about 34,667,000 cars (590 per 1,000 people) and 4,015,000 goods vehicles circulated on the network.\nThe railway network, state-owned and operated by Rete Ferroviaria Italiana (FSI), in 2024 totalled , of which is electrified, and on which 4,802 locomotives and railcars run. The main public operator of high-speed trains is Trenitalia, part of FSI. High-speed trains are in three categories: Frecciarossa ('red arrow') trains operate at a maximum 300km/h on dedicated high-speed tracks; Frecciargento ('silver arrow') operate at a maximum 250km/h on high-speed and mainline tracks; and Frecciabianca ('white arrow') operate on high-speed regional lines at a maximum 200km/h. Italy has 11 rail border crossings over the Alpine mountains with neighbouring countries.\nItaly is fifth in Europe by number of passengers using air transport, with about 148 million passengers, or about 10% of the European total in 2011. In 2022, there were 45 civil airports, including the hubs of Milan Malpensa Airport and Rome Fiumicino Airport. Since 2021, Italy's flag carrier has been ITA Airways, which took over from Alitalia.\nIn 2004, there were 43 major seaports, including Genoa, the country's largest and second-largest in the Mediterranean. In 2005, Italy maintained a civilian air fleet of about 389,000 units and a merchant fleet of 581 ships. The national inland waterways network had a length of for commercial traffic in 2012. North Italian ports, such as the deep-water port of Trieste, with its extensive rail connections to Central and Eastern Europe, are the destination of subsidies and significant foreign investment.\nIn August 2025, the planned Strait of Messina Bridge was given final approval by the Meloni government, with construction set to commence in the autumn of 2025. It will connect Calabria with Sicily when it opens in 2032, and it will become the longest suspension bridge in the world.\nEnergy.\nItaly has become one of the world's largest producers of renewable energy, ranking as the second largest producer in the EU and the ninth in the world. Wind power, hydroelectricity, and geothermal power are significant sources of electricity in the country. Renewable sources account for 28% of all electricity produced, with hydro alone reaching 13%, followed by solar at 6%, wind at 4%, bioenergy at 3.5%, and geothermal at 1.6%. The rest of the national demand is supplied by fossil fuels (natural gas 38%, coal 13%, oil 8%) and imports. Eni, operating in 79 countries, is one of the seven \"Big Oil\" companies, and one of the world's largest industrial companies.\nSolar energy production alone accounted for 9% of electricity in 2014, making Italy the country with the highest contribution from solar energy in the world. The Montalto di Castro Photovoltaic Power Station, completed in 2010, is the largest photovoltaic (PV) power station in Italy. Italy was the first country to exploit geothermal energy to produce electricity. Nuclear power in Italy was abandoned after 1987 referendums (in the wake of the 1986 Chernobyl disaster), although Italy still imports nuclear energy from Italy-owned reactors in foreign territories.\nScience and technology.\nThrough the centuries, Italy has fostered a scientific community that produced major discoveries the sciences. Galileo Galilei played a major role in the Scientific Revolution and is widely considered the father of observational astronomy, modern physics, and the scientific method.\nThe Laboratori Nazionali del Gran Sasso (LNGS) is the largest underground research centre in the world. ELETTRA, Eurac Research, ESA Centre for Earth Observation, Institute for Scientific Interchange, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Centre for Maritime Research and Experimentation, and the International Centre for Theoretical Physics conduct basic research. Trieste has the highest percentage of researchers in Europe, in relation to the population. Italy was ranked 28th in the Global Innovation Index in 2025. There are technology parks in Italy such as the Science and Technology Parks Kilometro Rosso (Bergamo), the AREA Science Park (Trieste), The VEGA-Venice Gateway for Science and Technology (Venezia), the Toscana Life Sciences (Siena), the Technology Park of Lodi Cluster (Lodi), and the Technology Park of Navacchio (Pisa), as well as science museums such as the Museo Nazionale Scienza e Tecnologia Leonardo da Vinci in Milan.\nThe north\u2013south large difference in income leads to a \"digital divide\".\nTourism.\nPeople have visited Italy for centuries, yet the first to visit the peninsula for tourism were aristocrats during the Grand Tour, which began in the 17th century, and flourished in the 18th and the 19th centuries. This was a period in which European aristocrats, many of whom were British, visited parts of Europe, with Italy as a key destination. For Italy, this was in order to study ancient architecture, local culture, and admire its natural beauty.\nItaly is the fifth-most visited country, with a total of 57 million arrivals in 2024. In 2014, the income from travel and tourism was EUR163billion (10% of GDP) and 1,082,000 jobs were directly related to it (5% of employment).\nTourist interest is mainly in culture, cuisine, history, architecture, art, religious sites and routes, wedding tourism, naturalistic beauties, nightlife, underwater sites, and spas. Winter and summer tourism are present in locations in the Alps and the Apennines, while seaside tourism is widespread among locations along the Mediterranean. Italy is the leading cruise tourism destination in the Mediterranean. Small, historical, and artistic villages are promoted through the association I Borghi pi\u00f9 belli d'Italia (lit.\u2009'The most beautiful villages of Italy').\nThe most visited regions are Veneto, Tuscany, Lombardy, Emilia-Romagna, and Lazio. Rome is the third most visited city in Europe, and 12th in the world, with 9.4 million arrivals in 2017. Venice and Florence are among the world's top 100 destinations.\nItaly has the most World Heritage Sites of any country: 61, of which 55 are cultural and 6 natural.\nDemographics.\nAs of 2025, Italy has 58,915,561 inhabitants. Its population density of is higher than most Western European countries. However, distribution is uneven: the most densely populated areas are the Po Valley (almost half the population) and the metropolitan areas of Rome and Naples, while vast regions such as the Alps and Apennine highlands, the plateaus of Basilicata, and the island of Sardinia, as well as much of Sicily, are sparsely populated.\nItaly's population almost doubled during the 20th century, but the pattern of growth was uneven because of large-scale internal migration from the rural south to the industrial north, a consequence of the Italian economic miracle of the 1950\u20131960s. High fertility rates persisted until the 1970s, after which they started to decline; the total fertility rate (TFR) reached an all-time low of 1.2 children per woman in 1995, well below the replacement rate of 2.1 and considerably below the high of 5 in 1883. Since 2008, when the rate climbed slightly to 1.4, the number of births has consistently declined every year, reaching a record low of 379,000 in 2023 \u2013 the fewest since 1861. In 2024, it stood at 1.2.\nAs a result of these trends, Italy's population is rapidly aging and gradually shrinking. Nearly one in four Italians is over 65, and the country has the fourth oldest population in the world, with a median age of 48 and an average age of 46.6. The overall population has been falling steadily since 2014 and is estimated to have fallen just below 59 million in 2024, representing a cumulative loss of more than 1.36 million people in one decade.\nFrom the late 19th century to the 1960s, Italy was a country of mass emigration. Between 1898 and 1914, the peak years of Italian diaspora, approximately 750,000 Italians emigrated annually. The diaspora included more than 25 million Italians and is considered the greatest mass migration of recent times.\nRomani people are the biggest ethnic minority group in Italy. According to the Council of Europe, there are approximately 120,000 to 180,000 Romani individuals residing in the country. A large number of them lack Italian citizenship. The majority of immigrants in Italy originate from Romania, Albania, Morocco, Ukraine, China, the Philippines and India.\nLargest cities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nImmigration.\nIn the 1980s, until then a linguistically and culturally homogeneous society, Italy began to attract substantial flows of immigrants. After the fall of the Berlin Wall and of the Iron Curtain, waves of migration originated from many former socialist countries of East Europe. The EU enlarged in 2004, in 2007 (Romania and Bulgaria) and in 2013 (Croatia).\nOther sources of immigration have been neighbouring North Africa, the Asia-Pacific region, the Philippines and Latin America.\nIn 2010, the foreign-born population was from the following regions: Europe (54%), Africa (22%), Asia (16%), the Americas (8%), and Oceania (0.06%). The distribution of the foreign population is geographically varied: in 2020, 61% of foreign citizens lived in the north, 24% in the centre, 11% in the south, and 4% on the islands.\nIn 2021, Italy had about 5.2 million foreign residents, making up 9% of the population. The figures include more than half a million children born in Italy to foreign nationals, but exclude foreign nationals who have subsequently acquired Italian citizenship; in 2016, about 201,000 people became Italian citizens. The official figures also do not include illegal immigrants, which was estimated to be 670,000 in 2008. About one million Romanian citizens are registered as living in Italy, representing the largest migrant population.\nLanguages.\nItaly's official language is Italian. \nThere are an estimated 64 million native Italian speakers around the world, and another 21 million use it as a second language. \nItalian is often natively spoken as a regional dialect, not to be confused with Italy's regional and minority languages; however, during the 20th century, the establishment of a national education system led to a decrease in regional dialects. Standardisation was further expanded in the 1950s and 1960s, due to economic growth and the rise of mass media and television.\nTwelve \"historical minority languages\" are formally recognised: Albanian, Catalan, German, Greek, Slovene, Croatian, French, Franco-Proven\u00e7al, Friulian, Ladin, Occitan, and Sardinian. Four of these enjoy co-official status in their respective regions: French in the Aosta Valley; German in South Tyrol, and Ladin as well in some parts of the same province and in parts of the neighbouring Trentino; and Slovene in the provinces of Trieste, Gorizia, and Udine. Other Ethnologue, ISO, and UNESCO languages are not recognised under Italian law. Like France, Italy has signed the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, but has not ratified it.\nDue to recent immigration, Italy has sizeable populations whose native language is not Italian, nor a regional language. According to the Italian National Institute of Statistics, in 2012 Romanian was the most common mother tongue among foreign residents: almost 800,000 people speak Romanian as their first language (22% of foreign residents aged 6 and over). Other prevalent mother tongues were Arabic (spoken by over 475,000; 13% of foreign residents), Albanian (380,000), and Spanish (255,000).\nReligion.\nThe Holy See, the episcopal jurisdiction of Rome, contains the government of Vatican City and the worldwide Catholic Church. It is recognised as a sovereign entity, headed by the pope, who is also the Bishop of Rome, with which diplomatic relations can be maintained.\nItaly has historically been dominated by Catholicism. \nMost Catholics are nominal; Associated Press described Italian Catholicism as \"nominally embraced but rarely lived\". Around 2010, Italy had the world's fifth-largest Catholic population and the largest in Europe. Since 1985, Catholicism is no longer the state religion.\nIn 2011, minority Christian faiths included an estimated 1.5 million Orthodox Christians, while Protestantism has been growing. Italy has for centuries welcomed Jews expelled from other countries, notably Spain. However, about 20% of Italian Jews were killed during the Holocaust. This, together with emigration before and after World War II, has left around 28,000 Jews. There are 120,000 Hindus and 70,000 Sikhs.\nThe state devolves shares of income tax to recognised religious communities, under a regime known as eight per thousand. Donations are allowed to Christian, Jewish, Buddhist, and Hindu communities; however, Islam remains excluded, as no Muslim communities have signed a concordat. Taxpayers who do not wish to fund a religion contribute their share to the welfare system.\nEducation.\nEducation is mandatory and free from ages six to sixteen, and consists of five stages: kindergarten, primary school, lower secondary school, upper secondary school, and university.\nPrimary school lasts eight years. Students are given a basic education in Italian, English, mathematics, natural sciences, history, geography, social studies, physical education, and visual and musical arts. Secondary school lasts for five years and includes three traditional types of schools focused on different academic levels: the \"liceo\" prepares students for university studies with a classical or scientific curriculum, while the \"istituto tecnico\" and the \"istituto professionale\" prepare pupils for vocations.\nIn 2018, secondary education was evaluated as being below the average among OECD countries. Italy scored below the OECD average in reading and science, and near the OECD average in mathematics. A wide gap exists between northern schools, which perform near average, and the south, which had much poorer results.\nTertiary education is divided between public universities, private universities, and the prestigious and selective superior graduate schools, such as the Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisa. 33 Italian universities were ranked among the world's top 500 in 2019. Bologna University, founded in 1088, is the oldest university still in operation, and one of the leading academic institutions in Europe. Bocconi University, the Universit\u00e0 Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, LUISS, the Polytechnic University of Turin, the Polytechnic University of Milan, the Sapienza University of Rome, and the University of Milan are also ranked among the best.\nHealth.\nItaly's life expectancy in 2015 was 80.5 years for men and 84.8 for women, placing the country 5th in the world. Compared to other Western countries, Italy has a low rate of adult obesity (below 10%), as the health benefits of the Mediterranean diet are very significant. In 2013, UNESCO, prompted by Italy, added the Mediterranean diet to the Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity of Italy, Morocco, Spain, Portugal, Greece, Cyprus, and Croatia.\nThe proportion of daily smokers was 22% in 2012, down from 24% in 2000 but above the OECD average. Since 2005, smoking in public places has been restricted to \"specially ventilated rooms\".\nSince 1978, the state has run a universal public healthcare system. However, healthcare is provided to all citizens and residents by a mixed public-private system. The public part is the Servizio Sanitario Nazionale, which is organised under the Ministry of Health and administered on a devolved regional basis. Healthcare spending accounted for 10% of GDP in 2020. Italy's healthcare system has been consistently ranked among the best in the world; according to research by the World Health Organization (WHO) dating back to 2000, Italy had the second best healthcare system in the world in terms of spending efficiency and access to public care for citizens, after France.\nCulture.\nItaly is one of the primary birthplaces of Western civilisation and a cultural superpower. Its culture has been shaped by a multitude of regional customs and local centres of power and patronage. The country has made substantial contributions to the cultural and historical heritage of Europe.\nArchitecture.\nItaly is known for its architectural achievements, such as the construction of arches, domes, and similar structures by ancient Rome, the founding of the Renaissance architectural movement in the late 14th to 16th centuries, and as the home of Palladianism, a style that inspired movements such as Neoclassical architecture and influenced designs of country houses all over the world, notably in the UK and US during the late 17th to early 20th centuries.\nThe first to begin a recognised sequence of designs were the Greeks and the Etruscans, progressing to classical Roman, then the revival of the classical Roman era during the Renaissance, and evolving into the Baroque era. The Christian concept of the basilica, a style that came to dominate in the Middle Ages, was invented in Rome. Romanesque architecture, which flourished from approximately 800 to 1100 AD, was one of the most fruitful and creative periods in Italian architecture, when masterpieces, such as the Leaning Tower of Pisa and the Basilica of Sant'Ambrogio in Milan, were built. It was known for its usage of Roman arches, stained glass windows, and curved columns. The main innovation of Italian Romanesque architecture was the vault, which had never been seen in Western architecture.\nItalian architecture significantly evolved during the Renaissance. Filippo Brunelleschi contributed to architectural design with his dome for the Cathedral of Florence, a feat of engineering not seen since antiquity. \nA popular achievement of Italian Renaissance architecture was St. Peter's Basilica, designed by Donato Bramante in the early 16th century. Andrea Palladio influenced architects throughout Western Europe with the villas and palaces he designed.\nThe Baroque period produced outstanding Italian architects. The most original work of late Baroque and Rococo architecture is the Palazzina di caccia of Stupinigi. In 1752, Luigi Vanvitelli began the construction of the Royal Palace of Caserta. In the late 18th and early 19th centuries, Italy was influenced by the Neoclassical architectural movement. Villas, palaces, gardens, interiors, and art began again to be based on ancient Roman and Greek themes.\nDuring the Fascist period, the supposedly \"Novecento movement\" flourished, based on the rediscovery of imperial Rome. Marcello Piacentini, responsible for the urban transformations of cities, devised a form of simplified Neoclassicism.\nVisual art.\nThe history of Italian visual arts is significant to Western painting. Roman art was influenced by Greece and can be taken as a descendant of ancient Greek painting. The only surviving Roman paintings are wall paintings. These may contain the first examples of trompe-l'\u0153il, pseudo-perspective, and pure landscape.\nThe Italian Renaissance is considered to be the golden age of painting, spanning from the 14th through the mid-17th centuries and having significant influence outside Italy. Artists such as Masaccio, Filippo Lippi, Tintoretto, Sandro Botticelli, Leonardo da Vinci, Michelangelo, Raphael, and Titian took painting to a higher level through the use of perspective. Michelangelo was also active as a sculptor; his works include masterpieces such as \"David\", \"Piet\u00e0\", and \"Moses\".\nIn the 15th and 16th centuries, the High Renaissance gave rise to a stylised art known as Mannerism. In place of the balanced compositions and rational approach to perspective that characterised art at the dawn of the 16th century, the Mannerists sought instability, artifice, and doubt. The unperturbed faces and gestures of Piero della Francesca and the calm Virgins of Raphael were replaced by the troubled expressions of Pontormo and emotional intensity of El Greco.\nIn the 17th century, among the greatest painters of Italian Baroque are Caravaggio, Artemisia Gentileschi, Carlo Saraceni, and Bartolomeo Manfredi. In the 18th century, Italian Rococo was mainly inspired by French Rococo. Italian Neoclassical sculpture focused, with Antonio Canova's nudes, on the idealist aspect of the movement.\nIn the 19th century, Romantic painters included Francesco Hayez and Francesco Podesti. Impressionism was brought from France to Italy by the \"Macchiaioli\", and realism by Gioacchino Toma and Giuseppe Pellizza da Volpedo. In the 20th century, with futurism, Italy rose again as a seminal country for evolution in painting and sculpture. Futurism was succeeded by the metaphysical paintings of Giorgio de Chirico, who exerted an influence on the surrealists.\nLiterature.\nFormal Latin literature began in 240 BC, when the first stage play was performed in Rome. Latin literature was, and is, highly influential, with numerous writers, poets, philosophers, and historians, such as Pliny the Elder, Pliny the Younger, Virgil, Horace, Propertius, Ovid, and Livy. The Romans were famous for their oral tradition, poetry, drama, and epigrams. In the early 13th century, Francis of Assisi was the first Italian poet, with his religious song \"Canticle of the Sun\".\nAt the court of Emperor Frederick II in Sicily, in the 13th century, lyrics modelled on Proven\u00e7al forms and themes were written in a refined version of the local vernacular. One of these poets was Giacomo da Lentini, inventor of the sonnet form; the most famous early sonneteer was Petrarch.\nGuido Guinizelli is the founder of the \"Dolce Stil Novo\", a school that added a philosophical dimension to love poetry. This new understanding of love, expressed in a smooth style, influenced the Florentine poet Dante Alighieri, who established the basis of modern Italian. Dante's work, \"Divine Comedy\", is among the finest in literature. Petrarch and Giovanni Boccaccio sought and imitated the works of antiquity and cultivated their own artistic personalities. Petrarch achieved fame through his collection of poems, \"Il Canzoniere\". Equally influential was Boccaccio's \"The Decameron\", a very popular collection of short stories.\nRenaissance authors' works include Niccol\u00f2 Machiavelli's \"The Prince\", an essay on political science in which the \"effectual truth\" is taken to be more important than any abstract ideal. Giovanni Francesco Straparola and Giambattista Basile, who wrote \"The Facetious Nights of Straparola\" (1550\u201355) and the \"Pentamerone\" (1634), respectively, printed some of the first known versions of fairy tales in Europe. The Baroque period produced the clear scientific prose of Galileo. In the 17th century, the Arcadians began a movement to restore simplicity and classical restraint to poetry.\nItalian writers embraced Romanticism in the 19th century; it coincided with ideas of the Risorgimento, the movement that brought Italian unification. Unification was heralded by the poets Vittorio Alfieri, Ugo Foscolo, and Giacomo Leopardi. Works by Alessandro Manzoni, the leading Italian Romantic, are a symbol of Italian unification for their patriotic message and because of his efforts in the development of modern, unified Italian.\nIn the late 19th century, a literary movement called \"verismo\", which extolled realism, played a major role in Italian literature. Emilio Salgari, a writer of action-adventure swashbucklers and a pioneer of science fiction, published his \"Sandokan\" series. In 1883, Carlo Collodi published \"The Adventures of Pinocchio\", which became the most celebrated children's classic by an Italian author and one of the world's most translated non-religious books. A movement called futurism influenced literature in the early 20th century. Filippo Tommaso Marinetti wrote \"Manifesto of Futurism\" and called for the use of language and metaphors that glorified the speed, dynamism, and violence of the machine age.\nModern literary figures and Nobel laureates are Gabriele D'Annunzio, nationalist poet Giosu\u00e8 Carducci 1906 Nobel laureate, realist writer Grazia Deledda 1926 laureate, modern theatre author Luigi Pirandello in 1936, short story writer Italo Calvino in 1960, poets Salvatore Quasimodo in 1959 and Eugenio Montale in 1975, Umberto Eco in 1980, and satirist and theatre author Dario Fo in 1997.\nPhilosophy.\nItalian philosophy had an influence on Western philosophy, beginning with the Greeks and Romans, and Renaissance humanism, the Age of Enlightenment, and modern philosophy. Formal philosophy was introduced to Italy by Pythagoras, founder of the Italian school of philosophy in Crotone. Italian philosophers of the Greek period include Xenophanes, Parmenides, and Zeno. Roman philosophers include Cicero, Lucretius, Seneca the Younger, Plutarch, Epictetus, Marcus Aurelius, and Augustine of Hippo.\nItalian medieval philosophy was mainly Christian, and included theologians such as Thomas Aquinas, a classical proponent of natural theology, who reintroduced Aristotelian philosophy to Christianity. Renaissance philosophers include: Giordano Bruno, a major scientific figure of the West; Marsilio Ficino, a humanist philosopher; and Niccol\u00f2 Machiavelli, a founder of modern political science. Machiavelli's most famous work is \"The Prince\", whose contribution to political thought is the fundamental break between political idealism and realism. University cities such as Padua, Bologna, and Naples remained centres of scholarship, with philosophers such as Giambattista Vico. Cesare Beccaria was a significant Enlightenment figure and a father of classical criminal theory and penology.\nItaly had a renowned philosophical movement in the 1800s, with idealism, sensism, and empiricism. During the late 19th and 20th centuries, there were other movements that gained popularity, such as Ontologism, anarchism, communism, socialism, futurism, fascism, and Christian democracy. Antonio Gramsci remains a relevant philosopher within communist theory, credited with creating the theory of cultural hegemony. Italian philosophers were influential in development of the non-Marxist liberal socialism philosophy. In the 1960s, left-wing activists adopted the anti-authoritarian pro-working class theories that became known as autonomism and workerism.\nItalian feminists include Sibilla Aleramo, Alaide Gualberta Beccari, and Anna Maria Mozzoni, and proto-feminist philosophies had previously been touched upon by Italian writers. Italian educator Maria Montessori created the philosophy of education that bears her name. Giuseppe Peano was a founder of analytic philosophy and the contemporary philosophy of mathematics. Analytic philosophers include Carlo Penco, Gloria Origgi, Pieranna Garavaso, and Luciano Floridi.\nTheatre.\nItalian theatre came about in the Middle Ages, with its antecedents dating back to ancient Greek colonies in southern Italy (Magna Graecia), as well as the theatre of the Italic peoples and the theatre of ancient Rome. There were two main lines along which theatre developed. The first, dramatisation of Catholic liturgies, and the second, formed by pagan forms of spectacle, such as staging for city festivals, court preparations of jesters, and songs of the troubadours. Renaissance theatre marked the beginning of modern theatre. Ancient theatrical texts were translated and staged at courts, and moved to public theatres. In the late 15th century, the cities of Ferrara and Rome were important for the rediscovery and renewal of theatre.\nDuring the 16th into the 18th century, commedia dell'arte was a form of improvisational theatre, and is still performed. Travelling troupes of players set up an outdoor stage and provided amusement in the form of juggling, acrobatics, and humorous plays. Plays did not originate from written drama, but scenarios called \"lazzi\", loose frameworks around which actors would improvise. The characters of the \"commedia\" usually represent fixed social types and stock characters, each of which has a distinct costume. The first recorded commedia dell'arte performances came from Rome as early as 1551. Female roles were played by women, documented as early as the 1560s, making them the first known professional actresses in Europe since antiquity. Lucrezia Di Siena, named on a 1564 contract, has been referred to as the first Italian actress known by name, with Vincenza Armani and Barbara Flaminia as the first prima donnas.\nBallet originated in Italy during the Renaissance, as an outgrowth of court pageantry.\nMusic.\nFrom folk to classical, music is an intrinsic part of Italian culture. Instruments associated with classical music, including the piano and violin, were invented in Italy, and many prevailing forms, such as the symphony, concerto, and sonata, trace their roots back to innovations in 16th- and 17th-century Italian music.\nItaly's most famous composers include the Renaissance Palestrina, Monteverdi, and Gesualdo; the Baroque Scarlatti, and Vivaldi; the classical Paganini, and Rossini; and the Romantic Verdi and Puccini. Classical music has a strong hold in Italy, as evidenced by the fame of its opera houses, such as La Scala, and performers such as the pianist Maurizio Pollini and tenor Luciano Pavarotti. Italy is known as the birthplace of opera. Italian opera is believed to have been founded in the 17th century.\nIntroduced in the early 1920s, jazz gained a strong foothold in Italy, and remained popular despite xenophobic policies of the fascists. Italy was represented in the progressive rock and pop movements of the 1970s, with bands such as PFM, Banco del Mutuo Soccorso, Le Orme, Goblin, and Pooh. The same period saw diversification in the cinema of Italy, and Cinecitt\u00e0 films included complex scores by composers including Ennio Morricone. In the 1980s, the first star to emerge from Italian hip hop was singer Jovanotti. Italian metal bands include Rhapsody of Fire, Lacuna Coil, Elvenking, Forgotten Tomb, and Fleshgod Apocalypse.\nItaly contributed to the development of disco and electronic music, with Italo disco, known for its futuristic sound and prominent use of synthesisers and drum machines, one of the earliest electronic dance genres. Producers such as Giorgio Moroder, who won three Academy Awards and four Golden Globes, were influential in the development of electronic dance music. Italian pop is represented annually with the Sanremo Music Festival, which served as inspiration for the Eurovision Song Contest. Gigliola Cinquetti, Toto Cutugno, and M\u00e5neskin won Eurovision, in 1964, 1990, and 2021 respectively. Singers such as Domenico Modugno, Mina, Andrea Bocelli, Raffaella Carr\u00e0, Il Volo, Al Bano, Toto Cutugno, Nek, Umberto Tozzi, Giorgia, Grammy winner Laura Pausini, Eros Ramazzotti, Tiziano Ferro, M\u00e5neskin, and others have received international acclaim.\nFashion and design.\nItalian fashion has a long tradition. \"Top Global Fashion Capital Rankings\" (2013), by Global Language Monitor, ranked Rome sixth and Milan twelfth. Major Italian fashion labels \u2013 such as Gucci, Armani, Prada, Versace, Valentino, Dolce &amp; Gabbana \u2013 are among the finest fashion houses in the world. Jewellers such as Bulgari, Damiani, and Buccellati were founded in Italy. The fashion magazine \"Vogue Italia\" is one of the most prestigious fashion magazines in the world.\nItaly is prominent in the field of design, notably interior, architectural, industrial, and urban designs. Milan and Turin are the nation's leaders in architectural and industrial design. The city of Milan hosts Fiera Milano, Europe's largest design fair. Milan hosts major design- and architecture-related events and venues, such as the \"Fuori Salone\" and the Milan Furniture Fair, and has been home to the designers Bruno Munari, Lucio Fontana, Enrico Castellani, and Piero Manzoni.\nCinema.\nItalian cinema began just after the Lumi\u00e8re brothers introduced motion picture exhibitions. The first Italian director is Vittorio Calcina, who filmed Pope Leo XIII in 1896. \"Cabiria\", from 1914, is the most famous Italian silent film. The oldest European avant-garde cinema movement, Italian futurism, took place in the late 1910s.\nAfter decline in the 1920s, the industry was revitalised in the 1930s with the arrival of sound. A popular Italian genre, the \"Telefoni Bianchi\", consisted of comedies with glamorous backgrounds. \"Calligrafismo\" was a sharp contrast to the \"Telefoni Bianchi\"-American style comedies and is rather artistic, highly formalistic, expressive in complexity, and deals mainly with contemporary literary material. Cinema was used by Mussolini, who founded Rome's renowned Cinecitt\u00e0 studio, for the production of Fascist propaganda.\nAfter World War II, Italian film was widely recognised and exported until an artistic decline occurred in the 1980s. Italian film directors include Federico Fellini, Sergio Leone, Pier Paolo Pasolini, Duccio Tessari, Luchino Visconti, Vittorio De Sica, Michelangelo Antonioni, and Roberto Rossellini, recognised among the greatest of all time. The mid-1940s to the early 1950s was the heyday of Italian neorealism, reflecting the poor condition of post-war Italy.\nAs the country grew wealthier in the 1950s, a form of neorealism known as pink neorealism succeeded, and the \"commedia all'italiana\" genre and other film genres, such as sword-and-sandal and spaghetti Westerns, were popular in the 1960s and 70s. Actresses such as Sophia Loren achieved international stardom. Erotic Italian thrillers, or \"gialli\", produced by directors such as Dario Argento in the 1970s, influenced horror. Recently, the Italian scene has received only occasional attention, with movies such as \"Life Is Beautiful\", \"Cinema Paradiso\", and \"\".\nCinecitt\u00e0 studio is the largest film and television production facility in Europe, where many international box office hits were filmed. In the 1950s, the number of international productions made there led to Rome's being dubbed \"Hollywood on the Tiber\". More than 3,000 productions have been made on its lot, of which 90 received an Academy Award nomination, with 47 wins. Italy is the most awarded country at the Academy Awards for Best Foreign Language Film, with 14 wins, 3 Special Awards, and 31 nominations. As of 2016[ [update]], Italian films have won 12 Palmes d'Or, 11 Golden Lions, and 7 Golden Bears.\nCuisine.\nItalian cuisine is heavily influenced by Etruscan, ancient Greek, ancient Roman, Byzantine, Arabic, and Jewish cuisines. Significant changes occurred with the discovery of the New World, with items such as potatoes, tomatoes, and maize becoming main ingredients from the 18th century. The Mediterranean diet forms the basis of Italian cuisine, which is rich in pasta, fish, fruits, and vegetables and characterised by its simplicity and variety, with many dishes having only four to eight ingredients. Italian cuisine is noted for its regional diversity, abundance of difference in taste, and as one of the most popular in the world, wielding strong influence abroad.\nItalian cuisine relies heavily on traditional products; the country has a large number of traditional specialties protected under EU law. Italy is home to 395 Michelin star-rated restaurants. Cheese, cold cuts, and wine are central to Italian cuisine, with regional declinations and protected designation of origin or protected geographical indication labels, along with pizza and coffee forming part of gastronomic culture. Desserts have a long tradition of merging local flavours, such as citrus fruits, pistachio, and almonds, with sweet cheeses such as mascarpone and ricotta or exotic tastes such as cocoa, vanilla, and cinnamon. Gelato, tiramisu, and cassata are among the most famous examples of Italian desserts.\nThe Italian meal structure is typical of the Mediterranean region and differs from North, Central, and East European meal structures, although it still often consists of breakfast (\"colazione\"), lunch (\"pranzo\"), and dinner (\"cena\"). However, much less emphasis is placed on breakfast, which is often skipped or involves lighter portions than are seen in non-Mediterranean Western countries. Late-morning and mid-afternoon snacks, called \"merenda\" (pl.: \"merende\"), are often included.\nSport.\nThe most popular sport is football. Italy's team is one of the most successful, with four World Cup victories (1934, 1938, 1982, and 2006) and two UEFA Euro victories (1968 and 2020). Italian clubs have won 48 major European trophies, making Italy the second most successful country in Europe, after Spain. Italy's top league is Serie A and is followed by millions of fans around the world.\nOther popular team sports include basketball, volleyball, and rugby. Italy's male and female national volleyball teams are often featured among the world's best. The men's team won three consecutive World Championships (in 1990, 1994, and 1998). Italy men's basketball team's best results were gold at EuroBasket 1983 and 1999, and silver at the 2004 Olympics. Lega Basket Serie A is one of the most competitive in Europe. The Italy national rugby union team competes in the Six Nations Championship, and at the Rugby World Cup.\nAmong individual sports, bicycle racing is popular; Italians have won the UCI World Championships more than any other country, except Belgium. The Giro d'Italia is a cycling race held every May and one of the three Grand Tours. Alpine skiing is a widespread sport, and the country is a popular skiing destination. Italian skiers achieve good results in Winter Olympic Games and the Alpine Ski World Cup. Tennis has a significant following: it is the fourth most practised sport. The Rome Masters, founded in 1930, is one of the most prestigious tennis tournaments. Italian players won the Davis Cup in 1976, 2023, and 2024 and the Fed Cup in 2006, 2009, 2010, 2013, and 2024.\nMotorsports are popular. Italy has won, by far, the most MotoGP World Championships. Italian Scuderia Ferrari is the oldest surviving team in Grand Prix racing, competing since 1948, and the most successful Formula One team with 232 wins. The Italian Grand Prix of Formula One has been held since 1921 always at Autodromo Nazionale Monza (except 1980). Other successful Italian car manufacturers in motorsports are Alfa Romeo, Lancia, Maserati, and Fiat.\nItaly has been successful in the Olympics, taking part from the first Olympiad and in 47 Games out of 48 (not 1904). Italians have won 618 medals at the Summer Olympic Games, and 141 at the Winter Olympics, with 259 golds, the sixth most successful for total medals. The country hosted Winter Olympics in 1956 and 2006, and will host another in 2026; and a Summer games in 1960.\nPublic holidays, festivals and folklore.\nPublic holidays include religious, national, and regional observances. Italy's National Day, the \"Festa della Repubblica\" ('Republic Day'), is celebrated on 2 June, with the main celebration taking place in Rome, and commemorates the birth of the Italian Republic in 1946. The ceremony includes deposition of a wreath as a tribute to the Italian Unknown Soldier and a military parade along Via dei Fori Imperiali in Rome.\nSaint Lucy's Day, on 13 December, is popular among children in some Italian regions, where she plays a role similar to Santa Claus. The Epiphany is associated with the folklore figure of Befana, a broomstick-riding old woman who, on the night of 5 January, brings good children gifts, and bad ones charcoal or bags of ashes. The Assumption of Mary coincides with \"Ferragosto\" on 15 August, the summer vacation period. The Italian national patronal day, on 4 October, celebrates Saints Francis and Catherine. Each city or town also celebrates a public holiday on the festival of the local patron saint. Natale di Roma (lit.\u2009'Birthday of Rome') is an annual festival held in Rome on 21 April to celebrate the legendary founding of the city. According to legend, Romulus is said to have founded the city of Rome on 21 April 753 BC. It was celebrated for the first time in 47 AD.\nFestivals and festivities include the Palio di Siena horse race, Holy Week rites, Saracen Joust of Arezzo, and the \"calcio storico fiorentino\". In 2013, UNESCO included among the intangible cultural heritage Italian festivals and \"pasos\", such as the Varia di Palmi, the Macchina di Santa Rosa in Viterbo, and \"faradda di li candareri\" in Sassari. Other festivals include carnivals in Venice, Viareggio, Ivrea, Foiano della Chiana, and Satriano di Lucania. The Venice Film Festival, awarding the Golden Lion and held since 1932, is the oldest in the world and one of the \"Big Three\" European film festivals, alongside Cannes and Berlin.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14533", "revid": "237572", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14533", "title": "India", "text": "Country in South Asia\nIndia, officially the Republic of India, is a country in South Asia. It is the seventh-largest country by area; the most populous country since 2023; and, since its independence in 1947, the world's most populous democracy. Bounded by the Indian Ocean on the south, the Arabian Sea on the southwest, and the Bay of Bengal on the southeast, it shares land borders with Pakistan to the west; China, Nepal, and Bhutan to the north; and Bangladesh and Myanmar to the east. In the Indian Ocean, India is near Sri Lanka and the Maldives; its Andaman and Nicobar Islands share a maritime border with Myanmar, Thailand, and Indonesia.\nModern humans arrived on the Indian subcontinent from Africa no later than 55,000 years ago. Their long occupation, predominantly in isolation as hunter-gatherers, has made the region highly diverse. Settled life emerged on the subcontinent in the western margins of the Indus river basin 9,000 years ago, evolving gradually into the Indus Valley Civilisation of the third millennium BCE. By \u00a0BCE, an archaic form of Sanskrit, an Indo-European language, had diffused into India from the northwest. Its hymns recorded the early dawnings of Hinduism in India. India's pre-existing Dravidian languages were supplanted in the northern regions. By \u00a0BCE, caste had emerged within Hinduism, and Buddhism and Jainism had arisen, proclaiming social orders unlinked to heredity. Early political consolidations gave rise to the loose-knit Maurya and Gupta Empires. Widespread creativity suffused this era, but the status of women declined, and untouchability became an organised belief. In South India, the Middle kingdoms exported Dravidian language scripts and religious cultures to the kingdoms of Southeast Asia.\nIn the 1st millennium, Islam, Christianity, Judaism, and Zoroastrianism became established on India's southern and western coasts. In the early centuries of the 2nd millennium Muslim armies from Central Asia intermittently overran India's northern plains. The resulting Delhi Sultanate drew northern India into the cosmopolitan networks of medieval Islam. In south India, the Vijayanagara Empire created a long-lasting composite Hindu culture. In the Punjab, Sikhism emerged, rejecting institutionalised religion. The Mughal Empire ushered in two centuries of economic expansion and relative peace, and left a a rich architectural legacy. Gradually expanding rule of the British East India Company turned India into a colonial economy but consolidated its sovereignty. British Crown rule began in 1858. The rights promised to Indians were granted slowly, but technological changes were introduced, and modern ideas of education and the public life took root. A nationalist movement emerged in India, the first in the non-European British Empire and an influence on other nationalist movements. Noted for nonviolent resistance after 1920, it became the primary factor in ending British rule. In 1947, the British Indian Empire was partitioned into two independent dominions, a Hindu-majority dominion of India and a Muslim-majority dominion of Pakistan. A large-scale loss of life and an unprecedented migration accompanied the partition.\nIndia has been a federal republic since 1950, governed through a democratic parliamentary system. It is a pluralistic, multilingual and multi-ethnic society. India's population grew from 361 million in 1951 to over 1.4 billion in 2023. During this time, its nominal per capita income increased from US$64 annually to US$2,601, and its literacy rate from 16.6% to 74%. A comparatively destitute country in 1951, India has become a fast-growing major economy and a hub for information technology services, with an expanding middle class. India has reduced its poverty rate, though at the cost of increasing economic inequality. It is a nuclear-weapon state that ranks high in military expenditure. It has disputes over Kashmir with its neighbours, Pakistan and China, unresolved since the mid-20th century. Among the socio-economic challenges India faces are gender inequality, child malnutrition, and rising levels of air pollution. India's land is megadiverse with four biodiversity hotspots. India's wildlife, which has traditionally been viewed with tolerance in its culture, is supported in protected habitats.\nEtymology.\nAccording to the \"Oxford English Dictionary\", the English proper noun \"India\" derives most immediately from the Classical Latin \"India\", a reference to a loosely-defined historical region of Asia stretching from South Asia to the borders of China. Further etymons are: Hellenistic Greek (); Ancient Greek (), or the River Indus; Achaemenian Old Persian (an eastern province of the Achaemenid Empire); and Sanskrit , or \"river,\" but specifically the Indus river, and by extension its well-settled basin. The Ancient Greeks referred to South Asians as , 'the people of the Indus'.\nThe term \"Bharat\" (; ), mentioned in both Indian epic poetry and the Constitution of India, is used in its variations by many Indian languages. A modern rendering of the historical name , which applied originally to North India, \"Bharat\" gained increased currency from the mid-19th century as a native name for India.\n\"Hindustan\" () is a Middle Persian name for India that became popular by the 13th century, and was used widely since the era of the Mughal Empire. The meaning of \"Hindustan\" has varied, referring to a region encompassing the northern Indian subcontinent (present-day northern India and Pakistan) or to India in its near entirety.\nHistory.\nAncient India.\nBased on coalescence of Mitochondrial DNA and Y Chromosome data, it is thought that the earliest extant lineages of anatomically modern humans or \"Homo sapiens\" on the Indian subcontinent had reached there from Africa between 80,000 and 50,000 years ago, and with high likelihood by 55,000 years ago. However, the earliest known modern human fossils in South Asia date to about 30,000 years ago. Evidence for domestication of food crops and animals, construction of permanent structures, and storage of agricultural surplus appeared in Mehrgarh and other sites in Balochistan, Pakistan after \u00a0BCE. These gradually developed into the Indus Valley Civilisation, the first urban culture in South Asia, which flourished during \u00a0BCE in Pakistan and western India. Centred around cities such as Mohenjo-daro, Harappa, Dholavira, and Kalibangan, and relying on varied forms of subsistence, the civilisation engaged robustly in crafts production and wide-ranging trade.\nDuring the period \u00a0BCE, many regions of the subcontinent transitioned from the Chalcolithic cultures to the Iron Age ones. The Vedas, the oldest scriptures associated with Hinduism, were composed during this period, and historians have analysed these to posit a Vedic culture in the Punjab region and the upper Gangetic Plain. Most historians also consider this period to have encompassed several waves of Indo-Aryan migration into the subcontinent from the north-west. The caste system, which created a hierarchy of priests, warriors, and free peasants, but which excluded indigenous peoples by labelling their occupations impure, arose during this period. On the Deccan Plateau, archaeological evidence from this period suggests the existence of a chiefdom stage of political organisation. In South India, a progression to sedentary life is indicated by the large number of megalithic monuments dating from this period, as well as by nearby traces of agriculture, irrigation tanks, and craft traditions.\nClassical Sanskrit, a refined and standardized grammatical form emerged in the mid-1st millennium BCE and was codified in the \"A\u1e63\u1e6d\u0101dhy\u0101y\u012b\" ('Eight chapters') of P\u0101\u1e47ini. Later, the best-known dramatist of Sanskrit, K\u0101lid\u0101sa, wrote in classical Sanskrit, and the foundations of modern arithmetic were first described in classical Sanskrit. The two major Sanskrit epics, the Mah\u0101bh\u0101rata and the R\u0101m\u0101ya\u1e47a, however, were composed in a range of oral storytelling registers called Epic Sanskrit which was used in northern India between 400 BCE and 300 CE, and roughly contemporary with classical Sanskrit. Politically, around the 6th century BCE, the small states and chiefdoms of the Ganges Plain and the north-western regions had consolidated into 16 major oligarchies and monarchies that were known as the \"mahajanapadas\". The emerging urbanisation gave rise to non-Vedic religious movements, two of which became independent religions. Jainism came into prominence during the life of its exemplar, Mahavira. Buddhism, based on the teachings of Gautama Buddha, attracted followers from many social classes; chronicling the life of the Buddha was central to the beginnings of recorded history in India. In an age of increasing urban wealth, both religions held up renunciation as an ideal, and both established long-lasting monastic traditions. By the 3rd century BCE, the kingdom of Magadha had annexed or reduced other states to emerge as the Maurya Empire. The empire was once thought to have controlled most of the subcontinent except the far south, but its core regions are now thought to have been separated by large autonomous areas. The Mauryan kings are known as much for their empire-building and determined management of public life as for Ashoka's renunciation of militarism and far-flung advocacy of the Buddhist \"dhamma\".\nThe Sangam literature of the Tamil language reveals that, between \u00a0BCE and \u00a0CE, the southern peninsula was ruled by the Cheras, the Cholas, and the Pandyas, dynasties that traded extensively with the Roman Empire and with West and Southeast Asia. In North India, Hinduism asserted patriarchal control within the family, leading to increased subordination of women. By the 4th and 5th centuries, the Gupta Empire had created a complex system of administration and taxation in the greater Ganges Plain; this system became a model for later Indian kingdoms. Under the Guptas, a renewed Hinduism based on devotion, rather than the management of ritual, began to assert itself. This renewal was reflected in a flowering of sculpture and architecture, which found patrons among an urban elite.\nMedieval India.\nThe Indian early medieval age, from \u00a0CE, is defined by regional kingdoms and cultural diversity. When Harsha of Kannauj, who ruled much of the Indo-Gangetic Plain from \u00a0CE, attempted to expand southwards, he was defeated by the Chalukya ruler of the Deccan. When his successor attempted to expand eastwards, he was defeated by the Pala king of Bengal. When the Chalukyas attempted to expand southwards, they were defeated by the Pallavas from farther south, who in turn were opposed by the Pandyas and the Cholas from still farther south. No ruler of this period was able to create an empire and consistently control lands much beyond their core region. During this time, pastoral peoples, whose land had been cleared to make way for the growing agricultural economy, were accommodated within caste society, as were new non-traditional ruling classes. The caste system consequently began to show regional differences.\nIn the 6th and 7th centuries, the first devotional hymns were created in the Tamil language. They were imitated all over India and led to both the resurgence of Hinduism and the development of all modern languages of the subcontinent. Indian royalty, big and small, and the temples they patronised drew citizens in great numbers to the capital cities, which became economic hubs as well. Temple towns of various sizes began to appear everywhere as India underwent another urbanisation. By the 8th and 9th centuries, the effects were felt in Southeast Asia, as South Indian culture and political systems were exported to lands that became part of modern-day Myanmar, Thailand, Laos, Brunei, Cambodia, Vietnam, Philippines, Malaysia, and Indonesia. Indian merchants, scholars, and sometimes armies were involved in this transmission; Southeast Asians took the initiative as well, with many sojourning in Indian seminaries and translating Buddhist and Hindu texts into their languages.\nAfter the 10th century, Muslim Central Asian nomadic clans, using swift-horse cavalry and raising vast armies united by ethnicity and religion, repeatedly overran South Asia's north-western plains, leading eventually to the establishment of the Islamic Delhi Sultanate in 1206. The sultanate was to control much of North India and to make many forays into South India. Although at first disruptive for the Indian elites, the sultanate largely left its vast non-Muslim subject population to its own laws and customs.\nBy repeatedly repulsing Mongol raiders in the 13th century, the sultanate saved India from the devastation visited on West and Central Asia, setting the scene for centuries of migration of fleeing soldiers, learned men, mystics, traders, artists, and artisans from that region into the subcontinent, thereby creating a syncretic Indo-Islamic culture in the north. The sultanate's raiding and weakening of the regional kingdoms of South India paved the way for the indigenous Vijayanagara Empire. Embracing a strong Shaivite tradition and building upon the military technology of the sultanate, the empire came to control much of peninsular India, and was to influence South Indian society for long afterwards.\nEarly modern India.\nIn the early 16th century, northern India, then under mainly Muslim rulers, fell again to the superior mobility and firepower of a new generation of Central Asian warriors. The resulting Mughal Empire did not stamp out the local societies it came to rule. Instead, it balanced and pacified them through new administrative practices and diverse and inclusive ruling elites, leading to more systematic, centralised, and uniform rule. Eschewing tribal bonds and Islamic identity, especially under Akbar, the Mughals united their far-flung realms through loyalty, expressed through a Persianised culture, to an emperor who had near-divine status.\nThe Mughal state's economic policies, deriving most revenues from agriculture and mandating that taxes be paid in the well-regulated silver currency, caused peasants and artisans to enter larger markets. The relative peace maintained by the empire during much of the 17th century was a factor in India's economic expansion, resulting in greater patronage of painting, literary forms, textiles, and architecture. Newly coherent social groups in northern and western India, such as the Marathas, the Rajputs, and the Sikhs, gained military and governing ambitions during Mughal rule, which, through collaboration or adversity, gave them both recognition and military experience. Expanding commerce during Mughal rule gave rise to new Indian commercial and political elites along the coasts of southern and eastern India. As the empire disintegrated, many among these elites were able to seek and control their own affairs.\nBy the early 18th century, with the lines between commercial and political dominance being increasingly blurred, a number of European trading companies, including the English East India Company, had established coastal outposts. The East India Company's control of the seas, greater resources, and more advanced military training and technology led it to increasingly assert its military strength and caused it to become attractive to a portion of the Indian elite; these factors were crucial in allowing the company to gain control over the Bengal region by 1765 and sideline the other European companies. Its further access to the riches of Bengal and the subsequent increased strength and size of its army enabled it to annexe or subdue most of India by the 1820s. India was then no longer exporting manufactured goods as it long had, but was instead supplying the British Empire with raw materials. Many historians consider this to be the onset of India's colonial period. By this time, with its economic power severely curtailed by the British parliament and having effectively been made an arm of British administration, the East India Company began more consciously to enter non-economic arenas, including education, social reform, and culture.\nModern India.\nThe appointment in 1848 of Lord Dalhousie as Governor General of the East India Company set the stage for changes essential to a modern state. These included the consolidation and demarcation of sovereignty, the surveillance of the population, and the education of citizens. Technological changes\u2014among them, railways, canals, and the telegraph\u2014were introduced not long after their introduction in Europe. Disaffection with the company also grew during this time and set off the Indian Rebellion of 1857. Fed by diverse resentments and perceptions, including invasive British-style social reforms, harsh land taxes, and summary treatment of some rich landowners and princes, the rebellion rocked many regions of northern and central India and shook the foundations of Company rule. The East India Company was disbanded, and the British government began to directly administer India. Proclaiming a unitary state and a gradual but limited British-style parliamentary system, the new rulers also protected princes and landed gentry as a feudal safeguard against future unrest. In the decades following, public life gradually emerged all over India, leading eventually to the founding of the Indian National Congress (generally referred to as the Congress) in 1885.\nThe rush of technology and the commercialisation of agriculture in the second half of the 19th century was marked by economic setbacks, and many small farmers became dependent on the whims of far-away markets. There was an increase in the number of large-scale famines, and, despite the risks of infrastructure development borne by Indian taxpayers, little industrial employment was generated for Indians. However, commercial cropping, especially in the newly canalled Punjab, led to increased food production for internal consumption. The railway network provided critical famine relief, notably reduced the cost of moving goods, and helped nascent Indian-owned industry.\nAfter World War I, in which approximately one million Indians served, a new period began. It was marked by British reforms but also repressive legislation, by more strident Indian calls for self-rule, and by the beginnings of a nonviolent movement of non-co-operation, of which Mahatma Gandhi would become the leader and enduring symbol. During the 1930s, slow legislative reform was enacted by the British; the Indian National Congress won victories in the resulting elections. The next decade was beset with crises: Indian participation in World War\u00a0II, the Congress's final push for non-co-operation, and an upsurge of Muslim nationalism. All were capped by the advent of independence in 1947, but tempered by the partition of India into two states: India and Pakistan.\nIndia's constitution was completed in 1950, and put in place a secular and democratic republic. Economic liberalisation has created a large urban middle class and transformed India into a fast growing economy, and increased its geopolitical influence. Yet, India is also shaped by persistent poverty, both rural and urban; by religious and caste-related violence; by Maoist-inspired Naxalite insurgencies; and by separatism in Jammu and Kashmir and in Northeast India. It has unresolved territorial disputes with China and with Pakistan. India's sustained democratic freedoms are unique among the world's newer nations; however, in spite of its recent economic successes, freedom from want for its disadvantaged population remains a goal yet to be achieved.\nGeography.\nIndia accounts for the bulk of the Indian subcontinent, lying atop the Indian tectonic plate, and a part of the Indo-Australian Plate. India's defining geologic processes began approximately 70\u00a0million years ago, when the Indian Plate, then part of the southern supercontinent Gondwana, began a north-eastward drift caused by seafloor spreading to its south-west, and later, south and south-east. Simultaneously, the vast Tethyan oceanic crust, to its northeast, began to subduct under the Eurasian Plate. The Indian continental crust, however, was obstructed and was sheared horizontally. Its lower crust and mantle slid under, but the upper layer piled up in sheets (or nappes) ahead of the subduction zone. This created the orogeny, or process of mountain building, of the Himalayas. The middle and stiffer layer continued to push into Tibet, causing crustal thickening of the Tibetan Plateau. Immediately south of the emerging Himalayas, plate movement created a vast crescent-shaped trough that rapidly filled with river-borne sediment and now constitutes the Indo-Gangetic Plain. The original Indian plate makes its first appearance above the sediment in the ancient Aravalli range, which extends from the Delhi Ridge in a southwesterly direction. To the west lies the Thar Desert, the eastern spread of which is checked by the Aravallis.\nThe remaining Indian Plate survives as peninsular India, the oldest and geologically most stable part of India. It extends as far north as the Satpura and Vindhya ranges in central India. These parallel chains run from the Arabian Sea coast in Gujarat in the west to the coal-rich Chota Nagpur Plateau in Jharkhand in the east. To the south, the remaining peninsular landmass, the Deccan Plateau, is flanked on the west and east by coastal ranges known as the Western and Eastern Ghats; the plateau contains the country's oldest rock formations, some over one billion years old. Constituted in such fashion, India lies to the north of the equator between 6\u00b0 44\u2032 and 35\u00b0 30\u2032 north latitude and 68\u00b0 7\u2032 and 97\u00b0 25\u2032 east longitude.\nMajor Himalayan-origin rivers that substantially flow through India include the Ganges and the Brahmaputra, both of which drain into the Bay of Bengal. Important tributaries of the Ganges include the Yamuna and the Kosi. The Kosi's extremely low gradient, caused by long-term silt deposition, leads to severe floods and course changes. Major peninsular rivers, whose steeper gradients prevent their waters from flooding, include the Godavari, the Mahanadi, the Kaveri, and the Krishna, which also drain into the Bay of Bengal; and the Narmada and the Tapti, which drain into the Arabian Sea.\nIndia's coastline measures in length; of this distance, belong to peninsular India and to the Andaman, Nicobar, and Lakshadweep island chains. According to the Indian naval hydrographic charts, the mainland coastline consists of the following: 43% sandy beaches; 11% rocky shores, including cliffs; and 46% mudflats or marshy shores. Coastal features include the marshy Rann of Kutch of western India and the alluvial Sundarbans delta of eastern India; the latter is shared with Bangladesh. India has two archipelagos: the Lakshadweep, coral atolls off India's south-western coast; and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, a volcanic chain in the Andaman Sea.\nClimate.\nThe Indian climate is strongly influenced by the Himalayas and the Thar Desert, both of which drive the economically and culturally pivotal summer and winter monsoons. The Himalayas prevent cold Central Asian katabatic winds from blowing in, keeping the bulk of the Indian subcontinent warmer than most locations at similar latitudes. The Thar Desert plays a crucial role in attracting the moisture-laden south-west summer monsoon winds that, between June and October, provide the majority of India's rainfall.\nFour major climatic groupings predominate in India: tropical wet, tropical dry, subtropical humid, and montane. Temperatures in India have risen by between 1901 and 2018. Climate change in India is often thought to be the cause. The retreat of Himalayan glaciers has adversely affected the flow rate of the major Himalayan rivers, including the Ganges and the Brahmaputra. According to some current projections, the number and severity of droughts in India will have markedly increased by the end of the present century.\nBiodiversity.\nIndia is a megadiverse country, a term employed for 17 countries that display high biological diversity and contain many species exclusively indigenous, or endemic, to them. India is the habitat for 8.6% of all mammals, 13.7% of bird species, 7.9% of reptile species, 6% of amphibian species, 12.2% of fish species, and 6.0% of all flowering plant species. Fully a third of Indian plant species are endemic. India also contains four of the world's 34 biodiversity hotspots, or regions that display significant habitat loss in the presence of high endemism.\nIndia's most dense forests, such as the tropical moist forest of the Andaman Islands, the Western Ghats, and Northeast India, occupy approximately 3% of its land area. \"Moderately dense forest\", whose canopy density is between 40% and 70%, occupies 9.39% of India's land area. It predominates in the temperate coniferous forest of the Himalayas, the moist deciduous \"sal\" forest of eastern India, and the dry deciduous teak forest of central and southern India. India has two natural zones of thorn forest, one in the Deccan Plateau, immediately east of the Western Ghats, and the other in the western part of the Indo-Gangetic plain, now turned into rich agricultural land by irrigation, its features no longer visible. Among the Indian subcontinent's notable indigenous trees are the astringent \"Azadirachta indica\", or \"neem\", which is widely used in rural Indian herbal medicine, and the luxuriant \"Ficus religiosa\", or \"peepul\", which is displayed on the ancient seals of Mohenjo-daro, and under which the Buddha is recorded in the Pali canon to have sought enlightenment.\nMany Indian species have descended from those of Gondwana, the southern supercontinent from which India separated more than 100 million years ago. India's subsequent collision with Eurasia set off a mass exchange of species. However, volcanism and climatic changes later caused the extinction of many endemic Indian forms. Still later, mammals entered India from Asia through two zoogeographic passes flanking the Himalayas. This lowered endemism among India's mammals, which stands at 12.6%, contrasting with 45.8% among reptiles and 55.8% among amphibians. Among endemics are the vulnerable hooded leaf monkey and the threatened Beddome's toad of the Western Ghats.\nIndia contains 172 IUCN-designated threatened animal species, or 2.9% of endangered forms. These include the endangered Bengal tiger and the Ganges river dolphin. Critically endangered species include the gharial, a crocodilian; the great Indian bustard; and the Indian white-rumped vulture, which has become nearly extinct by having ingested the carrion of diclofenac-treated cattle. Before they were extensively used for agriculture and cleared for human settlement, the thorn forests of Punjab were mingled at intervals with open grasslands that were grazed by large herds of blackbuck preyed on by the Asiatic cheetah; the blackbuck, no longer extant in Punjab, is now severely endangered in India, and the cheetah is extinct. The pervasive and ecologically devastating human encroachment of recent decades has critically endangered Indian wildlife. In response, the system of national parks and protected areas, first established in 1935, was expanded substantially. In 1972, India enacted the Wildlife Protection Act and Project Tiger to safeguard crucial wilderness; the Forest Conservation Act was enacted in 1980 and amendments added in 1988. India hosts more than five hundred wildlife sanctuaries and eighteenbiosphere reserves, four of which are part of the World Network of Biosphere Reserves; its eighty-nine wetlands are registered under the Ramsar Convention.\nGovernment and politics.\nPolitics.\nIndia is a parliamentary republic with a multi-party system. It has sixrecognised national parties, including the Indian National Congress (generally referred to as the Congress) and the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), and over 50regional parties. The Congress is considered the ideological centre in Indian political culture, whereas the BJP is right-wing to far-right. From 1950 to the late 1980s, Congress held a majority in India's parliament. Afterwards, it increasingly shared power with the BJP, as well as with powerful regional parties, which forced multi-party coalition governments at the centre.\nIn the general elections in 1951, 1957, and 1962, the Congress, led by Jawaharlal Nehru, won easy victories. On Nehru's death in 1964, Lal Bahadur Shastri briefly became prime minister; he was succeeded in 1966, by Nehru's daughter Indira Gandhi, who led the Congress to election victories in 1967 and 1971. Following public discontent with the state of emergency Indira Gandhi had declared in 1975, the Congress was voted out of power in 1977; Janata Party, which had opposed the emergency, was voted in. Its government lasted two years; Morarji Desai and Charan Singh served as prime ministers. After the Congress was returned to power in 1980, Indira Gandhi was assassinated and succeeded by Rajiv Gandhi, who won comfortably in the elections later that year. A National Front coalition led by the Janata Dal in alliance with the Left Front won the 1989 elections, with the subsequent government lasting just under two years, and V.P. Singh and Chandra Shekhar serving as prime ministers. In the 1991 Indian general election, the Congress, as the largest single party, formed a minority government led by P. V. Narasimha Rao.\nAfter the 1996 Indian general election, the BJP formed a government briefly; it was followed by United Front coalitions, which depended on external political support. Two prime ministers served during this period: H.D. Deve Gowda and I.K. Gujral. In 1998, the BJP formed a coalition\u2014the National Democratic Alliance (NDA). Led by Atal Bihari Vajpayee, the NDA became the first non-Congress, coalition government to complete a five-year term. In the 2004 Indian general elections, no party won an absolute majority. Still, the Congress emerged as the largest single party, forming another successful coalition: the United Progressive Alliance (UPA). It had the support of left-leaning parties and MPs who opposed the BJP. The UPA returned to power in the 2009 general election with increased numbers, and it no longer required external support from India's communist parties. Manmohan Singh became the first prime minister since Jawaharlal Nehru in 1957 and 1962 to be re-elected to a consecutive five-year term. In the 2014 general election, the BJP became the first political party since 1984 to win an absolute majority. In the 2019 general election, the BJP regained an absolute majority. In the 2024 general election, a BJP-led NDA coalition formed a minority government. Narendra Modi, a former chief minister of Gujarat, is in his third term as the prime minister of India and has held the position since 26 May 2014.\nGovernment.\nThe Constitution of India was drafted by the Constituent Assembly of India with uncommon speed and absence of irregularities between 1946 and 1949. The Government of India Act 1935 was used as a model and framework. Long passages from the Act were included. The constitution describes a federal state with a parliamentary system of democracy. The federal structure was conspicuous for the strength of the central government, which exclusively exercised control of defence, foreign affairs, railways, ports, and currency. The President, the constitutional head of government, has reserve powers for taking over the administration of a state. The central legislature has two houses: the \"Lok Sabha\", whose delegates are directly elected by the people in general elections every five years, and the \"Rajya Sabha\", whose members are nominated by the elected representatives in the states. There are also features not to be found in the Act of 1935. The definition of fundamental rights is based on the Constitution of the United States, and the constitutional directives, or goals of endeavor, are based on the Constitution of Ireland. An Indian institution recommended by the constitution is the \"panchayat\" or village committees. Untouchability is illegal (Article 17) and caste distinctions are derecognized (Articles 15(2) and 16(2)). The promulgation of the Indian constitution transformed India into a republic within the Commonwealth.\nThe Prime Minister of India is the head of government and exercises most executive power. Appointed by the president, the prime minister is supported by the party or political alliance with a majority of seats in the lower house of parliament. The executive of the Indian government consists of the president, the vice-president, and the Union Council of Ministers\u2014with the cabinet being its executive committee\u2014headed by the prime minister. Any minister holding a portfolio must be a member of one of the houses of parliament. In the Indian parliamentary system, the executive is subordinate to the legislature; the prime minister and their council are directly responsible to the lower house of the parliament. Civil servants act as permanent executives and all decisions of the executive are implemented by them.\nIndia has a three-tierunitary independent judiciary comprising the supreme court, headed by the Chief Justice of India, 25high courts, and a large number of trial courts. The supreme court has original jurisdiction over cases involving fundamental rights and over disputes between states and the centre and has appellate jurisdiction over the high courts. It has the power to both strike down union or state laws which contravene the constitution and invalidate any government action it deems unconstitutional.\nAdministrative divisions.\nIndia is a federal union comprising 28 states and 8 union territories. All states, as well as the union territories of Jammu and Kashmir, Puducherry and the National Capital Territory of Delhi, have elected legislatures and governments following the Westminster system. The remaining five union territories are directly ruled by the central government through appointed administrators. In 1956, under the States Reorganisation Act, states were reorganised on a linguistic basis. There are over a quarter of a million local government bodies at city, town, block, district and village levels.\nForeign relations.\nIndia became a republic in 1950, remaining a member of the Commonwealth of Nations. India strongly supported decolonisation in Africa and Asia in the 1950s; it played a leading role in the Non-Aligned Movement. After initial cordial relations, India suffered a military defeat to China in the Sino-Indian War of 1962. Following this, in the Sino-Indian War of 1967 India achieved a military victory over China.\nIndia has had uneasy relations with its western neighbour, Pakistan. The two countries went to war in 1947, 1965, 1971, and 1999. Three of these wars were fought over the disputed territory of Kashmir. In contrast, the 1971 war followed India's support for the independence of Bangladesh. After the 1965 war with Pakistan, India began to pursue close military and economic ties with the Soviet Union. By the late 1960s, the Soviet Union was its largest arms supplier.\nChina's nuclear test of 1964 and threats to intervene in support of Pakistan in the 1965 war caused India to produce nuclear weapons. India conducted its first nuclear weapons test in 1974 and carried out additional underground testing in 1998. India has signed neither the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty nor the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, considering both to be flawed and discriminatory. India maintains a \"no first use\" nuclear policy and is developing a nuclear triad capability as a part of its \"Minimum Credible Deterrence\" doctrine.\nSince the end of the Cold War, India has increased its economic, strategic, and military cooperation with the United States and the European Union. In 2008, a civilian nuclear agreement was signed between India and the United States. Although India possessed nuclear weapons at the time and was not a party to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, it received waivers from the International Atomic Energy Agency and the Nuclear Suppliers Group, ending earlier restrictions on India's nuclear technology and commerce; India subsequently signed co-operation agreements involving civilian nuclear energy with Russia, France, the United Kingdom, and Canada.\nMilitary.\nThe President of India is the supreme commander of the nation's armed forces. With 1.45\u00a0million active troops, India's military is the world's second-largest. The military comprises the Indian Army, the Indian Navy, the Indian Air Force, and the Indian Coast Guard. The official Indian defence budget for 2011 was US$36.03\u00a0billion, or 1.83% of GDP. Defence expenditure was pegged at US$70.12\u00a0billion for fiscal year 2022\u201323 and, increased 9.8% on the previous fiscal year. India is the world's second-largest arms importer; between 2016 and 2020, it accounted for 9.5% of the total global arms imports. Much of the military expenditure was focused on defence against Pakistan and countering growing Chinese influence in the Indian Ocean.\nEconomy.\nAccording to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the Indian economy in 2024 was nominally worth $3.94\u00a0trillion; it is the fifth-largest economy by market exchange rates and, at around $15.0\u00a0trillion, the third-largest by purchasing power parity (PPP). With an average annual GDP growth rate of 5.8% over the past two decades, and reaching 6.1% during 2011\u20132012, India is one of the world's fastest-growing economies. However, due to its low GDP per capita\u2014which ranks 136th in the world in nominal per capita income and 125th in per capita income adjusted for purchasing power parity (PPP)\u2014the vast majority of Indians fall into the low-income group.\nUntil 1991, all Indian governments followed protectionist policies that were influenced by socialist economics. Widespread state intervention and regulation largely walled the economy off from the outside world. An acute balance of payments crisis in 1991 forced the nation to liberalise its economy; since then, it has moved increasingly towards a free-market system by emphasising both foreign trade and direct investment inflows. India has been a member of World Trade Organization since 1 January 1995.\nThe 522-million-worker Indian labour force is the world's second largest, as of 2017[ [update]]. The service sector makes up 55.6% of GDP, the industrial sector 26.3% and the agricultural sector 18.1%. India's foreign exchange remittances of US$100 billion in 2022, highest in the world, were contributed to its economy by 32 million Indians working in foreign countries. In 2006, the share of external trade in India's GDP stood at 24%, up from 6% in 1985. In 2008, India's share of world trade was 1.7%; In 2021, India was the world's ninth-largest importer and the sixteenth-largest exporter. Between 2001 and 2011, the contribution of petrochemical and engineering goods to total exports grew from 14% to 42%. India was the world's second-largest textile exporter after China in the 2013 calendar year.\nAveraging an economic growth rate of 7.5% for several years before 2007, India has more than doubled its hourly wage rates during the first decade of the 21st century. Some 431 million Indians have left poverty since 1985; India's middle classes are projected to number around 580\u00a0million by 2030. In 2024, India's consumer market was the world's third largest. India's nominal GDP per capita increased steadily from US$308 in 1991, when economic liberalisation began, to US$1,380 in 2010, to an estimated US$2,731 in 2024. It is expected to grow to US$3,264 by 2026.\nIndustries.\nThe Indian automotive industry, the world's second-fastest growing, increased domestic sales by 26% during 2009\u20132010, and exports by 36% during 2008\u20132009. In 2022, India became the world's third-largest vehicle market after China and the United States, surpassing Japan. At the end of 2011, the Indian IT industry employed 2.8\u00a0million professionals, generated revenues close to US$100\u00a0billion equalling 7.5% of Indian GDP, and contributed 26% of India's merchandise exports.\nThe pharmaceutical industry in India includes 3,000 pharmaceutical companies and 10,500 manufacturing units; India is the world's third-largest pharmaceutical producer, largest producer of generic medicines, and supplies up to 50\u201360% of global vaccines demand, contributing up to US$24.44\u00a0billions in exports. India's local pharmaceutical market is estimated up to US$42\u00a0billion. India is among the top 12 biotech destinations in the world. The Indian biotech industry grew by 15.1% in 2012\u20132013, increasing its revenues from \u20b9204.4\u00a0billion (Indian rupees) to \u20b9235.24\u00a0billion (US$3.94\u00a0billion at June 2013 exchange rates).\nIndia's capacity to generate electrical power is 300 gigawatts, of which 42 gigawatts is renewable. The country's usage of coal is a major cause of India's greenhouse gas emissions, but its renewable energy is competing strongly. India emits about 7% of global greenhouse gas emissions. This equates to about 2.5 tons of carbon dioxide per person per year, which is half the world average. Increasing access to electricity and clean cooking with liquefied petroleum gas have been priorities for energy in India.\nDemographics.\nWith an estimated 1,428,627,663 residents in 2023, India is the world's most populous country. 1,210,193,422 residents were reported in the 2011 provisional census report. The median age was 28.7 in 2020. Medical advances made in the last 50 years as well as increased agricultural productivity brought about by the \"Green Revolution\" have caused India's population to grow rapidly, though India's decennial rates of growth are decreasing: ts population grew by 17.64% from 2001 to 2011, compared to 21.54% growth in the previous decade (1991\u20132001). The first post-colonial census, conducted in 1951, counted 361\u00a0million people. The life expectancy at birth has increased from 49.7 years in 1970\u20131975 to 72.0 years in 2023. The under-five mortality rate for the country was 113 per 1,000 live births in 1994 whereas in 2018 it reduced to 41.1 per 1,000 live births.\nThe human sex ratio, according to the 2011 census, is 940 females per 1,000 males. Female infanticide in India, and lately female foeticide, have created lop-sided gender ratios; the number of missing women in the country quadrupled from 15 million to 63\u00a0million during the period 1964\u20132014, faster than the population growth during the same period. According to an Indian government study, an additional 21 million girls are unwanted and do not receive adequate care. Despite a government ban on sex-selective foeticide, the practice has far from stopped.\nMigration from rural to urban areas has been an important dynamic in India's recent history. The number of people living in urban areas grew by 31.2% between 1991 and 2001. In 2001, over 70% lived in rural areas. The level of urbanisation increased further from 27.81% in the 2001 census to 31.16% in the 2011 census. The slowing down of the overall population growth rate was due to the sharp decline in the growth rate in rural areas since 1991. In the 2011 census, there were 53 million-plus urban agglomerations in India. Among them Mumbai, Delhi, Kolkata, Chennai, Bengaluru, Hyderabad and Ahmedabad, in decreasing order by population. \nLanguages.\nLanguages of India belong to several language families. The 2011 Census of India, the last conducted by the Indian government, gives the following breakdown:\nThere are also small numbers of speakers of Tai\u2013Kadai, Andamanese, and minor language families and isolates.\nThr official language of India's federal government was chosen by the Constituent Assembly of India in September 1949 after three years of debate between two opposing camps. The Hindi language protagonists wanted the Hindi in the Devanagari script to be the sole \"national language\" of India; the delegates from South India preferred English to have a place in the Constitution. The compromise formula declared (i) Hindi to be the \"official language\" of India's federal government; (ii) English to be an associate official language for 15 years during which Hindi's formal lexicon would be developed; and (iii) the international form of the Hindu\u2013Arabic numerals to be the official numerals. The compromise resolution became articles 343\u2013351 of India's constitution, which came into effect on 26 January 1950. In 1965, when the 15 years were up, the Government of India announced that English would continue to be the \"de facto formal language of India.\"\nThe Eighth Schedule of India's Constitution also recognizes 22 languages, including Hindu but not English, which the government is obligated to develop. These are sometimes called \"scheduled languages.\" This list includes major regional languages, but also others\u2014such as Sanskrit, which no longer has first language speakers in India, and Urdu, which is not region-specific\u2014because of their value to India's cultural heritage. In 1950, there were 14 scheduled languages: Assamese, Bengali, Gujarati, Hindi, Kannada, Kashmiri, Malayalam, Marathi, Oriya, Punjabi, Sanskrit, Tamil, Telugu and Urdu. In the coming decades contitutional amendments added others: Sindhi (1967), Nepali, Manipuri, and Konkani (1992), Maithili, Dogri, Santali and Bodo (2004), all now totaling 22.\nReligion.\nReligion in India is characterised by a diversity of beliefs and practices. Throughout India's history, religion has been an important part of its culture. The Indian subcontinent is the birthplace of four major world religions: Buddhism, Hinduism, Jainism, and Sikhism. India has the largest population of Hindus, Sikhs, and Jains, the third-largest population of Muslims (after Indonesia and Pakistan) and the ninth largest of Buddhists. India also has the largest population of people adhering to both Zoroastrianism (Parsis and Iranis) and the Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith; these religions are otherwise largely followed in Iran where they arose.\nThe Preamble to the Constitution of India declares India to be a secular state, and freedom of religion to be a fundamental right (\"... liberty of thought, expression, belief, faith, and worship.\") According to the 2011 census of India, 79.8% of the population of India follows Hinduism, 14.2% Islam, 2.3% Christianity, 1.7% Sikhism, 0.7% Buddhism and 0.4% Jainism. Several tribal religions are also present in India, such as Donyi-Polo, Sanamahism, Sarnaism, and Niamtre.\nEducation.\nThe literacy rate in 2011 was 74.04%: 65.46% among females and 82.14% among males. The rural-urban literacy gap, which was 21.2 percentage points in 2001, dropped to 16.1 percentage points in 2011. The improvement in the rural literacy rate is twice that of urban areas. Kerala is the most literate state with 93.91% literacy; while Bihar the least with 63.82%. In the 2011 census, about 73% of the population was literate, with 81% for men and 65% for women. This compares to 1981 when the respective rates were 41%, 53% and 29%. In 1951, the rates were 18%, 27% and 9%. In 1921, the rates 7%, 12% and 2%. In 1891, they were 5%, 9% and 1%, According to Latika Chaudhary, in 1911 there were under three primary schools for every ten villages. Statistically, more caste and religious diversity reduced private spending. Primary schools taught literacy, so local diversity limited its growth.\nThe education system of India is the world's second-largest. India has over 900 universities, 40,000 colleges and 1.5\u00a0million schools. In India's higher education system, a significant number of seats are reserved under affirmative action policies for the historically disadvantaged. In recent decades India's improved education system is often cited as one of the main contributors to its economic development.\nHealth.\nIndia bears a disproportionately large burden of the world's tuberculosis rates, with World Health Organization (WHO) statistics for 2022 estimating 2.8 million new infections annually, accounting for 26% of the global total. It is estimated that approximately 40% of the population of India carry tuberculosis infection.\nIn 2018 chronic obstructive pulmonary disease was the leading cause of death after heart disease. The 10 most polluted cities in the world are all in India with more than 140 million people breathing air 10 times or more over the WHO safe limit. In 2017, air pollution killed 1.24 million Indians.\nCulture.\nSociety.\nAlthough sometimes applied to other cultures and religions, caste is a uniquely Indian, and Hindu, social institution. All Hindus fall fall broadly into four castes, or \"varnas\": Brahmin, or priests, at the top; below them Kshatriya, or warriors; further below, Vaishya, or merchants and farmers; and at the bottom, Shudra, or the service class. Outside the caste system, and therefore of traditional Hinduism, lie people formerly called \"outcastes\" or \"untouchables,\" and now scheduled caste (a term used in India's constitution) or Dalit, a later self-description of pride, meaning broken or downtrodden. Each caste is further divided into sub-castes, or jatis, many tied to occupations. The custom of endogamy, or marrying within one's subcaste, however, makes caste is a hereditary label, not of one occupational choice, and the caste system, therefore, entrenched. The Constituent Assembly of India abolished untouchability in 1947, the Republic of India more formally in 1950, and India has since enacted other anti-discriminatory laws and social welfare initiatives related to caste. Still, caste-based inequality, discrimination, segregation, and violence persist.\nMulti-generational patrilineal joint families have been the norm in India, though nuclear families are becoming common in urban areas. A very large majority of Indians have their marriages arranged by their parents or family elders. Marriage is thought to be for life; and the divorce rate is extremely low; less than one in a thousand marriages end in divorce. Many women marry before reaching 18, which is their legal marriageable age; child marriages are not uncommon, especially in rural areas; In large parts of Hindu northern India, moreover, a form of territorial exogamy is observed in which a bride marries out of her natal village and her parents do not visit her in her married home; the annual rite raksha bandhan, during which married women return to their natal homes, has served both to affirm bonds with their natal families and offer a recourse in times of marital stress. \nVisual art.\nIndia has a very ancient tradition of art, which has exchanged many influences with the rest of Eurasia, especially in the first millennium, when Buddhist art spread with Indian religions to Central, East and Southeast Asia, the last also greatly influenced by Hindu art. Thousands of seals from the Indus Valley civilisation of the third millennium BCE have been found, usually carved with animals, but also some with human figures. The Pashupati seal, excavated in Mohenjo-daro, Pakistan, in 1928\u201329, is the best known. After this there is a long period with virtually nothing surviving. Almost all surviving ancient Indian art thereafter is in various forms of religious sculpture in durable materials, or coins. There was probably originally far more in wood, which is lost. In north India Mauryan art is the first imperial movement.\nIn the first millennium CE, Buddhist art spread with Indian religions to Central, East and Southeast Asia, the last also greatly influenced by Hindu art. Over the following centuries a distinctly Indian style of sculpting the human figure developed, with less interest in articulating precise anatomy than ancient Greek sculpture but showing smoothly flowing forms expressing \"prana\" (\"breath\" or life-force). This is often complicated by the need to give figures multiple arms or heads, or represent different genders on the left and right of figures, as with the Ardhanarishvara form of Shiva and Parvati.\nMost of the earliest large sculpture is Buddhist, either excavated from Buddhist stupas such as Sanchi, Sarnath and Amaravati, or is rock cut reliefs at sites such as Ajanta, Karla and Ellora. Hindu and Jain sites appear rather later. In spite of this complex mixture of religious traditions, generally, the prevailing artistic style at any time and place has been shared by the major religious groups, and sculptors probably usually served all communities. Gupta art, at its peak c., is often regarded as a classical period whose influence lingered for many centuries after; it saw a new dominance of Hindu sculpture, as at the Elephanta Caves. Across the north, this became rather stiff and formulaic after c., though rich with finely carved detail in the surrounds of statues. But in the South, under the Pallava and Chola dynasties, sculpture in both stone and bronze had a sustained period of great achievement; the large bronzes with Shiva as Nataraja have become an iconic symbol of India.\nAncient paintings have only survived at a few sites, of which the crowded scenes of court life in the Ajanta Caves are some of the most important. Painted manuscripts of religious texts survive from Eastern India from 10th century onwards, most of the earliest being Buddhist and later Jain. These significantly influenced later artistic styles. The Persian-derived Deccan painting, starting just before the Mughal miniature, between them give the first large body of secular painting, with an emphasis on portraits, and the recording of princely pleasures and wars. The style spread to Hindu courts, especially among the Rajputs, and developed a variety of styles, with the smaller courts often the most innovative, with figures such as Nih\u00e2l Chand and Nainsukh. As a market developed among European residents, it was supplied by Company painting by Indian artists with considerable Western influence. In the 19th century, cheap Kalighat paintings of gods and everyday life, done on paper, were urban folk art from Calcutta, which later saw the Bengal School of Art, reflecting the art colleges founded by the British, the first movement in modern Indian painting.\nMathematics.\nSignificant mathematics began in India in the early first millennium BCE. The \"\u015aulba S\u016btras\" (literally, \"Aphorisms of the Chords\" in Vedic Sanskrit) (c. 700\u2013400 BCE) contain the earliest extant verbal expression of the Pythagorean Theorem (although it had already been known to the Old Babylonians.) All mathematical works were orally transmitted until approximately 500\u00a0BCE; thereafter, they were transmitted both orally and in manuscript form. The oldest extant mathematical document produced on the Indian subcontinent is the birch bark Bakhshali Manuscript from the 7th century CE.\nIn the classical period of Indian mathematics (400 CE to 1200 CE), important contributions were made by Aryabhata, Brahmagupta, Bhaskara II, Var\u0101hamihira, and Madhava. The decimal number system in use today was first recorded in Indian mathematics. Indian mathematicians made early contributions to the study of the concept of zero as a number, negative numbers, arithmetic, and algebra. Trigonometry was further advanced in India, and the modern definitions of sine and cosine were developed there. These mathematical concepts were transmitted to the Middle East, China, and Europe A later landmark in Indian mathematics was the development of the series expansions for trigonometric functions (sine, cosine, and arc tangent) by mathematicians of the Kerala school in the 15th century CE. Their work, completed two centuries before the invention of calculus in Europe, provided the first example of a power series. In the modern era Srinivasa Ramanujan made fundamental contributions to number theory.\nMusic.\nIndia contains a wide array of musical practices, including many different folk musics from different regions. Indian classical music has Vedic origins, and split in the 13th century into the two main traditions of Hindustani and Carnatic music. Hindustani is associated with North India and more improvisational, featuring instruments such as the sitar and tabla, and Carnatic is South Indian and more focused on written compositions such as the \"kriti\", while both styles contain common elements such as the raga melodic framework and tala rhythmic meter. Indian music has influenced western genres, notably rock and jazz musicians during the 1960s counterculture.\nFilmi is music written for Indian cinema, generally composed by music directors and sung by playback singers. Modern Indian pop takes influences from classical, folk, and western pop music.\nDance.\nDance in India is heavily influenced by classical dance traditions. Their numbers vary, but the Sangeet Natak Academy, the Indian government's organisation for the presentation of Indian performing arts, recognizes eight classical dances: \nAlthough many classical dances were originally religious or temple dances, their sponsorship and promotion has continued in secular, modern India. Among young urban middle-class women, a proficiency in classical dance is a sought after social achievement. India also has many local dance traditions. The conventional dance sequences of Indian films, including Bollywood, have relied on classical and local traditions.\nClothing.\nFrom ancient times until the advent of the modern, the most widely worn traditional dress in India was draped. For women it took the form of a sari, a single piece of cloth many yards long. The sari was traditionally wrapped around the lower body and the shoulder. In its modern form, it is combined with an underskirt, or Indian petticoat, and tucked in along the waist band for more secure fastening. It is also commonly worn with an Indian blouse, or choli, which serves as the primary upper-body garment, the sari's end\u2014passing over the shoulder\u2014covering the midriff and obscuring the upper body's contours. For men, a similar but shorter length of cloth, the dhoti, has served as a lower-body garment.\nThe use of stitched clothes became widespread after Muslim rule was established by the Delhi sultanate (c.\u20091300 CE) and continued by the Mughal Empire (c.\u20091525 CE). Among the garments introduced during this time and still commonly worn are: the shalwars and pyjamas, both styles of trousers, and the tunics kurta and kameez. Shalwars are atypically wide at the waist but narrow to a cuffed bottom. They are held up by a drawstring, which causes them to become pleated around the waist. When the pants are cut quite narrow, on the bias, they are called churidars. The kameez is a long shirt or tunic. Its side seams left open below the waistline. The kurta is traditionally collarless and made of cotton or silk; it is worn plain or with embroidered decoration, such as chikankari; and typically falls to either just above or just below the wearer's knees.\nIn the last 50 years, fashions have changed a great deal in India. Increasingly, in urban northern India, the sari is no longer the apparel of everyday wear, though they remain popular on formal occasions. The traditional shalwar kameez is rarely worn by younger urban women, who favour churidars or jeans. In office settings, ubiquitous air conditioning allows men to wear sports jackets year-round. For weddings and formal occasions, men in the middle and upper classes often wear bandhgala, or short Nehru jackets, with pants, with the groom and his groomsmen sporting sherwanis and churidars.\nCuisine.\nThe foundation of a typical Indian meal is a cereal cooked plainly and complemented with savoury dishes. The cooked cereal could be steamed rice; chapati, a thin unleavened bread; the idli, a steamed breakfast cake; or dosa, a griddled pancake. The savoury dishes might include lentils, pulses, vegetables, meat, poultry and fish commonly spiced with ginger and garlic, but also coriander, cumin, turmeric, cinnamon, cardamon and others. In some instances, the ingredients may be mixed during the cooking process. India has distinctive vegetarian cuisines, each a feature of the geographical and cultural histories of its adherents. About 20% to 39% of India's population consists of vegetarians. Although meat is eaten widely in India, the proportional consumption of meat in the overall diet is low.\nThe most significant import of cooking techniques into India during the last millennium occurred during the Mughal Empire. Dishes such as the pilaf, and cooking techniques spread into northern India from regions to its northwest. To the simple yogurt marinade of Persia, onions, garlic, almonds, and spices began to be added in India. Rice was partially cooked and layered alternately with the sauteed meat, the pot sealed tightly, and slow cooked according to another Persian cooking technique, to produce biryani, a feature of festive dining in many parts of India.\nThe diversity of Indian food served worldwide has been partially concealed by the dominance of Punjabi cuisine. The popularity of tandoori chicken\u2014cooked in the tandoor oven, which had traditionally been used for baking bread in the rural Punjab and the Delhi region, especially among Muslims, but which is originally from Central Asia\u2014dates to the 1950s, and was caused in large part by an entrepreneurial response among people from the Punjab who had been displaced by the 1947 partition.\nSports.\nSeveral traditional indigenous sports such as \"kabaddi\", \"kho kho\", \"pehlwani\" and \"gilli-danda\", and also martial arts, such as \"Kalarippayattu\" and \"marma adi\" remain popular. Chess is commonly held to have originated in India as \"chatura\u1e45ga\"; There has been a rise in the number of Indian grandmasters. Viswanathan Anand became the undisputed Chess World Champion in 2007 and held the status until 2013. Parcheesi is derived from \"Pachisi\" another traditional Indian pastime, which in early modern times was played on a giant marble court by Mughal emperor Akbar.\nCricket is the most popular sport in India. India is one of the more successful cricket teams, having won two Cricket World Cups, two T20 World Cups, and three Champions Trophies. India has won a record eight field hockey gold medals in the summer Olympics.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nOverview.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEtymology.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBiodiversity.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPolitics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nForeign relations and military.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEconomy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCulture.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nGovernment\nGeneral information"}
{"id": "14535", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14535", "title": "Music of India", "text": " \nOwing to India's vastness and diversity, Indian music encompasses numerous genres in multiple varieties and forms which include classical music, folk, rock, and pop. It has a history spanning several millennia and developed over several geo-locations spanning the sub-continent. Music in India began as an integral part of socio-religious life.\nHistory.\nPre-history.\nPaleolithic.\nThe 30,000-year-old paleolithic and neolithic cave paintings at the UNESCO world heritage site at Bhimbetka rock shelters in Madhya Pradesh show a type of dance. Mesolithic and chalcolithic cave art of Bhimbetka illustrates musical instruments such as Gongs, Bowed Lyre, daf etc.\nNeolithic.\nChalcolithic era (4000 BCE onward) narrow bar shaped polished stone celts like music instruments, one of the earlier musical instrument in India, were excavated at Sankarjang in the Angul district of Odisha. There is historical evidence in the form of sculptural evidence, i.e. musical instruments, singing and dancing postures of damsels in the Ranigumpha Caves in Khandagiri and Udayagiri at Bhubaneswar.\nIndus River Valley Civilization.\nDancing Girl sculpture (2500 BCE) was found from the Indus Valley civilization (IVC) site. There are IVC-era paintings on pottery of a man with a dhol hanging from his neck and a woman holding a drum under her left arm.\nVedic and ancient era.\nVedas (c. 1500 \u2013 c. 800 BCE Vedic period) document rituals with performing arts and play. For example, Shatapatha Brahmana (c.800\u2013700 BCE) has verses in chapter 13.2 written in the form of a play between two actors. \"Tala\" or \"taal\" is an ancient music concept traceable to Vedic era texts of Hinduism, such as the \"Samaveda\" and methods for singing the Vedic hymns. Smriti (500 BCE to 100 BCE ) post-vedic Hindu texts include Valmiki's Ramayana (500 BCE to 100 BCE) which mentions dance and music (dance by Apsaras such as Urvashi, Rambha, Menaka, Tilottama Panch\u0101psaras, and Ravana's wives excelling in \"nrityageeta\" or \"singing and dancing\" and \"nritavaditra\" or \"playing musical instruments\"), music and singing by Gandharvas, several string instruments (vina, tantri, b\u012bn, vipanci and \"vallaki\" similar to \"veena\"), wind instruments (shankha, venu and \"venugana\" \u2013 likely a mouth organ made by tying several flutes together), raga (including \"kaushika\" such as \"raag kaushik dhwani\"), vocal registers (seven \"svara\" or \"sur\", \"ana\" or \"ekashurti\" drag note, \"murchana\" the regulated rise and fall of voice in \"matra\" and \"tripramana\" three-fold \"teen taal\" \"laya\" such as \"drut\" or quick, \"madhya\" or middle, and \"vilambit\" or slow), poetry recitation in Bala Kanda and also in Uttara Kanda by Luv and Kusha in \"marga\" style. \nStarting from the earliest known work Tholkappiyam (500 BCE), there are several references to music and \"Panns\" in the ancient pre-Sangam and Sangam literature starting from the earliest known work Tholkappiyam (500 BCE). Among Sangam literature, \"Mathuraikkanci\" refers to women singing \"sevvazhi pann\" to invoke the mercy of God during childbirth. In \"Tolkappiyam\", the five landscapes of the Sangam literature had each an associated \"Pann\", each describing the mood of the song associated with that landscape. Among the numerous \"panns\" that find mention in the ancient Tamil literature are, \"Ambal Pann\", which is suitable to be played on the flute, \"sevvazhi pann\" on the \"Yazh\" (lute), \"Nottiram\" and \"Sevvazhi\" expressing pathos, the captivating \"Kurinji pann\" and the invigorating \"Murudappann\". Pann() is the melodic mode used by the Tamil people in their music since the ancient times. The ancient \"panns\" over centuries evolved first into a pentatonic scale and later into the seven note Carnatic Sargam. But from the earliest times, Tamil Music is heptatonic and known as Ezhisai (\u0b8f\u0bb4\u0bbf\u0b9a\u0bc8).\nsanskrit saint-poet Jayadeva, who was the great composer and illustrious master of classical music, shaped \"Odra-Magadhi\" style music and had great influence on Odissi Sangita.\n\u015a\u0101r\u1e45gadeva composed Sangita-Ratnakara, one of the most important Sanskrit musicological texts from India, which is regarded as the definitive text in both Hindustani music and Carnatic music traditions of Indian classical music.\nAssamese poet Madhava Kandali, writer of Saptakanda Ramayana, lists several instruments in his version of \"Ramayana\", such as mardala, khumuchi, bhemachi, dagar, gratal, ramtal, tabal, jhajhar, jinjiri, bheri mahari, tokari, dosari, kendara, dotara, vina, rudra-vipanchi, etc. (meaning that these instruments existed since his time in the 14th century or earlier). The Indian system of notation is perhaps the world's oldest and most elaborate.\nMedieval era.\nIn the early 14th century under the Khiljis, there were concerts and competitions between Hindustani and Carnatic musicians.\nFrom the 16th century onwards, treatises written on music were Sangitamava Chandrika, Gita Prakasha, Sangita Kalalata and Natya Manorama.\nTwentieth century.\nIn the early 1960s Jazz pioneers such as John Coltrane and George Harrison collaborated with Indian instrumentalists and started to use Indian instruments such as sitar in their songs. In the late 1970s and early 1980s, rock and roll fusions with Indian music were well known throughout Europe and North America. In the late 1980s, Indian-British artists fused Indian and Western traditions to make the Asian Underground. In the new millennium, American hip-hop has featured Indian filmi and bhangra. Mainstream hip-hop artists have sampled songs from Bollywood movies and have collaborated with Indian artists, such as Timbaland's \"Indian Flute\"\nIn 2010, Laura Marling and Mumford &amp; Sons collaborated with the Dharohar Project.\nClassical music.\nThe two main traditions of Indian classical music are Carnatic music, which is practised predominantly in the peninsular (southern) regions, and Hindustani music, which is found in the northern, eastern and central regions. The basic concepts of this music includes \"Shruti\" (microtones), \"Swaras\" (notes), \"Alankar\" (ornamentations), \"Raga\" (melodies improvised from basic grammars), and \"Tala\" (rhythmic patterns used in percussion). Its tonal system divides the octave into 22 segments called Shrutis, not all equal but each roughly equal to a quarter of a whole tone of the Western music. Both the classical music are standing on the fundamentals of The seven notes of Indian Classical music. These seven notes are also called as Sapta svara or Sapta Sur. These seven svaras are Sa, Re, Ga, Ma, Pa, Dha and Ni respectively. These Sapta Svaras are spelt as Sa, Re, Ga, Ma, Pa, Dha and Ni, but these are shortforms of Shadja (\u0937\u0921\u094d\u091c), Rishabha (\u090b\u0937\u092d), Gandhara (\u0917\u093e\u0928\u094d\u0927\u093e\u0930), Madhyama (\u092e\u0927\u094d\u092f\u092e), Panchama (\u092a\u0902\u091a\u092e), Dhaivata (\u0927\u0948\u0935\u0924) and Nishada (\u0928\u093f\u0937\u093e\u0926) respectively. These are also equivalent to Do, Re, Mi, Fa, So, La, Ti. Only these seven svaras built up the Hindustani classical music and the Carnatic classical music. These seven svaras are the fundamentals of a raga. This seven svaras without any variations in them, are called as Shuddha svaras. Variations in these svaras cause them to be and svaras. All the other svaras except Sadja(Sa) and Pancham (Pa) can be or svaras but Sa and Pa are always svaras. And hence svaras Sa and Pa are called Achal Svaras, since these svaras don't move from their original position while svaras Ra, Ga, Ma, Dha, Ni are called Chal Svaras, since these svaras move from their original position.\n Sa, Re, Ga, Ma, Pa, Dha, Ni - Svaras\n Re, Ga, Dha, Ni - Komal Svaras \n Ma - Svaras\nSangeet Natak Academy recognizes eight classical dance and music forms, namely Bharatanatyam, Kathak, Kuchipudi, Odissi, Kathakali, Sattriya, Manipuri and Mohiniyattam. Additionally, India's Ministry of culture also includes Chhau in its classical list.\nCarnatic music.\nCarnatic music can be traced to the 14th - 15th centuries AD and thereafter. It originated in South India during the rule of Vijayanagar Empire through the Keerthanas composed by Purandara Dasa. Like Hindustani music, it is melodic, with improvised variations, but tends to have more fixed compositions. It consists of a composition with improvised embellishments added to the piece in the forms of \"Raga Alapana\", \"Kalpanaswaram\", \"Neraval\" and, in the case of more advanced students, Ragam Thanam Pallavi. The main emphasis is on the vocals as most compositions are written to be sung, and even when played on instruments, they are meant to be performed in a singing style (known as \"g\u0101yaki\"). Around 300 ragams are in use today. Annamayya is the first known composer in Carnatic music. He is widely regarded as the Andhra Pada kavit\u0101 Pit\u0101maha (Godfather of Telugu song-writing).\nPurandara Dasa is considered the father of Carnatic music, while the later musicians Tyagaraja, Shyama Shastry and Muthuswami Dikshitar are considered the trinity of Carnatic music.\nNoted artists of Carnatic music include Ariyakudi Ramanuja Iyengar (the father of the current concert format), Palghat Mani Iyer, Madurai Mani Iyer, Semmangudi Srinivasa Iyer, Nedunuri Krishnamurthy Alathur Brothers, M. S. Subbulakshmi, Lalgudi Jayaraman, Balamuralikrishna, T. N. Seshagopalan, K. J. Yesudas, N. Ramani, Umayalpuram K. Sivaraman, Sanjay Subrahmanyan, T. M. Krishna, Bombay Jayashri, Aruna Sairam, Mysore Manjunath,\nEvery December, the city of Chennai in India has its eight-week-long Music Season, which is the world's largest cultural event.\nCarnatic music has served as the foundation for most music in South India, including folk music, festival music and has also extended its influence to film music in the past 100\u2013150 years or so.\nHindustani music.\nThe tradition of Hindustani music dates back to Vedic times where the hymns in the Sama Veda, an ancient religious text, were sung as Samagana and not chanted. It diverged from Carnatic music around the 13th\u201314th centuries CE, primarily due to Islamic influences. Developing a strong and diverse tradition over several centuries, it has contemporary traditions established primarily in India but also in Pakistan and Bangladesh. In contrast to Carnatic music, the other main Indian classical music tradition originating from the South, Hindustani music was not only influenced by ancient Hindu musical traditions, historical Vedic philosophy and native Indian sounds but also enriched by the Persian performance practices of the Mughals. Classical genres are dhrupad, dhamar, khyal, tarana and sadra, and there are also several semi-classical forms.\nThe root of the name C(K)arnatic music is derived from Sanskrit. Karnam means ears and Atakam means that which is sweet or that which lingers on.\nLight classical music.\nThere are many types of music which comes under the category of light classical or semi-classical. Some of the forms are Thumri, Dadra, Bhajan, Ghazal, Chaiti, Kajri, Tappa, Natya Sangeet and Qawwali. These forms place emphasis on explicitly seeking emotion from the audience, as opposed to the classical forms.\nFolk music.\nTamang Selo.\nThis is a musical genre of the Tamang people and popular amongst the Nepali speaking community in West Bengal, Sikkim, India and around the world. It is accompanied by Tamang instruments, the Madal, Damphu and Tungna, although nowadays musicians have taken to modern instruments. A Tamang Selo can be catchy and lively or slow and melodious, and is usually sung to convey sorrow, love, happiness or day-to-day incidents and stories of folklore.\nHira Devi Waiba is hailed as the pioneer of Nepali folk songs and Tamang Selo. Her song 'Chura ta Hoina Astura' (\u091a\u0941\u0930\u093e \u0924 \u0939\u094b\u0907\u0928 \u0905\u0938\u094d\u0924\u0941\u0930\u093e) is said to be the first Tamang Selo ever recorded. She has sung nearly 300 songs through her musical career spanning 40 years. After Waiba's death in 2011, her son Satya Aditya Waiba (producer/manager) and Navneet Aditya Waiba (singer) collaborated and re-recorded her most iconic songs and released an album titled \"Ama Lai Shraddhanjali\" (\u0906\u092e\u093e\u0932\u093e\u0908 \u0936\u094d\u0930\u0926\u094d\u0927\u093e\u091e\u094d\u091c\u0932\u0940-Tribute to Mother). The duo are the only individuals in the Nepali folk music genre who produce authentic traditional Nepali folk songs without adulteration or modernisation.\nBhangra and Giddha.\nBhangra (Punjabi: \u0a2d\u0a70\u0a17\u0a5c\u0a3e) is a form of dance-oriented folk music of Punjab. The present musical style is derived from non-traditional musical accompaniment to the riffs of Punjab called by the same name. The female dance of Punjab region is known as Giddha (Punjabi: \u0a17\u0a3f\u0a71\u0a27\u0a3e).\nBihu and Borgeet.\nBihu () is the festival of New Year of Assam falling on mid-April. This is a festival of nature and mother earth where the first day is for the cows and buffaloes. The second day of the festival is for the man. Bihu dances and songs accompanied by traditional drums and wind instruments are an essential part of this festival. Bihu songs are energetic and with beats to welcome the festive spring. Assamese drums (dhol), Pepa(usually made from buffalo horn), Gogona are major instruments used.\nBorgeets () are lyrical songs that are set to specific ragas but not necessarily to any tala. These songs, composed by Srimanta Sankardeva and Madhavdeva in the 15th\u201316th centuries, are used to begin prayer services in monasteries, e.g. Satra and Namghar associated with the Ekasarana Dharma; and they also belong to the repertoire of Music of Assam outside the religious context. They are a lyrical strain that express the religious sentiments of the poets reacting to different situations, and differ from other lyrics associated with the Ekasarana Dharma. Prominent instruments used in borgeets are \"Negera,\"Taal, Khols etc.\nDandiya.\nDandiya or Raas is a form of Gujarati cultural dance that is performed with sticks. The present musical style is derived from the traditional musical accompaniment to the folk dance. It is practiced mainly in the state of Gujarat. There is also another type of dance and music associated with Dandiya/Raas called Garba.\nGaana.\nGaana is a rap-like \"collection of rhythms, beats and sensibilities native to the Dalits of Chennai.\" It evolved over the past two centuries, combining influences from the \"siddhars\" (tantric adepts) of ancient Tamilakam, Tamil Sufi saints, and more. Gaana songs are performed at weddings, stage shows, political rallies, and funerals. Performers sing about a wide range of topics, but the essence of gaana is said to be \"angst and melancholy\" based in life's struggles. In the past few decades, the genre has entered the music of the mainstream Tamil film industry and gained popularity. Contemporary gaana bands like The Casteless Collective are bringing the genre to new audiences while using it for social activism, especially against caste discrimination.\nHaryanvi.\nHaryana folk music has two main forms: classical folk music of Haryana and desi folk music of Haryana (country music of Haryana). They take the form of ballads and pangs of parting of lovers, valor and bravery, harvest and happiness. Haryana is rich in musical tradition and even places have been named after ragas, for example Charkhi Dadri district has many villages named as Nandyam, Sarangpur, Bilawala, Brindabana, Todi, Asaveri, Jaisri, Malakoshna, Hindola, Bhairvi and Gopi Kalyana.\nHimachali.\nHimachal's folk music varies according to the event or the festival. One of the most popular style of music is \"Nati Music,\" where \"nati\" being the traditional dance that is done on the song. Nati Music is usually celebratory, and done in fairs or other occasions such as marriages.\nJhumair and Domkach.\nJhumair and Domkach are Nagpuri folk music. The musical instruments used in folk music and dance are Dhol, Mandar, Bansi, Nagara, Dhak, Shehnai, Khartal, Narsinga etc.\nLavani.\nLavani comes from the word \"Lavanya\" which means \"beauty\". This is one of the most popular forms of dance and music that is practiced all over Maharashtra. It has, in fact, become a necessary part of the Maharashtrian folk dance performances. Traditionally, the songs are sung by female artists, but male artists may occasionally sing Lavanis. The dance format associated with Lavani is known as Tamasha. Lavani is a combination of traditional song and dance, which particularly performed to the enchanting beats of 'Dholaki', a drum-like instrument. The dance is performed by attractive women wearing nine-yard saris. They are sung in a quick tempo. Lavani originated in the arid region of Maharashtra and Madhya Pradesh.\nManipuri.\nMusic of Manipur and Manipuri dance are heritage of Manipuri people. According to tradition of the Manipuri people in the Himalayan foothills and valleys connecting India to Burma, they are the Gandharvas (celestial musicians and dancers) in the Vedic texts, and historic texts of Manipuri people calls the region as \"Gandharva-desa\". The Vedic \"Usha\", the goddess of the dawn, is a cultural motif for Manipuri women, and in the Indian tradition, it was \"Usha\" who created and taught the art of feminine dance to girls. This oral tradition of women's dance is celebrated as \"Chingkheirol\" in the Manipuri tradition.\nThe ancient Sanskrit texts such as the Mahabharata epic mentions Manipur, where Arjuna meets and falls in love with Chitragada. Dance is called \"Jagoi\" in a major Meitei language of the region and it traces a long tradition in Manipur. Lai Haraoba dance likely has ancient roots and shares many similarities with dance postures of Nataraja and his legendary disciple called Tandu (locally called \"Tangkhu\"). Similarly, as does the dance related to commoner \"Khamba\" and princess \"Thoibi\" \u2013 who perform as pan-Indian Shiva and Parvati, in the legendary tragic love story of Khamba-Thoibi found in the Manipuri epic \"Moirang Parba\".\nMarfa music.\nHadrani Marfa, or simply Marfa music, introduced during the 18th century in Hyderabad State by the East African Siddi community from Afro-Arab music of Hadhramawt in Yemen, is a form of celebratory rhythmic music and dance among the Hyderabadi Muslims, played with high tempo using Marfa instrument, daff, Dhol, sticks, steel pots and wooden strips called \"thapi\".\nMizo.\nMizo music originated when couplets were developed during the settlement of Thantlang in Burma between 1300 and 1400 CE, and folk songs developed during this period were dar hla (songs on gong); Bawh hla (War chants), Hlado (Chants of hunting); Nauawih hla (Cradle songs) A greater development of songs can be seen from the settlement of Lentlang in Burma, estimated between late 15th to 17th Century CE. The Mizo occupied the present Mizoram from the late 17th century. The pre-colonial period, that is from the 18th to 19th century was another important era in the history of Mizo folk literature. Prior to the annexation by the British Government, the Mizo occupied the present Mizoram for two centuries. In comparison with the folk songs of Thantlang and Lentlang settlement, the songs of this period are more developed in its number, form and contents. The languages are more polished and the flows also better. Most of the songs of this period are named after the composers.\nOdissi.\nJayadeva, the 12th century sanskrit saint-poet, the great composer and illustrious master of classical music, has immense contribution to Odissi music. During his time Odra-Magadhi style music got shaped and achieved its classical status. He indicated the classical ragas prevailing at that time in which these were to be sung. Prior to that there was the tradition of Chhanda which was simple in musical outline. From the 16th century onwards, treatises on music were Sangitamava Chandrika, Gita Prakasha, Sangita Kalalata and Natya Manorama. A couple of treatise namely, \"Sangita Sarani\" and \"Sangi Narayana\", were also written in the early path of the 19th century.\nOdissi Sangita comprises four classes of music namely Dhruvapada, Chitrapada, Chitrakala and Panchal, described in the ancient oriya music texts. The chief Odissi and Shokabaradi. Odissi Sangita (music) is a synthesis of four classes of music, i.e. Dhruvapada, Chitrapada, Chitrakala and Panchal, described in the above-mentioned texts.\nThe great exponents of Odissi music in modern times are the Late Singhari Shyamasundara Kar, Markandeya Mahapatra, Kashinath Pujapanda, Balakrushna Das, Gopal Chandra Panda, Ramhari Das, Bhubaneswari Misra, Shymamani Devi and Sunanda Patnaik, who have achieved eminence in classical music.\nRabindra Sangeet (music of Bengal).\nRabindra Sangeet ( \"Robindro Shonggit\", ), also known as Tagore songs, are songs written and composed by Rabindranath Tagore. They have distinctive characteristics in the music of Bengal, popular in India and Bangladesh. \"Sangeet\" means music, \"Rabindra Sangeet\" means music (or more aptly songs) of Rabindra.\nTagore wrote some 2,230 songs in Bengali, now known as \"Rabindra Sangeet\", using classical music and traditional folk music as sources.\nTagore wrote national anthems of India and Bangladesh, and influenced the national anthem of Sri Lanka. Furthermore, the digitisation of Rabindra Sangeet has been undertaken by https://, which has created digital archives and made the music available on streaming platforms. Additionally, Brainware University's \"https://\" initiative includes online archives, educational resources, and https:// to promote Tagore's works.\nShyama Sangeet (music of Bengal).\nGenerally all music dedicated to goddess Mother Kali is called 'Shyama Sangeet' in Bengali. Two famous singers of this Bengali Shyama Sangeet are Pannalal Bhattacharya and Dhananjay Bhattacharya. Pannalal Bhattacharya's elder brother Prafulla Bhattacharya and middle brother Dhananjay Bhattacharya were the first music teachers of saint artist Pannalal Bhattacharya. Dhananjay Bhattacharya stopped singing devotional songs after finding devotional spirit in his brother Pannalal. However, after the demise of Pannalal Bhattacharya, he contributed again in Bengali music with many devotional songs by his sweet, melodious voice.\nRajasthani.\nRajasthan has a very diverse cultural collection of musician castes, including Langas, Sapera, Bhopa, Jogi and Manganiyar (lit. \"the ones who ask/beg\"). \"Rajasthan Diary\" quotes it as a soulful, full-throated music with harmonious diversity. The melodies of Rajasthan come from a variety of instruments. The stringed variety includes the Sarangi, Ravanahatha, Kamayacha, Morsing and Ektara. Percussion instruments come in all shapes and sizes from the huge Nagaras and Dhols to the tiny Damrus. The Daf and Chang are a favorite of Holi (the festival of colours) revelers. Flutes and bagpipers come in local flavors such as Shehnai, Poongi, Algoza, Tarpi, Been and Bankia.\nRajasthani music is derived from a combination of string instruments, percussion instruments and wind instruments accompanied by renditions of folk singers. It enjoys a respectable presence in Bollywood music as well.\nSufi folk rock / Sufi rock.\nSufi folk rock contains elements of modern hard rock and traditional folk music with Sufi poetry. While it was pioneered by bands like Junoon in Pakistan it became very popular, especially in northern India.\nUttarakhandi.\nUttarakhandi folk music had its root in the lap of nature and the hilly terrain of the region. Common themes in the folk music of Uttarakhand are the beauty of nature, various seasons, festivals, religious traditions, cultural practices, folk stories, historical characters, and the bravery of ancestors. The folk songs of Uttarakhand are a reflection of the cultural heritage and the way people live their lives in the Himalayas. Musical instruments used in Uttarakhand music include the Dhol, Damoun, Hudka, Turri, Ransingha, Dholki, Daur, Thali, Bhankora and Masakbhaja. Tabla and Harmonium are also sometimes used, especially in recorded folk music from the 1960s onwards. Generic Indian and global musical instruments have been incorporated in modern popular folks by singers like Mohan Upreti, Narendra Singh Negi, Gopal Babu Goswami, and Chandra Singh Rahi.\nPopular music in India.\nDance music.\nDance music, more popularly called \"DJ music\", is mostly played at nightclubs, parties, weddings and other celebrations. It is more popular among youths. It is mostly based on Indian movie music as well as Indian pop music, both of which tend to borrow and modernise the classical and folk dance songs with modern instruments and other innovations.\nMovie music.\nThe biggest form of Indian popular music is filmi, or songs from Indian films, it makes up 72% of the music sales in India. The film industry of India supported music by according reverence to classical music while utilising the western orchestration to support Indian melodies. Music composers, like R. D. Burman, Shankar Jaikishan, S. D. Burman, Laxmikant\u2013Pyarelal, Madan Mohan, Bhupen Hazarika, Naushad Ali, O. P. Nayyar, Hemant Kumar, C. Ramchandra, Salil Chowdhury, Kalyanji Anandji, Ilaiyaraaja, A. R. Rahman, Jatin\u2013Lalit, Anu Malik, Nadeem-Shravan, Harris Jayaraj, Himesh Reshammiya, Vidyasagar, Shankar\u2013Ehsaan\u2013Loy, Salim\u2013Sulaiman, Pritam, M. S. Viswanathan, K. V. Mahadevan, Ghantasala and S. D. Batish employed the principles of harmony while retaining classical and folk flavor. Reputed names in the domain of Indian classical music like Ravi Shankar, Vilayat Khan, Ali Akbar Khan and Ram Narayan have also composed music for films. Traditionally, in Indian films, the voice for the songs is not provided by the actors, they are provided by the professional playback singers, to sound more developed, melodious and soulful, while actors lipsynch on the screen. In the past, only a handful of singers provided the voice in films. These include Kishore Kumar, K. J. Yesudas, Mohammed Rafi, Mukesh, S. P. Balasubrahmanyam, T. M. Soundararajan, Hemant Kumar, Manna Dey, P. Susheela, Lata Mangeshkar, Asha Bhonsle, K. S. Chitra, Geeta Dutt, S. Janaki, Shamshad Begum, Suraiya, Noorjahan and Suman Kalyanpur. Recent playback singers include Udit Narayan, Kumar Sanu, Kailash Kher, Alisha Chinai, KK, Shaan, S. P. Charan, Madhushree, Shreya Ghoshal, Nihira Joshi, Kavita Krishnamurthy, Hariharan (singer), Ilaiyaraaja, A. R. Rahman, Sonu Nigam, Sukhwinder Singh, Kunal Ganjawala, Anu Malik, Sunidhi Chauhan, Anushka Manchanda, Raja Hasan, Arijit Singh and Alka Yagnik. Rock bands like Indus Creed, Indian Ocean, Silk Route and Euphoria have gained mass appeal with the advent of cable music television.\nPop music.\nIndian pop music is based on an amalgamation of Indian folk and classical music, and modern beats from different parts of the world. Pop music really started in the South Asian region with the playback singer Ahmed Rushdi's song \u2018\"Ko Ko Korina\"\u2019 in 1966, then by Kishore Kumar in the early 1970s.\nAfter that, much of Indian Pop music comes from the Indian Film Industry, and until the 1990s, few singers like Usha Uthup, Sharon Prabhakar, and Peenaz Masani outside it were popular. Since then, pop singers in the latter group have included Daler Mehndi, Baba Sehgal, Alisha Chinai, KK, Shantanu Mukherjee a.k.a. Shaan, Sagarika, Colonial Cousins (Hariharan, Lesle Lewis), Lucky Ali, and Sonu Nigam, and music composers like Zila Khan or Jawahar Wattal, who made top selling albums with, Daler Mehndi, Shubha Mudgal, Baba Sehgal, Shweta Shetty and Hans Raj Hans.\nBesides those listed above, popular Indi-pop singers include Sanam (Band), Gurdas Maan, Sukhwinder Singh, Papon, Zubeen Garg, Raghav Sachar Rageshwari, Vandana Vishwas, Devika Chawla, Bombay Vikings, Asha Bhosle, Sunidhi Chauhan, Anushka Manchanda, Bombay Rockers, Anu Malik, Jazzy B, Malkit Singh, Raghav, Jay Sean, Jaimin Rajani, Juggy D, Rishi Rich, Udit Swaraj, Sheila Chandra, Bally Sagoo, Punjabi MC, Beno, Bhangra Knights, Mehnaz, Sanober and Vaishali Samant.\nRecently, Indian pop has taken an interesting turn with the \"remixing\" of songs from past Indian movie songs, new beats being added to them.\nPatriotic music.\nPatriotic feelings have been instigated within Indians through music since the era of the freedom struggle. Jana Gana Mana, the national anthem of India by Rabindranath Tagore, is largely credited for uniting India through music and Vande Mataram by Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay as the national song of India. Patriotic songs were also written in many regional languages such as \"Biswo Bizoyi No Zuwan \" in Assamese. Post-independence songs such as Aye mere watan ke logo, Mile Sur Mera Tumhara, Ab Tumhare Hawale Watan Saathiyo, Maa Tujhe Salaam by A.R. Rahman have been responsible for consolidating feelings of national integration and unity in diversity.\nWestern music adoption in India.\nWestern world's music has been adopted in India, by creating fusion music in India which in turn have enriched and created global genres of western music.\nGoa trance.\nGoa trance, an electronic music style that originated during the late 1980s in Goa in India, has funky, drone-like basslines, similar to the techno minimalism of 21st century psytrance. Psychedelic trance developed from Goa trance. In the late 1960s and early 1970s, Goa became popular as a hippie capital, which resulted in evolution of Goa trance throughout the 1980s by mixing the spiritual culture of India with western musical elements of industrial music, new beat and electronic body music (EBM), and the actual Goa trance style became established by the early 1990s.\nJazz and blues.\nJazz in India was first performed regularly in the metropoles Calcutta and Bombay in the early or middle 1920s. From the 1930s to the 1950s is called as the golden age of jazz in India, when jazz musicians like Leon Abbey, Crickett Smith, Creighton Thompson, Ken Mac, Roy Butler, Teddy Weatherford (who recorded with Louis Armstrong), and Rudy Jackson who toured India to avoid the racial discrimination they faced in the United States. In the 1930s, jazz musicians played in the nightclubs of Bombay, such as at the Taj Mahal hotel ballroom, many of these musicians were Goans most whom also worked in the Bollywood film industry and were responsible for the introduction of genres like jazz and swing to Hindi film music.\nIndian blues is less prevalent in India than jazz. Interest in the blues in India has only been incidental due to the shared ancestry with jazz.\nRock and metal music.\nIndian rock.\nThe rock music scene in India is small compared to the filmi or fusion musicality scenes. Rock music in India has its origins in the 1960s when international stars such as the Beatles visited India and brought their music with them. These artists' collaboration with Indian musicians such as Ravi Shankar and Zakir Hussain have led to the development of raga rock. International shortwave radio stations such as The Voice of America, BBC, and Radio Ceylon played a major part in bringing Western pop, folk, and rock music to the masses. Indian rock bands began to gain prominence only much later, around the late 1980s.\nIt was around this time that the rock band Indus Creed formerly known as The Rock Machine got itself noticed on the international stage with hits like \"Rock N Roll Renegade\". Other bands quickly followed. With the introduction of MTV in the early 1990s, Indians began to be exposed to various forms of rock such as grunge and speed metal, impacting the national scene. The cities of the North Eastern Region, mainly Guwahati and Shillong, Kolkata, Delhi, Mumbai and Bangalore have emerged as major melting pots for rock and metal enthusiasts. Bangalore has been the hub for rock and metal movement in India. Some prominent bands include Nicotine, Voodoo Child, Indian Ocean, Kryptos, Thermal and a Quarter, Demonic Resurrection, Motherjane, Avial, Bloodywood and Parikrama. Rock-specific labels such as DogmaTone Records and Eastern Fare Music Foundation have since emerged, supporting Indian rock acts.\nFrom Central India, Nicotine, an Indore-based metal band, has been credited with pioneering metal music in the region.\nRaga rock.\nRaga rock is rock or pop music with a heavy Indian influence, either in its construction, its timbre, or its use of instrumentation, such as the sitar and tabla. Raga and other forms of classical Indian music began to influence many rock groups during the 1960s; most famously the Beatles. The first traces of \"raga rock\" can be heard on songs such as \"See My Friends\" by the Kinks and the Yardbirds' \"Heart Full of Soul\", released the previous month, featured a sitar-like riff by guitarist Jeff Beck. The Beatles song \"Norwegian Wood (This Bird Has Flown)\", which first appeared on the band's 1965 album Rubber Soul, was the first western pop song to actually incorporate the sitar (played by lead guitarist George Harrison). The Byrds' March 1966 single \"Eight Miles High\" and its B-side \"Why\" were also influential in originating the musical subgenre. Indeed, the term \"raga rock\" was coined by The Byrds' publicist in the press releases for the single and was first used in print by journalist Sally Kempton in her review of \"Eight Miles High\" for The Village Voice. George Harrison's interest in Indian music, popularised the genre in the mid-1960s with songs such as \"Love You To\", \"Tomorrow Never Knows\" (credited to Lennon-McCartney), \"Within You Without You\" and \"The Inner Light\". The rock acts of the sixties both in turn influenced British and American groups and Indian acts to develop a later form of Indian rock.\nWestern classical music.\nDespite more than a century of exposure to Western classical music and two centuries of British colonialism, classical music in India has never gained significant popularity..\nHowever, Western classical music education has improved with the help of certain institutions in India, including KM Music Conservatory (founded by Oscar-winning Composer A.R. Rahman), Calcutta School of Music, Eastern Fare Music Foundation, In 1930, Mehli Mehta set up the Bombay Symphony Orchestra. His son Zubin Mehta has enjoyed a long international conducting career. The Bombay Chamber Orchestra (BCO) was founded in 1962. Delhi School of Music, Delhi Music Academy, Guitarmonk and others supporting Western classical music.. In 2006, the Symphony Orchestra of India was founded, housed at the NCPA in Mumbai. It is today the only professional symphony orchestra in India and presents two concert seasons per year, with world-renowned conductors and soloists.\nGlobalization of Indian music.\nAs per UN, the Indian diaspora is world's largest overseas diaspora with 17.5 million Indian-origin international migrants across the world, who help spread the global soft power of India.\nInfluence on other genres.\nAncient influence on Southeast Asian music genres.\nWith expansion of Indosphere cultural influence of Greater India, through transmission of Hinduism in Southeast Asia and the Silk Road transmission of Buddhism leading to Indianization of Southeast Asia through formation of non-Indian southeast Asian native Indianized kingdoms which adopted sanskritized language and other Indian elements such as the honorific titles, naming of people, naming of places, mottos of organisations and educational institutes as well as adoption of Indian architecture, martial arts, Indian music and dance, traditional Indian clothing, and Indian cuisine, a process which has also been aided by the ongoing historic expansion of Indian diaspora.\nIndonesian and Malay music.\nIn Indonesian and Malaysian music, the Dangdut a genre of folk music is partly derived and fused from Hindustani music. It is a very popular because of its melodious instrumentation and vocals. Dangdut features a tabla and gendang beat. Indonesians dance in somewhat similar to the ghoomar while listening to dangdut music, but in a much slower version.\nThai music.\nThai literature and drama draws great inspiration from Indian arts and Hindu legends. Epic of Ramayana is as popular in Thailand as the Ramakien. Two of the most popular classical thai dances the Khon, performed by men wearing ferocious masks, and the Lakhon (Lakhon nai, Lakhon chatri and Lakhon nok), performed by women who play both male and female roles draws inspiration primarily from the Ramakien. Percussion instruments and Piphat, a type of woodwind accompany the dance. Nang talung, a Thai shadow play inspired by South Indian Bommalattam, has shadows made from the pieces of cow or water buffalo hide cut to represent human figures with movable arms and legs are thrown on a screen for the entertainment of spectators.\nFusion with traditional music of other nations.\nSometimes, the music of India is fused with the native traditional music of other countries. For example, Delhi 2 Dublin, a band based in Canada, is known for fusing Indian and Irish music, and Bhangraton is a fusion of Bhangra music with reggaeton.\nWestern world music.\nFilm music.\nIndian film composer A. R. Rahman wrote the music for Andrew Lloyd Webber's \"Bombay Dreams\", and a musical version of \"Hum Aapke Hain Koun\" was staged in London's West End. The Bollywood sports film \"Lagaan\" (2001) was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film, and two other Bollywood films (2002's \"Devdas\" and 2006's \"Rang De Basanti\") were nominated for the BAFTA Award for Best Film Not in the English Language.\nDanny Boyle's \"Slumdog Millionaire\" (2008) was inspired by Bollywood films.\nHip hop and reggae.\nBhangraton is a fusion of Bhangra music with reggaeton, which itself is a fusion of hip hop, reggae, and traditional Latin American music.\nJazz.\nIn early 1960s Jazz pioneers such as John Coltrane\u2014who recorded a composition entitled 'India' during the November 1961 sessions for his album \"Live at the Village Vanguard\" (the track was not released until 1963 on Coltrane's album \"Impressions\")\u2014also embraced this fusion. George Harrison (of the Beatles) played the sitar on the song \"Norwegian Wood (This Bird Has Flown)\" in 1965, which sparked interest from Shankar, who subsequently took Harrison as his apprentice. Jazz innovator Miles Davis recorded and performed with musicians like Khalil Balakrishna, Bihari Sharma, and Badal Roy in his post-1968 electric ensembles. Virtuoso jazz guitarist John McLaughlin spent several years in Madurai learning Carnatic music and incorporated it into many of his acts including Shakti which featured prominent Indian musicians. Other Western artists such as the Grateful Dead, Incredible String Band, the Rolling Stones, the Move and Traffic soon incorporated Indian influences and instruments, and added Indian performers.\nLegendary Grateful Dead frontman Jerry Garcia joined guitarist Sanjay Mishra on his classic CD \"Blue Incantation\" (1995). Mishra also wrote an original score for French Director Eric Heumann for his film \"Port Djema\" (1996) which won best score at Hamptons film festival and The Golden Bear at Berlin. in 2000 he recorded \"Rescue\" with drummer Dennis Chambers (Carlos Santana, John McLaughlin et al.) and in 2006 Chateau Benares with guests DJ Logic and Keller Williams (guitar and bass).\nMusical film.\nSince the early 2000s, Bollywood began influencing musical films in the Western world and was instrumental role in reviving the American musical film. Baz Luhrmann said that his musical film, \"Moulin Rouge!\" (2001), was inspired by Bollywood musicals; the film incorporated a Bollywood-style dance scene with a song from the film \"China Gate\". The critical and financial success of \"Moulin Rouge!\" began a renaissance of Western musical films such as \"Chicago\", \"Rent\", and \"Dreamgirls\".\nPsychedelic and trance music.\nPsychedelic trance developed from Goa trance.\nRock and roll.\nIn the late 1970s and early 1980s, rock and roll fusions with Indian music were well known throughout Europe and North America. Ali Akbar Khan's 1955 performance in the United States was perhaps the beginning of this trend. In 1985, a beat-oriented, Raga Rock hybrid called Sitar Power by Ashwin Batish reintroduced sitar in western nations. Sitar Power drew the attention of a number of record labels and was snapped up by Shanachie Records of New Jersey to head their World Beat Ethno Pop division.\nTechnopop.\nThe influence of \"filmi\" may be seen in popular music worldwide. Technopop pioneers Haruomi Hosono and Ryuichi Sakamoto of the Yellow Magic Orchestra produced a 1978 electronic album, \"Cochin Moon\", based on an experimental fusion of electronic music and Bollywood-inspired Indian music. Truth Hurts' 2002 song \"Addictive\", produced by DJ Quik and Dr. Dre, was taken from Lata Mangeshkar's \"Thoda Resham Lagta Hai\" in \"Jyoti\" (1981). The Black Eyed Peas' Grammy Award winning 2005 song \"Don't Phunk with My Heart\" was inspired by two 1970s Bollywood songs: \"Ye Mera Dil Yaar Ka Diwana\" from \"Don\" (1978) and \"Ae Nujawan Hai Sub\" from \"Apradh\" (1972). Both songs were composed by Kalyanji Anandji, sung by Asha Bhosle, and featured the dancer Helen.\nWestern classical music.\nSome prominent Indians in Western classical music are: \nInfluence on national music scene.\nBollywood has been a significant form of soft power for India, increasing its influence and changing overseas perceptions of India. According to author Roopa Swaminathan, \"Bollywood cinema is one of the strongest global cultural ambassadors of a new India.\" Its role in expanding India's global influence is comparable to Hollywood's similar role with American influence.\nAfrica.\nKishore Kumar is popular in Egypt and Somalia.\nHindi films were originally distributed to some parts of Africa by Lebanese businessmen, and \"Mother India\" (1957) continued to be screened in Nigeria decades after its release. Indian movies have influenced Hausa clothing, songs have been covered by Hausa singers, and stories have influenced Nigerian novelists. Stickers of Indian films and stars decorate taxis and buses in Nigeria's Northern Region, and posters of Indian films hang on the walls of tailoring shops and mechanics' garages.\nIn South Africa, film imports from India were watched by black and Indian audiences. Several Bollywood figures have travelled to Africa for films and off-camera projects. \"Padmashree Laloo Prasad Yadav\" (2005) was filmed in South Africa. \"Dil Jo Bhi Kahey...\" (2005) was also filmed almost entirely in Mauritius, which has a large ethnic-Indian population.\nIn Egypt, Bollywood films were popular during the 1970s and 1980s. Amitabh Bachchan has remained popular in the country and Indian tourists visiting Egypt are asked, \"Do you know Amitabh Bachchan?\"\nAmericas.\nCaribbean.\nIndo-Caribbean music of Indo-Caribbean people in Caribbean is most common in Trinidad and Tobago, Guyana, Jamaica, and Suriname, which reflects their Bhojpuri heritage. Main instrumentation are dhantal, metal rod, clapper, dholak, two-headed barrel drum. Women sing Hindu bhajans and folk songs from the music of Bhojpur on various important life events, rituals, celebrations, festivals like phagwah and holi. Indo-Caribbean contributions to popular music are very important. The most well-known is the Indo-Trinidadian \"chutney music\" tradition. Chutney is a form of popular dance music that developed in the mid-to late 20th century. Baithak Gana is a similar popular form originating in Suriname.\nLatin America.\nThere is significant Indian diaspora communities in Suriname and Guyana, Indian music and Hindi-language movies are popular. In 2006, \"Dhoom 2\" became the first Bollywood film to be shot in Rio de Janeiro.\nNorth America.\nIn the new millennium, American hip-hop has featured Indian filmi and bhangra. Mainstream hip-hop artists have sampled songs from Bollywood movies and have collaborated with Indian artists. Examples include Timbaland's \"Indian Flute\", Erick Sermon and Redman's \"React\", Slum Village's \"Disco\", and Truth Hurts' hit song \"Addictive\", which sampled a Lata Mangeshkar song, and The Black Eyed Peas sampled Asha Bhosle's song \"Yeh Mera Dil\" in their hit single \"Don't Phunk With My Heart\". In 1997, the British band Cornershop paid tribute to Asha Bhosle with their song \"Brimful of Asha\", which became an international hit. British-born Indian artist Panjabi MC also had a Bhangra hit in the US with \"Mundian To Bach Ke\" which featured rapper Jay-Z. Asian Dub Foundation are not huge mainstream stars, but their politically charged rap and punk rock influenced sound has a multi-racial audience in their native UK. In 2008, international star Snoop Dogg appeared in a song in the film Singh Is Kinng. In 2007, hip-hop producer Madlib released ; an album which heavily samples and is inspired by the music of India.\nAsia.\nSouth Asia.\nDue to shared cultural heritage and language, Indian music and Bollywood films are also popular in Afghanistan, Pakistan, Bangladesh, and Nepal, where Hindustani is widely understood.\nSoutheast Asia.\nAlready covered in earlier section Ancient influence on Southeast Asian music genre.\nWest Asia.\nWest Asia has large Indian diaspora population, who mainly consume Indian music. Indian music is also popular with native middle eastern people. 85% of Qatar's and 75% of UAE's total population are Indian citizens. Hindi films and music have become popular in Arab countries, and imported Indian films are usually subtitled in Arabic when they are released. Bollywood has progressed in Israel since the early 2000s, with channels dedicated to Indian films on cable television;\nEurope.\nGermany.\nIn Germany, Indian stereotypes included bullock carts, beggars, sacred cows, corrupt politicians, and catastrophes before Bollywood and the IT industry transformed global perceptions of India.\nUK.\nIn the late 1980s, Indian-British artists fused Indian and Western traditions to make the Asian Underground. Since the 1990s, Canadian born musician Nadaka who has spent most of his life in India, has been creating music that is an acoustic fusion of Indian classical music with western styles. One such singer who has merged the Bhakti sangeet tradition of India with the western non-Indian music is Krishna Das and sells music records of his musical sadhana. Another example is the Indo-Canadian musician Vandana Vishwas who has experimented with western music in her 2013 album \"Monologues\".\nIn a more recent example of Indian-British fusion, Laura Marling along with Mumford and Sons collaborated in 2010 with the Dharohar Project on a four-song EP. The British band Bombay Bicycle Club also sampled the song \"Man Dole Mera Tan Dole\" for their single \"Feel\". Laxmikant-Pyarelal\nOceania.\nDue to large Indian diaspora population, Indian music and movies are very popular in Fiji especially among Indo-Fijians.\nAustralia and New Zealand have 2 percent Indian population, as well as other a large South Asian diaspora, and Bollywood music and movies are popular amongst non-Asians in the country as well.\nOrganisations promoting Indian music.\nSangeet Natak Akademi is the national level academy for performing arts set up by the Government of India in 1952, which bestows Sangeet Natak Akademi Award as the highest official Indian government's recognition given to practicing artists, It has established several institutions including the Manipur Dance Academy in Imphal, Ravindra Rangshala Centers, Sattriya Centre, Kathak Kendra (National Institute of Kathak Dance) at New Delhi, Centre for Kutiyattam at Thiruvananthapuram, Chhau Centre at Baripada in Jamshedpur, Banaras Music Akademi, Varanasi, and the Northeast Centre. Akhil Bharatiya Gandharva Mahavidyalaya Mandal (\u0905\u0916\u093f\u0932 \u092d\u093e\u0930\u0924\u0940\u092f \u0917\u093e\u0928\u094d\u0927\u0930\u094d\u0935 \u092e\u0939\u093e\u0935\u093f\u0926\u094d\u092f\u093e\u0932\u092f \u092e\u0902\u0921\u0932) is an institution for the promotion and propagation of Indian classical music and dance.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14536", "revid": "1310969385", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14536", "title": "List of Indian musical instruments", "text": "Musical instruments of the Indian subcontinent can be broadly classified according to the Hornbostel\u2013Sachs system into four categories: chordophones (string instruments), aerophones (wind instruments), membranophones (drums) and idiophones (non-drum percussion instruments).\nHand harmonium.\nDwarkanath Ghose (Dwarkin) modified the French pedal harmonium.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14537", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14537", "title": "IRIX", "text": "Computer operating system\nIRIX (, , a portmanteau of IRIS and UNIX) is a discontinued operating system developed by Silicon Graphics (SGI) to run on the company's proprietary MIPS workstations and servers. It is based on UNIX System V with BSD extensions. In IRIX, SGI originated the XFS file system and the industry-standard OpenGL graphics API.\nHistory.\nSGI originated the IRIX name in the 1988 release 3.0 of the operating system for the SGI IRIS 4D series of workstations and servers. Previous releases are identified only by the release number prefixed by \"4D1-\", such as \"4D1-2.2\". The \"4D1-\" prefix continued to be used in official documentation to prefix IRIX release numbers. Prior to the IRIS 4D, SGI bundled the GL2 operating system, based on UniSoft UniPlus System V Unix, and using the proprietary MEX (Multiple EXposure) windowing system.\nIRIX 3.x was based on UNIX System V Release 3 with 4.3BSD enhancements, and incorporated the 4Sight windowing system, based on NeWS and IRIS GL. SGI's Extent File System (EFS) replaced the System V filesystem.\nIRIX 4.0, released in 1991, replaced 4Sight with the X Window System (X11R4), the 4Dwm window manager provided a similar look and feel to 4Sight.\nIRIX 5.0, released in 1993, incorporates certain features of UNIX System V Release 4, including ELF executables. IRIX 5.3 introduced the XFS journaling file system.\nIn 1994, IRIX 6.0 added support for the 64-bit MIPS R8000 processor, but is otherwise similar to IRIX 5.2. Later 6.x releases support other members of the MIPS processor family in 64-bit mode. IRIX 6.3 was released for the SGI O2 workstation only. IRIX 6.4 improved multiprocessor scalability for the Octane, Origin 2000, and Onyx2 systems. The Origin 2000 and Onyx2 IRIX 6.4 was marketed as \"Cellular IRIX\", although it only incorporates some features from the original Cellular IRIX distributed operating system project.\nThe last major version of IRIX is 6.5, released in May 1998. New minor versions of IRIX 6.5 were released every quarter until 2005, and then four minor releases. Through version 6.5.22, there are two branches of each release: a maintenance release (identified by an \"m\" suffix) that includes only fixes to the original IRIX 6.5 code, and a feature release (with an \"f\" suffix) that includes improvements and enhancements. An overlay upgrade from 6.5.x to the 6.5.22 maintenance release was available as a free download, whereas versions 6.5.23 and higher required an active Silicon Graphics support contract.\nA 2001 \"Computerworld\" review found IRIX in a \"critical\" state. SGI had been moving its efforts to Linux and the Windows-based SGI Visual Workstation but MIPS and IRIX customers convinced SGI to continue to support its platform through 2006. On September 6, 2006, an SGI press release announced the end of the MIPS and IRIX product lines. Production ended on December 29, 2006, with final deliveries in March 2007, except by special arrangement. Support for these products ended in December 2013 and they will receive no further updates.\nMuch of IRIX's core technology has been open sourced and ported by SGI to Linux, including XFS.\nIn 2009, SGI filed for bankruptcy and then was purchased by Rackable Systems, which was later purchased by Hewlett Packard Enterprise in 2016. All SGI hardware produced after 2007 is based on either IA-64 or x86-64 architecture, so it is incapable of running IRIX and is instead intended for Red Hat Enterprise Linux or SUSE Linux Enterprise Server. HPE has not stated any plans for IRIX development or source code release.\nFeatures.\nIRIX 6.5 is compliant with UNIX System V Release 4, UNIX 95, and POSIX (including 1e/2c draft 15 ACLs and Capabilities).\nIn the early 1990s, IRIX was a leader in Symmetric Multi-Processing (SMP), scalable from 1 to more than 1,024 processors with a single system image. IRIX has strong support for real-time disk and graphics I/O. IRIX was widely used for the 1990s and 2000s in the computer animation and scientific visualization industries, due to its large application base and high performance. It still is relevant in a few legacy applications.\nIRIX is one of the first Unix versions to feature a graphical user interface for the main desktop environment. IRIX Interactive Desktop uses the 4Dwm X window manager with a custom look designed using the Motif widget toolkit. IRIX is the originator of the industry standard OpenGL for graphics chips and image processing libraries.&lt;ref name=\"opengl/overview\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nIRIX uses the MIPSPro compiler for both its front end and back end. The compiler, also known in earlier versions as IDO (IRIS Development Option), was released in many versions, many of which are coupled to the OS version. The last version was 7.4.4m, designed for 6.5.19 or later. The compiler is designed to support parallel POSIX programming in C/C++, Fortran 77/90. The Workshop GUI IDE is used for development. Other tools include Speedshop for performance tuning, and Performance Co-Pilot.\n4Dwm.\n4Dwm is the window manager component of the IRIX Interactive Desktop normally used on Silicon Graphics workstations running IRIX. 4Dwm is derived from the older Motif Window Manager and uses the Motif widget toolkit on top of the X Window System found on most Unix systems. 4Dwm on IRIX was one of the first default graphical user interface desktops to be standard on a Unix computer system. 4Dwm refers to \"Fourth dimension window manager\" and has no relation to dwm.\nOther X window managers that mimic the 4Dwm look and feel exist, such as 4Dwm theme for IceWM and MaxxDesktop which is a clone/compatible implementation of 4Dwm based on OpenMotif. MaxxDesktop supports both the classic SGI look and a modern/polished look and feel with anti-aliased fonts and UTF-8 support.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14539", "revid": "4062893", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14539", "title": "Internet", "text": "Global system of connected computer networks\nThe Internet (or internet) is the global system of interconnected computer networks that uses the Internet protocol suite (TCP/IP) to communicate between networks and devices. It is a network of networks that comprises private, public, academic, business, and government networks of local to global scope, linked by electronic, wireless, and optical networking technologies. The Internet carries a vast range of information services and resources, such as the interlinked hypertext documents and applications of the World Wide Web (WWW), electronic mail, internet telephony, streaming media and file sharing.\nMost traditional communication media, including telephone, radio, television, paper mail, newspapers, and print publishing, have been transformed by the Internet, giving rise to new media such as email, online music, digital newspapers, news aggregators, and audio and video streaming websites. The Internet has enabled and accelerated new forms of personal interaction through instant messaging, Internet forums, and social networking services. Online shopping has also grown to occupy a significant market across industries, enabling firms to extend brick and mortar presences to serve larger markets. Business-to-business and financial services on the Internet affect supply chains across entire industries. \nThe Internet has no single centralized governance in either technological implementation or policies for access and usage. Each constituent network sets its own policies. The overarching definitions of the two principal name spaces on the Internet, the Internet Protocol address (IP address) space and the Domain Name System (DNS), are directed by a maintainer organization, the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN). The technical underpinning and standardization of the core protocols is an activity of the non-profit Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTerminology.\nThe word \"internetted\" was used as early as 1849, meaning \"interconnected\" or \"interwoven\". The word \"Internet\" was used in 1945 by the United States War Department in a radio operator's manual, and in 1974 as the shorthand form of Internetwork. Today, the term \"Internet\" most commonly refers to the global system of interconnected computer networks, though it may also refer to any group of smaller networks.\nThe word \"Internet\" may be capitalized as a proper noun, although this is becoming less common. This reflects the tendency in English to capitalize new terms and move them to lowercase as they become familiar. The word is sometimes still capitalized to distinguish the global internet from smaller networks, though many publications, including the \"AP Stylebook\" since 2016, recommend the lowercase form in every case. In 2016, the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" found that, based on a study of around 2.5 billion printed and online sources, \"Internet\" was capitalized in 54% of cases.\nThe terms \"Internet\" and \"World Wide Web\" are often used interchangeably; it is common to speak of \"going on the Internet\" when using a web browser to view web pages. However, the World Wide Web, or \"the Web\", is only one of a large number of Internet services. It is the global collection of web pages, documents and other web resources linked by hyperlinks and URLs.\nHistory.\n1960s.\nThe origins of the Internet date back to research that enabled the time-sharing of computer resources, the development of packet switching, and the design of computer networks for data communication. \nIn the 1960s, computer scientists began developing systems for time-sharing of computer resources. J. C. R. Licklider proposed the idea of a universal network while working at Bolt Beranek &amp; Newman and, later, leading the Information Processing Techniques Office at the Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) of the United States Department of Defense. Research into packet switching, one of the fundamental Internet technologies, started in the work of Paul Baran at RAND in the early 1960s and, independently, Donald Davies at the United Kingdom's National Physical Laboratory in 1965. \nAfter the Symposium on Operating Systems Principles in 1967, packet switching from the proposed NPL network and routing concepts proposed by Baran were incorporated into the design of the ARPANET, an experimental resource sharing network proposed by ARPA.\n1970s.\nThe set of communication protocols to enable internetworking on the Internet arose from research and development commissioned in the 1970s by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) of the United States Department of Defense in collaboration with universities and researchers across the United States and in the United Kingdom and France. \nARPANET development began with two network nodes which were interconnected between the University of California, Los Angeles and the Stanford Research Institute on 29 October 1969. The third site was at the University of California, Santa Barbara, followed by the University of Utah. By the end of 1971, 15 sites were connected to the young ARPANET. Thereafter, the ARPANET gradually developed into a decentralized communications network, connecting remote centers and military bases in the United States. Other user networks and research networks, such as the Merit Network and CYCLADES, were developed in the late 1960s and early 1970s.\nEarly international collaborations for the ARPANET were rare. Connections were made in 1973 to Norway (NORSAR and NDRE) and to Peter Kirstein's research group at University College London, which provided a gateway to British academic networks, the first internetwork for resource sharing. \nARPA projects, the International Network Working Group and commercial initiatives led to the development of various protocols and standards by which multiple separate networks could become a single network, or a network of networks. In 1974, Vint Cerf at Stanford University and Bob Kahn at DARPA published a proposal for \"A Protocol for Packet Network Intercommunication\". Cerf and his students used the term \"internet\" as a shorthand for \"internetwork\" in \"\". The Internet Experiment Notes and later RFCs repeated this use. The work of Louis Pouzin and others had important influences on the resulting TCP/IP design. National PTTs and commercial providers developed the X.25 standard and deployed it on public data networks.\n1980s.\nThe ARPANET initially served as a backbone for the interconnection of regional academic and military networks in the United States to enable resource sharing. Access to the ARPANET was expanded in 1981 when the National Science Foundation (NSF) funded the Computer Science Network (CSNET). \nIn 1982, the Internet Protocol Suite (TCP/IP) was standardized, which facilitated worldwide proliferation of interconnected networks. TCP/IP network access expanded again in 1986 when the National Science Foundation Network (NSFNet) provided access to supercomputer sites in the United States for researchers, first at speeds of 56\u00a0kbit/s and later at 1.5\u00a0Mbit/s and 45\u00a0Mbit/s. \nThe NSFNet expanded into academic and research organizations in Europe, Australia, New Zealand and Japan in 1988\u201389. Although other network protocols such as UUCP and PTT public data networks had global reach well before this time, this marked the beginning of the Internet as an intercontinental network. Commercial Internet service providers emerged in 1989 in the United States and Australia. The ARPANET was decommissioned in 1990.\n1990s.\nThe linking of commercial networks and enterprises by the early 1990s, as well as the advent of the World Wide Web, marked the beginning of the transition to the modern Internet. Steady advances in semiconductor technology and optical networking created new economic opportunities for commercial involvement in the expansion of the network in its core and for delivering services to the public. In mid-1989, MCI Mail and Compuserve established connections to the Internet, delivering email and public access products to the half million users of the Internet. \nJust months later, on 1 January 1990, PSInet launched an alternate Internet backbone for commercial use; one of the networks that added to the core of the commercial Internet of later years. In March 1990, the first high-speed T1 (1.5\u00a0Mbit/s) link between the NSFNET and Europe was installed between Cornell University and CERN, allowing much more robust communications than were capable with satellites.\nLater in 1990, Tim Berners-Lee began writing WorldWideWeb, the first web browser, after two years of lobbying CERN management. By Christmas 1990, Berners-Lee had built all the tools necessary for a working Web: the HyperText Transfer Protocol (HTTP) 0.9, the HyperText Markup Language (HTML), the first Web browser (which was also an HTML editor and could access Usenet newsgroups and FTP files), the first HTTP server software (later known as CERN httpd), the first web server, and the first Web pages that described the project itself. \nIn 1991 the Commercial Internet eXchange was founded, allowing PSInet to communicate with the other commercial networks CERFnet and Alternet. Stanford Federal Credit Union was the first financial institution to offer online Internet banking services to all of its members in October 1994. In 1996, OP Financial Group, also a cooperative bank, became the second online bank in the world and the first in Europe. By 1995, the Internet was fully commercialized in the U.S. when the NSFNet was decommissioned, removing the last restrictions on use of the Internet to carry commercial traffic.\nAs technology advanced and commercial opportunities fueled reciprocal growth, the volume of Internet traffic started experiencing similar characteristics as that of the scaling of MOS transistors, exemplified by Moore's law, doubling every 18 months. This growth, formalized as Edholm's law, was catalyzed by advances in MOS technology, laser light wave systems, and noise performance.\n21st-century.\nSince 1995, the Internet has tremendously impacted culture and commerce, including the rise of near-instant communication by email, instant messaging, telephony (Voice over Internet Protocol or VoIP), two-way interactive video calls, and the World Wide Web. Increasing amounts of data are transmitted at higher and higher speeds over fiber optic networks operating at 1\u00a0Gbit/s, 10\u00a0Gbit/s, or more. The Internet continues to grow, driven by ever-greater amounts of online information and knowledge, commerce, entertainment and social networking services. \nDuring the late 1990s, it was estimated that traffic on the public Internet grew by 100 percent per year, while the mean annual growth in the number of Internet users was thought to be between 20% and 50%. This growth is often attributed to the lack of central administration, which allows organic growth of the network, as well as the non-proprietary nature of the Internet protocols, which encourages vendor interoperability and prevents any one company from exerting too much control over the network.\nIn November 2006, the Internet was included on \"USA Today\"'s list of the New Seven Wonders. As of 2011[ [update]], the estimated total number of Internet users was 2.095\u00a0billion (30% of world population). It is estimated that in 1993 the Internet carried only 1% of the information flowing through two-way telecommunication. By 2000 this figure had grown to 51%, and by 2007 more than 97% of all telecommunicated information was carried over the Internet. Modern smartphones can access the Internet through cellular carrier networks, and internet usage by mobile and tablet devices exceeded desktop worldwide for the first time in October 2016. As of 2018[ [update]], 80% of the world's population were covered by a 4G network. \nMobile communication.\n The International Telecommunication Union (ITU) estimated that, by the end of 2017, 48% of individual users regularly connect to the Internet, up from 34% in 2012. Mobile Internet connectivity has played an important role in expanding access in recent years, especially in Asia and the Pacific and in Africa. The number of unique mobile cellular subscriptions increased from 3.9\u00a0billion in 2012 to 4.8\u00a0billion in 2016, two-thirds of the world's population, with more than half of subscriptions located in Asia and the Pacific. \nThe limits that users face on accessing information via mobile applications coincide with a broader process of fragmentation of the Internet. Fragmentation restricts access to media content and tends to affect the poorest users the most. One solution, zero-rating, is the practice of Internet service providers allowing users free connectivity to access specific content or applications without cost.\nSocial impact.\nThe Internet has enabled new forms of social interaction, activities, and social associations, giving rise to the scholarly study of the sociology of the Internet.\nUsers.\nBetween 2000 and 2009, the number of Internet users globally rose from 390\u00a0million to 1.9\u00a0billion. By 2010, 22% of the world's population had access to computers with 1\u00a0billion Google searches every day, 300\u00a0million Internet users reading blogs, and 2\u00a0billion videos viewed daily on YouTube. In 2014 the world's Internet users surpassed 3\u00a0billion or 44 percent of world population, but two-thirds came from the richest countries, with 78 percent of Europeans using the Internet, followed by 57 percent of the Americas. However, by 2018, Asia alone accounted for 51% of all Internet users, with 2.2\u00a0billion out of the 4.3\u00a0billion Internet users in the world. China's Internet users surpassed a major milestone in 2018, when the country's Internet regulatory authority, China Internet Network Information Centre, announced that China had 802\u00a0million users. China was followed by India, with some 700\u00a0million users, with the United States third with 275\u00a0million users. \nHowever, in terms of penetration, in 2022, China had a 70% penetration rate compared to India's 60% and the United States's 90%. In 2022, 54% of the world's Internet users were based in Asia, 14% in Europe, 7% in North America, 10% in Latin America and the Caribbean, 11% in Africa, 4% in the Middle East and 1% in Oceania. In 2019, Kuwait, Qatar, the Falkland Islands, Bermuda and Iceland had the highest Internet penetration by the number of users, with 93% or more of the population with access. As of 2022, it was estimated that 5.4\u00a0billion people use the Internet, more than two-thirds of the world's population.\nEarly computer systems were limited to the characters in the American Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII), a subset of the Latin alphabet. After English (27%), the most requested languages on the World Wide Web are Chinese (25%), Spanish (8%), Japanese (5%), Portuguese and German (4% each), Arabic, French and Russian (3% each), and Korean (2%). Modern character encoding standards, such as Unicode, allow for development and communication in the world's widely used languages. However, some glitches such as \"mojibake\" (incorrect display of some languages' characters) still remain.\nSeveral neologisms exist that refer to Internet users: Netizen (as in \"citizen of the net\") refers to those actively involved in improving online communities, the Internet in general or surrounding political affairs and rights such as free speech, Internaut refers to operators or technically highly capable users of the Internet, digital citizen refers to a person using the Internet in order to engage in society, politics, and government participation.\nUsage.\nThe Internet allows greater flexibility in working hours and location, especially with the spread of unmetered high-speed connections. The Internet can be accessed almost anywhere by numerous means, including through mobile Internet devices. Mobile phones, datacards, handheld game consoles and cellular routers allow users to connect to the Internet wirelessly.\nInformation and education.\nEducational material at all levels from pre-school (e.g. CBeebies) to post-doctoral (e.g. scholarly literature through Google Scholar) is available on websites. The internet has facilitated the development of virtual universities and distance education, enabling both formal and informal education. The Internet allows researchers to conduct research remotely via virtual laboratories, with profound changes in reach and generalizability of findings as well as in communication between scientists and in the publication of results. By the late 2010s the Internet had been described as \"the main source of scientific information \"for the majority of the global North population\".\nWikis have also been used in the academic community for sharing and dissemination of information across institutional and international boundaries. In those settings, they have been found useful for collaboration on grant writing, strategic planning, departmental documentation, and committee work. The United States Patent and Trademark Office uses a wiki to allow the public to collaborate on finding prior art relevant to examination of pending patent applications. Queens, New York has used a wiki to allow citizens to collaborate on the design and planning of a local park. The English Wikipedia has the largest user base among wikis on the World Wide Web and ranks in the top 10 among all sites in terms of traffic.\nEntertainment.\nThe Internet has been a major outlet for leisure activity since its inception, with entertaining social experiments such as MUDs and MOOs being conducted on university servers, and humor-related Usenet groups receiving much traffic. Many Internet forums have sections devoted to games and funny videos. \nAnother area of leisure activity on the Internet is multiplayer gaming. This form of recreation creates communities, where people of all ages and origins enjoy the fast-paced world of multiplayer games. These range from MMORPG to first-person shooters, from role-playing video games to online gambling. While online gaming has been around since the 1970s, modern modes of online gaming began with subscription services such as GameSpy and MPlayer.\nStreaming media is the real-time delivery of digital media for immediate consumption or enjoyment by end users. Streaming companies (such as Netflix, Disney+, Amazon's Prime Video, Mubi, Hulu, and Apple TV+) now dominate the entertainment industry, eclipsing traditional broadcasters. Audio streamers such as Spotify and Apple Music also have significant market share in the audio entertainment market.\nVideo sharing websites are also a major factor in the entertainment ecosystem. YouTube was founded on 15 February 2005 and is now the leading website for free streaming video with more than two billion users. It uses a web player to stream and show video files. YouTube users watch hundreds of millions, and upload hundreds of thousands, of videos daily. Other video sharing websites include Vimeo, Instagram and TikTok.\nPornography.\nAlthough many governments have attempted to restrict both Internet pornography and online gambling, this has generally failed to stop their widespread popularity.\nA number of advertising-funded ostensible video sharing websites known as \"tube sites\" have been created to host shared pornographic video content. Due to laws requiring the documentation of the origin of pornography, these websites now largely operate in conjunction with pornographic movie studios and their own independent creator networks, acting as de-facto video streaming services. Major players in this field include the market leader Aylo, the operator of PornHub and numerous other branded sites, as well as other independent operators such as xHamster and Xvideos. As of 2023[ [update]], Internet traffic to pornographic video sites rivalled that of mainstream video streaming and sharing services.\nRemote work.\nRemote work is facilitated by tools such as groupware, virtual private networks, conference calling, videotelephony, and VoIP so that work may be performed from any location, such as the worker's home.\nPhilanthropy.\nThe spread of low-cost Internet access in developing countries has opened up new possibilities for peer-to-peer charities, which allow individuals to contribute small amounts to charitable projects for other individuals. Websites, such as DonorsChoose and GlobalGiving, allow small-scale donors to direct funds to individual projects of their choice. A popular twist on Internet-based philanthropy is the use of peer-to-peer lending for charitable purposes. Kiva pioneered this concept in 2005, offering the first web-based service to publish individual loan profiles for funding.\nSoftware.\nThe low cost and nearly instantaneous sharing of ideas, knowledge, and skills have made collaborative work dramatically easier, with the help of collaborative software, which allow groups to easily form, cheaply communicate, and share ideas. An example of collaborative software is the free software movement, which has produced, among other things, Linux, Mozilla Firefox, and OpenOffice.org (later forked into LibreOffice). Content management systems allow collaborating teams to work on shared sets of documents simultaneously without accidentally destroying each other's work.\nThe internet also allows for cloud computing, virtual private networks, remote desktops, and remote work.\nPsychology.\nThe online disinhibition effect describes the tendency of many individuals to behave more stridently or offensively online than they would in person. A significant number of feminist women have been the target of various forms of harassment, including insults and hate speech, to, in extreme cases, rape and death threats, in response to posts they have made on social media. Social media companies have been criticized in the past for not doing enough to aid victims of online abuse.\nChildren also face dangers online such as cyberbullying and approaches by sexual predators, who sometimes pose as children themselves. Due to naivety, they may also post personal information about themselves online, which could put them or their families at risk unless warned not to do so. Many parents choose to enable Internet filtering or supervise their children's online activities in an attempt to protect their children from pornography or violent content on the Internet. The most popular social networking services commonly forbid users under the age of 13. However, these policies can be circumvented by registering an account with a false birth date, and a significant number of children aged under 13 join such sites. Social networking services for younger children, which claim to provide better levels of protection for children, also exist.\nInternet usage has been correlated to users' loneliness. Lonely people tend to use the Internet as an outlet for their feelings and to share their stories with others, such as in the \"I am lonely will anyone speak to me\" thread.\nCyberslacking can become a drain on corporate resources; employees spend a significant amount of time surfing the Web while at work. Internet addiction disorder is excessive computer use that interferes with daily life. Nicholas G. Carr believes that Internet use has other effects on individuals, for instance improving skills of scan-reading and interfering with the deep thinking that leads to true creativity.\nBusiness.\nElectronic business encompasses business processes spanning the entire value chain: purchasing, supply chain management, marketing, sales, customer service, and business relationship. E-commerce seeks to add revenue streams using the Internet to build and enhance relationships with clients and partners. According to International Data Corporation, the size of worldwide e-commerce, when global business-to-business and -consumer transactions are combined, equate to $16\u00a0trillion in 2013. A report by Oxford Economics added those two together to estimate the total size of the digital economy at $20.4\u00a0trillion, equivalent to roughly 13.8% of global sales.\nWhile much has been written of the economic advantages of Internet-enabled commerce, there is also evidence that some aspects of the Internet such as maps and location-aware services may serve to reinforce economic inequality and the digital divide. Electronic commerce may be responsible for consolidation and the decline of mom-and-pop, brick and mortar businesses resulting in increases in income inequality.\nA 2013 Institute for Local Self-Reliance report states that brick-and-mortar retailers employ 47 people for every $10\u00a0million in sales, while Amazon employs only 14. Similarly, the 700-employee room rental start-up Airbnb was valued at $10\u00a0billion in 2014, about half as much as Hilton Worldwide, which employs 152,000 people. At that time, Uber employed 1,000 full-time employees and was valued at $18.2\u00a0billion, about the same valuation as Avis Rent a Car and The Hertz Corporation combined, which together employed almost 60,000 people.\nAdvertising on popular web pages can be lucrative, and e-commerce. Online advertising is a form of marketing and advertising which uses the Internet to deliver promotional marketing messages to consumers. It includes email marketing, search engine marketing (SEM), social media marketing, many types of display advertising (including web banner advertising), and mobile advertising. In 2011, Internet advertising revenues in the United States surpassed those of cable television and nearly exceeded those of broadcast television. Many common online advertising practices are controversial and increasingly subject to regulation.\nPolitics.\nThe Internet has achieved new relevance as a political tool. The presidential campaign of Howard Dean in 2004 in the United States was notable for its success in soliciting donation via the Internet. Many political groups use the Internet to achieve a new method of organizing for carrying out their mission, having given rise to Internet activism. Social media websites, such as Facebook and Twitter, helped people organize the Arab Spring, by helping activists organize protests, communicate grievances, and disseminate information.\nMany have understood the Internet as an extension of the Habermasian notion of the \"public sphere\", observing how network communication technologies provide something like a global civic forum. However, incidents of politically motivated Internet censorship have now been recorded in many countries, including western democracies.\nE-government is the use of technological communications devices, such as the Internet, to provide public services to citizens and other persons in a country or region. E-government offers opportunities for more direct and convenient citizen access to government and for government provision of services directly to citizens.\nReligion and terrorism.\nCybersectarianism is a new organizational form that involves:highly dispersed small groups of practitioners that may remain largely anonymous within the larger social context and operate in relative secrecy, while still linked remotely to a larger network of believers who share a set of practices and texts, and often a common devotion to a particular leader. Overseas supporters provide funding and support; domestic practitioners distribute tracts, participate in acts of resistance, and share information on the internal situation with outsiders. Collectively, members and practitioners of such sects construct viable virtual communities of faith, exchanging personal testimonies and engaging in the collective study via email, online chat rooms, and web-based message boards. In particular, the British government has raised concerns about the prospect of young British Muslims being indoctrinated into Islamic extremism by material on the Internet, being persuaded to join terrorist groups such as the so-called \"Islamic State\", and then potentially committing acts of terrorism on returning to Britain after fighting in Syria or Iraq.\nApplications and services.\nThe Internet carries many applications and services, most prominently the World Wide Web, including social media, electronic mail, mobile applications, multiplayer online games, Internet telephony, file sharing, and streaming media services. \nWorld Wide Web.\nThe World Wide Web is a global collection of documents, images, multimedia, applications, and other resources, logically interrelated by hyperlinks and referenced with Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs), which provide a global system of named references. URIs symbolically identify services, web servers, databases, and the documents and resources that they can provide.\nHyperText Transfer Protocol (HTTP) is the main access protocol of the World Wide Web. Web services also use HTTP for communication between software systems for information transfer, sharing and exchanging business data and logistics and is one of many languages or protocols that can be used for communication on the Internet.\nWorld Wide Web browser software, such as Microsoft Edge, Mozilla Firefox, Opera, Apple's Safari, and Google Chrome, enable users to navigate from one web page to another via the hyperlinks embedded in the documents. These documents may also contain computer data, including graphics, sounds, text, video, multimedia and interactive content. Client-side scripts can include animations, games, office applications and scientific demonstrations.\nCommunication.\nEmail is an important communications service available via the Internet. The concept of sending electronic text messages between parties, analogous to mailing letters or memos, predates the creation of the Internet.\nInternet telephony is a common communications service realized with the Internet. The name of the principal internetworking protocol, the Internet Protocol, lends its name to voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP). VoIP systems now dominate many markets, being as easy and convenient as a traditional telephone, while having substantial cost savings, especially over long distances.\nFile sharing.\nFile sharing is the practice of transferring large amounts of data in the form of computer files across the Internet, for example via file servers. The load of bulk downloads to many users can be eased by the use of \"mirror\" servers or peer-to-peer networks. \nAccess to the file may be controlled by user authentication, the transit of the file over the Internet may be obscured by encryption, and money may change hands for access to the file. The price can be paid by the remote charging of funds from, for example, a credit card whose details are also passed\u2014usually fully encrypted\u2014across the Internet. The origin and authenticity of the file received may be checked by a digital signature.\nGovernance.\nThe Internet is a global network that comprises many voluntarily interconnected autonomous networks. It operates without a central governing body. \nIETF.\nThe technical underpinning and standardization of the core protocols (IPv4 and IPv6) is an activity of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), a non-profit organization of loosely affiliated international participants that anyone may associate with by contributing technical expertise.\nWhile the hardware components in the Internet infrastructure can often be used to support other software systems, it is the design and the standardization process of the software that characterizes the Internet and provides the foundation for its scalability and success. The responsibility for the architectural design of the Internet software systems has been assumed by the IETF. \nThe IETF conducts standard-setting work groups, open to any individual, about the various aspects of Internet architecture. The resulting contributions and standards are published as \"Request for Comments\" (RFC) documents on the IETF web site. The principal methods of networking that enable the Internet are contained in specially designated RFCs that constitute the Internet Standards. Other less rigorous documents are simply informative, experimental, or historical, or document the best current practices when implementing Internet technologies.\nICANN.\nTo maintain interoperability, the principal name spaces of the Internet are administered by the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN). ICANN is governed by an international board of directors drawn from across the Internet technical, business, academic, and other non-commercial communities. The organization coordinates the assignment of unique identifiers for use on the Internet, including domain names, IP addresses, application port numbers in the transport protocols, and many other parameters. Globally unified name spaces are essential for maintaining the global reach of the Internet. This role of ICANN distinguishes it as perhaps the only central coordinating body for the global Internet.\nThe National Telecommunications and Information Administration, an agency of the United States Department of Commerce, had final approval over changes to the DNS root zone until the IANA stewardship transition on 1 October 2016. \nRegional internet registries.\nRegional Internet registries (RIRs) were established for five regions of the world to assign IP address blocks and other Internet parameters to local registries, such as Internet service providers, from a designated pool of addresses set aside for each region:\nOther groups.\nThe Internet Society (ISOC) was founded in 1992 with a mission to \"assure the open development, evolution and use of the Internet for the benefit of all people throughout the world\". Its members include individuals as well as corporations, organizations, governments, and universities. Among other activities ISOC provides an administrative home for a number of less formally organized groups that are involved in developing and managing the Internet, including: the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), Internet Architecture Board (IAB), Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG), Internet Research Task Force (IRTF), and Internet Research Steering Group (IRSG). \nOn 16 November 2005, the United Nations-sponsored World Summit on the Information Society in Tunis established the Internet Governance Forum (IGF) to discuss Internet-related issues.\nInfrastructure.\nThe communications infrastructure of the Internet consists of its hardware components and a system of software layers that control various aspects of the architecture. As with any computer network, the Internet physically consists of routers, media (such as cabling and radio links), repeaters, and modems. However, as an example of internetworking, many of the network nodes are not necessarily Internet equipment per se. Internet packets are carried by other full-fledged networking protocols, with the Internet acting as a homogeneous networking standard, running across heterogeneous hardware, with the packets guided to their destinations by IP routers.\nService tiers.\nInternet service providers (ISPs) establish worldwide connectivity between individual networks at various levels of scope. At the top of the routing hierarchy are the tier 1 networks, large telecommunication companies that exchange traffic directly with each other via very high speed fiber-optic cables and governed by peering agreements. Tier 2 and lower-level networks buy Internet transit from other providers to reach at least some parties on the global Internet, though they may also engage in peering. End-users who only access the Internet when needed to perform a function or obtain information, represent the bottom of the routing hierarchy.\nAn ISP may use a single upstream provider for connectivity, or implement multihoming to achieve redundancy and load balancing. Internet exchange points are major traffic exchanges with physical connections to multiple ISPs. Large organizations, such as academic institutions, large enterprises, and governments, may perform the same function as ISPs, engaging in peering and purchasing transit on behalf of their internal networks. Research networks tend to interconnect with large subnetworks such as GEANT, GLORIAD, Internet2, and the UK's national research and education network, JANET.\nAccess.\nCommon methods of Internet access by users include broadband over coaxial cable, fiber optics or copper wires, Wi-Fi, satellite, and cellular telephone technology. Grassroots efforts have led to wireless community networks. Commercial Wi-Fi services that cover large areas are available in many cities, such as New York, London, Vienna, Toronto, San Francisco, Philadelphia, Chicago and Pittsburgh. \nData centers.\nMost servers that provide internet services are today hosted in data centers, and content is often accessed through high-performance content delivery networks.\nColocation centers often host private peering connections between their customers, internet transit providers, cloud providers, meet-me rooms for connecting customers together, Internet exchange points, and landing points and terminal equipment for fiber optic submarine communication cables, connecting the internet.\nInternet Protocol Suite.\nThe Internet standards describe a framework known as the Internet protocol suite (also called TCP/IP, based on the first two components.) This is a suite of protocols that are ordered into a set of four conceptional layers by the scope of their operation, originally documented in and :\nInternet protocol.\nThe most prominent component of the Internet model is the Internet Protocol. IP enables internetworking, essentially establishing the Internet itself. Two versions of the Internet Protocol exist, IPv4 and IPv6. Aside from the complex array of physical connections that make up its infrastructure, the Internet is facilitated by bi- or multi-lateral commercial contracts (e.g., peering agreements), and by technical specifications or protocols that describe the exchange of data over the network.\nIP Addresses.\nFor locating individual computers on the network, the Internet provides IP addresses. IP addresses are used by the Internet infrastructure to direct internet packets to their destinations. They consist of fixed-length numbers, which are found within the packet. IP addresses are generally assigned to equipment either automatically via Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol, or are configured.\nDomain Name Systems convert user-inputted domain names (e.g. \"en.wikipedia.org\") into IP addresses.\nIPv4.\nInternet Protocol version 4 (IPv4) defines an IP address as a 32-bit number. IPv4 is the initial version used on the first generation of the Internet and is still in dominant use. It was designed in 1981 to address up to \u22484.3\u00a0billion (109) hosts. However, the explosive growth of the Internet has led to IPv4 address exhaustion, which entered its final stage in 2011, when the global IPv4 address allocation pool was exhausted.\nIPv6.\nBecause of the growth of the Internet and the depletion of available IPv4 addresses, a new version of IP IPv6, was developed in the mid-1990s, which provides vastly larger addressing capabilities and more efficient routing of Internet traffic. IPv6 uses 128 bits for the IP address and was standardized in 1998. IPv6 deployment has been ongoing since the mid-2000s and is currently in growing deployment around the world, since Internet address registries began to urge all resource managers to plan rapid adoption and conversion.\nBy design, IPv6 is not directly interoperable with IPv4. Instead, it establishes a parallel version of the Internet not directly accessible with IPv4 software. Thus, translation facilities exist for internetworking, and some nodes have duplicate networking software for both networks. Essentially all modern computer operating systems support both versions of the Internet Protocol. Network infrastructure, however, has been lagging in this development.\nSubnets.\nA subnet or subnetwork is a logical subdivision of an IP network. Computers that belong to a subnet are addressed with an identical most-significant bit-group in their IP addresses. This results in the logical division of an IP address into two fields, the network number or routing prefix and the rest field or host identifier. The \"rest field\" is an identifier for a specific host or network interface.\nThe routing prefix may be expressed in Classless Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR) notation written as the first address of a network, followed by a slash character (\"/\"), and ending with the bit-length of the prefix. For example, is the prefix of the Internet Protocol version 4 network starting at the given address, having 24 bits allocated for the network prefix, and the remaining 8 bits reserved for host addressing. Addresses in the range to belong to this network. The IPv6 address specification is a large address block with 296 addresses, having a 32-bit routing prefix.\nFor IPv4, a network may also be characterized by its \"subnet mask\" or \"netmask\", which is the bitmask that when applied by a bitwise AND operation to any IP address in the network, yields the routing prefix. Subnet masks are also expressed in dot-decimal notation like an address. For example, is the subnet mask for the prefix .\nRouting.\nComputers and routers use routing tables in their operating system to forward IP packets to reach a node on a different subnetwork. Routing tables are maintained by manual configuration or automatically by routing protocols. End-nodes typically use a default route that points toward an ISP providing transit, while ISP routers use the Border Gateway Protocol to establish the most efficient routing across the complex connections of the global Internet.\nThe default gateway is the node that serves as the forwarding host (router) to other networks when no other route specification matches the destination IP address of a packet.\nSecurity.\nInternet resources, hardware, and software components are the target of criminal or malicious attempts to gain unauthorized control to cause interruptions, commit fraud, engage in blackmail or access private information.\nMalware.\nMalware is malicious software used and distributed via the Internet. It includes computer viruses which are copied with the help of humans, computer worms which copy themselves automatically, software for denial of service attacks, ransomware, botnets, and spyware that reports on the activity and typing of users. Usually, these activities constitute cybercrime. Defense theorists have also speculated about the possibilities of hackers using cyber warfare using similar methods on a large scale.\nMalware poses serious problems to individuals and businesses on the Internet. According to Symantec's 2018 Internet Security Threat Report (ISTR), malware variants number has increased to 669,947,865 in 2017, which is twice as many malware variants as in 2016. Cybercrime, which includes malware attacks as well as other crimes committed by computer, was predicted to cost the world economy US$6 trillion in 2021, and is increasing at a rate of 15% per year. Since 2021, malware has been designed to target computer systems that run critical infrastructure such as the electricity distribution network. Malware can be designed to evade antivirus software detection algorithms.\nSurveillance.\nThe vast majority of computer surveillance involves the monitoring of data and traffic on the Internet. In the United States for example, under the Communications Assistance For Law Enforcement Act, all phone calls and broadband Internet traffic (emails, web traffic, instant messaging, etc.) are required to be available for unimpeded real-time monitoring by Federal law enforcement agencies. Under the Act, all U.S. telecommunications providers are required to install packet sniffing technology to allow Federal law enforcement and intelligence agencies to intercept all of their customers' broadband Internet and VoIP traffic.\nThe large amount of data gathered from packet capture requires surveillance software that filters and reports relevant information, such as the use of certain words or phrases, the access to certain types of web sites, or communicating via email or chat with certain parties. Agencies, such as the Information Awareness Office, NSA, GCHQ and the FBI, spend billions of dollars per year to develop, purchase, implement, and operate systems for interception and analysis of data. Similar systems are operated by Iranian secret police to identify and suppress dissidents. The required hardware and software were allegedly installed by German Siemens AG and Finnish Nokia.\nCensorship.\nSome governments, such as those of Myanmar, Iran, North Korea, Mainland China, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, restrict access to content on the Internet within their territories, especially to political and religious content, with domain name and keyword filters.\nIn Norway, Denmark, Finland, and Sweden, major Internet service providers have voluntarily agreed to restrict access to sites listed by authorities. While this list of forbidden resources is supposed to contain only known child pornography sites, the content of the list is secret. \nMany countries, including the United States, have enacted laws against the possession or distribution of certain material, such as child pornography, via the Internet but do not mandate filter software. Many free or commercially available software programs, called content-control software are available to users to block offensive specific on individual computers or networks in order to limit access by children to pornographic material or depiction of violence.\nPerformance.\nAs the Internet is a heterogeneous network, its physical characteristics, including, for example the data transfer rates of connections, vary widely. It exhibits emergent phenomena that depend on its large-scale organization.\nTraffic volume.\nThe volume of Internet traffic is difficult to measure because no single point of measurement exists in the multi-tiered, non-hierarchical topology. Traffic data may be estimated from the aggregate volume through the peering points of the Tier 1 network providers, but traffic that stays local in large provider networks may not be accounted for.\nOutages.\nAn Internet blackout or outage can be caused by local signaling interruptions. Disruptions of submarine communications cables may cause blackouts or slowdowns to large areas, such as in the 2008 submarine cable disruption. Less-developed countries are more vulnerable due to the small number of high-capacity links. Land cables are also vulnerable, as in 2011 when a woman digging for scrap metal severed most connectivity for the nation of Armenia. Internet blackouts affecting almost entire countries can be achieved by governments as a form of Internet censorship, as in the blockage of the Internet in Egypt, whereby approximately 93% of networks were without access in 2011 in an attempt to stop mobilization for anti-government protests.\nEnergy use.\nEstimates of the Internet's electricity usage have been the subject of controversy, according to a 2014 peer-reviewed research paper that found claims differing by a factor of 20,000 published in the literature during the preceding decade, ranging from 0.0064 kilowatt hours per gigabyte transferred (kWh/GB) to 136 kWh/GB. The researchers attributed these discrepancies mainly to the year of reference (i.e. whether efficiency gains over time had been taken into account) and to whether \"end devices such as personal computers and servers are included\" in the analysis.\nIn 2011, academic researchers estimated the overall energy used by the Internet to be between 170 and 307 GW, less than two percent of the energy used by humanity. This estimate included the energy needed to build, operate, and periodically replace the estimated 750\u00a0million laptops, a billion smart phones and 100\u00a0million servers worldwide as well as the energy that routers, cell towers, optical switches, Wi-Fi transmitters and cloud storage devices use when transmitting Internet traffic. According to a non-peer-reviewed study published in 2018 by The Shift Project (a French think tank funded by corporate sponsors), nearly 4% of global CO2 emissions could be attributed to global data transfer and the necessary infrastructure. The study also said that online video streaming alone accounted for 60% of this data transfer and therefore contributed to over 300\u00a0million tons of CO2 emission per year, and argued for new \"digital sobriety\" regulations restricting the use and size of video files.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14540", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14540", "title": "Indo-European (disambiguation)", "text": "Indo-European is a major language family of Europe, parts of West and Central Asia, and South Asia.\nIndo-European may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "14541", "revid": "49584393", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14541", "title": "Indo-Iranian languages", "text": "Branch of the Indo-European language family\nThe Indo-Iranian languages, also known as Indo-Iranic languages, constitute the largest branch of the Indo-European language family. They include over 300 languages, spoken by around 1.7 billion speakers worldwide, predominantly in South Asia, West Asia and parts of Central Asia.\nIndo-Iranian languages are divided into three major branches: Indo-Aryan, Iranian (or Iranic), and Nuristani languages. The Badeshi language remains unclassified within the Indo-Iranian branch. The largest Indo-Iranian language is the Hindustani language (which later on split into Hindi and Urdu).\nThe areas with Indo-Iranian languages stretch from Europe (Romani) and the Caucasus (Ossetian, Tat, Talysh), down to Mesopotamia and eastern Anatolia (Kurdish, Zaza), the Levant and North Africa (Domari), and Iranian plateau, eastward to Xinjiang (Sarikoli) and Assam (Assamese), and south to Sri Lanka (Sinhala) and the Maldives (Maldivian), with branches stretching as far out as Oceania and the Caribbean for Fiji Hindi and Caribbean Hindustani respectively. Furthermore, there are large diaspora communities of Indo-Iranian speakers in Northwestern Europe, North America, Oceania, East Africa, South Africa, the Caribbean, and the Persian Gulf.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"Indo-Iranian languages\" refers to the spectrum of Indo-European languages spoken in the Southern Asian region of Eurasia, spanning from the Indian subcontinent (where the Indo-Aryan branch is spoken, also called Indic) up to the Iranian Plateau (where the Iranian branch is spoken, also called Iranic). It was later discovered that the Nuristani languages are also spoken in the isolated region of Nuristan, roughly situated in the intersection of these regions.\nThis branch is also known as \"Aryan languages\", referring to the languages spoken by Aryan peoples, where the term \"Aryan\" is considered as the ethnocultural self-designation of ancient Indo-Iranians. Today, the term \"Aryan\" is generally avoided, owing to the perceived negative connotation associated with Aryanism.\nClassification.\nBelow is an abridged classification scheme of the Indo-Iranian languages. The Badeshi language remains unclassified within the Indo-Iranian branch.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Tree list/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOrigin.\nAll Indo-Iranian languages can be traced back to a single hypothetical ancestral language: Proto-Indo-Iranian, which is the reconstructed proto-language to represent the latest point at which all modern-day Indo-Iranian languages were still unified. Proto-Indo-Iranian, in turn, is classified as belonging to the Indo-European language family, ultimately tracing back to the Proto-Indo-European language.\nHistorically, the Proto-Indo-Iranian speakers are thought to have originally referred to themselves using the reconstructed Proto-Indo-Iranian root , from which it derives terms like \"Aryavarta\" (, lit.\u2009'Land of the Aryans'), \"Airyanem Vaejah\" (, lit.\u2009'Expanse of the Arya'), \"Alania\" (), \"Iran\" (), and \"Aryan\".\nThe Proto-Indo-Iranian-speakers are generally associated with the Sintashta culture, which is thought to represent an eastward migration of peoples from the Corded Ware culture, which, in turn, is believed to represent an earlier westward migration of Yamnaya-related people from the Pontic\u2013Caspian steppe zone into the territory of late Neolithic European cultures, possibly bringing with them the Proto-Indo-European language. However, the exact genetic relationship between the Yamnaya culture, Corded Ware culture and Sinthasta culture remains unclear.\nThe earliest known chariots have been found in Sintashta burials, and the culture is considered a strong candidate for the origin of the technology, which spread throughout the Old World and played an important role in ancient warfare. There is almost a general consensus among scholars that the Andronovo culture, the successor of Sintasha culture, was an Indo-Iranian culture. Currently, only two sub-cultures are considered as part of Andronovo culture: Alakul and F\u00ebdorovo cultures. The Andronovo culture is considered as an \"Indo-Iranic dialect continuum\", with a later split between Iranian and Indo-Aryan languages. However, according to Hiebert, an expansion of the Bactria\u2013Margiana Archaeological Complex (BMAC) into Iran and the margin of the Indus Valley is \"the best candidate for an archaeological correlate of the introduction of Indo-Iranian speakers to Iran and South Asia\", despite the absence of the characteristic timber graves of the steppe in the Near East, or south of the region between Kopet Dag and Pamir-Karakorum. J. P. Mallory acknowledges the difficulties of making a case for expansions from Andronovo to northern India, and that attempts to link the Indo-Aryans to such sites as the Beshkent and Vakhsh cultures \"only gets the Indo-Iranian to Central Asia, but not as far as the seats of the Medes, Persians or Indo-Aryans\". He has developed the \"Kulturkugel\" (lit.\u2009'the culture bullet') model that has the Indo-Iranians taking over cultural traits of BMAC, but preserving their language and religion while moving into Iran and India.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14543", "revid": "49943948", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14543", "title": "Industry (economics)", "text": "Economic branch that produces raw materials, goods or services\nIn microeconomics, an industry is a branch of an economy that produces a closely related set of raw materials, goods, or services. For example, one might refer to the wood industry or to the insurance industry.\nWhen evaluating a single group or company, its dominant source of revenue is typically used by industry classifications to classify it within a specific industry. For example the International Standard Industrial Classification (ISIC) \u2013 used directly or through derived classifications for the official statistics of most countries worldwide \u2013 classifies \"statistical units\" by the \"economic activity in which they mainly engage\". Industry is then defined as \"set of statistical units that are classified into the same ISIC category\". However, a single business need not belong just to one industry, such as when a large business (often referred to as a conglomerate) diversifies across separate industries.\nOther industry classification systems include the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS), which was developed through partnerships with North American countries such as the United States, Canada, and Mexico, in order to standardize the comparison of business activities in North America, the Global Industry Classification Standard (GICS), which is used to assign companies to specific economic sectors and industry groups, and the NACE classification used in the European Union.\nThere are many industry classifications in the modern economy, which can be grouped into larger categories called economic sectors. Sectors are broader than industry classifications. For example, the retail trade sector contains industries such as clothing stores, shoe stores, and health and personal care stores. Companies are not limited to one sector or industry. They can reside in multiple sectors and industries.\nIndustries, though associated with specific products, processes, and consumer markets, can evolve over time. One distinct industry (for example, barrelmaking) may become limited to a tiny niche market and get mostly re-classified into another industry using new techniques. At the same time, entirely new industries may branch off from older ones once a significant market becomes apparent (as an example, the semiconductor industry has become distinguished from the wider electronics industry).\nIndustry classification is valuable for economic analysis because it leads to largely distinct categories with simple relationships. Through these classifications, economists are able to compare companies within the same industry to evaluate the attractiveness of that industry. Companies within the same industry can also have similar movements in the unit value of their listed shares due to their similarity and macroeconomic factors that affect all members of an industry. However, more complex cases, such as otherwise different processes yielding similar products, require an element of standardization and prevent any one schema from fitting all possible uses.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14544", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14544", "title": "Indriidae", "text": "Family of lemurs\nThe Indriidae (sometimes incorrectly spelled Indridae) are a family of strepsirrhine primates. They are medium- to large-sized lemurs, with only four teeth in the toothcomb instead of the usual six. Indriids, like all lemurs, live exclusively on the island of Madagascar.\nClassification.\nThe 19 living species in the family are divided into three genera.\nFamily Indriidae\nCharacteristics.\nThe 19 extant Indriidae species vary considerably in size. Not counting the length of their tails, the avahis are only in length, while the indri is the largest extant strepsirrhine. The tail of the indri is only a stub, while avahi and the sifaka tails are as long as their bodies. Their fur is long and mostly from whitish over reddish up to grey. Their black faces, however, are always bald. The hind legs are longer than their fore limbs, their hands are long and thin, and their thumbs cannot be opposed to the other fingers correctly.\nAll species are arboreal, though they do come to the ground occasionally. When on the ground, they stand upright and move with short hops forward, with their arms held high. In the trees, though, they can make extraordinary leaps and are extremely agile, able to change direction from tree to tree. Like most leaf eaters, they adjust for the low nutrient content of their food by long rests. Often, they can be seen lying stretched on trees sunning themselves. Indriidae live together in family federations up to 15 animals, communicating with roars and facial expressions.\nIndriidae are herbivores, eating mostly leaves, fruits, and flowers. Like some other herbivores, they have a large cecum, containing bacteria that ferment cellulose, allowing for more efficient digestion of plant matter. They have fewer premolar teeth than other lemurs, with the dental formula of: 2.1.2.32.1.2.3\nFemales and males usually mate monogamously for many years. Mostly at the end of the dry season, their four- to five-month gestation ends with the birth of a single offspring, which lives in the family for a while after its weaning (at the age of five to six months).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14545", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14545", "title": "I, Robot", "text": "Collection of short stories by Isaac Asimov\nI, Robot is a fixup collection of science fiction short stories by American writer Isaac Asimov. The stories originally appeared in the American magazines \"Super Science Stories\" and \"Astounding Science Fiction\" between 1940 and 1950. The stories were then compiled into a single publication by Gnome Press in 1950, in an initial edition of 5,000 copies. \nAll the short stories in this collection, minus the frame story, were later included in \"The Complete Robot\" (1982). \nOverview.\nThe stories are woven together by a framing narrative in which the fictional Dr. Susan Calvin tells each story to a reporter (who serves as the narrator) in the 21st century. Although the stories can be read separately, they share a theme of the interaction of humans, robots, and morality, and when combined they tell a larger story of Asimov's fictional history of robotics.\nSeveral of the stories feature the character of Dr. Calvin, chief robopsychologist at U.S. Robots and Mechanical Men, Inc., the major manufacturer of robots. Upon their publication in this collection, Asimov wrote a framing sequence presenting the stories as Calvin's reminiscences during an interview with her about her life's work, chiefly concerned with aberrant behaviour of robots and the use of \"robopsychology\" to sort out what is happening in their positronic brain. The book also contains the short story in which Asimov's Three Laws of Robotics first appear, which had large influence on later science fiction and had impact on thought on ethics of artificial intelligence as well. Other characters that appear in these short stories are Powell and Donovan, a field-testing team which locates flaws in USRMM's prototype models.\nThe collection shares a title with the then recent short story \"I, Robot\" (1939) by Eando Binder (pseudonym of Earl and Otto Binder), which greatly influenced Asimov. Asimov had wanted to call his collection \"Mind and Iron\" and objected when the publisher made the title the same as Binder's. In his introduction to the story in \"Isaac Asimov Presents the Great SF Stories\" (1979), Asimov wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It certainly caught my attention. Two months after I read it, I began \"Robbie\", about a sympathetic robot, and that was the start of my positronic robot series. Eleven years later, when nine of my robot stories were collected into a book, the publisher named the collection \"I, Robot\" over my objections. My book is now the more famous, but Otto's story was there first.\nReception.\n\"The New York Times\" described \"I, Robot\" as \"an exciting science thriller [which] could be fun for those whose nerves are not already made raw by the potentialities of the atomic age\".\nDescribing it as \"continuously fascinating\", Groff Conklin \"unreservedly recommended\" the book.\nP. Schuyler Miller recommended the collection: \"For puzzle situations, for humor, for warm character, [and] for most of the values of plain good writing.\"\nAdaptations.\nTelevision.\nAt least three of the short stories from \"I, Robot\" have been adapted for television. The first was a 1962 episode of \"Out of this World\" hosted by Boris Karloff called \"Little Lost Robot\" with Maxine Audley as Susan Calvin. Two short stories from the collection were made into episodes of the British series \"Out of the Unknown\". These are \"The Prophet\" (1967), based on \"Reason\"; and \"Liar!\" (1969). Both episodes were wiped by the BBC and are no longer thought to exist, although video clips, audio extracts and still photographs have survived. Repurposed robot costumes from the former appeared in the 1968 \"Doctor Who\" serial \"The Mind Robber\". The 12th episode of the USSR science fiction TV series \"This Fantastic World\", filmed in 1987 and entitled \"Don't Joke with Robots\", was based on works by Aleksandr Belyaev and Fredrik Kilander as well as Asimov's \"Liar!\" story.\nBoth the original and revival series of \"The Outer Limits\" include episodes named \"I, Robot\" but these are adaptations of an unrelated work by Earl and Otto Binder under their joint pseudonym \"Eando Binder\". The Binders' story introduced a recurring character, the robot named Adam Link.\nIn August 2023, David S. Goyer revealed that he had gotten permission from FOX head Lachlan Murdoch, a self-professed fan of Apple TV+'s \"Foundation\", to adapt concepts from \"I, Robot\" to the series' 2023 second season, in \"tying [Demerzel/Daneel] into the \"I, Robot\" laws [and] doing a spin-off mini-series that specifically delves into our version of \"The Robot Wars\".\nFilms.\nHarlan Ellison's screenplay (1977\u20131978).\nDuring the late 1970s, Warner Bros. acquired the option to make a film based on the book, but no screenplay was ever accepted. The most notable attempt was one by Harlan Ellison, who collaborated with Asimov himself to create a version which captured the spirit of the original. Asimov is quoted as saying that this screenplay would lead to \"the first really adult, complex, worthwhile science fiction movie ever made.\" Ellison worked on the project from December 1977 to December 1978. Asimov himself advised Ellison as to the scientific validity of some elements of the script.\nEllison's script, taking inspiration from \"Citizen Kane\", began with reporter Robert Bratenahl tracking down information about Susan Calvin's alleged former lover Stephen Byerly. This provided for a framing sequence to adaptations of Asimov's stories. These differ from the originals in that they more strongly center around Calvin as a character. Ellison placed Calvin into stories in which she had not appeared and amplified her role in ones in which she did.\nAlthough well-regarded by critics, the screenplay is generally considered to have been unfilmable for practical reasons, given the technology and average film budgets of the time. Asimov also believed that the film may have been scrapped owing to a conflict between Ellison and the producers: when the producers suggested changes in the script, instead of being diplomatic as advised by Asimov, Ellison \"reacted violently\" and offended them.\nThe script was serialized in \"Asimov's Science Fiction\" magazine in late 1987, and appeared in book form with illustrations by Mark Zug under the title \"I, Robot: The Illustrated Screenplay\", in 1994 (reprinted 2004, ). Both Ellison and Asimov received credits.\n2004 film.\nThe film \"I, Robot\", starring Will Smith, was released by Twentieth Century Fox on July 16, 2004 in the United States. Its plot uses elements of \"Little Lost Robot\", a few of Asimov's character names and the \"Three Laws\". The plot of the movie is original; the screenplay \"Hardwired\" by Jeff Vintar is not based on Asimov's stories. It has been compared to Asimov's \"The Caves of Steel\", which revolves around the murder of a roboticist. Unlike the works by Asimov, the movie featured hordes of killer robots.\nRadio.\nBBC Radio 4 aired an audio drama adaptation of five of the \"I, Robot\" stories on their 15 Minute Drama in 2017, dramatized by Richard Kurti and starring Hermione Norris.\nThese also aired in a single program on BBC Radio 4 Extra as \"Isaac Asimov's 'I, Robot': Omnibus\".\nPrequels.\nThe Asimov estate asked Mickey Zucker Reichert (best known for the Norse fantasy \"Renshai\" series) to write three prequels for \"I, Robot\", since she was a science fiction writer with a medical degree who had first met Asimov when she was 23, although she did not know him well. She was the first female writer to be authorized to write stories based on Asimov's novels.\nThe follow-ups to Asimov's \"Foundation\" series had been written by Gregory Benford, Greg Bear, and David Brin.\nBerkley Books ordered the \"I, Robot\" prequels, which included:\nPopular culture references.\nIn 2004, \"The Saturday Evening Post\" said that \"I, Robot\"'s Three Laws \"revolutionized the science fiction genre and made robots far more interesting than they ever had been before.\" \"I, Robot\" has influenced many aspects of modern popular culture, particularly with respect to science fiction and technology. One example of this is in the technology industry. The name of the real-life modem manufacturer named U.S. Robotics was directly inspired by \"I, Robot\". The name is taken from the name of a robot manufacturer (\"United States Robots and Mechanical Men\") that appears throughout Asimov's robot short stories.\nMany works in the field of science fiction have also paid homage to Asimov's collection.\nAn episode of the original ' series, \"I, Mudd\" (1967), which depicts a planet of androids in need of humans, references \"I, Robot\". Another reference appears in the title of a ' episode, \"I, Borg\" (1992), in which Geordi La Forge befriends a lost member of the Borg collective and teaches it a sense of individuality and free will.\nA \"Doctor Who\" story, \"The Robots of Death\" (1977), references \"I, Robot\" with the \"First Principle\", with one character stating: \"Robots can't harm humans. It's the first principle.\"\nIn the film \"Aliens\" (1986), the synthetic person Bishop paraphrases Asimov's First Law in the line: \"It is impossible for me to harm, or by omission of action allow to be harmed, a human being.\"\nAn episode of \"The Simpsons\" entitled \"I D'oh Bot\" (2004) has Professor Frink build a robot named \"Smashius Clay\" (also named \"Killhammad Aieee\") that follows all three of Asimov's laws of robotics.\nThe animated science fiction/comedy \"Futurama\" makes several references to \"I, Robot\". The title of the episode \"I, Roommate\" (1999) is a spoof on \"I, Robot\" although the plot of the episode has little to do with the original stories. Additionally, the episode \"The Cyber House Rules\" included an optician named \"Eye Robot\" and the episode \"Anthology of Interest II\" included a segment called \"I, Meatbag.\" Also in \"Bender's Game\" (2008) the psychiatrist is shown a logical fallacy and explodes when the assistant shouts \"Liar!\" a la \"Liar!\". Leela once told Bender to \"cover his ears\" so that he would not hear the robot-destroying paradox which she used to destroy Robot Santa (he punishes the bad, he kills people, killing is bad, therefore he must punish himself), causing a total breakdown; additionally, Bender has stated that he is Three Laws Safe.\nThe positronic brain, which Asimov named his robots' central processors, is what powers Data from \"Star Trek: The Next Generation\", as well as other Soong type androids. Positronic brains have been referenced in a number of other television shows including \"Doctor Who\", \"Once Upon a Time... Space\", \"Perry Rhodan\", \"The Number of the Beast\", and others.\nAuthor Cory Doctorow has written a story called \"I, Robot\" as homage to and critique of Asimov, as well as \"I, Row-Boat\", both released in the 2007 short story collection \"\". He has also said, \"If I return to this theme, it will be with a story about uplifted cheese sandwiches, called 'I, Rarebit.'\"\nOther cultural references to the book are less directly related to science fiction and technology. The album \"I Robot\" (1977), by The Alan Parsons Project, was inspired by Asimov's \"I, Robot\". In its original conception, the album was to follow the themes and concepts presented in the short story collection. The Alan Parsons Project were not able to obtain the rights in spite of Asimov's enthusiasm; he had already assigned the rights elsewhere. Thus, the album's concept was altered slightly although the name was kept (minus comma to avoid copyright infringement). An album, \"I, Human\" (2009), by Singaporean band Deus Ex Machina, draws heavily upon Asimov's principles on robotics and applies it to the concept of cloning.\nThe Indian science fiction film \"Endhiran\" (2010) refers to Asimov's three laws for artificial intelligence for the fictional character \"Chitti: The Robot\". When a scientist takes in the robot for evaluation, the panel inquires whether the robot was built using the Three Laws of Robotics.\nThe theme for Burning Man 2018 was \"I, Robot\".\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14546", "revid": "8036153", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14546", "title": "Invictus", "text": "Poem by William Ernest Henley\n\"Invictus\" is a short poem by English poet William Ernest Henley. Henley wrote it in 1875, and in 1888 he published it in his first volume of poems, \"Book of Verses\", in the section titled \"Life and Death (Echoes)\".\nBackground.\nWhen Henley was 16 years old, his left leg required amputation below the knee owing to complications arising from tuberculosis. In the early 1870s, after seeking treatment for problems with his other leg at Margate, he was told that it would require a similar procedure.\nHe instead chose to travel to Edinburgh in August 1873 to enlist the services of the distinguished English surgeon Joseph Lister, who was able to save Henley's remaining leg after multiple surgical interventions on the foot. While recovering in the infirmary, he was moved to write the verses that became the poem \"Invictus\". A memorable evocation of Victorian stoicism\u2014the \"stiff upper lip\" of self-discipline and fortitude in adversity, which popular culture rendered into a British character trait\u2014\"Invictus\" remains a cultural touchstone.\nPoem.\nINVICTUS\n&lt;poem&gt;Out of the night that covers me\nBlack as the pit from pole to pole,\nI thank whatever gods may be\nFor my unconquerable soul.\nIn the fell clutch of circumstance,\nI have not winced nor cried aloud.\nUnder the bludgeonings of chance\nMy head is bloody, but unbowed.\nBeyond this place of wrath and tears\nLooms but the Horror of the shade,\nAnd yet the menace of the years\nFinds, and shall find, me unafraid.\nIt matters not how strait the gate,\nHow charged with punishments the scroll, \nI am the master of my fate\nI am the captain of my soul.&lt;/poem&gt;\nAnalysis.\nLatin for \"unconquered\", the poem \"Invictus\" is a deeply descriptive and motivational work filled with vivid imagery. With four stanzas and sixteen lines, each containing eight syllables, the poem has a rather uncomplicated structure. The poem is most known for its themes of willpower and strength in the face of adversity, much of which is drawn from the horrible fate assigned to many amputees of the day\u2014gangrene and death.\nEach stanza takes considerable note of William Ernest Henley's perseverance and fearlessness throughout his early life and over twenty months under Lister's care. In the second stanza, Henley refers to the strength that helped him through a childhood defined by his struggles with tuberculosis when he says \"I have not winced nor cried aloud.\" In the fourth stanza, Henley alludes to the fact that each individual's destiny is under the jurisdiction of themselves, not at the mercy of the obstacles they face, nor other worldly powers.\nThose who have taken time to analyze \"Invictus\" have also taken notice of religious themes, or the lack thereof, that exist in this piece. There is agreement that much of the dark descriptions in the opening lines make reference to Hell. Later, the fourth stanza of the poem alludes to a phrase from Jesus's Sermon on the Mount in the King James Bible, which says, at , \"Because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it.\"\nDespite Henley's evocative tellings of perseverance and determination, worry was on his mind; in a letter to a close companion, William Ernest Henley later confided, \"I am afeard my marching days are over\" when asked about the condition of his leg.\nPublication history.\nThe second edition of Henley's \"Book of Verses\" added a dedication \"To R. T. H. B.\"\u2014a reference to Robert Thomas Hamilton Bruce, a successful Scottish flour merchant, baker, and literary patron. The 1900 edition of Henley's \"Poems\", published after Bruce's death, altered the dedication to \"I. M. R. T. Hamilton Bruce (1846\u20131899),\" whereby \"I. M.\" stands for \"in memoriam.\"\nTitle.\nThe poem was published in 1888 in his first volume of poems, \"Book of Verses,\" with no title, but would later be reprinted in 19th-century newspapers under various titles, including:\nThe established title \"Invictus\" was added by editor Arthur Quiller-Couch when the poem was included in the \"Oxford Book of English Verse\" (1900).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14551", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14551", "title": "Tertiary sector", "text": "Service sector\nIn economics, the tertiary sector (also known as the service sector) is the economic sector which comprises the provision of services as opposed to the manufacture of finished goods. Services (also known as \"intangible goods\") include attention, advice, access, experience and affective labour.\nThe tertiary sector involves the provision of services to other businesses as well as to final consumers. Services may involve the transport, distribution and sale of goods from a producer to a consumer, as may happen in wholesaling and retailing, pest control or financial services. The goods may be transformed in the process of providing the service, as happens in the restaurant industry. However, the focus is on people by interacting with them and serving the customers rather than transforming the physical goods. The production of information has been long regarded as a service, but some economists now attribute it to a fourth sector, called the quaternary sector.\nDifficulty of definition.\nIt is sometimes hard to determine whether a given company is part of the secondary or the tertiary sector. It is not only for-profit companies that make up the sector in some schemes, but also governments and government agencies (such as the police or military) and nonprofit organizations (such as charities or research associations) that provide services.\nTo classify a business as a service, one can use a classification system such as the United Nations' International Standard Industrial Classification, the North American Industrial Classification System (NAICS), the Statistical Classification of Economic Activities in the European Community (NACE) or similar systems elsewhere. These governmental classification systems have a first level of hierarchy that reflects whether the economic goods are tangible or intangible. \nFor purposes of finance and market research, market-based classification systems such as the Global Industry Classification Standard and the Industry Classification Benchmark are used to classify businesses that participate in the service sector. Unlike governmental classification systems, the first level of market-based classification systems divides the economy into functionally related markets or industries. The second or third level of these hierarchies then reflects whether goods or services are produced.\nTheory of progression.\nFor the last 100 years, there has been a substantial shift from the primary and secondary sectors to the tertiary sector in industrialized countries. This shift is called tertiarisation. The tertiary sector is now the largest sector of the economy in the Western world, and is also the fastest-growing sector.\nIn examining the growth of the service sector in the early nineties, the globalist Kenichi Ohmae noted that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the United States, 70 per cent of the workforce works in the service sector; in Japan, 60 per cent, and in Taiwan, 50 per cent. These are not necessarily busboys and live-in maids. Numerous of them are in the skilled category. They are earning as much as manufacturing employees, and often more.\nEconomies tend to follow a developmental progression that takes them from heavy reliance on agriculture and mining, toward the development of manufacturing (e.g. automobiles, textiles, shipbuilding, steel) and finally toward a more service-based structure. The first economy to follow this path in the modern world was the United Kingdom. The speed at which other economies have made the transition to service-based (or \"post-industrial\") economies has increased over time.\nHistorically, manufacturing tended to be more open to international trade and competition than services. However, with dramatic cost reduction and speed and reliability improvements in the transportation of people and the communication of information, the service sector now includes some of the most intensive international competition, despite residual protectionism.\nIssues for service providers.\nService providers face obstacles selling services that goods-sellers rarely face. Services are intangible, making it difficult for potential customers to understand what they will receive and what value it will hold for them. Indeed, some, such as consultants and providers of investment services, offer no guarantees of the value for the price paid.\nSince the quality of most services depends largely on the quality of the individuals providing the services, \"people costs\" are usually a high fraction of service costs. Whereas a manufacturer may use technology, simplification, and other techniques to lower the cost of goods sold, the service provider often faces an unrelenting pattern of increasing costs.\nProduct differentiation is often difficult. For example, how does one choose one investment adviser over another, since they are often seen to provide identical services.\nCharging a premium for services is usually an option only for the most established firms, who charge extra based upon brand recognition.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14552", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14552", "title": "Primary sector", "text": "Industry of raw materials and unprocessed food\nIn economics, the primary sector is the economic sector which comprises industry involved in the extraction and production of raw materials, such as farming, logging, fishing, forestry and mining. The primary sector tends to make up a larger portion of the economy in developing countries than it does in developed countries. For example, in 2018, agriculture, forestry, and fishing comprised more than 15% of GDP in sub-Saharan Africa but less than 1% of GDP in North America.\nIn developed countries the primary sector has become more technologically advanced, enabling for example the mechanization of farming, as compared with lower-tech methods in poorer countries. More developed economies may invest additional capital in primary means of production: for example, in the United States Corn Belt, combine harvesters pick the corn, and sprayers spray large amounts of insecticides, herbicides and fungicides, producing a higher yield than is possible using less capital-intensive techniques. These technological advances and investment allow the primary sector to employ a smaller workforce, so developed countries tend to have a smaller percentage of their workforce involved in primary activities, instead having a higher percentage involved in the secondary and tertiary sectors.\nList of countries by agricultural output.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Bar chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14553", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14553", "title": "Secondary sector", "text": "Manufacturing and construction industries\nIn economics, the secondary sector is the economic sector which comprises manufacturing, encompassing industries that produce a finished, usable product or are involved in construction.\nThis sector generally takes the output of the primary sector (i.e. raw materials like metals, wood) and creates finished goods suitable for sale to domestic businesses or consumers and for export (via distribution through the tertiary sector). Many of these industries consume large quantities of energy, require factories and use machinery; they are often classified as light or heavy based on such quantities. This also produces waste materials and waste heat that may cause environmental problems or pollution (see negative externalities). Examples include textile production, car manufacturing, and handicraft.\nManufacturing is an important activity in promoting economic growth and development. Nations that export manufactured products tend to generate higher marginal GDP growth, which supports higher incomes and therefore marginal tax revenue needed to fund such government expenditures as health care and infrastructure. Among developed countries, it is an important source of well-paying jobs for the middle class (e.g., engineering) to facilitate greater social mobility for successive generations on the economy. Currently, an estimated 20% of the labor force in the United States is involved in the secondary industry.\nThe secondary sector depends on the primary sector for the raw materials necessary for production. Countries that primarily produce agricultural and other raw materials. The value added through the transformation of raw materials into finished goods reliably generates greater profitability, which underlies the faster growth of developed economies.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Bar chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14554", "revid": "262666", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14554", "title": "Imaginary number", "text": "Square root of a non-positive real number\nAn imaginary number is the product of a real number and the imaginary unit i, which is defined by its property \"i\"2 = \u22121. The square of an imaginary number bi is \u2212\"b\"2. For example, 5\"i\" is an imaginary number, and its square is \u221225. The number zero is considered to be both real and imaginary.\nOriginally coined in the 17th century by Ren\u00e9 Descartes as a derogatory term and regarded as fictitious or useless, the concept gained wide acceptance following the work of Leonhard Euler in the 18th century, and Augustin-Louis Cauchy and Carl Friedrich Gauss in the early 19th century.\nAn imaginary number \"bi\" can be added to a real number a to form a complex number of the form \"a\" + \"bi\", where the real numbers a and b are called, respectively, the \"real part\" and the \"imaginary part\" of the complex number.\nHistory.\nAlthough the Greek mathematician and engineer Heron of Alexandria is noted as the first to present a calculation involving the square root of a negative number, it was Rafael Bombelli who first set down the rules for multiplication of complex numbers in 1572. The concept had appeared in print earlier, such as in work by Gerolamo Cardano. At the time, imaginary numbers and negative numbers were poorly understood and were regarded by some as fictitious or useless, much as zero once was. Many other mathematicians were slow to adopt the use of imaginary numbers, including Ren\u00e9 Descartes, who wrote about them in his \"La G\u00e9om\u00e9trie\" in which he coined the term \"imaginary\" and meant it to be derogatory. The use of imaginary numbers was not widely accepted until the work of Leonhard Euler (1707\u20131783) and Carl Friedrich Gauss (1777\u20131855). The geometric significance of complex numbers as points in a plane was first described by Caspar Wessel (1745\u20131818).\nIn 1843, William Rowan Hamilton extended the idea of an axis of imaginary numbers in the plane to a four-dimensional space of quaternion imaginaries in which three of the dimensions are analogous to the imaginary numbers in the complex field.\nGeometric interpretation.\nGeometrically, imaginary numbers are found on the vertical axis of the complex number plane, which allows them to be presented perpendicular to the real axis. One way of viewing imaginary numbers is to consider a standard number line positively increasing in magnitude to the right and negatively increasing in magnitude to the left. At 0 on the x-axis, a y-axis can be drawn with \"positive\" direction going up; \"positive\" imaginary numbers then increase in magnitude upwards, and \"negative\" imaginary numbers increase in magnitude downwards. This vertical axis is often called the \"imaginary axis\" and is denoted formula_1 formula_2 or \u2111.\nIn this representation, multiplication by\u00a0i corresponds to a counterclockwise rotation of 90 degrees about the origin, which is a quarter of a circle. Multiplication by\u00a0\u2212\"i\" corresponds to a clockwise rotation of 90 degrees about the origin. Similarly, multiplying by a purely imaginary number bi, with b a real number, both causes a counterclockwise rotation about the origin by 90 degrees and scales the answer by a factor of b. When \"b\" &lt; 0, this can instead be described as a clockwise rotation by 90 degrees and a scaling by .\nSquare roots of negative numbers.\nCare must be used when working with imaginary numbers that are expressed as the principal values of the square roots of negative numbers. For example, if x and y are both positive real numbers, the following chain of equalities appears reasonable at first glance:\n formula_3\nBut the result is clearly nonsense. The step where the square root was broken apart was illegitimate. (See Mathematical fallacy.)\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14556", "revid": "11508456", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14556", "title": "Input/Output Device", "text": ""}
{"id": "14559", "revid": "21112944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14559", "title": "Indictment", "text": "Formal accusation that someone committed a crime\nAn indictment ( ) is a formal accusation that a person has committed a crime. In jurisdictions that use the concept of felonies, the most serious criminal offense is a felony; jurisdictions that do not use that concept often use that of an indictable offence, which is an offence that requires an indictment.\nAustralia.\nSection 80 of the Constitution of Australia provides that \"the trial on indictment of any offence against any law of the Commonwealth shall be by jury\". The High Court of Australia has consistently used a narrow interpretation of this clause, allowing the Parliament of Australia to define which offences proceed on indictment rather than conferring a universal right to a jury trial. Section 4G of the \"Crimes Act 1914\" provides that \"offences against a law of the Commonwealth punishable by imprisonment for a period exceeding 12 months are indictable offences, unless the contrary intention appears\".\nCanada.\nA direct indictment is one in which the case is sent directly to trial before a preliminary inquiry is completed or when the accused has been discharged by a preliminary inquiry. It is meant to be an extraordinary, rarely used power to ensure that those who should be brought to trial are in a timely manner or where an error of judgment is seen to have been made in the preliminary inquiry. In the aftermath of the 2016 Jordan decision, in which the Supreme Court of Canada imposed time limits on the Crown to bring criminal cases to trial, the Crown has started to use the procedure more frequently.\nUnited Kingdom.\nEngland and Wales.\nIn England and Wales (except in private prosecutions by individuals) an indictment is issued by the public prosecutor (in most cases this will be the Crown Prosecution Service) on behalf of the Crown, which is the nominal plaintiff in all public prosecutions under English law.\nThis is why a public prosecution of a person whose surname is Smith would be referred to in writing as \"R v Smith\" (or alternatively as \"Regina v Smith\" or \"Rex v Smith\" depending on the sex of the Sovereign; \"Regina\" and \"Rex\" being Latin for \"Queen\" and \"King\" respectively and in either case may informally be pronounced as such) and when cited orally in court would be pronounced \"the Crown against Smith\".\nAll proceedings on indictment must be brought before the Crown Court. By virtue of practice directions issued under section 75(1) of the Senior Courts Act 1981, an indictment must be tried by a High Court judge, a circuit judge or a recorder (which of these depends on the offence).\nAs to the form of an indictment, see the Indictments Act 1915 and the Indictment Rules 1971 made thereunder.\nThe Indictment Rules 1971 were revoked by the Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Rules 2007 (on the whole) incorporated into the Criminal Procedure Rules 2010. The form and content and the service of an indictment are governed by Rule 14 of the CPR 2012. Additional guidance is contained in the Consolidated Criminal Practice Direction Part IV.34.\nAs to the preferring of a bill of indictment and the signing of an indictment, see section 2 of the Administration of Justice (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1933 and the Indictments (Procedure) Rules 1971 (SI 1971/2084) made thereunder, as amended and modified by the Indictments (Procedure) (Amendment) Rules 1983 (SI 1983/284), the Indictments (Procedure) (Amendment) Rules 1988 (SI 1988/1783), the Indictments (Procedure) (Amendment) Rules 1992 (SI 1992/284), the Indictments (Procedure) (Amendment) Rules 1997 (SI 1997/711), the Indictments (Procedure) (Modification) Rules 1998 (SI 1998/3045) and the Indictments (Procedure) (Amendment) Rules 2000 (SI 2000/3360).\nNorthern Ireland.\nSee the Indictments Act (Northern Ireland) 1945.\nScotland.\nIn Scotland, all of these cases brought in the High Court of Justiciary are brought in the name of the Lord Advocate and will be tried on indictment. In a sheriff court where trials proceed using the solemn proceedings they will also be tried on indictment and are brought in the name of the Lord Advocate. All solemn indictments are designed in the manner Her (or His) Majesty's Advocate v Smith, or, more frequently HMA v Smith.\nUnited States.\nThe Fifth Amendment of the United States Constitution states in part: \"No person shall be held to answer for a capital, or otherwise infamous crime, unless on a presentment or indictment of a Grand Jury, except in cases arising in the land or naval forces, or in the Militia when in actual service in time of War or public danger.\" The requirement of an indictment has not been incorporated against the states; therefore, even though the federal government uses grand juries and indictments, not all states do. As of 2019, all states besides Pennsylvania and Connecticut still use grand juries to indict suspects for some offenses.\nIn many jurisdictions that use grand juries, prosecutors often have a choice between seeking an indictment from a grand jury and filing a charging document directly with the court. Such a document is usually called an \"information\", \"accusation\", or \"complaint\", to distinguish it from a grand-jury indictment. To protect the suspect's due process rights in felony cases (where the suspect's interest in liberty is at stake), there is usually a preliminary hearing, at which a judge determines whether there was probable cause to arrest the suspect who is in custody. If the judge finds such probable cause, they bind, or hold over, the suspect for trial.\nThe substance of an indictment or other charging instrument is usually the same, regardless of the jurisdiction: it consists of a short and plain statement of where, when, and how the defendant allegedly committed the offense. Each offense is usually set out in a separate \"count\". Indictments for complex crimes, particularly those involving conspiracy or numerous counts, may run to hundreds of pages. In other cases, however, an indictment for a crime as serious as murder may consist of a single sheet of paper.\nIndictable offenses are tried by jury, unless the accused waives the right to a jury trial. Even though the Sixth Amendment of the Constitution mandates the right to a jury trial in any criminal prosecution, the vast majority of criminal cases in the US are resolved by the plea-bargaining process.\nTypes.\nA sealed indictment stays non-public, for various reasons, until it is unsealed (for example, once the indicted is arrested or notified by police). A superseding indictment takes the place of the previously active one. A speaking indictment goes beyond the legally required statement of the elements of the charged crime(s) and also includes a narrative of the alleged underlying acts in more detail than the law requires.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14560", "revid": "73920", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14560", "title": "Republic of Ireland", "text": "Country in northwestern Europe\nIreland ( ), also known as the Republic of Ireland (), is a country in Northwestern Europe. It consists of 26 of the 32 counties of the island of Ireland, with a population of about 5.4\u00a0million. Its capital and largest city is Dublin, on the eastern side of the island, with a population of over 1.5\u00a0million. The sovereign state shares its only land border with Northern Ireland, which is part of the United Kingdom. It is otherwise surrounded by the Atlantic Ocean, with the Celtic Sea to the south, St George's Channel to the south-east and the Irish Sea to the east. It is a unitary, parliamentary republic. The legislature, the , consists of a lower house, ; an upper house, ; and an elected president () who serves as the largely ceremonial head of state, but with some important powers and duties. The head of government is the (prime minister, lit.\u2009'chief'), elected by the D\u00e1il and appointed by the president, who appoints other government ministers.\nThe Irish Free State was created with Dominion status in 1922, following the Anglo-Irish Treaty. In 1937, a new constitution was adopted, in which the state was named \"Ireland\" and effectively became a republic, with an elected non-executive president. It was officially declared a republic in 1949, following The Republic of Ireland Act 1948. Ireland became a member of the United Nations in 1955. It joined the European Communities (EC), the predecessor of the European Union (EU), in 1973. The state had no formal relations with Northern Ireland for most of the 20th century, but the 1980s and 1990s saw the British and Irish governments working with Northern Irish parties to resolve the conflict that had become known as the Troubles. Since the signing of the Good Friday Agreement in 1998, the Irish government and Northern Irish government have co-operated on a number of policy areas under the North/South Ministerial Council created by the Agreement.\nIreland is a developed country with a quality of life ranked sixth in the world by the 2024 Human Development Index Report adjusted for inequality. It also ranks highly in healthcare, economic freedom and freedom of the press. According to the Global Peace Index, Ireland was the second most peaceful country worldwide in 2024.\nIt is a member of the EU and a founding member of the Council of Europe and the OECD. The Irish government has followed a policy of military neutrality through non-alignment since before World War II, and the country is consequently not a member of NATO, although it is a member of the Partnership for Peace and certain aspects of PESCO. Ireland's economy is advanced, with one of Europe's major financial hubs being centred on Dublin. It ranks among the top five wealthiest countries in the world in terms of both GDP and GNI per capita. After joining the EC, the country's government enacted a series of liberal economic policies that helped to boost economic growth between 1995 and 2007, a time now often referred to as the Celtic Tiger period. A recession and reversal in growth then followed during the Great Recession, which was exacerbated by the bursting of the Irish property bubble. The Great Recession lasted until 2014, and was followed by a new period of strong economic growth.\nName.\nThe names \"Ireland\" and both derive from Old Irish \"\u00c9riu\", which in turn comes from Proto-Celtic \"\u0278\u012bweriy\u016b\" meaning \"fertile soil\". The Classical Latin name for the island of Ireland, \"Ivernia\", also comes from this same root, and it remains a popular, poetic synonym for Ireland to this day (usually respelled \"Hibernia\", under the influence of \"hibernum\", the Latin word for \"winter\").\nThe state created in 1922, comprising 26 of the 32 counties of Ireland, was \"styled and known as the Irish Free State\" (). The Constitution of Ireland, adopted in 1937, says that \"the name of the State is \"\u00c9ire\", or, in the English language, Ireland\". Section 2 of the Republic of Ireland Act 1948 states, \"It is hereby declared that the description of the State shall be the Republic of Ireland.\" The 1948 Act does not \"name\" the state \"Republic of Ireland\", because to have done so would have put it in conflict with the Constitution.\nThe government of the United Kingdom used the name \"Eire\" (without the diacritic) and, from 1949, \"Republic of Ireland\", for the state. It was not until the 1998 Good Friday Agreement, when the state dropped its claim to Northern Ireland, that it began calling the state \"Ireland\".\nThe state is also informally called \"the Republic\", \"Southern Ireland\" or \"the South\"; especially when distinguishing the state from the island or when discussing Northern Ireland (\"the North\"). Irish republicans reserve the name \"Ireland\" for the whole island and often refer to the state as \"the Free State\", \"the 26 Counties\", or \"the South of Ireland\". This is a \"response to the partitionist view [...] that Ireland stops at the border\".\nHistory.\nHome-rule movement.\nFrom the Act of Union on 1 January 1801, until 6 December 1922, the island of Ireland was part of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. During the Great Famine, from 1845 to 1849, the island's population of over 8\u00a0million fell by 30%. One million Irish died of starvation and disease and another 1.5\u00a0million emigrated, mostly to the United States. This set the pattern of emigration for the century to come, resulting in constant population decline up to the 1960s.\nFrom 1874, and particularly under Charles Stewart Parnell from 1880, the Irish Parliamentary Party gained prominence. This was firstly through widespread agrarian agitation via the Irish Land League, which won land reforms for tenants in the form of the Irish Land Acts, and secondly through its attempts to achieve Home Rule, via two unsuccessful bills which would have granted Ireland limited national autonomy. These led to \"grass-roots\" control of national affairs, under the Local Government Act 1898, that had been in the hands of landlord-dominated grand juries of the Protestant Ascendancy.\nHome Rule seemed certain when the Parliament Act 1911 abolished the veto of the House of Lords, and John Redmond secured the Third Home Rule Act in 1914. However, the Unionist movement had been growing since 1886 among Irish Protestants after the introduction of the first home rule bill, fearing discrimination and loss of economic and social privileges if Irish Catholics achieved real political power. In the late 19th and early 20th-century unionism was particularly strong in parts of Ulster, where industrialisation was more common in contrast to the more agrarian rest of the island, and where the Protestant population was more prominent, with a majority in four counties. Under the leadership of the Dublin-born Sir Edward Carson of the Irish Unionist Party and the Ulsterman Sir James Craig of the Ulster Unionist Party, unionists became strongly militant, forming Ulster Volunteers in order to oppose \"the Coercion of Ulster\". After the Home Rule Bill passed parliament in May 1914, to avoid rebellion with Ulster, the British Prime Minister H. H. Asquith introduced an Amending Bill reluctantly conceded to by the Irish Party leadership. This provided for the temporary exclusion of Ulster from the workings of the bill for a trial period of six years, with an as yet undecided new set of measures to be introduced for the area to be temporarily excluded.\nRevolution and steps to independence.\nThough it received the Royal Assent and was placed on the statute books in 1914, the implementation of the Third Home Rule Act was suspended until after the First World War which defused the threat of civil war in Ireland. With the hope of ensuring the implementation of the Act at the end of the war through Ireland's engagement in the war, Redmond and the Irish National Volunteers supported the UK and its Allies. 175,000 men joined Irish regiments of the 10th (Irish) and 16th (Irish) divisions of the New British Army, while Unionists joined the 36th (Ulster) divisions.\nThe remainder of the Irish Volunteers, who refused Redmond and opposed any support of the UK, launched an armed insurrection against British rule in the 1916 Easter Rising, together with the Irish Citizen Army. This commenced on 24 April 1916 with the declaration of independence. After a week of heavy fighting, primarily in Dublin, the surviving rebels were forced to surrender their positions. The majority were imprisoned, with fifteen of the prisoners (including most of the leaders) were executed as traitors to the UK. This included Patrick Pearse, the spokesman for the rising and who provided the signal to the volunteers to start the rising, as well as James Connolly, socialist and founder of the Industrial Workers of the World union and both the Irish and Scottish Labour movements. These events, together with the Conscription Crisis of 1918, had a profound effect on changing public opinion in Ireland against the British Government.\nIn January 1919, after the December 1918 general election, 73 of Ireland's 105 Members of Parliament (MPs) elected were Sinn F\u00e9in members who were elected on a platform of abstentionism from the British House of Commons. In January 1919, they set up an Irish parliament called D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann. This first D\u00e1il issued a declaration of independence and proclaimed an Irish Republic. The declaration was mainly a restatement of the 1916 Proclamation with the additional provision that Ireland was no longer a part of the United Kingdom. The Irish Republic's Ministry of D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann sent a delegation under (Head of Council, or Speaker, of the Da\u00edl) Se\u00e1n T. O'Kelly to the Paris Peace Conference of 1919, but it was not admitted.\nAfter the War of Independence and truce called in July 1921, representatives of the British government and the five Irish treaty delegates, led by Arthur Griffith, Robert Barton and Michael Collins, negotiated the Anglo-Irish Treaty in London from 11 October to 6 December 1921. The Irish delegates set up headquarters at Hans Place in Knightsbridge, and it was here in private discussions that the decision was taken on 5 December to recommend the treaty to D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann. On 7 January 1922, the Second D\u00e1il ratified the Treaty by 64 votes to 57.\nIn accordance with the treaty, on 6 December 1922 the entire island of Ireland became a self-governing Dominion called the Irish Free State (\"Saorst\u00e1t \u00c9ireann\"). Under the Constitution of the Irish Free State, the Parliament of Northern Ireland had the option to leave the Irish Free State one month later and return to the United Kingdom. During the intervening period, the powers of the Parliament of the Irish Free State and Executive Council of the Irish Free State did not extend to Northern Ireland. Northern Ireland exercised its right under the treaty to leave the new Dominion and rejoined the United Kingdom on 8 December 1922. It did so by making an address to the King requesting, \"that the powers of the Parliament and Government of the Irish Free State shall no longer extend to Northern Ireland.\" The Irish Free State was a constitutional monarchy sharing a monarch with the United Kingdom and other Dominions of the British Commonwealth. The country had a governor-general (representing the monarch), a bicameral parliament, a cabinet called the \"Executive Council\", and a prime minister called the President of the Executive Council.\nIrish Civil War.\nThe Irish Civil War (June 1922 \u2013 May 1923) was the consequence of the ratification of the Anglo-Irish Treaty and the creation of the Irish Free State. Anti-treaty forces, led by \u00c9amon de Valera, objected to the fact that acceptance of the treaty abolished the Irish Republic of 1919 to which they had sworn loyalty, arguing in the face of public support for the settlement that the \"people have no right to do wrong\". They objected most to the fact that the state would remain part of the British Empire and that members of the Free State Parliament would have to swear what the anti-treaty side saw as an oath of fidelity to the British king. Pro-treaty forces, led by Michael Collins, argued that the treaty gave \"not the ultimate freedom that all nations aspire to and develop, but the freedom to achieve it\".\nAt the start of the war, the Irish Republican Army (IRA) split into two opposing camps: a pro-treaty IRA and an anti-treaty IRA. The pro-treaty IRA disbanded and joined the new National Army. However, because the anti-treaty IRA lacked an effective command structure and because of the pro-treaty forces' defensive tactics throughout the war, Michael Collins and his pro-treaty forces were able to build up an army with many tens of thousands of World War I veterans from the 1922 disbanded Irish regiments of the British Army, capable of overwhelming the anti-treatyists. British supplies of artillery, aircraft, machine-guns and ammunition boosted pro-treaty forces, and the threat of a return of Crown forces to the Free State removed any doubts about the necessity of enforcing the treaty. Lack of public support for the anti-treaty forces (often called the Irregulars) and the determination of the government to overcome the Irregulars contributed significantly to their defeat.\nConstitution of Ireland 1937.\nFollowing a national plebiscite in July 1937, the new Constitution of Ireland (\"Bunreacht na h\u00c9ireann\") came into force on 29 December 1937. This replaced the Constitution of the Irish Free State and declared that the name of the state is , or \"Ireland\" in the English language. While Articles 2 and 3 of the Constitution defined the national territory to be the whole island, they also confined the state's jurisdiction to the area that had been the Irish Free State. The former Irish Free State government had abolished the Office of Governor-General in December 1936. Although the constitution established the office of President of Ireland, the question over whether Ireland was a republic remained open. Diplomats were accredited to the king, but the president exercised all internal functions of a head of state. For instance, the President gave assent to new laws with his own authority, without reference to King George VI who was only an \"organ\", that was provided for by statute law.\nIreland remained neutral during World War II, a period it described as The Emergency. Ireland's Dominion status was terminated with the passage of The Republic of Ireland Act 1948, which came into force on 18 April 1949 and declared that the state was a republic. At the time, a declaration of a republic terminated Commonwealth membership. This rule was changed 10 days after Ireland declared itself a republic, with the London Declaration of 28 April 1949. Ireland did not reapply when the rules were altered to permit republics to join. Later, the Crown of Ireland Act 1542 was repealed in Ireland by the Statute Law Revision (Pre-Union Irish Statutes) Act 1962.\nRecent history.\nIreland became a member of the United Nations in December 1955, after having been denied membership because of its neutral stance during the Second World War and not supporting the Allied cause. At the time, joining the UN involved a commitment to using force to deter aggression by one state against another if the UN thought it was necessary.\nInterest towards membership of the European Communities (EC) developed in Ireland during the 1950s, with consideration also given to membership of the European Free Trade Area. As the United Kingdom intended on EC membership, Ireland applied for membership in July 1961 due to the substantial economic linkages with the United Kingdom. The founding EC members remained sceptical regarding Ireland's economic capacity, neutrality, and unattractive protectionist policy. Many Irish economists and politicians realised that economic policy reform was necessary. The prospect of EC membership became doubtful in 1963 when French President General Charles de Gaulle stated that France opposed Britain's accession, which ceased negotiations with all other candidate countries. In 1969 his successor, Georges Pompidou, was not opposed to British and Irish membership. Negotiations began and in 1972 the Treaty of Accession was signed. A referendum was held later that year which confirmed Ireland's entry into the bloc, and it finally joined the EC as a member state on 1 January 1973.\nThe economic crisis of the late 1970s was fuelled by the Fianna F\u00e1il government's budget, the abolition of the car tax, excessive borrowing, and global economic instability including the 1979 oil crisis. There were significant policy changes from 1989 onwards, with economic reform, tax cuts, welfare reform, an increase in competition, and a ban on borrowing to fund current spending. This policy began in 1989\u20131992 by the Fianna F\u00e1il/Progressive Democrats government, and continued by the subsequent Fianna F\u00e1il/Labour government and Fine Gael/Labour/Democratic Left government. Ireland became one of the world's fastest growing economies by the late 1990s in what was known as the Celtic Tiger period, which lasted until the Great Recession. Since 2014, Ireland has experienced increased economic activity.\nIn the Northern Ireland question, the British and Irish governments started to seek a peaceful resolution to the violent conflict involving many paramilitaries and the British Army in Northern Ireland known as \"The Troubles\". A peace settlement for Northern Ireland, known as the Good Friday Agreement, was approved in 1998 in referendums north and south of the border. As part of the peace settlement, the territorial claim to Northern Ireland in Articles 2 and 3 of the Constitution of Ireland was removed by referendum. In its white paper on Brexit the United Kingdom government reiterated its commitment to the Good Friday Agreement. With regard to Northern Ireland's status, it said that the UK Government's \"clearly-stated preference is to retain Northern Ireland's current constitutional position: as part of the UK, but with strong links to Ireland\".\nGeography.\n \nThe state extends over an area of about five-sixths () of the island of Ireland (), with Northern Ireland constituting the remainder. The island is bounded to the north and west by the Atlantic Ocean and to the northeast by the North Channel. To the east, the Irish Sea connects to the Atlantic Ocean via St George's Channel and the Celtic Sea to the southwest.\nThe western landscape mostly consists of rugged cliffs, hills and mountains. The central lowlands are extensively covered with glacial deposits of clay and sand, as well as significant areas of bogland and several lakes. The highest point is Carrauntoohil (), located in the MacGillycuddy's Reeks mountain range in the southwest. River Shannon, which traverses the central lowlands, is the longest river in Ireland at in length. The west coast is more rugged than the east, with numerous islands, peninsulas, headlands and bays.\nIreland is one of the least forested countries in Europe. Until the end of the Middle Ages, the land was heavily forested. Native species include deciduous trees such as oak, ash, hazel, birch, alder, willow, aspen, elm, rowan and hawthorn, as well as evergreen trees such Scots pine, yew, holly and strawberry trees. The growth of blanket bog and the extensive clearing of woodland for farming are believed to be the main causes of deforestation. Today, only about 10% of Ireland is woodland, most of which is non-native conifer plantations, and only 2% of which is native woodland. The average woodland cover in European countries is over 33%. According to \"Coillte\", a state-owned forestry business, the country's climate gives Ireland one of the fastest growth rates for forests in Europe. Hedgerows, which are traditionally used to define land boundaries, are an important substitute for woodland habitat, providing refuge for native wild flora and a wide range of insect, bird and mammal species. It is home to two terrestrial ecoregions: Celtic broadleaf forests and North Atlantic moist mixed forests.\nAgriculture accounts for about 64% of the total land area. This has resulted in limited land to preserve natural habitats, in particular for larger wild mammals with greater territorial requirements. The long history of agricultural production coupled with modern agricultural methods, such as pesticide and fertiliser use, has placed pressure on biodiversity.\nClimate.\nThe Atlantic Ocean and the warming influence of the Gulf Stream affect weather patterns in Ireland. Temperatures differ regionally, with central and eastern areas tending to be more extreme. However, due to a temperate oceanic climate, temperatures are seldom lower than in winter or higher than in summer. The highest temperature recorded in Ireland was on 26 June 1887 at Kilkenny Castle in Kilkenny, while the lowest temperature recorded was at Markree Castle in Sligo. Rainfall is more prevalent during winter months and less so during the early months of summer. Southwestern areas experience the most rainfall as a result of south westerly winds, while Dublin receives the least. Sunshine duration is highest in the southeast of the country. The far north and west are two of the windiest regions in Europe, with great potential for wind energy generation.\nIreland normally gets between 1100 and 1600 hours of sunshine each year, most areas averaging between 3.25 and 3.75 hours a day. The sunniest months are May and June, which average between 5 and 6.5 hours per day over most of the country. The extreme southeast gets most sunshine, averaging over 7 hours a day in early summer. December is the dullest month, with an average daily sunshine ranging from about 1 hour in the north to almost 2 hours in the extreme southeast. The sunniest summer in the 100 years from 1881 to 1980 was 1887, according to measurements made at the Phoenix Park in Dublin; 1980 was the dullest.\nPolitics.\nIreland is a constitutional republic with a parliamentary system of government. The is the bicameral national parliament composed of the President of Ireland and the two Houses of the Oireachtas: (House of Representatives) and (Senate). \u00c1ras an Uachtar\u00e1in is the official residence of the President of Ireland, while the houses of the Oireachtas meet at Leinster House in Dublin.\nThe President serves as head of state, is elected for a seven-year term, and may be re-elected once. The President is primarily a figurehead, but is entrusted with certain constitutional powers with the advice of the Council of State. The office has absolute discretion in some areas, such as referring a bill to the Supreme Court for a judgment on its constitutionality. Catherine Connolly became the tenth President of Ireland on 11 November 2025.\nThe (Prime Minister) serves as the head of government and is appointed by the President upon the nomination of the . Most have served as the leader of the political party that gains the most seats in national elections. It has become customary for coalitions to form a government, as there has not been a single-party government since 1989.\nThe has 174 members () elected to represent multi-seat constituencies under the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote. The is composed of sixty members, with eleven nominated by the , six elected by two university constituencies, and 43 elected by public representatives from panels of candidates established on a vocational basis.\nThe government is constitutionally limited to fifteen members. No more than two members can be selected from the , and the , (deputy prime minister) and Minister for Finance must be members of the . The D\u00e1il must be dissolved within five years of its first meeting following the previous election, and a general election for members of the D\u00e1il must take place no later than thirty days after the dissolution. In accordance with the Constitution of Ireland, parliamentary elections must be held at least every seven years, though a lower limit may be set by statute law. The current government is a coalition of Fianna F\u00e1il, Fine Gael, and some independents with Miche\u00e1l Martin of Fianna F\u00e1il as Taoiseach and Simon Harris of Fine Gael as T\u00e1naiste. Opposition parties in the current are Sinn F\u00e9in, the Labour Party, People Before Profit\u2013Solidarity, Social Democrats, Aont\u00fa, The Green Party as well as a number of independents.\nIreland has been a member state of the European Union since 1973. Citizens of the United Kingdom can freely enter the country without a passport due to the Common Travel Area, which is a passport-free zone comprising the islands of Ireland, Great Britain, the Isle of Man and the Channel Islands. However, some identification is required at airports and seaports.\nThe Regimes of the World index classified Ireland as a liberal democracy in year 2024.\nLocal government.\nThe Local Government (Ireland) Act 1898 was the founding statute of the present system of local government, while the Twentieth Amendment to the constitution of 1999 provided for its constitutional recognition. The twenty-six traditional counties of Ireland are the basis of the local government areas, with the traditional counties of Cork, Dublin and Galway containing two or more local government areas. The Local Government Act 2001, as amended by the Local Government Reform Act 2014, provides for a system of thirty-one local authorities \u2013 twenty-six county councils, two city and county councils, and three city councils. Counties (with the exception of the three counties in Dublin) are divided into municipal districts. A second local government tier of town councils was abolished in 2014.\nLocal authorities are responsible for matters such as planning, local roads, sanitation, and libraries. The breaching of county boundaries should be avoided as far as practicable in drawing D\u00e1il constituencies. Counties with greater populations have multiple constituencies, some of more than one county, but generally do not cross county boundaries. The counties are grouped into three regions, each with a Regional Assembly composed of members delegated by the various county and city councils in the region. The regions do not have any direct administrative role as such, but they serve for planning, coordination and statistical purposes.\nLaw.\nIreland has a common law legal system with a written constitution that provides for a parliamentary democracy. The court system consists of the Supreme Court, the Court of Appeal, the High Court, the Circuit Court and the District Court, all of which apply the Irish law and hear both civil and criminal matters. Trials for serious offences must usually be held before a jury. The High Court, Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court have authority, by means of judicial review, to determine the compatibility of laws and activities of other institutions of the state with the constitution and the law. Except in exceptional circumstances, court hearings must occur in public.\nThe Garda S\u00edoch\u00e1na (\"lit.\" Guardians of the Peace), more commonly referred to as the Garda\u00ed, is the state's civilian police force. The force is responsible for all aspects of civil policing, both in terms of territory and infrastructure. It is headed by the Garda Commissioner, who is appointed by the Government. Most uniformed members do not routinely carry firearms. Standard policing is traditionally carried out by uniformed officers equipped only with a baton and pepper spray.\nThe Military Police is the corps of the Irish Army responsible for the provision of policing service personnel and providing a military police presence to forces while on exercise and deployment. In wartime, additional tasks include the provision of a traffic control organisation to allow rapid movement of military formations to their mission areas. Other wartime roles include control of prisoners of war and refugees.\nIreland's citizenship laws relate to \"the island of Ireland\", including islands and seas, thereby extending them to Northern Ireland, which is part of the United Kingdom. Therefore, anyone born in Northern Ireland who meets the requirements for being an Irish citizen, such as birth on the island of Ireland to an Irish or British citizen parent or a parent who is entitled to live in Northern Ireland or the Republic without restriction on their residency, may exercise an entitlement to Irish citizenship, such as an Irish passport.\nIn 2024, Ireland was second only to Iceland in the list of the world's most peaceful countries.\nForeign relations.\nForeign relations are substantially influenced by membership of the European Union, although bilateral relations with the United Kingdom and United States are also important. It held the Presidency of the Council of the European Union on six occasions, most recently from January to June 2013.\nIreland tends towards independence in foreign policy; thus the country is not a member of NATO and has a longstanding policy of military neutrality. This policy has led to the Irish Defence Forces contributing to peace-keeping missions with the United Nations since 1960, including during the Congo Crisis and subsequently in Cyprus, Lebanon and Bosnia and Herzegovina.\nDespite Irish neutrality during World War II, Ireland had more than 50,000 participants in the war through enlistment in the British armed forces. During the Cold War, Irish military policy, while ostensibly neutral, was biased towards NATO. During the Cuban Missile Crisis, Se\u00e1n Lemass authorised the search of Cuban and Czechoslovak aircraft passing through Shannon and passed the information to the CIA. Ireland's air facilities were used by the United States military for the delivery of military personnel involved in the 2003 invasion of Iraq through Shannon Airport. The airport had previously been used for the United States invasion of Afghanistan in 2001, as well as the First Gulf War.\nSince 1999, Ireland has been a member of NATO's Partnership for Peace (PfP) program and NATO's Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council (EAPC), which is aimed at creating trust between NATO and other states in Europe and the former Soviet Union.\nMilitary.\nIreland is a neutral country, and has \"triple-lock\" rules governing the participation of Irish troops in conflict zones, whereby approval must be given by the UN, the D\u00e1il and Government. Accordingly, its military role is limited to national self-defence and participation in United Nations peacekeeping.\nThe Irish Defence Forces () are made up of the Army, Naval Service, Air Corps and Reserve Defence Force. It is small but well equipped, with almost 10,000 full-time military personnel and over 2,000 in reserve. Daily deployments of the Defence Forces cover aid to civil power operations, protection and patrol of Irish territorial waters and EEZ by the Irish Naval Service, and UN, EU and PfP peace-keeping missions. By 1996, over 40,000 Irish service personnel had served in international UN peacekeeping missions.\nThe Irish Air Corps is the air component of the Defence Forces and operates sixteen fixed wing aircraft and eight helicopters. The Irish Naval Service is Ireland's navy, and operates six patrol ships, and smaller numbers of inflatable boats and training vessels, and has armed boarding parties capable of seizing a ship and a special unit of frogmen. The military includes the Reserve Defence Forces (Army Reserve and Naval Service Reserve) for part-time reservists. Ireland's special forces include the Army Ranger Wing, which trains and operates with international special operations units. The President is the formal Supreme Commander of the Defence Forces, but in practice these Forces answer to the Government via the Minister for Defence.\nIn 2017, Ireland signed the United Nations Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons.\nEconomy.\nIreland is an open economy and ranks first for \"high-value\" foreign direct investment (FDI) flows. Ireland ranks 5th of 187 (IMF) and 6th of 175 (World Bank) in GDP per capita as well as ranking in the top ten for GNI per capita. An alternative metric, known as modified gross national income (GNI), was created by the Central Statistics Office and is used by the Irish government to give a view of activity in the domestic economy after stripping out large multinational export movements which can often relate to intangible assets. This is particularly relevant in Ireland's economy, as GDP disproportionately includes income from non-Irish owned companies, which often flows out of Ireland. Foreign multinationals are the main driver of Ireland's economy, employing a quarter of the private sector workforce, and paying 80% of Irish corporate taxes. 14 of Ireland's top 20 firms (by 2017 turnover) are US-based multinationals and 80% of foreign multinationals in Ireland are from the US.\nIreland adopted the euro currency in 2002 along with eleven other EU member states.\nFollowing the Great Recession and the bursting of the Irish property bubble, the country officially exited recession in 2010, driven by a growth in exports from US multinationals in Ireland. However, due to a rise in the cost of public borrowing due to government guarantees of private banking debt, the Irish government accepted an \u20ac85\u00a0billion programme of assistance from the EU, International Monetary Fund (IMF) and bilateral loans from the United Kingdom, Sweden and Denmark. Following three years of contraction, the economy grew by 0.7% in 2011 and 0.9% in 2012. The unemployment rate was 14.7% in 2012, including 18.5% among recent immigrants. In March 2016 the unemployment rate was reported by the CSO to be 8.6%, down from a peak unemployment rate of 15.1% in February 2012. In addition to unemployment, net emigration from Ireland between 2008 and 2013 totalled 120,100, or some 2.6% of the total population according to the Census of Ireland 2011. One-third of the emigrants were aged between 15 and 24. By November 2022, unemployment had fallen back to 4.4%.\nIreland exited its EU-IMF bailout programme on 15 December 2013. Having implemented budget cuts, reforms and sold assets, Ireland was again able to access debt markets. Since then, Ireland has been able to sell long term bonds at record rates. However, the stabilisation of the Irish credit bubble required a large transfer of debt from the private sector balance sheet (highest OECD leverage), to the public sector balance sheet (almost unleveraged, pre-crisis), via Irish bank bailouts and public deficit spending. The transfer of this debt means that Ireland, in 2017, still has one of the highest levels of both public sector indebtedness, and private sector indebtedness, in the EU-28/OECD.\nIreland became one of the main destinations for US pharmaceutical corporate tax inversions from 2009 to 2016. The country has also become the largest foreign location for large US technology multinationals (i.e. Apple, Google, Microsoft, Facebook), which delivered a GDP growth rate of 26.3% (and GNP growth rate of 18.7%) in 2015. This growth was subsequently shown to be due to Apple restructuring its \"double Irish\" subsidiary (Apple Sales International, currently under threat of a \u20ac13bn EU \"illegal state aid\" fine for preferential tax treatment).\nTaxation policy.\nThe transformation of Ireland's tax policy started with the creation of a 10% low-tax special economic zone, called the International Financial Services Centre (IFSC), in 1987. In 2003, the IFSC was expanded nationwide with the reduction of Irish corporation tax from 32% to 12.5%. This accelerated the later stages of Ireland's transition from a predominantly agricultural economy into a knowledge and service economy focused on attracting mainly US multinationals from high-tech, life sciences, and financial services industries seeking to avail of Ireland's low corporation tax rates and favourable corporate tax system.\nThe multinational tax planning schemes corporations use in Ireland have materially affected Irish economic statistics. This reached a climax with what Paul Krugman termed leprechaun economics with double digit GDP growth rates in 2015 relating largely to Apple restructuring its Irish subsidiaries. The Central Bank of Ireland introduced additional statistics based on a modified gross national income, to remove these distortions.\nFrom the creation of the IFSC, the country experienced strong and sustained economic growth which fuelled a dramatic rise in Irish consumer borrowing and spending, and Irish construction and investment, which became known as the Celtic Tiger period. By 2007, Ireland had the highest private sector debt in the OECD with a household debt-to-disposable income ratio of 190%. Global capital markets, which had financed Ireland's build-up of debt in the Celtic Tiger period by enabling Irish banks to borrow in excess of the domestic deposit base to over 180% at peak, withdrew support in the 2008 financial crisis. Their withdrawal from the over-borrowed Irish credit system would precipitate a deep Irish property correction which then led to the Post-2008 Irish banking crisis.\nThe country's successful low-tax economy opens it to accusations of Ireland being a corporate haven. A 2017 study ranks Ireland as the 5th largest global Conduit OFC, which legally route funds to tax havens. The EU's 2018 Digital Sales Tax (DST) and the desire for a Common Consolidated Corporate Tax Base was seen partially as an attempt to restrict \"multinational tax schemes.\nTrade.\nAlthough multinational corporations dominate Ireland's export sector, exports from other sources also contribute significantly to the national income and particularly to employment and local economies outside of the major cities. The activities of multinational companies based in Ireland have made it one of the largest exporters of pharmaceutical agents, medical devices and software-related goods and services in the world. Ireland's exports also relate to the activities of large Irish companies (such as Ryanair, Kerry Group, Smurfit Kappa) and increasingly Irish based aircraft lessors such as Avolon.\nThe country exports mineral resources including zinc and lead concentrates and also has significant deposits of gypsum and smaller quantities of copper, aluminium oxide, silver, gold, barite, and dolomite.\nTourism in Ireland contributes about 4% of GDP and is a significant source of employment.\nOther goods exports include agri-food such as cattle, beef, sheep and dairy products.\nIreland's major imports include data processing equipment, chemicals, petroleum and petroleum products, textiles, and clothing. Financial services provided by multinational corporations based at the Irish Financial Services Centre also contribute to Irish exports.\nThe EU is by far the country's largest trading partner, accounting for 57.9% of exports and 60.7% of imports. Prior to Brexit, the United Kingdom was the most important trading partner within the EU, accounting for 15.4% of exports and 32.1% of imports. Outside the EU, the United States accounted for 23.2% of exports and 14.1% of imports in 2010.\nEnergy.\nESB, Bord G\u00e1is Energy and Airtricity are the three main electricity and gas suppliers in Ireland. There are 19.82\u00a0billion cubic metres of proven reserves of gas. Natural gas extraction previously occurred at the Kinsale Head until its exhaustion. The Corrib gas field was due to come on stream in 2013/14. In 2012, the Barryroe field was confirmed to have up to 1.6\u00a0billion barrels of oil in reserve, with between 160 and 600\u00a0million recoverable. That could provide for Ireland's entire energy needs for up to 13 years, when it is developed in 2015/16.\nThere have been significant efforts to increase the use of renewable and sustainable forms of energy in Ireland, particularly in wind power, with 3,000 MegaWatts of wind farms being constructed, some for the purpose of export. The Sustainable Energy Authority of Ireland (SEAI) has estimated that 6.5% of Ireland's 2011 energy requirements were produced by renewable sources. The SEAI has also reported an increase in energy efficiency in Ireland with a 28% reduction in carbon emissions per house from 2005 to 2013.\nIn 2021, Ireland was the 24th largest wind energy producer in the world and the 3rd ranked in 2020 on a per capita basis.\nTransport.\nThe country's three main international airports at Dublin, Shannon and Cork serve many European and intercontinental routes with scheduled and chartered flights. The London to Dublin air route is the ninth busiest international air route in the world, and also the busiest international air route in Europe, with 14,500 flights between the two in 2017. In 2015, 4.5\u00a0million people took the route, at that time, the world's second-busiest. Aer Lingus is the flag carrier of Ireland, although Ryanair is the country's largest airline. Ryanair is Europe's largest low-cost carrier, the second largest in terms of passenger numbers, and the world's largest in terms of international passenger numbers.\nRailway services are provided by Iarnr\u00f3d \u00c9ireann (Irish Rail), which operates all internal intercity, commuter and freight railway services in the country. Dublin is the centre of the network with two main stations, Heuston station and Connolly station, linking to the country's cities and main towns. The Enterprise service, which runs jointly with Northern Ireland Railways, connects Dublin and Belfast. The whole of Ireland's mainline network operates on track with a gauge of, which is unique in Europe and has resulted in distinct rolling stock designs. Dublin's public transport network includes the DART, Luas, Dublin Bus, and dublinbikes.\nMotorways, national primary roads and national secondary roads are managed by Transport Infrastructure Ireland, while regional roads and local roads are managed by the local authorities in each of their respective areas. The road network is primarily focused on the capital, but motorways connect it to other major Irish cities including Cork, Limerick, Waterford and Galway.\nDublin is served by major infrastructure such as the East-Link and West-Link toll-bridges, as well as the Dublin Port Tunnel. The Jack Lynch Tunnel, under the River Lee in Cork, and the Limerick Tunnel, under the River Shannon, were two major projects outside Dublin.\nDemographics.\nGenetic research suggests that the earliest settlers migrated from Iberia following the most recent ice age. After the Mesolithic, Neolithic and Bronze Age, migrants introduced a Celtic language and culture. Migrants from the two latter eras still represent the genetic heritage of most Irish people. Gaelic tradition expanded and became the dominant form over time. Irish people are a combination of Gaelic, Norse, Anglo-Norman, French, and British ancestry.\nThe population of Ireland stood at 5,149,139 in 2022, an increase of 8% since 2016. In 2011, Ireland had the highest birth rate in the European Union (16 births per 1,000 of population). In 2014, 36.3% of births were to unmarried women. Annual population growth rates exceeded 2% during the 2002\u20132006 intercensal period, which was attributed to high rates of natural increase and immigration. This rate declined somewhat during the subsequent 2006\u20132011 intercensal period, with an average annual percentage change of 1.6%. The total fertility rate (TFR) in 2017 was estimated at 1.80 children born per woman, below the replacement rate of 2.1, it remains considerably below the high of 4.2 children born per woman in 1850. In 2018 the median age of the Irish population was 37.1 years.\nAt the time of the 2022 census, the number of non-Irish nationals was recorded at 631,785. This represents an 8% increase from the 2016 census figure of 535,475. The five largest sources of non-Irish nationals were Poland (93,680), the UK (83,347), India (45,449), Romania (43,323), Lithuania (31,177), and Latvia (27,338) respectively. The non-Irish nationalities which saw the largest increase from 2016 were India (+33,984), Romania (+14,137), Brazil (+13,698), Ukraine (+10,006). The non-Irish nationalities which saw the largest decrease from 2016 were Poland (\u221228,835), UK (\u221219,766), Lithuania (\u22125,375), Latvia (\u22121,633), and Slovakia (\u22121,117).\nLanguages.\nThe Irish Constitution describes Irish as the \"national language\" and the \"first official language\", but English (the \"second official language\") is the dominant language. In the 2016 census, about 1.75 million people (40% of the population) said they were able to speak Irish but, of those, under 74,000 spoke it on a daily basis. Irish is spoken as a community language only in a small number of rural areas mostly in the west and south of the country, collectively known as the Gaeltacht. Except in Gaeltacht regions, road signs are usually bilingual. Most public notices and print media are in English only. While the state is officially bilingual, citizens can often struggle to access state services in Irish and most government publications are not available in both languages, even though citizens have the right to deal with the state in Irish. Irish language media include the TV channel TG4, the radio station RT\u00c9 Raidi\u00f3 na Gaeltachta and online newspaper Tuairisc.ie. In the Irish Defence Forces, all foot and arms drill commands are given in the Irish language.\nAs a result of immigration, Polish is the most widely spoken language in Ireland after English, with Irish as the third most spoken. Several other Central European languages (namely Czech, Hungarian and Slovak), as well as Baltic languages (Lithuanian and Latvian) are also spoken on a day-to-day basis. Other languages spoken in Ireland include Shelta, spoken by Irish Travellers, and a dialect of Scots is spoken by some Ulster Scots people in Donegal. Most secondary school students choose to learn one or two foreign languages. Languages available for the Junior Certificate and the Leaving Certificate include French, German, Italian and Spanish; Leaving Certificate students can also study Arabic, Japanese and Russian. Some secondary schools also offer Ancient Greek, Hebrew and Latin. The study of Irish is generally compulsory for Leaving Certificate students, but some may qualify for an exemption in some circumstances, such as learning difficulties or entering the country after age 11.\nReligion.\nReligious freedom is constitutionally provided for in Ireland, and the country's constitution has been secular since 1973. Christianity is the predominant religion, and while Ireland remains a predominantly Catholic country, the percentage of the population who identified as Catholic on the census has declined significantly in the early 21st century, from 84.2 percent in the 2011 census to 69.1 percent in 2022. Other results from the 2016 census were: 4.2% Protestant, 1.3% Orthodox, 1.3% Muslim, and 9.8% having no religion. According to a Georgetown University study, before 2000 the country had one of the highest rates of regular mass attendance in the Western world.\nWhile daily attendance was 13% in 2006, there was a reduction in weekly attendance from 81% in 1990 to 48% in 2006; the decline was reported as stabilising, though. In 2011, it was reported that weekly mass attendance in Dublin was 18% and even lower among younger generations.\nThe Church of Ireland, at 2.7% of the population, is the second largest Christian denomination. Membership declined throughout the twentieth century but experienced an increase early in the 21st century alongside other Christian denominations. Other significant Protestant denominations are the Presbyterian Church and Methodist Church. Immigration has contributed to a growth in Hindu and Muslim populations. In percentage terms, as of the 2006 census, Orthodox Christianity and Islam are the fastest growing religions with increases of 100% and 70% respectively.\nIreland's patron saints are Saint Patrick, Saint Bridget, and Saint Columba; Saint Patrick is commonly recognised as the primary patron saint. Saint Patrick's Day is celebrated on 17 March in Ireland and abroad as the Irish national day with parades and other celebrations.\nAs with other traditionally Catholic European states, such as Spain and Italy, Ireland underwent a period of legal secularisation in the late twentieth century. In 1972, the article of the Constitution naming specific religious groups was deleted by the Fifth Amendment in a referendum. Article 44 remains in the Constitution: \"The State acknowledges that the homage of public worship is due to Almighty God. It shall hold His Name in reverence, and shall respect and honour religion.\" The article also establishes freedom of religion, prohibits endowment of any religion, prohibits the state from religious discrimination, and requires the state to treat religious and non-religious schools in a non-prejudicial manner.\nAlthough most schools in Ireland are patronised by religious organisations, government policy has been to \"transfer\" some schools to non-denominational or multi-denominational patronage, and a secularist trend is occurring among younger generations.\nEducation.\nIreland has three levels of education: primary, secondary and higher education. The education systems are largely under the direction of the Government via the Minister for Education. Recognised primary and secondary schools must adhere to the curriculum established by the relevant authorities. Education is compulsory between the ages of six and fifteen years, and all children up to the age of eighteen must complete the first three years of secondary, including one sitting of the Junior Certificate examination.\nThere are approximately 3,300 primary schools in Ireland. The vast majority (92%) are under the patronage of the Catholic Church. Schools run by religious organisations, but receiving public money and recognition, cannot discriminate against pupils based upon religion or lack thereof. A sanctioned system of preference does exist, where students of a particular religion may be accepted before those who do not share the ethos of the school, in a case where a school's quota has already been reached.\nThe Leaving Certificate, which is taken after two years of study, is the final examination in the secondary school system. Those intending to pursue higher education normally take this examination, with access to third-level courses generally depending on results obtained from the best six subjects taken, on a competitive basis. Third-level education awards are conferred by at least 38 Higher Education Institutions \u2013 this includes the constituent or linked colleges of seven universities, plus other designated institutions of the Higher Education and Training Awards Council. According to the 2022 US News rankings, Ireland is among the top twenty best countries for education.\nThe Programme for International Student Assessment, coordinated by the OECD, currently ranks Ireland as having the fourth highest reading score, ninth highest science score and thirteenth highest mathematics score, among OECD countries, in its 2012 assessment. In 2012, Irish students aged 15 years had the second highest levels of reading literacy in the EU. Ireland also has 0.747 of the World's top 500 Universities per capita, which ranks the country in 8th place in the world. Primary, secondary and higher (university/college) level education are all free in Ireland for all EU citizens. There are charges to cover student services and examinations.\nIn addition, 37 percent of Ireland's population has a university or college degree, which is among the highest percentages in the world.\nHealthcare.\nHealthcare in Ireland is provided by both public and private healthcare providers. The Minister for Health has responsibility for setting overall health service policy. Every resident of Ireland is entitled to receive health care through the public health care system, which is managed by the Health Service Executive and funded by general taxation. A person may be required to pay a subsidised fee for certain health care received; this depends on income, age, illness or disability. All maternity services are provided free of charge and children up to the age of 6 months. Emergency care is provided to patients who present to a hospital emergency department. However, visitors to emergency departments in non-emergency situations who are not referred by their GP may incur a fee of \u20ac100. In some circumstances this fee is not payable or may be waived.\nAnyone holding a European Health Insurance Card is entitled to free maintenance and treatment in public beds in Health Service Executive and voluntary hospitals. Outpatient services are also provided for free. However, the majority of patients on median incomes or above are required to pay subsidised hospital charges. Private health insurance is available to the population for those who want to avail of it.\nThe average life expectancy in Ireland in 2021 was 82.4 years (OECD list), with 80.5 years for men and 84.3 years for women. It has the highest birth rate in the EU (16.8 births per 1,000 inhabitants, compared to an EU average of 10.7) and a very low infant mortality rate (3.5 per 1,000 live births). The Irish healthcare system ranked 13th out of 34 European countries in 2012 according to the European Health Consumer Index produced by Health Consumer Powerhouse. The same report ranked the Irish healthcare system as having the 8th best health outcomes but only the 21st most accessible system in Europe.\nCulture.\nIreland's culture was for centuries predominantly Gaelic, and it remains one of the six principal Celtic nations. Following the Anglo-Norman invasion in the 12th century, and gradual British conquest and colonisation beginning in the 16th century, Ireland became influenced by English and Scottish culture. Subsequently, Irish culture, though distinct in many aspects, shares characteristics with the rest of the Anglosphere, Catholic Europe, and other Celtic regions. The Irish diaspora, one of the world's largest and most dispersed, has contributed to the globalisation of Irish culture, producing many prominent figures in art, music, and science.\nLiterature.\nIreland has made a significant contribution to world literature in both the English and Irish languages. Modern Irish fiction began with the publishing of the 1726 novel \"Gulliver's Travels\" by Jonathan Swift. Other writers of importance during the 18th century and their most notable works include Laurence Sterne with the publication of \"The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman\" and Oliver Goldsmith's \"The Vicar of Wakefield\". Numerous Irish novelists emerged during the 19th century, including Maria Edgeworth, John Banim, Gerald Griffin, Charles Kickham, William Carleton, George Moore, and Somerville and Ross. Bram Stoker is best known as the author of the 1897 novel \"Dracula\".\nJames Joyce (1882\u20131941) published his most famous work \"Ulysses\" in 1922, which is an interpretation of the \"Odyssey\" set in Dublin. Edith Somerville continued writing after the death of her partner Martin Ross in 1915. Dublin's Annie M. P. Smithson was one of several authors catering for fans of romantic fiction in the 1920s and 1930s. After the Second World War, popular novels were published by, among others, Brian O'Nolan, who published as Flann O'Brien, Elizabeth Bowen, and Kate O'Brien. During the final decades of the 20th century, Edna O'Brien, John McGahern, Maeve Binchy, Joseph O'Connor, Roddy Doyle, Colm T\u00f3ib\u00edn, and John Banville came to the fore as novelists.\nPatricia Lynch was a prolific children's author in the 20th century, while Eoin Colfer's works were NYT Best Sellers in this genre in the early 21st century. In the genre of the short story, which is a form favoured by many Irish writers, the most prominent figures include Se\u00e1n \u00d3 Faol\u00e1in, Frank O'Connor and William Trevor. Well known Irish poets include Patrick Kavanagh, Thomas McCarthy, Dermot Bolger, and Nobel Prize in Literature laureates William Butler Yeats and Seamus Heaney (born in Northern Ireland but resided in Dublin). Prominent writers in the Irish language are P\u00e1draic \u00d3 Conaire, M\u00e1irt\u00edn \u00d3 Cadhain, S\u00e9amus \u00d3 Grianna, and Nuala N\u00ed Dhomhnaill.\nThe history of Irish theatre begins with the expansion of the English administration in Dublin during the early 17th century, and since then, Ireland has significantly contributed to English drama. In its early history, theatrical productions in Ireland tended to serve political purposes, but as more theatres opened and the popular audience grew, a more diverse range of entertainments were staged. Many Dublin-based theatres developed links with their London equivalents, and British productions frequently found their way to the Irish stage. However, most Irish playwrights went abroad to establish themselves. In the 18th century, Oliver Goldsmith and Richard Brinsley Sheridan were two of the most successful playwrights on the London stage at that time. At the beginning of the 20th century, theatre companies dedicated to the staging of Irish plays and the development of writers, directors and performers began to emerge, which allowed many Irish playwrights to learn their trade and establish their reputations in Ireland rather than in Britain or the United States. Following in the tradition of acclaimed practitioners, principally Oscar Wilde, Literature Nobel Prize laureates George Bernard Shaw (1925) and Samuel Beckett (1969), playwrights such as Se\u00e1n O'Casey, Brian Friel, Sebastian Barry, Brendan Behan, Conor McPherson and Billy Roche have gained popular success. Other Irish playwrights of the 20th century include Denis Johnston, Thomas Kilroy, Tom Murphy, Hugh Leonard, Frank McGuinness, and John B. Keane.\nMusic and dance.\nIrish traditional music has remained vibrant, despite globalising cultural forces, and retains many traditional aspects. It has influenced various music genres, such as American country and roots music, and to some extent modern rock. It has occasionally been blended with styles such as rock and roll and punk rock. Ireland has also produced many internationally known artists in other genres, such as rock, pop, jazz, and blues. Ireland's best selling musical act is the rock band U2, who have sold 170\u00a0million copies of their albums worldwide since their formation in 1976.\nThere are a number of classical music ensembles around the country, such as the RT\u00c9 Performing Groups. Ireland also has two opera organisations: Irish National Opera in Dublin, and the annual Wexford Opera Festival, which promotes lesser-known operas, takes place during October and November.\nIreland has participated in the Eurovision Song Contest since 1965. Its first win was in 1970, when Dana won with \"All Kinds of Everything\". It has subsequently won the competition six more times, the highest number of wins by any competing country. The phenomenon \"Riverdance\" originated as an interval performance during the 1994 contest.\nIrish dance can broadly be divided into social dance and performance dance. Irish social dance can be divided into \"c\u00e9il\u00ed\" and set dancing. Irish set dances are quadrilles, danced by 4 couples arranged in a square, while c\u00e9il\u00ed dances are danced by varied formations of couples of 2 to 16 people. There are also many stylistic differences between these two forms. Irish social dance is a living tradition, and variations in particular dances are found across the country. In some places dances are deliberately modified and new dances are choreographed. Performance dance is traditionally referred to as stepdance. Irish stepdance, popularised by the show \"Riverdance\", is notable for its rapid leg movements, with the body and arms being kept largely stationary. The solo stepdance is generally characterised by a controlled but not rigid upper body, straight arms, and quick, precise movements of the feet. The solo dances can either be in \"soft shoe\" or \"hard shoe\".\nArchitecture.\nIreland has a wealth of structures, surviving from the Neolithic period, such as \"Br\u00fa na B\u00f3inne\", Poulnabrone dolmen, Castlestrange stone, Turoe stone, and Drombeg stone circle. As Ireland was never a part of the Roman Empire, ancient architecture in Greco-Roman style is non-existent, in contrast to most of Western Europe. The country instead had an extended period of Iron Age architecture. The Irish round tower originated during the Early Medieval period and several of these structure are still extant throughout the country.\nChristianity introduced simple monastic houses, such as Clonmacnoise, Skellig Michael and Scattery Island. A stylistic similarity has been remarked between these double monasteries and those of the Copts of Egypt. Gaelic kings and aristocrats occupied ringforts or \"crann\u00f3gs\". Church reforms during the 12th century via the Cistercians stimulated further continental influence, with the Romanesque styled Mellifont, Boyle and Tintern abbeys. Gaelic settlement had been limited to the Monastic proto-towns, such as Kells, where the current street pattern preserves the original circular settlement outline to some extent. Significant urban settlements only developed following the period of Viking invasions. The major Hiberno-Norse Longphorts were located on the coast, but with minor inland fluvial settlements, such as the eponymous Longford.\nCastles were built by the Anglo-Normans during the late 12th century, such as Dublin Castle and Kilkenny Castle, and the concept of the planned walled trading town was introduced, which gained legal status and several rights by grant of a Charter under Feudalism. These charters specifically governed the design of these towns. Two significant waves of planned town formation followed, the first being the 16th- and 17th-century plantation towns, which were used as a mechanism for the Tudor English kings to suppress local insurgency, followed by 18th-century landlord towns. Surviving Norman founded planned towns include Drogheda and Youghal; plantation towns include Portlaoise and Portarlington; well-preserved 18th-century planned towns include Westport and Ballinasloe. These episodes of planned settlement account for many of the present-day towns throughout the country.\nGothic cathedrals, such as St Patrick's, were also introduced by the Normans. Franciscans were dominant in directing the abbeys by the Late Middle Ages, while elegant tower houses, such as Bunratty Castle, were built by the Gaelic and Norman aristocracy. Many religious buildings were ruined with the dissolution of the monasteries.\nAfter the Battle of the Boyne in the late 1690s and into the 1700s, palladianism and interior rococo, particularly in country houses, expanded throughout Ireland under continental influence as well as under the influence of one of Ireland's first specifically trained architects, Edward Lovett Pearce, with the Houses of Parliament being the most significant.\nWith the erection of buildings such as The Custom House, Four Courts, General Post Office and King's Inns, the neoclassical and Georgian styles flourished, especially in Dublin. Georgian townhouses produced streets of singular distinction, particularly in Dublin, Limerick and Cork. Following Catholic emancipation, cathedrals and churches influenced by the French Gothic Revival emerged, such as St Colman's and St Finbarre's. Ireland has long been associated with vernacular thatched roof cottages, though these are nowadays in decline.\nBeginning with the American designed art deco church at Turner's Cross, Cork in 1927, Irish architecture followed the international trend towards modern and sleek building styles since the 20th century. Other developments include the regeneration of Ballymun and an urban extension of Dublin at Adamstown. Since the establishment of the Dublin Docklands Development Authority in 1997, the Dublin Docklands area underwent large-scale redevelopment, which included the construction of the Convention Centre Dublin and Grand Canal Theatre. Completed in 2018, Capital Dock in Dublin is the tallest building in the Republic of Ireland achieving in height (the Obel Tower in Belfast, Northern Ireland being the tallest in Ireland). The Royal Institute of the Architects of Ireland regulates the practice of architecture in the state.\nMedia.\n (RT\u00c9) is Ireland's public service broadcaster, funded by a television licence fee and advertising. RT\u00c9 operates two national television channels, RT\u00c9 One and RT\u00c9 Two. The other independent national television channels are Virgin Media One, Virgin Media Two, Virgin Media Three and TG4, the latter of which is a public service broadcaster for speakers of the Irish language. All these channels are available on Saorview, the national free-to-air digital terrestrial television service. Additional channels included in the service are RT\u00c9 News Now, RT\u00c9jr, and RT\u00c9 One +1. Subscription-based television providers operating in Ireland include Virgin Media and Sky.\nThe BBC's Northern Irish division is widely available in Ireland. BBC One Northern Ireland and BBC Two Northern Ireland are available in pay television providers including Virgin and Sky as well as via signal overspill by Freeview in border counties.\nSupported by the Irish Film Board, the Irish film industry grew significantly since the 1990s, with the promotion of indigenous films as well as the attraction of international productions like \"Braveheart\" and \"Saving Private Ryan\".\nA large number of regional and local radio stations are available countrywide. A survey showed that a consistent 85% of adults listen to a mixture of national, regional and local stations on a daily basis. RT\u00c9 Radio operates four national stations, Radio 1, 2fm, Lyric fm, and RnaG. It also operates four national DAB radio stations. There are two independent national stations: Today FM and Newstalk.\nIreland has a traditionally competitive print media, which is divided into daily national newspapers and weekly regional newspapers, as well as national Sunday editions. The strength of the British press is a unique feature of the Irish print media scene, with the availability of a wide selection of British published newspapers and magazines.\nEurostat reported that 82% of Irish households had Internet access in 2013 compared to the EU average of 79% but only 67% had broadband access.\nCuisine.\nIrish cuisine was traditionally based on meat and dairy products, supplemented with vegetables and seafood.\nExamples of popular Irish cuisine include boxty, colcannon, coddle, stew, and bacon and cabbage. Ireland is known for the full Irish breakfast, which involves a fried or grilled meal generally consisting of rashers, egg, sausage, white and black pudding, and fried tomato. Apart from the influence by European and international dishes, there has been an emergence of a new Irish cuisine based on traditional ingredients handled in new ways. This cuisine is based on fresh vegetables, fish, oysters, mussels and other shellfish, and the wide range of hand-made cheeses that are now being produced across the country. Shellfish have increased in popularity, especially due to the high quality shellfish available from the country's coastline. The most popular fish include salmon and cod. Traditional breads include soda bread and wheaten bread. Barmbrack is a yeasted bread with added sultanas and raisins, traditionally eaten on Halloween.\nPopular everyday beverages among the Irish include tea and coffee. Alcoholic drinks associated with Ireland include Poit\u00edn and the world-famous Guinness, which is a dry stout that originated in the brewery of Arthur Guinness at St. James's Gate in Dublin. Irish whiskey is also popular throughout the country and comes in various forms, including single malt, single grain, and blended whiskey.\nSports.\nGaelic football and hurling are the traditional sports of Ireland as well as popular spectator sports. They are administered by the Gaelic Athletics Association on an all-Ireland basis. Other Gaelic games organised by the association include Gaelic handball and rounders. Association football (soccer) is the third most popular spectator sport and has the highest level of participation. Although the League of Ireland is the national league, the English Premier League is the most popular among the public. The Republic of Ireland national football team plays at international level and is administered by the Football Association of Ireland.\nThe Irish Rugby Football Union is the governing body of rugby union, which is played at local and international levels on an all-Ireland basis, and has produced players such as Brian O'Driscoll and Ronan O'Gara, who were on the team that won the Grand Slam in 2009. The success of the Irish Cricket Team in the 2007 Cricket World Cup has led to an increase in the popularity of cricket, which is also administered on an all-Ireland basis by Cricket Ireland. Ireland are one of the twelve Test playing members of the International Cricket Council, having been granted Test status in 2017. Professional domestic matches are played between the major cricket unions of Leinster, Munster, Northern, and North West. Netball is represented by the Ireland national netball team.\nGolf is another popular sport in Ireland, with over 300 courses countrywide. The country has produced several internationally successful golfers, such as P\u00e1draig Harrington, Shane Lowry and Paul McGinley. Horse racing has a large presence, with influential breeding and racing operations in the country. Racing takes place at courses at The Curragh Racecourse in County Kildare, Leopardstown Racecourse just outside Dublin, and Galway. Ireland has produced champion horses such as Galileo, Montjeu, and Sea the Stars. Boxing is Ireland's most successful sport at an Olympic level. Administered by the Irish Athletic Boxing Association on an all-Ireland basis, it has gained in popularity as a result of the international success of boxers such as Bernard Dunne, Andy Lee and Katie Taylor.\nSome of Ireland's highest performers in athletics have competed at the Olympic Games, such as Eamonn Coghlan and Sonia O'Sullivan. The annual Dublin Marathon and Dublin Women's Mini Marathon are two of the most popular athletics events in the country. Rugby league is represented by the Ireland national rugby league team and administered by Rugby League Ireland (who are full member of the Rugby League European Federation) on an all-Ireland basis. The team compete in the European Cup (rugby league) and the Rugby League World Cup. Ireland reached the quarter-finals of the 2000 Rugby League World Cup as well as reaching the semi-finals in the 2008 Rugby League World Cup. The Irish Elite League is a domestic competition for rugby league teams in Ireland.\nWhile Australian rules football in Ireland has a limited following, a series of International rules football games (constituting a hybrid of the Australian and Gaelic football codes) takes place annually between teams representing Ireland and Australia. Baseball and basketball are also emerging sports in Ireland, both of which have an international team representing the island of Ireland. Other sports which retain a following in Ireland include cycling, greyhound racing, horse riding, and motorsport.\nSociety.\nIreland ranks fifth in the world in terms of gender equality. In 2011, Ireland was ranked the most charitable country in Europe, and second most charitable in the world. Contraception was controlled in Ireland until 1979, however, the receding influence of the Catholic Church has led to an increasingly secularised society. A constitutional ban on divorce was lifted following a referendum in 1995. Divorce rates in Ireland are very low compared to European Union averages (0.7 divorced people per 1,000 population in 2011) while the marriage rate in Ireland is slightly above the European Union average (4.6 marriages per 1,000 population per year in 2012). Abortion had been banned throughout the period of the Irish state, first through provisions of the Offences Against the Person Act 1861 and later by the Protection of Life During Pregnancy Act 2013. The right to life of the unborn was protected in the constitution by the Eighth Amendment in 1983; this provision was removed following a referendum, and replaced it with a provision allowing legislation to regulate the termination of pregnancy. The Health (Regulation of Termination of Pregnancy) Act 2018 passed later that year provided for abortion generally during the first 12 weeks of pregnancy, and in specified circumstances after that date.\nCapital punishment is constitutionally banned in Ireland, while discrimination based on age, gender, sexual orientation, marital or familial status, religion, race or membership of the travelling community is illegal. The legislation which outlawed homosexual acts was repealed in 1993. The Civil Partnership and Certain Rights and Obligations of Cohabitants Act 2010 permitted civil partnerships between same-sex couples. The Children and Family Relationships Act 2015 allowed for adoption rights for couples other than married couples, including civil partners and cohabitants, and provided for donor-assisted human reproduction; however, significant sections of the Act have yet to be commenced. Following a referendum held on 23 May 2015, Ireland became the eighteenth country to provide in law for same-sex marriage, and the first to do so by popular vote.\nIreland became the first country in the world to introduce an environmental levy for plastic shopping bags in 2002 and a public smoking ban in 2004. Recycling in Ireland is carried out extensively, and Ireland has the second highest rate of packaging recycling in the European Union. It was the first country in Europe to ban incandescent lightbulbs in 2008 and the first EU country to ban in-store tobacco advertising and product display in 2009. In 2015, Ireland became the second country in the world to introduce plain cigarette packaging. Despite the above measures to discourage tobacco use, smoking rates in Ireland remain at approximately 15.4% as of 2020.\nState symbols.\nThe state shares many symbols with the island of Ireland. These include the colours green and blue, animals such as the Irish wolfhound and stags, structures such as round towers and celtic crosses, and designs such as Celtic knots and spirals. The shamrock, a type of clover, has been a national symbol of Ireland since the 17th century when it became customary to wear it as a symbol on St. Patrick's Day. These symbols are used by state institutions as well as private bodies in the Republic of Ireland.\nThe flag of Ireland is a tricolour of green, white and orange. The flag originates with the Young Ireland movement of the mid-19th century but was not popularised until its use during the Easter Rising of 1916. The colours represent the Gaelic tradition (green) and the followers of William of Orange in Ireland (orange), with white representing the aspiration for peace between them. It was adopted as the flag of the Irish Free State in 1922 and continues to be used as the sole flag and ensign of the state. A naval jack, a green flag with a yellow harp, is set out in Defence Forces Regulations and flown from the bows of warships in addition to the national flag in limited circumstances (e.g. when a ship is not underway). It is based on the unofficial green ensign of Ireland used in the 18th and 19th centuries and the traditional green flag of Ireland dating from the 16th century.\nLike the national flag, the national anthem, (), has its roots in the Easter Rising, when the song was sung by the rebels. Although originally published in English in 1912, the song was translated into Irish in 1923 and the Irish-language version is more commonly sung today. The song was officially adopted as the anthem of the Irish Free State in 1926 and continues as the national anthem of the state. The first four bars of the chorus followed by the last five comprise the presidential salute.\nThe arms of Ireland originate as the arms of the monarchs of Ireland and was recorded as the arms of the King of Ireland in the 12th century. From the union of the crowns of England, Scotland and Ireland in 1603, they have appeared quartered on the royal coat of arms of the United Kingdom. Today, they are the personal arms of the president of Ireland whilst he or she is in office and are flown as the presidential standard. The harp symbol is used extensively by the state to mark official documents, Irish coinage and on the seal of the president of Ireland.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14561", "revid": "27919687", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14561", "title": "Irish diaspora", "text": "Irish people and their descendants living outside Ireland\nThe Irish diaspora () refers to ethnic Irish people and their descendants who live outside the island of Ireland.\nThe phenomenon of migration from Ireland is recorded since the Early Middle Ages, but it can be quantified only from around 1700. Since then, between 9 and 10 million people born in Ireland have emigrated. That is more than the population of Ireland itself, which at its historical peak was 8.5 million on the eve of the Great Famine. The poorest of them went to Great Britain, especially Liverpool. Those who could afford it went further, including almost 5 million to the United States.\nAfter 1765, emigration from Ireland became a short, relentless and efficiently managed national enterprise. In 1890, 40% of Irish-born people were living abroad. By the 21st century, an estimated 80 million people worldwide claimed some Irish descent, which includes more than 36 million Americans claiming Irish as their primary ethnicity.\nAs recently as the second half of the 19th century, most Irish emigrants spoke Irish as their first language. That had social and cultural consequences for the cultivation of the language abroad, including innovations in journalism. The language continues to be cultivated abroad by a small minority as a literary and social medium. The Irish diaspora are largely assimilated in most countries outside Ireland after World War I. Se\u00e1n Fleming is the Republic of Ireland's Minister of State for the Diaspora and Overseas Aid, a post which was established in 2014.\nDefinition.\nThe term Irish diaspora is open to many interpretations. The diaspora, broadly interpreted, contains all those known to have Irish ancestors, i.e., over 100 million people, which is more than fifteen times the population of the island of Ireland, which was about 6.4 million in 2011. It has been argued the idea of an Irish diaspora, as distinct from the old identification of Irishness with Ireland itself, was influenced by the perceived advent of global mobility and modernity. Irishness could now be identified with dispersed individuals and groups of Irish descent. But many of those individuals were the product of complex ethnic intermarriage in America and elsewhere, complicating the idea of a single line of descent. \"Irishness\" might then rely primarily on individual identification with an Irish diaspora.\nThe Government of Ireland defines the Irish diaspora as all persons of Irish nationality who habitually reside outside the island of Ireland. This includes Irish citizens who have emigrated abroad and their children, who are Irish citizens by descent under Irish law. It also includes their grandchildren in cases where they were registered as Irish citizens in the Foreign Births Register held in every Irish diplomatic mission. Under this legal definition, the Irish diaspora is considerably smaller\u2014some 3 million persons, of whom 1.47 million are Irish-born emigrants. Given the island of Ireland's estimated population of 6.8 million in 2018, this is still a large ratio.\nHowever, the usage of \"Irish diaspora\" is generally not limited by citizenship status, thus leading to an estimated (and fluctuating) membership of up to 80 million persons\u2014the second and more emotive definition. The Irish Government acknowledged this interpretation\u2014although it did not acknowledge any legal obligations to persons in this larger diaspora\u2014when Article 2 of the Constitution of Ireland was amended in 1998 to read \"[f]urthermore, the Irish nation cherishes its special affinity with people of Irish ancestry living abroad who share its cultural identity and heritage.\"\nThere are people of Irish descent abroad (including Irish speakers) who reject inclusion in an Irish \"diaspora\" and who designate their identity in other ways. They may see the diasporic label as something used by the Irish government for its own purposes.\nCauses.\nThe Irish, who were called by the Romans \"Scotti\" but called themselves Gaels, had raided and settled along the West Coast of Roman Britain, and numbers of them were allowed to settle within the province, where the Roman Army recruited many Irish into auxiliary units that were dispatched to the German frontier. The Attacotti, who were similarly recruited into the Roman army, may also have been Irish settlers in Britain. The movement between Ireland and the classical Britain may have been two-way as similarities between the medieval accounts of T\u00faathal Techtmar and archaeological evidence indicate that the Romans may have supported the invasion and conquest of Ireland by Irish exiles from Britain with the hope of establishing a friendly ruler who could halt the raiding of Britain by the Irish, and some historians have also suggested that the Cruthin of the north of Ireland may have been Picts. After the departure of the Roman army, the Irish began increasing their footholds in Britain, with part of the north-West of the island annexed within the Irish kingdom of D\u00e1l Riata. In time, the Irish colonies became independent, merged with the Pictish kingdom and formed the basis of modern Scotland.\nThe traditionally Gaelic-speaking areas of Scotland (the Highlands and Hebrides) are still referred to in the Gaelic language as \"a' Gh\u00e0idhealtachd\" (\"the Gaeldom\"). Irish monks and the Celtic Church engineered a wave of Irish emigration to Great Britain and Continental Europe and were possibly the first inhabitants of the Faroe Islands and Iceland. Throughout the Early Middle Ages, Great Britain and Continental Europe experienced Irish immigration of varying intensity, mostly from clerics and scholars who are collectively known as \"peregrini\". Irish emigration to Western Europe, especially to Great Britain, has continued at a greater or lesser pace since then. Today, the ethnic Irish are the single largest minority group in both England and Scotland, most of whom eventually made it back to Ireland.\nThe dispersal of the Irish has been mainly to Britain or to countries colonised by Britain. England's political connection with Ireland began in 1155, when Pope Adrian IV issued a papal bull (known as \"Laudabiliter\"), which gave Henry II permission to invade Ireland as a means of strengthening the papacy's control over the Irish Church. That was followed in 1169 by the Norman invasion of Ireland, which was led by the general Richard de Clare, or \"Strongbow\".\nThe English Crown did not attempt to assert full control of the island until after Henry VIII's repudiation of papal authority over the Church in England, and the subsequent rebellion of the Earl of Kildare in Ireland in 1534 threatened English hegemony there. Until the break with Rome, it was widely believed that Ireland was a papal possession, which was granted as a mere fiefdom to the English king and so in 1541, Henry VIII asserted England's claim to Ireland free from the papal overlordship by proclaiming himself King of Ireland.\nAfter the Nine Years' War (1594 to 1603), political power rested in the hands of a Protestant Ascendancy minority and was marked by a Crown policy of plantation, which involved the arrival of thousands of English and Scottish Protestant settlers and the consequent displacement of the pre-plantation Roman Catholic landholders. As the military and political defeat of Gaelic Ireland became more pronounced in the early 17th century, sectarian conflict became a recurrent theme in Irish history.\nRoman Catholics and members of dissenting Protestant denominations suffered severe political and economic privations from Penal Laws. The Irish Parliament was abolished in 1801 in the wake of the republican United Irishmen Rebellion, and Ireland became an integral part of a new United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland under the Act of Union.\nThe Great Famine, during the 1840s saw a significant number of people flee from the island to all over the world. Between 1841 and 1851, as a result of death and mass emigration, mainly to Great Britain and North America, Ireland's population fell by over 2 million. In Connacht alone, the population fell by almost 30%.\nRobert E. Kennedy explains, however, that the common argument that the mass emigration from Ireland was a \"flight from famine\" is not entirely correct. Firstly, the Irish had been coming to Great Britain to build canals there since the 18th century, and as soon as conditions in Ireland improved, their emigration did not slow down. After the famine ended, the four years that followed it were marked by more emigration than the four years of the blight. Kennedy argues that the famine was considered the final straw because it convinced more people to move even though several other factors influenced their decision.\nBy 1900, the population of Ireland was about half of its 1840 peak, and it continued to fall during the 20th century.\nIn the decades that followed independence in the 1920s, emigration accelerated for economic and social reasons, and with the preferred destination switching from the United States to Great Britain, over 500,000 emigrated in the 1950s and 450,000 in the 1980s, and over 3 million Irish citizens resided outside Ireland in 2017.\nIrish people who still lived in Ireland were subjected to discrimination by Great Britain based on their religion. Evictions increased after the repeal of the British Corn Laws in 1846, the passage of the Encumbered Estates' Court in 1849 and the removal of existing civil rights and class norms. Any remaining hope for change was squashed by the 1847 death of Daniel O'Connell, the political leader who championed liberal and reform causes and emancipation for Ireland's Catholics, and the failed rising of the Young Irelanders in 1848. More was to be gained by immigrating to America from Ireland, and the 1848 discovery of gold in the Sierra Nevada lured away more.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIrish migration to Great Britain has occurred since the early medieval period. The largest waves of Irish migration occurred in the 19th century, when a devastating famine broke out in Ireland, resulting in thousands of Irish immigrants settling down in Britain, primarily in the port cities of Liverpool and Glasgow. Other waves of Irish migration occurred during the 20th century, as Irish immigrants escaping poor economic conditions in Ireland following the establishment of the Irish Free State, came to Britain in response to labour shortages. These waves of migration have resulted in millions of British citizens being of Irish descent.\nAn article for \"The Guardian\" estimated that as many as six million people living in the United Kingdom have an Irish-born grandparent (around 10% of the British population).\nThe 2001 UK census states that 869,093 people born in Ireland are living in Great Britain. More than 10% of those born in the United Kingdom have at least one grandparent born in Ireland. The article \"More Britons applying for Irish passports\" states that 6 million Britons have either an Irish grandfather or grandmother and are thus able to apply for Irish citizenship. Almost a quarter claimed some Irish ancestry in one survey.\nThe Irish have traditionally been involved in the building trade and transport particularly as dockers, following an influx of Irish workers, or navvies, to build the British canal, road and rail networks in the 19th century. This is largely due to the flow of emigrants from Ireland during the Great Famine of 1845\u20131849. Many Irish servicemen, particularly sailors, settled in Britain: During the first half of the 19th century a third of the Army and Royal Navy were Irish. The Irish still represent a large contingent of foreign volunteers to the British military. Since the 1950s and 1960s in particular, the Irish have become assimilated into the British population. Emigration continued into the next century; over half a million Irish went to Britain in World War II to work in industry and serve in the British armed forces. In the post-war reconstruction era, the numbers of immigrants began to increase, many settling in the larger cities and towns of Britain. According to the 2001 census, around 850,000 people in Britain were born in Ireland.\nThe largest Irish communities in Britain are located predominantly in the cities and towns: in London, in particular Kilburn (which has one of the largest Irish-born communities outside Ireland) out to the west and north west of the city, in the large port cities such as Liverpool (which elected the first Irish nationalist members of parliament), Glasgow, Bristol, Sunderland and Portsmouth. Big industrial cities such as Salford, Manchester, Luton, Coventry, Birmingham, Sheffield, Wolverhampton, Cardiff and parts of Newcastle and Nottingham also have large diaspora populations due to the Industrial Revolution and, in the case of the first three, the strength of the motor industry in the 1960s and 1970s. The towns of Hebburn, Jarrow and Coatbridge have all earned the nickname 'Little Ireland' due to their high Irish populations.\nCentral to the Irish community in Britain was the community's relationship with the Roman Catholic Church, with which it maintained a strong sense of identity. The Church remains a crucial focus of communal life among some of the immigrant population and their descendants. The largest ethnic group among the Roman Catholic priesthood of Britain remains Irish (in the United States, the upper ranks of the Church's hierarchy are of predominantly Irish descent). The former head of the Roman Catholic Church in Scotland is Cardinal Keith O'Brien.\nScotland experienced a significant amount of Irish immigration, particularly in Glasgow, Edinburgh and Coatbridge. This led to the formation of Celtic Football Club in 1888 by Marist Brother Walfrid, to raise money to help the community. In Edinburgh Hibernian were founded in 1875 and in 1909 another club with Irish links, Dundee United, was formed. Likewise the Irish community in London formed the London Irish rugby union club. The 2001 UK census states in Scotland 50,000 people identified as having Irish heritage.\nThe Irish have maintained a strong political presence in the UK (mostly in Scotland), in local government and at the national level. Former prime ministers David Cameron, Tony Blair, John Major and James Callaghan have been amongst the many in Britain of part-Irish ancestry; Blair's mother, Hazel Elizabeth Rosaleen Corscaden, was born on 12 June 1923 in Ballyshannon, County Donegal. Former Chancellor George Osborne is a member of the Anglo-Irish aristocracy and heir to the baronetcies of Ballentaylor and Ballylemon.\nMoreover, the UK holds official public St. Patrick's Day celebrations. While many such celebrations were suspended in the 1970s because of The Troubles, the holiday is now widely celebrated by the UK public.\nThe rest of Europe.\nIrish links with the continent go back many centuries. During the early Middle Ages, 700\u2013900 AD, many Irish religious figures went abroad to preach and found monasteries in what is known as the Hiberno-Scottish mission. Saint Brieuc founded the city that bears his name in Brittany, Saint Colm\u00e1n founded the great monastery of Bobbio in northern Italy and one of his monks was Saint Gall for whom the Swiss town of St Gallen and canton of St Gallen are named.\nDuring the Counter-Reformation, Irish religious and political links with Europe became stronger. An important centre of learning and training for Irish priests developed in Leuven (L\u00fabhan in Irish) in the Duchy of Brabant, now in Flanders (northern Belgium). The Flight of the Earls, in 1607, led much of the Gaelic nobility to flee the country, and after the wars of the 17th century many others fled to Spain, France, Austria, and other Roman Catholic lands. The lords and their retainers and supporters joined the armies of these countries, and were known as the Wild Geese. Some of the lords and their descendants rose to high ranks in their adoptive countries, such as the Spanish general and politician Leopoldo O'Donnell, 1st Duke of Tetuan, who became the president of the Government of Spain or the French general and politician Patrice de Mac-Mahon, Duke of Magenta, who became the president of the French Republic. The French Cognac brandy maker, Hennessy, was founded by Richard Hennessy, an Irish officer in the Clare Regiment of the Irish Brigade of the French Army. In Spain and its territories, many Irish descendants can be found with the name \"Obreg\u00f3n\" (\"O'Brien\", Irish, \"\u00d3 Briain\"), including Madrid-born actress \"Ana Victoria Garc\u00eda Obreg\u00f3n\".\nDuring the 20th century, certain Irish intellectuals made their homes in continental Europe, particularly James Joyce, and later Samuel Beckett (who became a courier for the French Resistance). Eoin O'Duffy led a brigade of 700 Irish volunteers to fight for Franco during the Spanish Civil War, and Frank Ryan led the Connolly Column who fought on the opposite side, with the Republican International Brigades. William Joyce became an English-language propagandist for Nazi Germany, known colloquially as Lord Haw-Haw.\nThe Americas.\nSome of the first Irish people to travel to the New World did so as members of the Spanish garrison in Florida during the 1560s, and small numbers of Irish colonists were involved in efforts to establish colonies in the Amazon region, in Newfoundland, and in Virginia between 1604 and the 1630s. According to historian Donald Akenson, there were \"few if any\" Irish being forcibly transported to the New World during this period.\nThe Plantation of Ulster, by the Stuart monarchy of the early 17th century, primarily in the lands gained by the Flight of the Earls, with an equal number of loyal Lowland Scots and redundant English Border reivers, caused resentment, as did their transferring of all property owned by the Roman Catholic Church to the Church of Ireland, resulting in the Irish Rebellion of 1641. Following the rebellion's failure the Commonwealth regime began to pacify Ireland, through the sentencing and transporting Irish rebels (known as \u201ctories\u201d), Catholic priests, friars and schoolmasters, to indentured servitude in the Crown's New World colonies. This increased following the Cromwellian invasion of Ireland (1649\u20131653), of the Wars of the Three Kingdoms (1639\u20131653). Cromwell took Irish land both to repay investors who had financed the invasion and as payment for his soldiers, many of whom settled down in Ireland. As a result, Irish in Leinster, and Munster, with property worth more than \u00a310, were ordered to move to Connaught, to land valued at no more than 1/3 the value of their current holding, or be banished on pain of death. In the 17th century 50,000 Irish people are estimated to have migrated to the New World colonies, 165,000 by 1775. During these events from 1641-53, the population of Ireland fell between 20 and 40 percent due to famine and other war-related causes, but doubled from approximately one to two million over the whole century. \nArgentina.\nIn the 19th and early 20th centuries, over 38,000 Irish immigrated to Argentina. Very distinct Irish communities and schools existed until the Per\u00f3n era in the 1950s.\nToday there are an estimated 500,000 people of Irish ancestry in Argentina, approximately 15.5% of the Republic of Ireland's current population; however, these numbers may be far higher, given that many Irish newcomers declared themselves to be British, as Ireland at the time was still part of the United Kingdom and today their descendants integrated into Argentine society with mixed bloodlines.\nThe modern Irish-Argentine community is composed of some of their descendants, and the total number is estimated at between 500,000 and 1,000,000.\nArgentina is the home of the fifth largest Irish community in the world, the largest in a non-English speaking nation and the greatest in South America.\nDespite the fact that Argentina was never the main destination for Irish emigrants it does form part of the Irish diaspora. The Irish-Argentine William Bulfin remarked as he travelled around Westmeath in the early 20th century that he came across many locals who had been to Buenos Aires. Several families from Bere island, County Cork were encouraged to send emigrants to Argentina by an islander who had been successful there in the 1880s.\nConsidered by some to be a national hero, William Brown is the most famous Irish citizen in Argentina. Creator of the Argentine Navy (\"Armada de la Rep\u00fablica Argentina\", ARA) and leader of the Argentine Armed Forces in the wars against Brazil and Spain, he was born in Foxford, County Mayo on 22 June 1777 and died in Buenos Aires in 1857. The is named after him, as well as the Almirante Brown partido, part of the Gran Buenos Aires urban area, with a population of over 500.000 inhabitants.\nThe first entirely Roman Catholic English language publication published in Buenos Aires, \"The Southern Cross\" is an Argentine newspaper founded on 16 January 1875 by Dean Patricio Dillon, an Irish immigrant, a deputy for Buenos Aires Province and president of the Presidential Affairs Commission amongst other positions. The newspaper continues in print to this day and publishes a beginner's guide to the Irish language, helping Irish Argentines keep in touch with their cultural heritage. Previously to \"The Southern Cross\" Dublin-born brothers Edward and Michael Mulhall successfully published \"The Standard\", allegedly the first English-language daily paper in South America.\nBetween 1943 and 1946, the de facto President of Argentina was Edelmiro Farrell, whose paternal ancestry was Irish.\nBermuda.\nEarly in its history, Bermuda had reputed connections with Ireland. It has been suggested that St. Brendan discovered it during his legendary voyage; a local psychiatric hospital (since renamed) was named after him. In 1616, an incident occurred in which five white settlers arrived in Ireland, having crossed the Atlantic (a distance of around ) in a two-ton boat. By the following year, one of Bermuda's main islands was named after Ireland. By the mid-17th century, Irish prisoners of war and civilian captives were involuntarily shipped to Bermuda, condemned to indentured servitude. These people had become indentured as a result of the Cromwellian conquest of Ireland. The Cromwellian conquest led to Irish captives, from both military and civilian backgrounds, to be sent as indentured servants to the West Indies. The Puritan Commonwealth government saw sending indentured servants from Ireland to the Caribbean as both assisting in their conquest of the island (by removing the strongest resistance against their rule) and saving the souls of the Roman Catholic Irish servants by settling them in Protestant-dominated colonies where they would supposedly inevitably convert to the \"true faith\".\nThese rapid demographic changes quickly began to alarm the dominant Anglo-Bermudian population, in particular the Irish indentured servants, most of whom were presumed to be secretly practising Catholicism (recusancy had been outlawed by the colonial government). Relationships between the Anglo-Bermudian community and Irish indentured servants consistently remained hostile, resulting in the Irish responding to ostracism by ultimately merging with the Scottish, African and Native American communities in Bermuda to form a new demographic: the coloureds, which in Bermuda meant anyone not entirely of European descent. In modern-day Bermuda, the term has been replaced by 'Black', in which wholly sub-Saharan African ancestry is erroneously implicit. The Irish quickly proved hostile to their new conditions in Bermuda, and colonial legislation soon stipulated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;that those that hath the Irish servants should take care that they straggle not night nor daie as is too common with them. If any masters or dames be remiss hereafter in watching over them, they shall be fyned according to the discretion of the Governor and counsell\", and that \"it shall not be lawfull for any inhabitant in these Islands to buy or purchase any more of the Irish nation upon any pretence whatsoever\".\nIn September, 1658, three Irishmen \u2013 John Chehen (Shehan, Sheehan, Sheene, or Sheen), David Laragen and Edmund Malony \u2013 were lashed for breaking curfew and being suspected of stealing a boat. Jeames Benninge (a Scottish indentured servant), black Franke (a servant to Mr John Devitt), and Tomakin, Clemento, and black Dick (servants of Mrs Anne Trimingham) were also punished.\nIn 1661, the colonial government alleged that a plot was being hatched by an alliance of Blacks and Irish, one which involved cutting the throats of all Bermudians of English descent. The governor of Bermuda, William Sayle (who had returned to Bermuda after the Bermudian colonial government acknowledged the authority of Parliament) countered the alleged plot with three edicts: The first was that a nightly watch be raised throughout the colony; second, that slaves and the Irish be disarmed of militia weapons; and third, that any gathering of two or more Irish or slaves be dispersed by whipping. There were no arrests, trials or executions connected to the plot, though an Irish woman named Margaret was found to be romantically involved with a Native American; she was voted to be stigmatised and he was whipped.\nDuring the course of the seventeenth and eighteenth Centuries, the colony's various demographic groups boiled down to free whites and mostly enslaved \"coloured\" Bermudians with a homogeneous Anglo-Bermudian culture. Little survived of the Irish culture brought by indentured servants from Ireland. Catholicism was outlawed in Bermuda by the colonial authorities, and all islanders were required by law to attend services of the established Anglican church. Some surnames that were common in Bermuda at this period, however, give lingering evidence of the Irish presence. For example, the area to the east of Bailey's Bay, in Hamilton Parish, is named \"Callan Glen\" for a Scottish-born shipwright, \"Claude MacCallan\", who settled in Bermuda after the vessel in which he was a passenger was wrecked off the North Shore in 1787. MacCallan swam to a rock from which he was rescued by a Bailey's Bay fisherman named \"Daniel Seon\" (\"Sheehan\"). A later Daniel Seon was appointed Clerk of the House of Assembly and Prothonotary of the Court of General Assize in 1889 (he was also the Registrar of the Supreme Court, and died in 1909).\nIn 1803, Irish poet Thomas Moore arrived in Bermuda, having been appointed registrar to the Admiralty there. Robert Kennedy, born in Cultra, County Down, was the Government of Bermuda's \"Colonial Secretary\", and was the acting Governor of Bermuda on three occasions (1829, 1830 and 1835\u20131836). Irish prisoners were again sent to Bermuda in the 19th century, including participants in the ill-fated Young Irelander Rebellion of 1848, nationalist journalist and politician John Mitchel, and painter and convicted murderer William Burke Kirwan. Alongside English convicts, they were used to build the Royal Naval Dockyard on Ireland Island. Conditions for the convicts were harsh, and discipline was draconian. In April, 1830, convict James Ryan was shot and killed during rioting of convicts on Ireland Island. Another five convicts were given death sentences for their parts in the riots, with those of the youngest three being commuted to transportation (to Australia) for life. In June 1849 convict James Cronin, on the hulk Medway at Ireland Island, was placed in solitary confinement from the 25th to the 29th for fighting. On release, and being returned to work, he refused to be cross-ironed. He ran onto the breakwater, brandishing a poker threateningly. For this, he was ordered to receive punishment (presumably flogging) on Tuesday, 3 July 1849, with the other convicts aboard the hulk assembled behind a rail to witness. When ordered to strip, he hesitated. Thomas Cronin, his older brother, addressed him and, while brandishing a knife, rushed forward to the separating rail. He called out to the other prisoners in Irish and many joined him in attempting to free the prisoner and attack the officers. The officers opened fire. Two men were killed and twelve wounded. Punishment of James Cronin was then carried out. Three hundred men of the 42nd Regiment of Foot, in barracks on Ireland Island, responded to the scene under arms.\nAlthough the Roman Catholic Church (which had been banned in Bermuda, as in the rest of England, since settlement) began to operate openly in Bermuda in the 19th century, its priests were not permitted to conduct baptisms, weddings or funerals. As the most important British naval and military base in the Western Hemisphere following US independence, large numbers of Irish Roman Catholic soldiers served in the British Army's Bermuda Garrison (the Royal Navy had also benefitted from a shipload of Irish emigres wrecked on Bermuda, with most being recruited into the navy there). The first Roman Catholic services in Bermuda were conducted by British Army chaplains early in the 19th century. Mount Saint Agnes Academy, a private school operated by the Roman Catholic Church of Bermuda, opened in 1890 at the behest of officers of the 86th (Royal County Down) Regiment of Foot (which was posted to Bermuda from 1880 to 1883), who had requested from the Archbishop of Halifax, Nova Scotia, a school for the children of Irish Roman Catholic soldiers.\nNot all Irish soldiers in Bermuda had happy lives there. Private Joseph McDaniel of the 30th Regiment of Foot (who was born in the East Indies to an Irish father and a Malay mother) was convicted of the murder of Mary Swears in June, 1837, after he had been found with a self-inflicted wound and her lifeless body. Although he maintained his innocence throughout the trial, after his conviction he confessed that they had made a pact to die together. Although he had succeeded in killing her, he survived his suicide attempt. He was put to death on Wednesday, 29 November 1837. Private Patrick Shea of the 20th Regiment of Foot was sentenced to death in June 1846, for discharging his weapon at Sergeant John Evans. His sentence was commuted to transportation (to Australia) for life. In October, 1841, County Carlow-born Peter Doyle had also been transported to Australia for fourteen years for shooting at a picket. At his court martial he had explained that he had been drunk at the time.\nOther Irish soldiers, taking discharge, made a home in Bermuda, remaining there for the rest of their lives. Dublin-born Sapper Cornelius Farrell was discharged in Bermuda from the Royal Engineers. His three Bermudian-born sons followed him into the army, fighting on the Western Front during the First World War in the Bermuda Volunteer Rifle Corps.\nAlthough there is little surviving evidence of Irish culture, some elderly islanders can remember when the term \"cilig\" (or \"killick\") was used to describe a common method of fishing for sea turtles by tricking them into swimming into prearranged nets (this was done by splashing a stone on a line\u2014the cilig\u2014into the water on the turtle's opposite side). The word \"cilig\" appears to be meaningless in English, but in some dialects of Gaelic is used as an adjective meaning \"easily deceived\". In Irish there is a word \"c\u00edl\u00ed\" meaning sly. It is used in the expression \"Is \u00e9 an c\u00edl\u00ed ceart \u00e9\" (pronounced \"Shayeh kilic airtay\") and means \"What a sly-boots\". Alternatively, the word may be derived from an Irish word for a stone and wood anchor. Characteristics of older Bermudian accents, such as the pronunciation of the letter 'd' as 'dj', as in \"Bermudjin\" (Bermudian), may indicate an Irish origin. Later Irish immigrants have continued to contribute to Bermuda's makeup, with names like Crockwell (\"\u00d3 Creachmhaoil\") and O'Connor (\"\u00d3 Conchobhair\") now being thought of locally as Bermudian names. The strongest remaining Irish influence can be seen in the presence of bagpipes in the music of Bermuda, which stemmed from the presence of Scottish and Irish soldiers from the 18th through 20th centuries. Several prominent businesses in Bermuda have a clear Irish influence, such as the Irish Linen Shop, Tom Moore's Tavern and Flanagan's Irish Pub and Restaurant.\nA succession of Irish Masonic lodges have existed in Bermuda, beginning with \"Military Lodge #192\", established by soldiers of the 47th Regiment of Foot, and operating in Bermuda from 1793 to 1801. This was an ambulatory or travelling lodge, as with other military lodges, moving with its members. Irish Lodges #220 (also a military travelling lodge) was active in Bermuda from 1856 to 1861, and Irish Lodge #209 was established in Bermuda in 1881. Minder Lodge #63 of the Irish Constitution was in Bermuda with the 20th Regiment of Foot from 1841 to 1847. The Hannibal Lodge #224 of the Irish Constitution was warranted in 1867, and still exists, meeting in the Masonic Hall on Old Maid's Lane, St. George's. Another Hannibal Chapter, #123 of the Irish Constitution, was chartered in 1877, but lasted only until 1911.\nBrazil.\nThe first known Irish settler in Brazil was a missionary, Thomas Field, who arrived to Brazil in late 1577 and spent three years in Piratininga (present-day S\u00e3o Paulo). In 1612, the Irish brothers Philip and James Purcell established a colony in Tauregue, at the mouth of the Amazon river, where English, Dutch, and French settlements were also established. Many of the colonists traded in tobacco, dyes, and hardwoods. A second group of Irish settlers led by Bernardo O'Brien of County Clare arrived in 1620. The first recorded Saint Patrick's Day celebration was on 17 March 1770.\nDuring the Cisplatine War, Brazil sent recruiters to Ireland to recruit men as soldiers for the war against Argentina. Any Irish that signed up for the Brazilian army were promised that if they enlisted they would be given a grant of land after five years of service. Approximately 2,400 men were recruited and when they arrived in Brazil (many with their families), they were completely neglected by the government. The Irish mutinied together with a German regiment, and for a few days there was open warfare on the streets of Rio de Janeiro. While most were ultimately sent home or re-emigrated to Canada or Argentina, some did stay and were sent to form a colony in the province of Bahia.\nSeveral attempts were made by Brazil to bring in more Irish immigrants to settle in the country, however, much of the land given to the settlers was porous or in extremely remote locations. Many of the Irish settlers died or re-emigrated to other countries. At the same time, several prominent Irish figures served in diplomatic posts in Brazil for the United Kingdom (as Ireland was part of the British Empire). Irish nationalist and British diplomat Roger Casement, served as British Consul in Santos, Bel\u00e9m, and in Rio de Janeiro.\nCanada.\nThe 2006 census by Statcan, Canada's Official Statistical office revealed that the Irish were the 4th largest ethnic group with 4,354,155 Canadians with full or partial Irish descent or 14% of the nation's total population. During the 2016 census by Statistics Canada, the Irish ethnicity retained its spot as the 4th largest ethnic group with 4,627,000 Canadians with full or partial Irish descent.\nAfter the permanent settlement in Newfoundland by Irish in the late 18th and early 19th century, overwhelmingly from County Waterford, increased immigration of the Irish elsewhere in Canada began in the decades following the War of 1812 and formed a significant part of The Great Migration of Canada. Between 1825 and 1845, 60% of all immigrants to Canada were Irish; in 1831 alone, some 34,000 arrived in Montreal.\nBetween 1830 and 1850, 624,000 Irish arrived; in contextual terms, at the end of this period, the population of the provinces of Canada was 2.4 million. Besides Upper Canada (Ontario), Lower Canada (Quebec), the Maritime colonies of Nova Scotia, Prince Edward Island and New Brunswick, especially Saint John, were arrival points. Not all remained; many out-migrated to the United States or to Western Canada in the decades that followed. Few returned to Ireland.\nMany Newfoundlanders are of Irish descent. It is estimated that about 80% of Newfoundlanders have Irish ancestry on at least one side of their family tree. The family names, the predominant Roman Catholic religion, the prevalence of Irish music \u2013 even the accents of the people \u2013 are so reminiscent of rural Ireland that Irish author Tim Pat Coogan has described Newfoundland as \"the most Irish place in the world outside Ireland\". Newfoundland Irish, the dialect of the Irish language specific to the island was widely spoken until the mid-20th century. It is very similar to the language heard in the southeast of Ireland centuries ago, due to mass emigration from counties Tipperary, Waterford, Wexford, Kerry and Cork.\nSaint John, New Brunswick, claims the distinction of being Canada's most Irish city, according to census records. There have been Irish settlers in New Brunswick since at least the late 18th century, but during the peak of the Great Irish Famine (1845\u20131847), thousands of Irish emigrated through Partridge Island in the port of Saint John. Most of these Irish were Roman Catholic, who changed the complexion of the Loyalist city. A large, vibrant Irish community can also be found in the Miramichi region of New Brunswick.\nGuysborough County, Nova Scotia has many rural Irish villages. Erinville (which means Irishville), Salmon River, Ogden, Bantry (named after Bantry Bay, County Cork, Ireland but now abandoned and grown up in trees) among others, where Irish last names are prevalent and the accent is reminiscent of the Irish as well as the music, traditions, religion (Roman Catholic), and the love of Ireland itself. Some of the Irish counties from which these people arrived were County Kerry (Dingle Peninsula), County Cork, and County Roscommon, along with others.\nQuebec is also home to a large Irish community, especially in Montreal, where the Irish shamrock is featured on the municipal flag. Notably, thousands of Irish emigrants during the Famine passed through Grosse Isle near Qu\u00e9bec City, where many succumbed to typhus. Most of the Irish who settled near Qu\u00e9bec City are now French speakers.\nIrish Catholic settlers also opened up new agricultural areas in the recently surveyed Eastern Townships, the Ottawa Valley, and Gatineau and Pontiac counties. Irish from Quebec would also settle in communities such as Frampton, Saint Sylvestre, and Saint Patrick in the Beauce region of southeastern Quebec.\nOntario has over 2 million people of Irish descent, who in greater numbers arrived in the 1820s and the decades that followed to work on colonial infrastructure and to settle land tracts in Upper Canada, the result today is a countryside speckled with the place names of Ireland. Ontario received a large number of those who landed in Quebec during the Famine years, many thousands died in Ontario's ports. Irish-born became the majority in Toronto by 1851.\nCaribbean.\nFrom the 1620s, many of the Irish Roman Catholic merchant class in this period migrated voluntarily to the West Indies to avail of the business opportunities there occasioned by the trade in sugar, tobacco and cotton. They were followed by landless Irish indentured labourers, who were recruited to serve a landowner for a specified time before receiving freedom and land. The descendants of some Irish immigrants are known today in the West Indies as redlegs. Most descendants of these Irishmen moved off the islands as African slavery was implemented and blacks began to replace whites. Many Barbadian-born Irishmen helped establish the Carolina colony in the United States.\nAfter the Cromwellian conquest of Ireland Irish prisoners were forcibly transferred to English colonies in the Americas and sold into indentured servitude, a practice that came to be known as being \"Barbadosed\", though Barbados was not the only colony to receive Irish prisoners, with those sent to Montserrat being the best known. To this day, Montserrat is the only country or territory in the world, apart from the Republic of Ireland, Northern Ireland and the Canadian province of Newfoundland to observe a public holiday on St Patrick's Day. The population is predominantly of mixed Irish and African descent.\nPuerto Rico.\nIrish immigrants played an instrumental role in Puerto Rico's economy. One of the most important industries of the island was the sugar industry. Among the successful businessmen in this industry were Miguel Conway, who owned a plantation in the town of Hatillo and Juan Nagle whose plantation was located in R\u00edo Piedras. General Alexander O'Reilly, \"Father of the Puerto Rican Militia\", named Tomas O'Daly chief engineer of modernising the defences of San Juan, this included the fortress of San Crist\u00f3bal. Tomas O'Daly and Miguel Kirwan were partners in the \"Hacienda San Patricio\", which they named after the patron saint of Ireland, Saint Patrick. A relative of O'Daly, Demetrio O'Daly, succeeded Captain Ramon Power y Giralt as the island's delegate to the Spanish Courts. The plantation no longer exists; however, the land in which the plantation was located is now a San Patricio suburb with a shopping mall by the same name. The Quinlan family established two plantations, one in the town of Toa Baja and the other in Lo\u00edza. Puerto Ricans of Irish descent were also instrumental in the development of the island's tobacco industry. Among them Miguel Conboy who was a founder of the tobacco trade in Puerto Rico.\nOther notable places in the Caribbean include:\nColombia.\nThe presence and impact of the Irish in Colombia dates back to the time of Spanish rule, when in different historical periods they migrated to the Iberian Peninsula and from there to the American continent, enlisted in the colonization, trade, army and administration companies. One episode in which this group had a special impact was the colonization of the Darien (Gulf of Urab\u00e1) in 1788. In this place 64 families and 50 single individuals from North America were established, to which were added families from the interior. Of these families, 28 were of Irish origin, which shows their numerical importance and valuation as an emerging social group within the Hispanic world.\nThere is no doubt that the greatest concentration and contributions to the country occurred during the emancipation campaigns. It is enough to look at the list drawn up by researcher Matthew Brown to understand their importance and impact, for out of some 6,808 Europeans, the Irish represented 48%; we are talking about more than 3,000 Irish who fought to give freedom to Colombia. These would have come enlisted in the Irish Legion, where they were famous officers like: Casey, Devereux, Egan, Ferguson, Foley, Lanagan, Rooke, Larkin, McCarthy, Murphy, O'Leary, O'Connell, O'Connor and Sanders.\nOnce the wars of Independence were over, a good portion of them would have remained to form part of the Colombian army. Others, on the other hand, would have abandoned military life to integrate into society as businessmen, merchants, musicians, doctors, poets, miners and settlers. The economic sector in which the Irish participated the most was mining: they formed small mining colonies in the north and south of Antioquia. In the middle of the century, the English miner Tyrell Moore, presented to the Sovereign State of Antioquia a project to colonize with 200 Irish families in the north and lower Cauca, an intention that apparently met with local disapproval and added to other logistical problems made its materialization impossible. But the largest mining colony was established in the south (currently Caldas department), in towns such as Marmato and Sup\u00eda. Among the hundreds of British, French, German and Swedish miners who moved there were some Irishmen such as Eduardo MacAllister, Joseph Raphson, Nicolas Fitzgerald, Juan O'Byrne, David Davis and the Nicholls.\nIn addition, this immigration has been highlighted in dozens of literary and academic works, the most important of which are: Irish Blood in Antioquia (\"Sangre irlandesa en Antioquia)\", by Aquiles Echeverri, Irish descendant; The Mysters of the Mines (\"Los m\u00edsteres de las minas)\", by Alvaro Gartner and The Sanctuary: Global History of a Battle (\"El Santuario: Historia global de una batalla)\", by Matthew Brown. For all of the above, it is evident that Irish immigration has not been alien to us and its presence, traces and impact also constitute an important part of our past and historical and cultural heritage.\nChile.\nMany of the Wild Geese, expatriate Irish soldiers who had gone to Spain, or their descendants, continued on to its colonies in South America. Many of them rose to prominent positions in the Spanish governments there. In the 1820s, some of them helped liberate the continent. Bernardo O'Higgins was the first Supreme director of Chile. When Chilean troops occupied Lima during the War of the Pacific in 1881, they put in charge certain Patricio Lynch, whose grandfather came from Ireland to Argentina and then moved to Chile. Other Latin American countries that have Irish settlement include Puerto Rico and Colombia.\nMexico.\nThe County Wexford born William Lamport, better known to most Mexicans as Guill\u00e9n de Lampart, was a precursor of the Independence movement and author of the first proclamation of independence in the New World. His statue stands today inside the column of the Angel of Independence in Mexico City, Mexico. Juan de O'Donoj\u00fa y O'Ryan, of Irish descent, was the last Viceroy of New Spain (Mexico), died and is buried in Mexico City.\nAmong the most famous Irishmen in Mexican history are \"Los Patricios\" of Saint Patrick's Battalion. Many communities existed in Mexican Texas until the revolution there, when they sided with Roman Catholic Mexico against Protestant pro-US elements. The \"Batall\u00f3n de San Patricio\", a battalion of US troops who deserted and fought alongside the Mexican Army against the United States in the Mexican\u2013American War of 1846\u20131848, is well known in Mexican history. The most well known of these was Major John Riley. \nMexico also has a large number of people of Irish ancestry, among them the actor Anthony Quinn. There are monuments in Mexico City paying tribute to those Irish who fought for Mexico in the 19th century. There is a monument to Los Patricios in the fort of Churubusco. During the Great Famine, thousands of Irish immigrants entered the country. Other notable Mexicans of Irish descent are Romulo O'Farril, Juan O'Gorman, and Edmundo O'Gorman.\nUnited States.\nThe first Irish came to modern day America during the 1600s mostly to Virginia and mostly indentured servants.\nThe diaspora to the United States was immortalised in the words of many songs including the Irish ballad, \"The Green Fields of America\":\n&lt;poem&gt;\nSo pack up your sea-stores, consider no longer,\nTen dollars a week is not very bad pay,\nWith no taxes or tithes to devour up your wages,\nWhen you're on the green fields of Americay.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nThe experience of Irish immigrants in the United States has not always been harmonious. The US did not have a good relationship with most of the incoming Irish because of their Roman Catholic faith, as the majority of the population was Protestant and had been originally formed by offshoots of the Protestant faith, many of whom were from the north of Ireland (Ulster). So it came as no surprise that the federal government issued new immigration acts, adding to previous ones which limited Eastern European immigration, ones which limited the immigration of the Irish.\nThose who were successful in coming over from Ireland were for the most part already good farmers and other hard labour workers, so the jobs they were taking were plentiful in the beginning. However, as time went on and the land needed less cultivation, the jobs the new Irish immigrants were taking were those that Americans wanted as well. \nIn most cases, Irish newcomers were sometimes uneducated and often found themselves competing with Americans for manual labour jobs or, in the 1860s, being recruited from the docks by the US Army to serve in the American Civil War and afterward to build the Union Pacific Railroad. This view of the Irish-American experience is depicted by another traditional song, \"Paddy's Lamentation.\"\n&lt;poem&gt;\nHear me boys, now take my advice,\nTo America I'll have ye's not be going,\nThere is nothing here but war, where the murderin' cannons roar,\nAnd I wish I was at home in dear old Ireland.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nThe classic image of an Irish immigrant is led to a certain extent by racist and anti-Catholic stereotypes. In modern times, in the United States, the Irish are largely perceived as hard workers. Most notably they are associated with the positions of police officer, firefighter, Roman Catholic Church leaders and politicians in the larger Eastern Seaboard metropolitan areas. Irish Americans number over 35 million, making them the second largest reported ethnic group in the country, after German Americans. Historically, large Irish American communities have been found in Philadelphia; Chicago; Boston; New York City; New York; Detroit; New England; Washington, D.C.; Baltimore; Pittsburgh; Cleveland; St. Paul, Minnesota; Buffalo; Broome County; Butte; Dubuque; Quincy; Dublin; Hartford; New Haven; Waterbury; Providence; Kansas City; New Orleans; Savannah; Braintree; Weymouth; Norfolk; Nashville; Scranton; Wilkes-Barre; O'Fallon; Tampa; Hazleton; Worcester; Lowell; Los Angeles; and the San Francisco Bay Area. Many cities across the country have annual St Patrick's Day parades; The nation's largest is in New York City\u2014one of the world's largest parades. The parade in Boston is closely associated with Evacuation Day, when the British left Boston in 1776 during the American War of Independence.\nBefore the Great Hunger, in which over a million died and more emigrated, there had been the Penal Laws which had already resulted in significant emigration from Ireland.\nAccording to the \"Harvard Encyclopedia of American Ethnic Groups\", in 1790 there were 400,000 Americans of Irish birth or ancestry out of a total white population of 3,100,000. Half of these Irish Americans were descended from Ulster people, and half were descended from the people of Connacht, Leinster and Munster.\nAccording to US census figures from 2000, 41,000,000 Americans claim to be wholly or partly of Irish ancestry, a group that represents more than one in five white Americans. Some African Americans are part of the Irish diaspora, as they are descended from Irish or Scots-Irish slave owners and overseers who arrived in America during the colonial era. The US Census Bureau's data from 2016 reveals that Irish ancestry is one of the most common reported ancestries reported (in the top 3 most common ancestries reported). Even though Irish immigration is extremely small relative to the scope of current migration, Irish ancestry is one of the most common ancestries in the United States because of the events that took place over a century ago.\nThe enduring nature of Irish-American identity is exemplified by the widespread celebration of St.Patrick's Day, the national day of Ireland, across the United States. The traditional St. Patrick's Day parade having developed, in its modern form, in the United States itself. The largest such parade in the world is the New York City St. Patrick's Day Parade which features in the region of 150,000 participants and 2,000,000 spectators annually, with thousands of parades of all sizes across the United States.\nAsia.\nIndian Subcontinent.\nIrishmen have been known in India right from the days of the East India Company, which was founded in 1600. While most of the early Irish came as traders, some also came as soldiers. However, the majority of these traders and soldiers were from the Protestant Ascendancy. Prominent among them were the generals Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington (1769\u20131852) who became Prime Minister of the United Kingdom in 1834 and his brother Richard Wellesley, 1st Marquess Wellesley (1760\u20131842), who was Governor-General of India (1798\u20131805). Later in the Victorian period, many thinkers, philosophers and Irish nationalists from the Roman Catholic majority too made it to India, prominent among the nationalists being the theosophist Annie Besant.\nIt is widely believed that there existed a secret alliance between the Irish and Indian independence movements. Some Indian intellectuals like Jawaharlal Nehru and V. V. Giri were certainly inspired by Irish nationalists when they studied in the United Kingdom. The Indian revolutionary group known as the Bengal Volunteers took this name in emulation of the Irish Volunteers.\nAustralia.\n2,087,800 Australians, 10.4% of the population, self-reported some Irish ancestry in the 2011 census, second only to English and Australian.\nThe Australian government estimates the total figure may be around 7 million (30%).\nIn the 2006 census 50,255 Australian residents declared they were born in the Republic of Ireland and a further 21,291 declared to have been born in Northern Ireland. This gives Australia the third largest Irish-born population outside Ireland (after Britain and America).\nBetween the 1790s and 1920s, approximately 400,000 Irish settlers \u2013 both voluntary and forced \u2013 are thought to have arrived in Australia. They first came over in large numbers as convicts, with around 50,000 transported between 1791 and 1867. Even larger numbers of free settlers came during the 19th century due to famine, the Donegal Relief Fund, the discovery of gold in Victoria and New South Wales, and the increasing \"pull\" of a pre-existing Irish community. By 1871, Irish immigrants accounted for one quarter of Australia's overseas-born population.\nIrish Catholic immigrants \u2013 who made up about 75% of the total Irish population \u2013 were largely responsible for the establishment of a separate Catholic school system. About 20% of Australian children attend Catholic schools as of 2017.\nIt has also been argued that the Irish language was the source of a significant number of words in Australian English.\nSouth Africa.\nThough they've never formed a substantial population, some Irish communities can be found in Cape Town, Port Elizabeth, Kimberley, and Johannesburg, with smaller communities in Pretoria, Barberton, Durban, and East London. A third of the Cape's governors were Irish, as were many of the judges and politicians. Both the Cape Colony and the Colony of Natal had Irish prime ministers: Sir Thomas Upington, \"The Afrikaner from Cork\"; and Sir Albert Hime, from Kilcoole in County Wicklow. Irish Cape Governors included Lord Macartney, Lord Caledon and Sir John Francis Cradock.\nHenry Nourse, a shipowner at the Cape, brought out a small party of Irish settlers in 1818. Many Irish were with the 1820 British settlers in the Eastern Cape frontier with the Xhosa. In 1823, John Ingram brought out 146 Irish from Cork. Single Irish women were sent to the Cape on a few occasions. Twenty arrived in November 1849 and 46 arrived in March 1851. The majority arrived in November 1857 aboard . A large contingent of Irish troops fought in the Anglo-Boer War on both sides and a few of them stayed in South Africa after the war. Others returned home but later came out to settle in South Africa with their families. Between 1902 and 1905, there were about 5,000 Irish immigrants. Places in South Africa named after Irish people include Upington, Porterville, Caledon, Cradock, Sir Lowry's Pass, the Biggarsberg Mountains, Donnybrook, Himeville and Belfast.\nJames Rorke was of Irish parentage and was the founder of Rorkes's drift.\nNew Zealand.\nThe diaspora population of Ireland also got a fresh start on the islands of New Zealand during the 19th century. The possibility of striking it rich in the gold mines caused many Irish people to flock to the docks; risking their lives on the long voyage to potential freedom and more importantly self-sufficiency, many Irish also came with the British army during the New Zealand wars. Several places, including Gabriel's Gully and Otago, were mining sites which, with the funding of large companies, allowed for the creation of wages and the appearance of mining towns. Women found jobs as housemaids cleaning the shacks of the single men at work thereby providing a second income to the Irish family household. The subsequent money accumulated with regards to this would allow for chain migration for the rest of the family left behind.\nThe transition to New Zealand was made easier due to the overexposure that the Irish had previously had with colonialism. They ventured upwards to the British ports, settling temporarily to accumulate the necessary finances before moving onwards towards the banks of the far away island. In doing so, they not only exposed themselves to the form of British form of government but likewise to capitalism. This aided to further the simplicity of the transition for the dispersed population.\nThe government aided through the use of both promissory notes and land grants. By promising to pay for the passage of a family the government ensured that the island would be populated and a British colony would be formed. Free passage was installed for women first between the ages of 15 and 35, while males between the ages of 18 and 40 years of age would be promised a certain number of acres of land upon arrival in the New World. This was attributed to the installment of the New Zealand Land act. To further aid with the financial burden, free passage to any immigrant was granted after 1874.\nThe Irish diaspora population in New Zealand also resulted in a diminished amount of prejudice against Roman Catholicism compared to that in other British colonies. The lack of embedded hierarchy and social structure allowed for previous sectarian tensions to be dissolved. This can also be attributed to the sheer amount of distance between the respective religions due to the sparseness of the unpopulated area and the sheer size of the islands.\nReligion.\nPaul Cardinal Cullen set out to spread Irish dominance over the English-speaking Roman Catholic Church in the 19th century. The establishment of an 'Irish Episcopal Empire' involved three transnational entities \u2013 the British Empire, the Roman Catholic Church, and the Irish diaspora. Irish clergy, notably Cullen, made particular use of the reach of the British Empire to spread their influence. From the 1830s until his death in 1878, Cullen held several key positions near the top of the Irish hierarchy and influenced Rome's appointment of Irish bishops on four continents.\nWalker (2007) compares Irish immigrant communities in the United States, Australia, New Zealand, Canada, and Great Britain respecting issues of identity and 'Irishness.' Religion remained the major cause of differentiation in all Irish diaspora communities and had the greatest impact on identity, followed by the nature and difficulty of socio-economic conditions faced in each new country and the strength of continued social and political links of Irish immigrants and their descendants with Ireland.\nIn the United States specifically, Irish immigrants were persecuted because of their religion. The Know Nothing Movement sprung up during the time of the Irish's arrival. The Know Nothing Party was formed by Protestants and was the first political party in American history to push against Catholic immigration to the United States, particularly targeting Irish and German immigrants. The Know Nothings fought to limit immigration from traditional Catholic countries, prohibit non-English language speaking on US territory, and create a policy where you must spend 21 years in the US before gaining citizenship. The party faded out of existence relatively quickly, but they are a reminder of the persecution Irish immigrants faced. During the third and fourth waves of immigration, new arrivals faced similar discrimination and the now settled Irish would take part in this persecution of other groups.\nFrom the late 20th century onward, Irish identity abroad became increasingly cultural, non-denominational, and non-political, although many emigrants from Northern Ireland stood apart from this trend. However, Ireland as religious reference point is now increasingly significant in neopagan contexts.\nFamous members of the diaspora.\nPoliticians.\nThis listing is for politicians of Irish nationality or origin, who were or are engaged in the politics of a foreign country. The term Irish diaspora is open to many interpretations. One, preferred by the government of Ireland, is defined in legal terms: the Irish diaspora are those of Irish nationality, mostly but not exclusively Roman Catholic, residing outside the island of Ireland. This includes Irish citizens who have emigrated abroad and their children, who were Irish citizens by descent under Irish law. It also includes their grandchildren in cases. See also Irish military diaspora. (See also Notable Americans of Scotch-Irish descent).\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14563", "revid": "12336988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14563", "title": "Integer", "text": "An integer is the number zero (0), a positive natural number (1, 2, 3, ...), or the negation of a positive natural number (\u22121, \u22122, \u22123, ...). The negations or additive inverses of the positive natural numbers are referred to as negative integers. The set of all integers is often denoted by the boldface Z or blackboard bold \nThe set of natural numbers formula_1 is a subset of formula_2, which in turn is a subset of the set of all rational numbers formula_3, itself a subset of the real numbers &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;. Like the set of natural numbers, the set of integers formula_2 is countably infinite. An integer may be regarded as a real number that can be written without a fractional component. For example, 21, 4, 0, and \u22122048 are integers, while 9.75, , 5/4, and the square root of 2 are not.\nThe integers form the smallest group and the smallest ring containing the natural numbers. In algebraic number theory, the integers are sometimes qualified as rational integers to distinguish them from the more general algebraic integers. In fact, (rational) integers are algebraic integers that are also rational numbers.\nHistory.\nThe word integer comes from the Latin \"integer\" meaning \"whole\" or (literally) \"untouched\", from \"in\" (\"not\") plus \"tangere\" (\"to touch\"). \"Entire\" derives from the same origin via the French word \"entier\", which means both \"entire\" and \"integer\". Historically the term was used for a number that was a multiple of 1, or to the whole part of a mixed number. Only positive integers were considered, making the term synonymous with the natural numbers. The definition of integer expanded over time to include negative numbers as their usefulness was recognized. For example Leonhard Euler in his 1765 \"Elements of Algebra\" defined integers to include both positive and negative numbers.\nThe phrase \"the set of the integers\" was not used before the end of the 19th century, when Georg Cantor introduced the concept of infinite sets and set theory. The use of the letter Z to denote the set of integers comes from the German word \"Zahlen\" (\"numbers\") and has been attributed to David Hilbert. The earliest known use of the notation in a textbook occurs in Alg\u00e8bre written by the collective Nicolas Bourbaki, dating to 1947. The notation was not adopted immediately. For example, another textbook used the letter J, and a 1960 paper used Z to denote the non-negative integers. But by 1961, Z was generally used by modern algebra texts to denote the positive and negative integers.\nThe symbol formula_2 is often annotated to denote various sets, with varying usage amongst different authors: formula_6, formula_7, or formula_8 for the positive integers, formula_9 or formula_10 for non-negative integers, and formula_11 for non-zero integers. Some authors use formula_12 for non-zero integers, while others use it for non-negative integers, or for {\u22121,1} (the group of units of formula_2). Additionally, formula_14 is used to denote either the set of integers modulo \"p\" (i.e., the set of congruence classes of integers), or the set of \"p\"-adic integers.\nThe \"whole numbers\" were synonymous with the integers up until the early 1950s. In the late 1950s, as part of the New Math movement, American elementary school teachers began teaching that \"whole numbers\" referred to the natural numbers, excluding negative numbers, while \"integer\" included the negative numbers. The \"whole numbers\" remain ambiguous to the present day.\nAlgebraic properties.\nLike the natural numbers, formula_2 is closed under the operations of addition and multiplication, that is, the sum and product of any two integers is an integer. However, with the inclusion of the negative natural numbers (and importantly, 0), formula_2, unlike the natural numbers, is also closed under subtraction.\nThe integers form a ring which is the most basic one, in the following sense: for any ring, there is a unique ring homomorphism from the integers into this ring. This universal property, namely to be an initial object in the category of rings, characterizes the ring\u00a0formula_2. This unique homomorphism is injective if and only if the characteristic of the ring is zero. It follows that every ring of characteristic zero contains a subring isomorphic to &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, which is its smallest subring.\nformula_2 is not closed under division, since the quotient of two integers (e.g., 1 divided by 2) need not be an integer. Although the natural numbers are closed under exponentiation, the integers are not (since the result can be a fraction when the exponent is negative).\nThe following table lists some of the basic properties of addition and multiplication for any integers \"a\", \"b\", and \"c\":\nThe first five properties listed above for addition say that formula_2, under addition, is an abelian group. It is also a cyclic group, since every non-zero integer can be written as a finite sum 1 + 1 + ... + 1 or (\u22121) + (\u22121) + ... + (\u22121). In fact, formula_2 under addition is the \"only\" infinite cyclic group\u2014in the sense that any infinite cyclic group is isomorphic to formula_2.\nThe first four properties listed above for multiplication say that formula_2 under multiplication is a commutative monoid. However, not every integer has a multiplicative inverse (as is the case of the number 2), which means that formula_2 under multiplication is not a group.\nAll the rules from the above property table (except for the last), when taken together, say that formula_2 together with addition and multiplication is a commutative ring with unity. It is the prototype of all objects of such algebraic structure. Only those equalities of expressions are true in\u00a0formula_2 for all values of variables, which are true in any unital commutative ring. Certain non-zero integers map to zero in certain rings.\nThe lack of zero divisors in the integers (last property in the table) means that the commutative ring\u00a0formula_2 is an integral domain.\nThe lack of multiplicative inverses, which is equivalent to the fact that formula_2 is not closed under division, means that formula_2 is \"not\" a field. The smallest field containing the integers as a subring is the field of rational numbers. The process of constructing the rationals from the integers can be mimicked to form the field of fractions of any integral domain. And back, starting from an algebraic number field (an extension of rational numbers), its ring of integers can be extracted, which includes formula_2 as its subring.\nAlthough ordinary division is not defined on formula_2, the division \"with remainder\" is defined on them. It is called Euclidean division, and possesses the following important property: given two integers \"a\" and \"b\" with \"b\" \u2260 0, there exist unique integers \"q\" and \"r\" such that \"a\" \n \"q\" \u00d7 \"b\" + \"r\" and 0 \u2264 \"r\" &lt; |\"b\"|, where |\"b\"| denotes the absolute value of \"b\". The integer \"q\" is called the \"quotient\" and \"r\" is called the \"remainder\" of the division of \"a\" by \"b\". The Euclidean algorithm for computing greatest common divisors works by a sequence of Euclidean divisions.\nThe above says that formula_2 is a Euclidean domain. This implies that formula_2 is a principal ideal domain, and any positive integer can be written as the products of primes in an essentially unique way. This is the fundamental theorem of arithmetic.\nOrder-theoretic properties.\nformula_2 is a totally ordered set without upper or lower bound. The ordering of formula_2 is given by:\n... \u22123 &lt; \u22122 &lt; \u22121 &lt; 0 &lt; 1 &lt; 2 &lt; 3 &lt; ...\nAn integer is \"positive\" if it is greater than zero, and \"negative\" if it is less than zero. Zero is defined as neither negative nor positive.\nThe ordering of integers is compatible with the algebraic operations in the following way:\nThus it follows that formula_2 together with the above ordering is an ordered ring.\nThe integers are the only nontrivial totally ordered abelian group whose positive elements are well-ordered. This is equivalent to the statement that any Noetherian valuation ring is either a field\u2014or a discrete valuation ring.\nConstruction.\nTraditional development.\nIn elementary school teaching, integers are often intuitively defined as the union of the (positive) natural numbers, zero, and the negations of the natural numbers. This can be formalized as follows. First construct the set of natural numbers according to the Peano axioms, call this formula_36. Then construct a set formula_37 which is disjoint from formula_36 and in one-to-one correspondence with formula_36 via a function formula_40. For example, take formula_37 to be the ordered pairs formula_42 with the mapping formula_43. Finally let 0 be some object not in formula_36 or formula_37, for example the ordered pair (0,0). Then the integers are defined to be the union formula_46. \nThe traditional arithmetic operations can then be defined on the integers in a piecewise fashion, for each of positive numbers, negative numbers, and zero. For example negation is defined as follows:\nformula_47\nThe traditional style of definition leads to many different cases (each arithmetic operation needs to be defined on each combination of types of integer) and makes it tedious to prove that integers obey the various laws of arithmetic. \nEquivalence classes of ordered pairs.\nIn modern set-theoretic mathematics, a more abstract construction allowing one to define arithmetical operations without any case distinction is often used instead. The integers can thus be formally constructed as the equivalence classes of ordered pairs of natural numbers (\"a\",\"b\").\nThe intuition is that (\"a\",\"b\") stands for the result of subtracting \"b\" from \"a\". To confirm our expectation that 1 \u2212 2 and 4 \u2212 5 denote the same number, we define an equivalence relation ~ on these pairs with the following rule:\nformula_48\nprecisely when\nformula_49.\nAddition and multiplication of integers can be defined in terms of the equivalent operations on the natural numbers; by using [(\"a\",\"b\")] to denote the equivalence class having (\"a\",\"b\") as a member, one has:\nformula_50.\nformula_51.\nThe negation (or additive inverse) of an integer is obtained by reversing the order of the pair:\nformula_52.\nHence subtraction can be defined as the addition of the additive inverse:\nformula_53.\nThe standard ordering on the integers is given by:\nformula_54 if and only if formula_55\nOther approaches.\nIn theoretical computer science, other approaches for the construction of integers are used by automated theorem provers and term rewrite engines. Integers are represented as algebraic terms built using a few basic operations (e.g., zero, succ, pred) and using natural numbers, which are assumed to be already constructed (using the Peano approach).\nThere exist at least ten such constructions of signed integers. These constructions differ in several ways: the number of basic operations used for the construction, the number (usually, between 0 and 2), and the types of arguments accepted by these operations; the presence or absence of natural numbers as arguments of some of these operations, and the fact that these operations are free constructors or not, i.e., that the same integer can be represented using only one or many algebraic terms.\nThe technique for the construction of integers presented in the previous section corresponds to the particular case where there is a single basic operation pairformula_56 that takes as arguments two natural numbers formula_57 and formula_58, and returns an integer (equal to formula_59). This operation is not free since the integer 0 can be written pair(0,0), or pair(1,1), or pair(2,2), etc.. This technique of construction is used by the proof assistant Isabelle; however, many other tools use alternative construction techniques, notable those based upon free constructors, which are simpler and can be implemented more efficiently in computers.\nComputer science.\nAn integer is often a primitive data type in computer languages. However, integer data types can only represent a subset of all integers, since practical computers are of finite capacity. Also, in the common two's complement representation, the inherent definition of sign distinguishes between \"negative\" and \"non-negative\" rather than \"negative, positive, and\u00a00\". (It is, however, certainly possible for a computer to determine whether an integer value is truly positive.) Fixed length integer approximation data types (or subsets) are denoted \"int\" or Integer in several programming languages (such as Algol68, C, Java, Delphi, etc.).\nVariable-length representations of integers, such as bignums, can store any integer that fits in the computer's memory. Other integer data types are implemented with a fixed size, usually a number of bits which is a power of\u00a02 (4, 8, 16, etc.) or a memorable number of decimal digits (e.g., 9 or\u00a010).\nCardinality.\nThe set of integers is countably infinite, meaning it is possible to pair each integer with a unique natural number. An example of such a pairing is\n(0,\u20091), (1,\u20092), (\u22121,\u20093), (2,\u20094), (\u22122,\u20095), (3,\u20096), .&amp;hairsp;.&amp;hairsp;.&amp;hairsp;,(1&amp;hairsp;\u2212\u2009\"k\",\u20092\"k\"\u2009\u2212&amp;hairsp;1), (\"k\",\u20092\"k\"&amp;hairsp;), .&amp;hairsp;.&amp;hairsp;.\nMore technically, the cardinality of formula_2 is said to equal \u21350 (aleph-null). The pairing between elements of formula_2 and formula_1 is called a bijection.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n\"This article incorporates material from Integer on PlanetMath, which is licensed under the .\""}
{"id": "14566", "revid": "50223174", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14566", "title": "Impressionism in music", "text": "Movement in Western classical music\nImpressionism in music was a movement among various composers in Western classical music (mainly during the late 19th and early 20th centuries) whose music focuses on mood and atmosphere, \"conveying the moods and emotions aroused by the subject rather than a detailed tone\u2010picture\". \"Impressionism\" is a philosophical and aesthetic term borrowed from late 19th-century French painting after Monet's \"Impression, Sunrise\". Composers were labeled Impressionists by analogy to the Impressionist painters who use starkly contrasting colors, effect of light on an object, blurry foreground and background, flattening perspective, etc. to make the observer focus their attention on the overall impression.\nThe most prominent feature in musical Impressionism is the use of \"color\", or in musical terms, timbre, which can be achieved through orchestration, harmonic usage, texture, etc. Other elements of musical Impressionism also involve new chord combinations, ambiguous tonality, extended harmonies, use of modes and exotic scales, parallel motion, extra-musicality, and evocative titles such as \u201c\"Reflets dans l'eau\"\u201d\n(\u201cReflections on the water\u201d), \u201c\"Brouillards\"\u201d (\u201cMists\u201d), etc.\nHistory.\nClaude Debussy and Maurice Ravel are two leading figures in Impressionism, though Debussy rejected this label (in a 1908 letter to Jacques Durand he wrote \"imbeciles call [what I am trying to write in \"Images\"] 'impressionism', a term employed with the utmost inaccuracy, especially by art critics who use it as a label to stick on Turner, the finest creator of mystery in the whole of art!\") and Ravel displayed discomfort with it, at one point claiming that it could not be adequately applied to music at all. Debussy's Impressionist works typically \"evoke a mood, feeling, atmosphere, or scene\" by creating musical images through characteristic motifs, harmony, non-diatonic scales (e.g., whole-tone and pentatonic scales), instrumental timbre, large unresolved chords (e.g., 9ths, 11ths, 13ths), parallel motion, ambiguous tonality, chromaticism, heavy use of the piano pedals, and other elements. \u201cThe perception of Debussy\u2019s compositional language as decidedly post-romantic/Impressionistic\u2014nuanced, understated, and subtle\u2014is firmly solidified among today\u2019s musicians and well-informed audiences.\" Some Impressionist composers, Debussy and Ravel in particular, are also labeled as symbolist composers. One trait shared with both aesthetic trends is \"a sense of detached observation: rather than expressing deeply felt emotion or telling a story\"; as in symbolist poetry, the normal syntax is usually disrupted and individual images that carry the work's meaning are evoked.\nIn 1912, the French composer Ernest Fanelli (1860\u20131917) received significant attention and coverage in the Parisian press following a performance of a symphonic poem he wrote in 1886, titled \"Th\u00e8bes\", incorporating elements associated with Impressionism, such as extended chords and whole-tone scales. Ravel was unimpressed by Fanelli's novelties, maintaining that these were already utilized by past composers such as Franz Liszt. He also opined that Fanelli's Impressionism stemmed from Hector Berlioz rather than Liszt or Russian composers.\nOther composers linked to Impressionism include Lili Boulanger, Isaac Alb\u00e9niz, Frederick Delius, Paul Dukas, Alexander Scriabin, Manuel de Falla, John Alden Carpenter, Ottorino Respighi, Albert Roussel, Karol Szymanowski, Charles Tomlinson Griffes, and Federico Mompou. The Finnish composer Jean Sibelius is also associated with Impressionism, and his tone poem \"The Swan of Tuonela\" (1893) predates Debussy's \"Pr\u00e9lude \u00e0 l'apr\u00e8s-midi d'un faune\" (regarded as a seminal work of musical Impressionism) by a year. The American composer Howard Hanson also borrowed from both Sibelius and Impressionism generally in works such as his Second Symphony.\nCharacteristics.\nOne of the most important tools of musical Impressionism was the tensionless harmony. The dissonance of chords was not resolved, but was used as timbre. These chords were often shifted parallel. In the melodic field the whole tone scale, the pentatonic and modal scales were used. The melodics were characterized by their circular melodic movements. The timbre became the stylistic device of Impressionism instead of concise themes or other traditional forms.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14567", "revid": "31192532", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14567", "title": "International trade", "text": "Exchange across international borders\nInternational trade is the exchange of capital, goods, and services across international borders or territories because there is a need or want of goods or services. \nIn most countries, such trade represents a significant share of gross domestic product (GDP). While international trade has existed throughout history (for example Uttarapatha, Silk Road, Amber Road, salt roads), its economic, social, and political importance has been on the rise in recent centuries.\nCarrying out trade at an international level is a complex process when compared to domestic trade. When trade takes place between two or more states, factors like currency, government policies, economy, judicial system, laws, and markets influence trade.\nTo ease and justify the process of trade between countries of different economic standing in the modern era, some international economic organizations were formed, such as the World Trade Organization. These organizations work towards the facilitation and growth of international trade. Statistical services of intergovernmental and supranational organizations and governmental statistical agencies publish official statistics on international trade.\nCharacteristics of global trade.\nA product that is transferred or sold from a party in one country to a party in another country is an export from the originating country, and an import to the country receiving that product. Imports and exports are accounted for in a country's current account in the balance of payments.\nTrading globally may give consumers and countries the opportunity to be exposed to new markets and products. Almost every kind of product can be found in the international market, for example: food, clothes, spare parts, oil, jewellery, wine, stocks, currencies, and water. Services are also traded, such as in tourism, banking, consulting, and transportation.\nAdvanced technology (including transportation), globalization, industrialization, outsourcing and multinational corporations have major impacts on the international trade systems.\nDifferences from domestic trade.\nInternational trade is, in principle, not different from domestic trade as the motivation and the behavior of parties involved in a trade do not change fundamentally regardless of whether trade is across a border or not.\nHowever, in practical terms, carrying out trade at an international level is typically a more complex process than domestic trade. The main difference is that international trade is typically more costly than domestic trade. This is due to the fact that cross-border trade typically incurs additional costs such as explicit tariffs as well as explicit or implicit non-tariff barriers such as time costs (due to border delays), language and cultural differences, product safety, the legal system, and so on.\nAnother difference between domestic and international trade is that factors of production such as capital and labor are often more mobile within a country than across countries. Thus, international trade is mostly restricted to trade in goods and services, and only to a lesser extent to trade in capital, labour, or other factors of production. Trade in goods and services can serve as a substitute for trade in factors of production. Instead of importing a factor of production, a country can import goods that make intensive use of that factor of production and thus embody it. An example of this is the import of labor-intensive goods by the United States from China. Instead of importing Chinese labor, the United States imports goods that were produced with Chinese labor. One report in 2010, suggested that international trade was increased when a country hosted a network of immigrants, but the trade effect was weakened when the immigrants became assimilated into their new country.\nHistory.\nThe history of international trade chronicles notable events that have affected trading among various economies.\nTheories and models.\nThere are several models that seek to explain the factors behind international trade, the welfare consequences of trade and the pattern of trade.\nLargest countries or regions by total international trade.\nThe following table is a list of the 30 largest trading states according to the World Trade Organization in 2024.\nTop traded commodities by value (exports).\nSource: International Trade Centre\nObservances.\nIn the US, starting in 1935, the various U.S. presidents have held \"World Trade Week\" observances to promote large and small companies to be more involved with the export and import of goods and services. This tradition was preceded by a local observance of \"Foreign Trade Week\" by the Los Angeles Area Chamber of Commerce that originated in 1927 as an expansion of United States National Maritime Day.\nEvery year the President declares the third week of May to be World Trade Week.\nInternational trade vs local production.\nFood security.\nThe trade-offs between local food production and distant food production are controversial, with limited studies comparing environmental impact and scientists cautioning that regionally specific environmental impacts should be considered. A 2020 study indicated that local food crop production alone cannot meet the demand for most food crops with \"current production and consumption patterns\" and the locations of food production at the time of the study for 72\u201389% of the global population and 100 km radiuses as of early 2020. Studies found that food miles are a relatively minor factor for carbon emissions, albeit increased food localization may also enable additional, more significant, environmental benefits such as recycling of energy, water, and nutrients. For specific foods regional differences in harvest seasons may make it more environmentally friendly to import from distant regions than more local production and storage or local production in greenhouses.\nQualitative differences and economic aspects.\nQualitative differences between substitutive products of different production regions may exist due to different legal requirements and quality standards or different levels of controllability by local production- and governance-systems which may have aspects of security beyond resource security, environmental protection, product quality and product design and health. The process of transforming supply as well as labor rights may differ as well.\nLocal production has been reported to increase local employment in many cases. A 2018 study claimed that international trade can increase local employment. A 2016 study found that local employment and total labor income in both manufacturing and nonmanufacturing were negatively affected by rising exposure to imports.\nLocal production in high-income countries, rather than distant regions may require higher wages for workers. Higher wages incentivize automation which could allow for automated workers' time to be reallocated by society and its economic mechanisms or be converted into leisure-like time.\nSpecialization, production efficiency and regional differences.\nLocal production may require knowledge transfer, technology transfer and may not be able to compete in efficiency initially with specialized, established industries and businesses, or in consumer demand without policy measures such as eco-tariffs. Regional differences may cause specific regions to be more suitable for a specific production, thereby increasing the advantages of specific trade over specific local production. Forms of local products that are highly localized may not be able to meet the efficiency of more large-scale, highly consolidated production in terms of efficiency, including environmental impact.\nResource security.\nA systematic, and possibly first large-scale, cross-sectoral analysis of water, energy and land in security in 189 countries that links total and sectorial consumption to sources showed that countries and sectors are highly exposed to over-exploited, insecure, and degraded such resources with economic globalization having decreased security of global supply chains. The 2020 study finds that most countries exhibit greater exposure to resource risks via international trade \u2013 mainly from remote production sources \u2013 and that diversifying trading partners is unlikely to help countries and sectors to reduce these or to improve their resource self-sufficiency.\nIllicit trade.\nIllegal gold trade.\nA number of people in Africa, including children, were using informal or \"artisanal\" methods to produce gold. While millions were making a livelihood through this small-scale mining, governments of Ghana, Tanzania and Zambia complained about the increase in illegal production and gold smuggling. Sometimes the procedure involved criminal operations and even human and environmental cost. Investigative reports based on Africa's export data revealed that gold in large quantities is smuggled out of the country through the United Arab Emirates, without any taxes being paid to the producing states. Analysis also reflected discrepancies in the amount exported from Africa and the total gold imported into the UAE.\nIn July 2020, a report by Swissaid highlighted that the Dubai-based precious metal refining firms, including Kaloti Jewellery International Group and Trust One Financial Services (T1FS), received most of their gold from poor African states like Sudan. The gold mines in Sudan were seldom under the militias involved in war crimes and human rights abuses. The Swissaid report also highlighted that the illicit gold coming into Dubai from Africa is imported in large quantities by the world's largest refinery in Switzerland, Valcambi.\nAnother report in March 2022 revealed the contradiction between the lucrative gold trade of West African countries and the illicit dealings. Like Sudan, Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), Ghana and other states, discrepancies were recorded between the gold production in Mali and its trade with Dubai, UAE. The third largest gold exporter in Africa, Mali imposed taxes only on the first of gold exports per month, which allowed several small-scale miners to enjoy tax exemptions and smuggle gold worth millions. In 2014, Mali's gold production was 45.8 tonnes, while the UAE's gold imports were 59.9 tonnes.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nData.\nStatistics from intergovernmental sources.\nData on the value of exports and imports and their quantities often broken down by detailed lists of products are available in statistical collections on international trade published by the statistical services of intergovernmental and supranational organisations and national statistical institutes. The definitions and methodological concepts applied for the various statistical collections on international trade often differ in terms of definition (e.g. special trade vs. general trade) and coverage (reporting thresholds, inclusion of trade in services, estimates for smuggled goods and cross-border provision of illegal services). Metadata providing information on definitions and methods are often published along with the data."}
{"id": "14568", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14568", "title": "International Trade/Risks", "text": ""}
{"id": "14569", "revid": "48914397", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14569", "title": "Interpolation", "text": "Method for estimating new data within known data points\nIn the mathematical field of numerical analysis, interpolation is a type of estimation, a method of constructing (finding) new data points based on the range of a discrete set of known data points.\nIn engineering and science, one often has a number of data points, obtained by sampling or experimentation, which represent the values of a function for a limited number of values of the independent variable. It is often required to interpolate; that is, estimate the value of that function for an intermediate value of the independent variable.\nA closely related problem is the approximation of a complicated function by a simple function. Suppose the formula for some given function is known, but too complicated to evaluate efficiently. A few data points from the original function can be interpolated to produce a simpler function which is still fairly close to the original. The resulting gain in simplicity may outweigh the loss from interpolation error and give better performance in calculation process.\nExample.\nThis table gives some values of an unknown function formula_1.\nInterpolation provides a means of estimating the function at intermediate points, such as formula_2\nWe describe some methods of interpolation, differing in such properties as: accuracy, cost, number of data points needed, and smoothness of the resulting interpolant function.\nPiecewise constant interpolation.\nThe simplest interpolation method is to locate the nearest data value, and assign the same value. In simple problems, this method is unlikely to be used, as linear interpolation (see below) is almost as easy, but in higher-dimensional multivariate interpolation, this could be a favourable choice for its speed and simplicity.\nLinear interpolation.\nOne of the simplest methods is linear interpolation (sometimes known as lerp). Consider the above example of estimating \"f\"(2.5). Since 2.5 is midway between 2 and 3, it is reasonable to take \"f\"(2.5) midway between \"f\"(2) = 0.9093 and \"f\"(3) = 0.1411, which yields 0.5252.\nGenerally, linear interpolation takes two data points, say (\"x\"\"a\",\"y\"\"a\") and (\"x\"\"b\",\"y\"\"b\"), and the interpolant is given by:\nformula_3\nformula_4\nformula_5\nThis previous equation states that the slope of the new line between formula_6 and formula_7 is the same as the slope of the line between formula_6 and formula_9\nLinear interpolation is quick and easy, but it is not very precise. Another disadvantage is that the interpolant is not differentiable at the point \"x\"\"k\".\nThe following error estimate shows that linear interpolation is not very precise. Denote the function which we want to interpolate by \"g\", and suppose that \"x\" lies between \"x\"\"a\" and \"x\"\"b\" and that \"g\" is twice continuously differentiable. Then the linear interpolation error is\nformula_10\nIn words, the error is proportional to the square of the distance between the data points. The error in some other methods, including polynomial interpolation and spline interpolation (described below), is proportional to higher powers of the distance between the data points. These methods also produce smoother interpolants.\nPolynomial interpolation.\nPolynomial interpolation is a generalization of linear interpolation. Note that the linear interpolant is a linear function. We now replace this interpolant with a polynomial of higher degree.\nConsider again the problem given above. The following sixth degree polynomial goes through all the seven points:\nformula_11\nSubstituting \"x\" = 2.5, we find that \"f\"(2.5) = ~0.59678.\nGenerally, if we have \"n\" data points, there is exactly one polynomial of degree at most \"n\"\u22121 going through all the data points. The interpolation error is proportional to the distance between the data points to the power \"n\". Furthermore, the interpolant is a polynomial and thus infinitely differentiable. So, we see that polynomial interpolation overcomes most of the problems of linear interpolation.\nHowever, polynomial interpolation also has some disadvantages. Calculating the interpolating polynomial is computationally expensive (see computational complexity) compared to linear interpolation. Furthermore, polynomial interpolation may exhibit oscillatory artifacts, especially at the end points (see Runge's phenomenon).\nPolynomial interpolation can estimate local maxima and minima that are outside the range of the samples, unlike linear interpolation. For example, the interpolant above has a local maximum at \"x\" \u2248 1.566, \"f\"(\"x\") \u2248 1.003 and a local minimum at \"x\" \u2248 4.708, \"f\"(\"x\") \u2248 \u22121.003. However, these maxima and minima may exceed the theoretical range of the function; for example, a function that is always positive may have an interpolant with negative values, and whose inverse therefore contains false vertical asymptotes.\nMore generally, the shape of the resulting curve, especially for very high or low values of the independent variable, may be contrary to commonsense; that is, to what is known about the experimental system which has generated the data points. These disadvantages can be reduced by using spline interpolation or restricting attention to Chebyshev polynomials.\nSpline interpolation.\nLinear interpolation uses a linear function for each of intervals [\"x\"\"k\",\"x\"\"k+1\"]. Spline interpolation uses low-degree polynomials in each of the intervals, and chooses the polynomial pieces such that they fit smoothly together. The resulting function is called a spline.\nFor instance, the natural cubic spline is piecewise cubic and twice continuously differentiable. Furthermore, its second derivative is zero at the end points. The natural cubic spline interpolating the points in the table above is given by\n formula_12\nIn this case we get \"f\"(2.5)\u00a0=\u00a00.5972.\nLike polynomial interpolation, spline interpolation incurs a smaller error than linear interpolation, while the interpolant is smoother and easier to evaluate than the high-degree polynomials used in polynomial interpolation. However, the global nature of the basis functions leads to ill-conditioning. This is completely mitigated by using splines of compact support, such as are implemented in Boost.Math and discussed in Kress.\nMimetic interpolation.\nDepending on the underlying discretisation of fields, different interpolants may be required. In contrast to other interpolation methods, which estimate functions on target points, mimetic interpolation evaluates the integral of fields on target lines, areas or volumes, depending on the type of field (scalar, vector, pseudo-vector or pseudo-scalar).\nA key feature of mimetic interpolation is that vector calculus identities are satisfied, including Stokes' theorem and the divergence theorem. As a result, mimetic interpolation conserves line, area and volume integrals. Conservation of line integrals might be desirable when interpolating the electric field, for instance, since the line integral gives the electric potential difference at the endpoints of the integration path. Mimetic interpolation ensures that the error of estimating the line integral of an electric field is the same as the error obtained by interpolating the potential at the end points of the integration path, regardless of the length of the integration path. \nLinear, bilinear and trilinear interpolation are also considered mimetic, even if it is the field values that are conserved (not the integral of the field). Apart from linear interpolation, area weighted interpolation can be considered one of the first mimetic interpolation methods to have been developed.\nFunctional interpolation.\nThe Theory of Functional Connections (TFC) is a mathematical framework specifically developed for https://. Given any interpolant that satisfies a set of constraints, TFC derives a functional that represents the entire family of interpolants satisfying those constraints, including those that are discontinuous or partially defined. These functionals identify the subspace of functions where the solution to a constrained optimization problem resides. Consequently, TFC transforms constrained optimization problems into equivalent unconstrained formulations. This transformation has proven highly effective in the solution of differential equations. TFC achieves this by constructing a constrained functional (a function of a free function), that inherently satisfies given constraints regardless of the expression of the free function. This simplifies solving various types of equations and significantly improves the efficiency and accuracy of methods like Physics-Informed Neural Networks (PINNs). TFC offers advantages over traditional methods like Lagrange multipliers and spectral methods by directly addressing constraints analytically and avoiding iterative procedures, although it cannot currently handle inequality constraints.\nFunction approximation.\nInterpolation is a common way to approximate functions. Given a function formula_13 with a set of points formula_14 one can form a function formula_15 such that formula_16 for formula_17 (that is, that formula_18 interpolates formula_19 at these points). In general, an interpolant need not be a good approximation, but there are well known and often reasonable conditions where it will. For example, if formula_20 (four times continuously differentiable) then cubic spline interpolation has an error bound given by formula_21 where formula_22 and formula_23 is a constant.\nVia Gaussian processes.\nGaussian process is a powerful non-linear interpolation tool. Many popular interpolation tools are actually equivalent to particular Gaussian processes. Gaussian processes can be used not only for fitting an interpolant that passes exactly through the given data points but also for regression; that is, for fitting a curve through noisy data. In the geostatistics community Gaussian process regression is also known as Kriging.\nInverse Distance Weighting.\nInverse Distance Weighting (IDW) is a spatial interpolation method that estimates values based on nearby data points, with closer points having more influence. It uses an inverse power law for weighting, where higher power values emphasize local effects, while lower values create a smoother surface. IDW is widely used in GIS, meteorology, and environmental modeling for its simplicity but may produce artifacts in clustered or uneven data.\nOther forms.\nOther forms of interpolation can be constructed by picking a different class of interpolants. For instance, rational interpolation is interpolation by rational functions using Pad\u00e9 approximant, and trigonometric interpolation is interpolation by trigonometric polynomials using Fourier series. Another possibility is to use wavelets.\nThe Whittaker\u2013Shannon interpolation formula can be used if the number of data points is infinite or if the function to be interpolated has compact support.\nSometimes, we know not only the value of the function that we want to interpolate, at some points, but also its derivative. This leads to Hermite interpolation problems.\nWhen each data point is itself a function, it can be useful to see the interpolation problem as a partial advection problem between each data point. This idea leads to the displacement interpolation problem used in transportation theory.\nIn higher dimensions.\nMultivariate interpolation is the interpolation of functions of more than one variable. \nMethods include nearest-neighbor interpolation, bilinear interpolation and bicubic interpolation in two dimensions, and trilinear interpolation in three dimensions.\nThey can be applied to gridded or scattered data. Mimetic interpolation generalizes to formula_24 dimensional spaces where formula_25.\nIn digital signal processing.\nIn the domain of digital signal processing, the term interpolation refers to the process of converting a sampled digital signal (such as a sampled audio signal) to that of a higher sampling rate (Upsampling) using various digital filtering techniques (for example, convolution with a frequency-limited impulse signal). In this application there is a specific requirement that the harmonic content of the original signal be preserved without creating aliased harmonic content of the original signal above the original Nyquist limit of the signal (that is, above fs/2 of the original signal sample rate). An early and fairly elementary discussion on this subject can be found in Rabiner and Crochiere's book \"Multirate Digital Signal Processing\".\nRelated concepts.\nThe term \"extrapolation\" is used to find data points outside the range of known data points.\nIn curve fitting problems, the constraint that the interpolant has to go exactly through the data points is relaxed. It is only required to approach the data points as closely as possible (within some other constraints). This requires parameterizing the potential interpolants and having some way of measuring the error. In the simplest case this leads to least squares approximation.\nApproximation theory studies how to find the best approximation to a given function by another function from some predetermined class, and how good this approximation is. This clearly yields a bound on how well the interpolant can approximate the unknown function.\nGeneralization.\nIf we consider formula_26 as a variable in a topological space, and the function formula_1 mapping to a Banach space, then the problem is treated as \"interpolation of operators\". The classical results about interpolation of operators are the Riesz\u2013Thorin theorem and the Marcinkiewicz theorem. There are also many other subsequent results.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14570", "revid": "28438", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14570", "title": "Intension", "text": "Property or quality connoted by a word, phrase, or another symbol\nIn any of several fields of study that treat the use of signs\u2014for example, in linguistics, logic, mathematics, semantics, semiotics, and philosophy of language\u2014an intension is any property or quality connoted by a word, phrase, or another symbol. In the case of a word, the word's definition often implies an intension. For instance, the intensions of the word \"plant\" include properties such as \"being composed of cellulose (not always true)\", \"alive\", and \"organism\", among others. A \"comprehension\" is the collection of all such intensions.\nOverview.\nThe meaning of a word can be thought of as the bond between the \"idea the word means\" and the \"physical form of the word\". Swiss linguist Ferdinand de Saussure (1857\u20131913) contrasts three concepts:\nWithout intension of some sort, a word has no meaning. For instance, the terms \"rantans\" or \"brillig\" have no intension and hence no meaning. Such terms may be suggestive, but a term can be \"suggestive\" without being meaningful. For instance, \"ran tan\" is an archaic onomatopoeia for chaotic noise or din and may suggest to English speakers a din or meaningless noise, and \"brillig\" though made up by Lewis Carroll may be suggestive of 'brilliant' or 'frigid'. Such terms, it may be argued, are always intensional since they connote the property 'meaningless term', but this is only an apparent paradox and does not constitute a counterexample to the claim that without intension a word has no meaning. Part of its intension is that it has no extension. Intension is analogous to the signified in the Saussurean system, extension to the referent.\nIn philosophical arguments about dualism versus monism, it is noted that thoughts have intensionality and physical objects do not (S. E. Palmer, 1999), but rather have extension in space and time.\nStatement forms.\nA statement-form is simply a form obtained by putting blanks into a sentence where one or more expressions with extensions occur\u2014for instance, \"The quick brown ___ jumped over the lazy ___'s back.\" An instance of the form is a statement obtained by filling the blanks in.\nIntensional statement form.\nAn \"intensional statement-form\" is a statement-form with at least one instance such that substituting co-extensive expressions into it does not always preserve logical value. An \"intensional statement\" is a statement that is an instance of an intensional statement-form. Here co-extensive expressions are expressions with the same extension.\nThat is, a statement-form is intensional if it has, as one of its instances, a statement for which there are two co-extensive expressions (in the relevant language) such that one of them occurs in the statement, and if the other one is put in its place (uniformly, so that it replaces the former expression wherever it occurs in the statement), the result is a (different) statement with a different logical value. An intensional statement, then, is an instance of such a form; it has the same form as a statement in which substitution of co-extensive terms fails to preserve logical value.\nExamples.\nThe first example has a different logical value if the term \"Mark Twain\" is replaced with the co-extensive term \"The author of \"Corn-pone Opinions\"\", since not everyone who has read \"Huckleberry Finn\" knows that the same author also wrote \"Corn-pone Opinions\".\nThe second example has a different logical value if the term \"stargazing\" is replaced with the co-extensive term \"looking at luminous spheroids of plasma held together by self-gravity\", since Aristotle would not have been aware of this definition of the term \"star\", and therefore would not have used it in a remark.\nThe intensional statements above feature expressions like \"knows\", \"possible\", and \"pleased\". Such expressions always, or nearly always, produce intensional statements when added (in some intelligible manner) to an extensional statement, and thus they (or more complex expressions like \"It is possible that\") are sometimes called \"intensional operators\". A large class of intensional statements, but by no means all, can be spotted from the fact that they contain intensional operators.\nExtensional statement form.\nAn \"extensional\" statement is a non-intensional statement. Substitution of co-extensive expressions into it always preserves logical value. A language is intensional if it contains intensional statements, and extensional otherwise. All natural languages are intensional. The only extensional languages are artificially constructed languages used in mathematical logic or for other special purposes and small fragments of natural languages.\nExamples.\nNote that if \"Samuel Clemens\" is put into (1) in place of \"Mark Twain\", the result is as true as the original statement. It should be clear that no matter what is put for \"Mark Twain\", so long as it is a singular term picking out the same man, the statement remains true. Likewise, we can put in place of the predicate any other predicate belonging to Mark Twain and only to Mark Twain, without changing the logical value. \nFor (2), the term \"stargazing\" can now be substituted with \"looking at luminous spheroids of plasma held together by self-gravity\", since Aristotle personally being aware of the two terms being co-extensive is no longer relevant to the logical value of the sentence.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14573", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14573", "title": "Isaac Asimov", "text": "American writer and biochemist (1920\u20131992)\nIsaac Asimov ( ; c.\u2009January 2, 1920\u00a0\u2013 April 6, 1992) was an American writer and professor of biochemistry at Boston University. During his lifetime, Asimov was considered one of the \"Big Three\" science fiction writers, along with Robert A. Heinlein and Arthur C. Clarke. A prolific writer, he wrote or edited more than 500 books. He also wrote an estimated 90,000 letters and postcards. Best known for his hard science fiction, Asimov also wrote mysteries and fantasy, as well as popular science and other non-fiction.\nAsimov's most famous work is the \"Foundation\" series, the first three books of which won the one-time Hugo Award for \"Best All-Time Series\" in 1966. His other major series are the \"Galactic Empire\" series and the \"Robot\" series, which include major works such as \"The Caves of Steel\" and \"The Naked Sun\", both written in the mid-1950s. The \"Galactic Empire\" novels are set in the much earlier history of the same fictional universe as the \"Foundation\" series. Later, with \"Foundation and Earth\" (1986), he linked this distant future to the \"Robot\" series, creating a unified \"future history\" for his works. He also wrote more than 380\u00a0short stories, including the social science fiction novelette \"Nightfall\", which in 1964 was voted the best short science fiction story of all time by the Science Fiction Writers of America. Asimov wrote the \"Lucky Starr\" series of juvenile science-fiction novels using the pen name Paul French.\nMost of his popular science books explain concepts in a historical way, going as far back as possible to a time when the science in question was at its simplest stage. Examples include \"Guide to Science\", the three-volume \"Understanding Physics\", and \"Asimov's Chronology of Science and Discovery\". He wrote on numerous other scientific and non-scientific topics, such as chemistry, astronomy, mathematics, history, biblical exegesis, and literary criticism.\nHe was the president of the American Humanist Association. Several entities have been named in his honor, including the asteroid (5020) Asimov, a crater on Mars, a Brooklyn elementary school, Honda's humanoid robot ASIMO, and four literary awards.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSurname.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There are three very simple English words: 'Has', 'him' and 'of'. Put them together like this\u2014'has-him-of'\u2014and say it in the ordinary fashion. Now leave out the two h's and say it again and you have Asimov.\u2014\u200a\nAsimov's family name derives from the first part of (), meaning 'winter grain' (specifically rye), in which his great-great-great-grandfather dealt, with the Russian surname ending \"-ov\" added. is spelled in the Cyrillic alphabet. When the family arrived in the United States in 1923 and their name had to be spelled in the Latin alphabet, Asimov's father spelled it with an S, believing this letter to be pronounced like Z (as in German), and so it became Asimov. This later inspired one of Asimov's short stories, \"Spell My Name with an S\".\nAsimov refused early suggestions of using a more common name as a pseudonym, believing that its recognizability helped his career. After becoming famous, he often met readers who believed that \"Isaac Asimov\" was a distinctive pseudonym created by an author with a common name.\nLife.\nEarly life.\nAsimov was born in Petrovichi, Russian SFSR, on an unknown date between October 4, 1919, and January 2, 1920, inclusive. Asimov celebrated his birthday on January 2.\nAsimov's parents were Russian Jews, Anna Rachel (n\u00e9e Berman) and Judah Asimov, the son of a miller. He was named Isaac after his mother's father, Isaac Berman. Asimov wrote of his father, \"My father, for all his education as an Orthodox Jew, was not Orthodox in his heart\", noting that \"he didn't recite the myriad prayers prescribed for every action, and he never made any attempt to teach them to me.\"\nIn 1921, Asimov and 16 other children in Petrovichi developed double pneumonia. Only Asimov survived. He had two younger siblings: a sister, Marcia (born Manya; June 17, 1922\u00a0\u2013 April 2, 2011), and a brother, Stanley (July 25, 1929\u00a0\u2013 August 16, 1995), who would become vice-president of \"Newsday\".\nAsimov's family travelled to the United States via Liverpool on the RMS \"Baltic\", arriving on February 3, 1923 when he was three years old. He later wrote two essays about his family's arrival in America: \"Ellis Island and I\" (in \"The Tyrannosaurus Prescription\", 1988) and \"Ellis Island: Enter One Immigrant ... Sprouting Measles\" (TV Guide, 1984). His parents spoke Yiddish and English to him; he never learned Russian, his parents using it as a secret language \"when they wanted to discuss something privately that my big ears were not to hear\". Growing up in Brooklyn, New York, Asimov taught himself to read at the age of five (and later taught his sister to read as well, enabling her to enter school in the second grade). His mother got him into first grade a year early by claiming he was born on September 7, 1919. In third grade he learned about the \"error\" and insisted on an official correction of the date to January 2. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1928 at the age of eight.\nAfter becoming established in the U.S., his parents owned a succession of candy stores in which everyone in the family was expected to work. The candy stores sold newspapers and magazines, which Asimov credited as a major influence in his lifelong love of the written word, as it presented him as a child with an unending supply of new reading material (including pulp science fiction magazines) that he could not have otherwise afforded. Asimov began reading science fiction at age nine, at the time that the genre was becoming more science-centered. Asimov was also a frequent patron of the Brooklyn Public Library during his formative years.\nEducation and career.\nAsimov attended New York City public schools from age five, including Boys High School in Brooklyn. Graduating at 15, he attended the City College of New York for several days before accepting a scholarship at Seth Low Junior College. This was a branch of Columbia University in Downtown Brooklyn designed to absorb some of the academically qualified Jewish and Italian-American students who applied to the more prestigious Columbia College but exceeded the unwritten ethnic admission quotas which were common at the time. Originally a zoology major, Asimov switched to chemistry after his first semester because he disapproved of \"dissecting an alley cat\". After Seth Low Junior College closed in 1936, Asimov finished his Bachelor of Science degree at Columbia's Morningside Heights campus (later the Columbia University School of General Studies) in 1939. (In 1983, Dr. Robert Pollack [dean of Columbia College, 1982\u20131989] granted Asimov an honorary doctorate from Columbia College after requiring that Asimov place his foot in a bucket of water to pass the college's swimming requirement.)\nAfter two rounds of rejections by medical schools, Asimov applied to the graduate program in chemistry at Columbia in 1939; initially he was rejected and then only accepted on a probationary basis. He completed his Master of Arts degree in chemistry in 1941 and earned a Doctor of Philosophy degree in chemistry in 1948. During his chemistry studies, he also learned French and German.\nFrom 1942 to 1945 during World War II, between his masters and doctoral studies, Asimov worked as a civilian chemist at the Philadelphia Navy Yard's Naval Air Experimental Station and lived in the Walnut Hill section of West Philadelphia. In September 1945, he was conscripted into the post-war U.S. Army; if he had not had his birth date corrected while at school, he would have been officially 26 years old and ineligible. In 1946, a bureaucratic error caused his military allotment to be stopped, and he was removed from a task force days before it sailed to participate in Operation Crossroads nuclear weapons tests at Bikini Atoll. He was promoted to corporal on July 11 before receiving an honorable discharge on July 26, 1946.\nAfter completing his doctorate and a postdoctoral year with Robert Elderfield, Asimov was offered the position of associate professor of biochemistry at the Boston University School of Medicine. This was in large part due to his years-long correspondence with William Boyd, a former associate professor of biochemistry at Boston University, who initially contacted Asimov to compliment him on his story \"Nightfall\". Upon receiving a promotion to professor of immunochemistry, Boyd reached out to Asimov, requesting him to be his replacement. The initial offer of professorship was withdrawn and Asimov was offered the position of instructor of biochemistry instead, which he accepted. He began work in 1949 with a $5,000 salary (), maintaining this position for several years. By 1952, however, he was making more money as a writer than from the university, and he eventually stopped doing research, confining his university role to lecturing students. In 1955, he was promoted to tenured associate professor. In December 1957, Asimov was dismissed from his teaching post, with effect from June 30, 1958, due to his lack of research. After a struggle over two years, he reached an agreement with the university that he would keep his title and give the opening lecture each year for a biochemistry class. On October 18, 1979, the university honored his writing by promoting him to full professor of biochemistry. Asimov's personal papers from 1965 onward are archived at the university's Mugar Memorial Library, to which he donated them at the request of curator Howard Gotlieb.\nIn 1959, after a recommendation from Arthur Obermayer, Asimov's friend and a scientist on the U.S. missile defense project, Asimov was approached by DARPA to join Obermayer's team. Asimov declined on the grounds that his ability to write freely would be impaired should he receive classified information, but submitted a paper to DARPA titled \"On Creativity\" containing ideas on how government-based science projects could encourage team members to think more creatively.\nPersonal life.\nAsimov met his first wife, Gertrude Blugerman, on a blind date on February 14, 1942, and married her on July 26. The couple lived in an apartment in West Philadelphia while Asimov was employed at the Philadelphia Navy Yard (where two of his co-workers were L. Sprague de Camp and Robert A. Heinlein). Gertrude returned to Brooklyn while he was in the Army, and they both lived there from July 1946 before moving to Stuyvesant Town, Manhattan, in July 1948. They moved to Boston in May 1949, then to nearby suburbs Somerville in July 1949, Waltham in May 1951, and, finally, West Newton in 1956. They had two children, David (born 1951) and Robyn Joan (born 1955). In 1970, they separated and Asimov moved back to New York, this time to the Upper West Side of Manhattan where he lived for the rest of his life. He began seeing Janet O. Jeppson, a psychiatrist and science-fiction writer, and married her on November 30, 1973, two weeks after his divorce from Gertrude.\nAsimov was a claustrophile: he enjoyed small, enclosed spaces. In the third volume of his autobiography, he recalls a childhood desire to own a magazine stand in a New York City Subway station, within which he could enclose himself and listen to the rumble of passing trains while reading.\nAsimov was afraid of flying, doing so only twice: once in the course of his work at the Naval Air Experimental Station and once returning home from O\u02bbahu in 1946. Consequently, he seldom traveled great distances. This phobia influenced several of his fiction works, such as the Wendell Urth mystery stories and the \"Robot\" novels featuring Elijah Baley. In his later years, Asimov found enjoyment traveling on cruise ships, beginning in 1972 when he viewed the Apollo 17 launch from a cruise ship. On several cruises, he was part of the entertainment program, giving science-themed talks aboard ships such as the \"Queen Elizabeth 2\". He sailed to England in June 1974 on the for a trip mostly devoted to lectures in London and Birmingham, though he also found time to visit Stonehenge and Shakespeare's birthplace.\nAsimov was a teetotaler.\nHe was an able public speaker and was regularly invited to give talks about science in his distinct New York accent. He participated in many science fiction conventions, where he was friendly and approachable. He patiently answered tens of thousands of questions and other mail with postcards and was pleased to give autographs. He was of medium height, and stocky build. In his later years, he adopted a signature style of \"mutton-chop\" sideburns. He took to wearing bolo ties after his wife Janet objected to his clip-on bow ties. He never learned to swim or ride a bicycle, but did learn to drive a car after he moved to Boston. In his humor book \"Asimov Laughs Again\", he describes Boston driving as \"anarchy on wheels\".\nAsimov's wide interests included his participation in later years in organizations devoted to the comic operas of Gilbert and Sullivan. Many of his short stories mention or quote Gilbert and Sullivan. He was a prominent member of The Baker Street Irregulars, the leading Sherlock Holmes society, for whom he wrote an essay arguing that Professor Moriarty's work \"The Dynamics of An Asteroid\" involved the willful destruction of an ancient, civilized planet. He was also a member of the male-only literary banqueting club the Trap Door Spiders, which served as the basis of his fictional group of mystery solvers, the Black Widowers. He later used his essay on Moriarty's work as the basis for a Black Widowers story, \"The Ultimate Crime\", which appeared in \"More Tales of the Black Widowers\".\nIn 1984, the American Humanist Association (AHA) named him the Humanist of the Year. He was one of the signers of the \"Humanist Manifesto\". From 1985 until his death in 1992, he served as honorary president of the AHA, and was succeeded by his friend and fellow writer Kurt Vonnegut. He was also a close friend of \"Star Trek\" creator Gene Roddenberry, and earned a screen credit as \"special science consultant\" on \"\" for his advice during production.\nAsimov was a founding member of the Committee for the Scientific Investigation of Claims of the Paranormal, CSICOP (now the Committee for Skeptical Inquiry) and is listed in its Pantheon of Skeptics. In a discussion with James Randi at CSICon 2016 regarding the founding of CSICOP, Kendrick Frazier said that Asimov was \"a key figure in the Skeptical movement who is less well known and appreciated today, but was very much in the public eye back then.\" He said that Asimov's being associated with CSICOP \"gave it immense status and authority\" in his eyes.\nAsimov described Carl Sagan as one of only two people he ever met whose intellect surpassed his own. The other, he claimed, was the computer scientist and artificial intelligence expert Marvin Minsky. Asimov was an on-and-off member and honorary vice president of Mensa International, albeit reluctantly; he described some members of that organization as \"brain-proud and aggressive about their IQs\".\nAfter his father died in 1969, Asimov annually contributed to a Judah Asimov Scholarship Fund at Brandeis University.\nIn 2006, he was named by Carnegie Corporation of New York to the inaugural class of winners of the Great Immigrants Award.\nIllness and death.\nIn 1977, Asimov had a heart attack. In December 1983, he had triple bypass surgery at NYU Medical Center, during which he contracted HIV from a blood transfusion. His HIV status was kept secret out of concern that the anti-AIDS prejudice might extend to his family members.\nHe died in Manhattan on April 6, 1992, and was cremated. The cause of death was reported as heart and kidney failure. Ten years following Asimov's death, Janet and Robyn Asimov agreed that the HIV story should be made public; Janet revealed it in her edition of his autobiography, \"It's Been a Good Life\".\nWritings.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[T]he only thing about myself that I consider to be severe enough to warrant psychoanalytic treatment is my compulsion to write ... That means that my idea of a pleasant time is to go up to my attic, sit at my electric typewriter (as I am doing right now), and bang away, watching the words take shape like magic before my eyes.\u2014\u200a\nOverview.\nAsimov's career can be divided into several periods. His early career, dominated by science fiction, began with short stories in 1939 and novels in 1950. This lasted until about 1958, all but ending after publication of \"The Naked Sun\" (1957). He began publishing nonfiction as co-author of a college-level textbook called \"Biochemistry and Human Metabolism\". Following the brief orbit of the first human-made satellite Sputnik I by the USSR in 1957, he wrote more nonfiction, particularly popular science books, and less science fiction. Over the next quarter-century, he wrote only four science fiction novels, and 120 nonfiction books.\nStarting in 1982, the second half of his science fiction career began with the publication of \"Foundation's Edge\". From then until his death, Asimov published several more sequels and prequels to his existing novels, tying them together in a way he had not originally anticipated, making a unified series. There are many inconsistencies in this unification, especially in his earlier stories. Doubleday and Houghton Mifflin published about 60% of his work up to 1969, Asimov stating that \"both represent a father image\".\nAsimov believed his most enduring contributions would be his \"Three Laws of Robotics\" and the \"Foundation\" series. The \"Oxford English Dictionary\" credits his science fiction for introducing into the English language the words \"robotics\", \"positronic\" (an entirely fictional technology), and \"psychohistory\" (which is also used for a different study on historical motivations). Asimov coined the term \"robotics\" without suspecting that it might be an original word; at the time, he believed it was simply the natural analogue of words such as mechanics and hydraulics, but for robots. Unlike his word \"psychohistory\", the word \"robotics\" continues in mainstream technical use with Asimov's original definition. \"\" featured androids with \"positronic brains\" and the first-season episode \"Datalore\" called the positronic brain \"Asimov's dream\".\nAsimov was so prolific and diverse in his writing that his books span all major categories of the Dewey Decimal Classification except for category 100, philosophy and psychology. However, he wrote several essays about psychology, and forewords for the books \"The Humanist Way\" (1988) and \"In Pursuit of Truth\" (1982), which were classified in the 100s category, but none of his own books were classified in that category.\nAccording to UNESCO's \"Index Translationum database\", Asimov is the world's 24th-most-translated author.\nScience fiction.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;No matter how various the subject matter I write on, I was a science-fiction writer first and it is as a science-fiction writer that I want to be identified.\u2014\u200a\nAsimov became a science fiction fan in 1929, when he began reading the pulp magazines sold in his family's candy store. At first his father forbade reading pulps until Asimov persuaded him that because the science fiction magazines had \"Science\" in the title, they must be educational. At age 18 he joined the Futurians science fiction fan club, where he made friends who went on to become science fiction writers or editors.\nAsimov began writing at the age of 11, imitating \"The Rover Boys\" with eight chapters of \"The Greenville Chums at College\". His father bought him a used typewriter at age 16. His first published work was a humorous item on the birth of his brother for Boys High School's literary journal in 1934. In May 1937 he first thought of writing professionally, and began writing his first science fiction story, \"Cosmic Corkscrew\" (now lost), that year. On May 17, 1938, puzzled by a change in the schedule of \"Astounding Science Fiction\", Asimov visited its publisher Street &amp; Smith Publications. Inspired by the visit, he finished the story on June 19, 1938, and personally submitted it to \"Astounding\" editor John W. Campbell two days later. Campbell met with Asimov for more than an hour and promised to read the story himself. Two days later he received a detailed rejection letter. This was the first of what became almost weekly meetings with the editor while Asimov lived in New York, until moving to Boston in 1949; Campbell had a strong formative influence on Asimov and became a personal friend.\nBy the end of the month, Asimov completed a second story, \"Stowaway\". Campbell rejected it on July 22 but\u2014in \"the nicest possible letter you could imagine\"\u2014encouraged him to continue writing, promising that Asimov might sell his work after another year and a dozen stories of practice. On October 21, 1938, he sold the third story he finished, \"Marooned Off Vesta\", to \"Amazing Stories\", edited by Raymond A. Palmer, and it appeared in the March 1939 issue. Asimov was paid $64 (), or one cent a word. Two more stories appeared that year, \"The Weapon Too Dreadful to Use\" in the May \"Amazing\" and \"Trends\" in the July \"Astounding\", the issue fans later selected as the start of the Golden Age of Science Fiction. For 1940, ISFDB catalogs seven stories in four different pulp magazines, including one in \"Astounding\". His earnings became enough to pay for his education, but not yet enough for him to become a full-time writer.\nHe later said that unlike other Golden Age writers Heinlein and A. E. van Vogt\u2014also first published in 1939, and whose talent and stardom were immediately obvious\u2014Asimov \"(this is not false modesty) came up only gradually\". Through July 29, 1940, Asimov wrote 22 stories in 25 months, of which 13 were published; he wrote in 1972 that from that date he never wrote a science fiction story that was not published (except for two \"special cases\"). By 1941 Asimov was famous enough that Donald Wollheim told him that he purchased \"The Secret Sense\" for a new magazine only because of his name, and the December 1940 issue of \"Astonishing\"\u2014featuring Asimov's name in bold\u2014was the first magazine to base cover art on his work, but Asimov later said that neither he nor anyone else\u2014except perhaps Campbell\u2014considered him better than an often published \"third rater\".\nBased on a conversation with Campbell, Asimov wrote \"Nightfall\", his 32nd story, in March and April 1941, and \"Astounding\" published it in September 1941. In 1968 the Science Fiction Writers of America voted \"Nightfall\" the best science fiction short story ever written. In \"Nightfall and Other Stories\" Asimov wrote, \"The writing of 'Nightfall' was a watershed in my professional career ... I was suddenly taken seriously and the world of science fiction became aware that I existed. As the years passed, in fact, it became evident that I had written a 'classic'.\" \"Nightfall\" is an archetypal example of social science fiction, a term he created to describe a new trend in the 1940s, led by authors including him and Heinlein, away from gadgets and space opera and toward speculation about the human condition.\nAfter writing \"Victory Unintentional\" in January and February 1942, Asimov did not write another story for a year. He expected to make chemistry his career, and was paid $2,600 annually at the Philadelphia Navy Yard, enough to marry his girlfriend; he did not expect to make much more from writing than the $1,788.50 he had earned from the 28 stories he had already sold over four years. Asimov left science fiction fandom and no longer read new magazines, and might have left the writing profession had not Heinlein and de Camp been his coworkers at the Navy Yard and previously sold stories continued to appear.\nIn 1942, Asimov published the first of his \"Foundation\" stories\u2014later collected in the \"Foundation\" trilogy: \"Foundation\" (1951), \"Foundation and Empire\" (1952), and \"Second Foundation\" (1953). The books describe the fall of a vast interstellar empire and the establishment of its eventual successor. They feature his fictional science of psychohistory, whose theories could predict the future course of history according to dynamical laws regarding the statistical analysis of mass human actions.\nCampbell raised his rate per word, Orson Welles purchased rights to \"Evidence\", and anthologies reprinted his stories. By the end of the war Asimov was earning as a writer an amount equal to half of his Navy Yard salary, even after a raise, but Asimov still did not believe that writing could support him, his wife, and future children.\nHis \"positronic\" robot stories\u2014many of which were collected in \"I, Robot\" (1950)\u2014were begun at about the same time. They promulgated a set of rules of ethics for robots (see Three Laws of Robotics) and intelligent machines that greatly influenced other writers and thinkers in their treatment of the subject. Asimov notes in his introduction to the short story collection \"The Complete Robot\" (1982) that he was largely inspired by the tendency of robots up to that time to fall consistently into a Frankenstein plot in which they destroyed their creators. The \"Robot\" series has led to film adaptations. With Asimov's collaboration, in about 1977, Harlan Ellison wrote a screenplay of \"I, Robot\" that Asimov hoped would lead to \"the first really adult, complex, worthwhile science fiction film ever made\". The screenplay has never been filmed and was eventually published in book form in 1994. The 2004 movie \"I, Robot\", starring Will Smith, was based on an unrelated script by Jeff Vintar titled \"Hardwired\", with Asimov's ideas incorporated later after the rights to Asimov's title were acquired. (The title was not original to Asimov but had previously been used for a story by Eando Binder.) Also, one of Asimov's robot short stories, \"The Bicentennial Man\", was expanded into a novel \"The Positronic Man\" by Asimov and Robert Silverberg, and this was adapted into the 1999 movie \"Bicentennial Man\", starring Robin Williams.\nIn 1966 the \"Foundation\" trilogy won the Hugo Award for the all-time best series of science fiction and fantasy novels, and they along with the \"Robot\" series are his most famous science fiction. Besides movies, his \"Foundation\" and \"Robot\" stories have inspired other derivative works of science fiction literature, many by well-known and established authors such as Roger MacBride Allen, Greg Bear, Gregory Benford, David Brin, and Donald Kingsbury. At least some of these appear to have been done with the blessing of, or at the request of, Asimov's widow, Janet Asimov.\nIn 1948, he also wrote a spoof chemistry article, \"The Endochronic Properties of Resublimated Thiotimoline\". At the time, Asimov was preparing his own doctoral dissertation, which would include an oral examination. Fearing a prejudicial reaction from his graduate school evaluation board at Columbia University, Asimov asked his editor that it be released under a pseudonym. When it nevertheless appeared under his own name, Asimov grew concerned that his doctoral examiners might think he wasn't taking science seriously. At the end of the examination, one evaluator turned to him, smiling, and said, \"What can you tell us, Mr. Asimov, about the thermodynamic properties of the compound known as thiotimoline\". Laughing hysterically with relief, Asimov had to be led out of the room. After a five-minute wait, he was summoned back into the room and congratulated as \"Dr. Asimov\".\nDemand for science fiction greatly increased during the 1950s, making it possible for a genre author to write full-time. In 1949, book publisher Doubleday's science fiction editor Walter I. Bradbury accepted Asimov's unpublished \"Grow Old with Me\" (40,000 words), but requested that it be extended to a full novel of 70,000 words. The book appeared under the Doubleday imprint in January 1950 with the title of \"Pebble in the Sky\". Doubleday published five more original science fiction novels by Asimov in the 1950s, along with the six juvenile Lucky Starr novels, the latter under the pseudonym \"Paul French\". Doubleday also published collections of Asimov's short stories, beginning with \"The Martian Way and Other Stories\" in 1955. The early 1950s also saw Gnome Press publish one collection of Asimov's positronic robot stories as \"I, Robot\" and his \"Foundation\" stories and novelettes as the three books of the \"Foundation trilogy\". More positronic robot stories were republished in book form as \"The Rest of the Robots\".\nBook publishers and the magazines \"Galaxy\" and \"Fantasy &amp; Science Fiction\" ended Asimov's dependence on \"Astounding\". He later described the era as his \"'mature' period\". Asimov's \"The Last Question\" (1956), on the ability of humankind to cope with and potentially reverse the process of entropy, was his personal favorite story.\nIn 1972, his stand-alone novel \"The Gods Themselves\" was published to general acclaim, winning Best Novel in the Hugo, Nebula, and Locus Awards.\nIn December 1974, former Beatle Paul McCartney approached Asimov and asked him to write the screenplay for a science-fiction movie musical. McCartney had a vague idea for the plot and a small scrap of dialogue, about a rock band whose members discover they are being impersonated by extraterrestrials. The band and their impostors would likely be played by McCartney's group Wings, then at the height of their career. Though not generally a fan of rock music, Asimov was intrigued by the idea and quickly produced a treatment outline of the story adhering to McCartney's overall idea but omitting McCartney's scrap of dialogue. McCartney rejected it, and the treatment now exists only in the Boston University archives.\nAsimov said in 1969 that he had \"the happiest of all my associations with science fiction magazines\" with \"Fantasy &amp; Science Fiction\"; \"I have no complaints about \"Astounding\", \"Galaxy\", or any of the rest, heaven knows, but \"F&amp;SF\" has become something special to me\". Beginning in 1977, Asimov lent his name to \"Isaac Asimov's Science Fiction Magazine\" (now \"Asimov's Science Fiction\") and wrote an editorial for each issue. There was also a short-lived \"Asimov's SF Adventure Magazine\" and a companion \"Asimov's Science Fiction Anthology\" reprint series, published as magazines (in the same manner as the stablemates \"Ellery Queen's Mystery Magazine\"'s and \"Alfred Hitchcock's Mystery Magazine\"'s \"anthologies\").\nDue to pressure by fans on Asimov to write another book in his \"Foundation\" series, he did so with \"Foundation's Edge\" (1982) and \"Foundation and Earth\" (1986), and then went back to before the original trilogy with \"Prelude to Foundation\" (1988) and \"Forward the Foundation\" (1992), his last novel.\nHe also helped Leonard Nimoy fleshing out the premise of the science fiction comic Primortals (1995\u20131997).\nPopular science.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Just say I am one of the most versatile writers in the world, and the greatest popularizer of many subjects.\nAsimov and two colleagues published a textbook in 1949, with two more editions by 1969. During the late 1950s and 1960s, Asimov substantially decreased his fiction output (he published only four adult novels between 1957's \"The Naked Sun\" and 1982's \"Foundation's Edge\", two of which were mysteries). He greatly increased his nonfiction production, writing mostly on science topics; the launch of Sputnik in 1957 engendered public concern over a \"science gap\". Asimov explained in \"The Rest of the Robots\" that he had been unable to write substantial fiction since the summer of 1958, and observers understood him as saying that his fiction career had ended, or was permanently interrupted. Asimov recalled in 1969 that \"the United States went into a kind of tizzy, and so did I. I was overcome by the ardent desire to write popular science for an America that might be in great danger through its neglect of science, and a number of publishers got an equally ardent desire to publish popular science for the same reason\".\n\"Fantasy and Science Fiction\" invited Asimov to continue his regular nonfiction column, begun in the now-folded bimonthly companion magazine \"Venture Science Fiction Magazine\". The first of 399 monthly \"F&amp;SF\" columns appeared in November 1958 and they continued until his terminal illness. These columns, periodically collected into books by Doubleday, gave Asimov a reputation as a \"Great Explainer\" of science; he described them as his only popular science writing in which he never had to assume complete ignorance of the subjects on the part of his readers. The column was ostensibly dedicated to popular science but Asimov had complete editorial freedom, and wrote about contemporary social issues in essays such as \"Thinking About Thinking\" and \"Knock Plastic!\". In 1975 he wrote of these essays: \"I get more pleasure out of them than out of any other writing assignment.\"\nAsimov's first wide-ranging reference work, \"The Intelligent Man's Guide to Science\" (1960), was nominated for a National Book Award, and in 1963 he won a Hugo Award\u2014his first\u2014for his essays for \"F&amp;SF\". The popularity of his science books and the income he derived from them allowed him to give up most academic responsibilities and become a full-time freelance writer. He encouraged other science fiction writers to write popular science, stating in 1967 that \"the knowledgeable, skillful science writer is worth his weight in contracts\", with \"twice as much work as he can possibly handle\".\nThe great variety of information covered in Asimov's writings prompted Kurt Vonnegut to ask, \"How does it feel to know everything?\" Asimov replied that he only knew how it felt to have the 'reputation' of omniscience: \"Uneasy\". Floyd C. Gale said that \"Asimov has a rare talent. He can make your mental mouth water over dry facts\", and \"science fiction's loss has been science popularization's gain\". Asimov said that \"Of all the writing I do, fiction, non-fiction, adult, or juvenile, these \"F &amp; SF\" articles are by far the most fun\". He regretted, however, that he had less time for fiction\u2014causing dissatisfied readers to send him letters of complaint\u2014stating in 1969 that \"In the last ten years, I've done a couple of novels, some collections, a dozen or so stories, but that's \"nothing\"\".\nIn his essay \"To Tell a Chemist\" (1965), Asimov proposed a simple shibboleth for distinguishing chemists from non-chemists: ask the person to read the word \"unionized\". Chemists, he noted, will read \"un\"-\"ionized\" (electrically neutral), while non-chemists will read \"union-ized\" (belonging to a trade union).\nCoined terms.\nAsimov coined the term \"robotics\" in his May 1941 story \"Liar!\", though he later remarked that he believed then that he was merely using an existing word, as he stated in \"Gold\" (\"The Robot Chronicles\"). While acknowledging the Oxford Dictionary reference, he incorrectly states that the word was first printed about one third of the way down the first column of page 100 in the March 1942 issue of \"Astounding Science Fiction\" \u2013 the printing of his short story \"Runaround\".\nIn the same story, Asimov also coined the term \"positronic\" (the counterpart to \"electronic\" for positrons).\nAsimov coined the term \"psychohistory\" in his \"Foundation\" stories to name a fictional branch of science which combines history, sociology, and mathematical statistics to make general predictions about the future behavior of very large groups of people, such as the Galactic Empire. Asimov said later that he should have called it psychosociology. It was first introduced in the five short stories (1942\u20131944) which would later be collected as the 1951 fix-up novel \"Foundation\". Somewhat later, the term \"psychohistory\" was applied by others to research of the effects of psychology on history.\nOther writings.\nIn addition to his interest in science, Asimov was interested in history. Starting in the 1960s, he wrote 14 popular history books, including \"The Greeks: A Great Adventure\" (1965), \"The Roman Republic\" (1966), \"The Roman Empire\" (1967), \"The Egyptians\" (1967) \"The Near East: 10,000 Years of History\" (1968), and \"Asimov's Chronology of the World\" (1991).\nHe published \"Asimov's Guide to the Bible\" in two volumes\u2014covering the Old Testament in 1967 and the New Testament in 1969\u2014and then combined them into one 1,300-page volume in 1981. Complete with maps and tables, the guide goes through the books of the Bible in order, explaining the history of each one and the political influences that affected it, as well as biographical information about the important characters. His interest in literature manifested itself in several annotations of literary works, including \"Asimov's Guide to Shakespeare\" (1970), \"Asimov's Annotated Don Juan\" (1972), \"Asimov's Annotated Paradise Lost\" (1974), and \"The Annotated Gulliver's Travels\" (1980).\nAsimov was also a noted mystery author and a frequent contributor to \"Ellery Queen's Mystery Magazine\". He began by writing science fiction mysteries such as his Wendell Urth stories, but soon moved on to writing \"pure\" mysteries. He published two full-length mystery novels, and wrote 66 stories about the Black Widowers, a group of men who met monthly for dinner, conversation, and a puzzle. He got the idea for the Widowers from his own association in a stag group called the Trap Door Spiders, and all of the main characters (with the exception of the waiter, Henry, who he admitted resembled Wodehouse's Jeeves) were modeled after his closest friends. A parody of the Black Widowers, \"An Evening with the White Divorc\u00e9s,\" was written by author, critic, and librarian Jon L. Breen. Asimov joked, \"all I can do ... is to wait until I catch him in a dark alley, someday.\"\nToward the end of his life, Asimov published a series of collections of limericks, mostly written by himself, starting with \"Lecherous Limericks\", which appeared in 1975. \"Limericks: Too Gross\", whose title displays Asimov's love of puns, contains 144 limericks by Asimov and an equal number by John Ciardi. He even created a slim volume of Sherlockian limericks. Asimov featured Yiddish humor in \"Azazel, The Two Centimeter Demon\". The two main characters, both Jewish, talk over dinner, or lunch, or breakfast, about anecdotes of \"George\" and his friend Azazel. Asimov's \"Treasury of Humor\" is both a working joke book and a treatise propounding his views on humor theory. According to Asimov, the most essential element of humor is an abrupt change in point of view, one that suddenly shifts focus from the important to the trivial, or from the sublime to the ridiculous.\nParticularly in his later years, Asimov to some extent cultivated an image of himself as an amiable lecher. In 1971, as a response to the popularity of sexual guidebooks such as \"The Sensuous Woman\" (by \"J\") and \"The Sensuous Man\" (by \"M\"), Asimov published \"The Sensuous Dirty Old Man\" under the byline \"Dr. 'A'\" (although his full name was printed on the paperback edition, first published 1972). However, by 2016, Asimov's habit of groping women was seen as sexual harassment and came under criticism, and was cited as an early example of inappropriate behavior that can occur at science fiction conventions.\nAsimov published three volumes of autobiography. \"In Memory Yet Green\" (1979) and \"In Joy Still Felt\" (1980) cover his life up to 1978. The third volume, \"I. Asimov: A Memoir\" (1994), covered his whole life (rather than following on from where the second volume left off). The epilogue was written by his widow Janet Asimov after his death. The book won a Hugo Award in 1995. Janet Asimov edited \"It's Been a Good Life\" (2002), a condensed version of his three autobiographies. He also published three volumes of retrospectives of his writing, \"Opus 100\" (1969), \"Opus 200\" (1979), and \"Opus 300\" (1984).\nIn 1987, the Asimovs co-wrote \"How to Enjoy Writing: A Book of Aid and Comfort\". In it they offer advice on how to maintain a positive attitude and stay productive when dealing with discouragement, distractions, rejection, and thick-headed editors. The book includes many quotations, essays, anecdotes, and husband-wife dialogues about the ups and downs of being an author.\nAsimov and \"Star Trek\" creator Gene Roddenberry developed a unique relationship during \"Star Trek\"'s initial launch in the late 1960s. Asimov wrote a critical essay on \"Star Trek\"'s scientific accuracy for \"TV Guide\" magazine. Roddenberry retorted respectfully with a personal letter explaining the limitations of accuracy when writing a weekly series. Asimov corrected himself with a follow-up essay to \"TV Guide\" claiming that despite its inaccuracies, \"Star Trek\" was a fresh and intellectually challenging science fiction television show. The two remained friends to the point where Asimov even served as an advisor on a number of \"Star Trek\" projects.\nIn 1973, Asimov published a proposal for calendar reform, called the World Season Calendar. It divides the year into four seasons (named A\u2013D) of 13 weeks (91 days) each. This allows days to be named, e.g., \"D-73\" instead of December 1 (due to December 1 being the 73rd day of the 4th quarter). An extra 'year day' is added for a total of 365 days.\nAwards and recognition.\nAsimov won more than a dozen annual awards for particular works of science fiction and a half-dozen lifetime awards.\nHe also received 14 honorary doctorate degrees from universities.\nWriting style.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I have an informal style, which means I tend to use short words and simple sentence structure, to say nothing of occasional colloquialisms. This grates on people who like things that are poetic, weighty, complex, and, above all, obscure. On the other hand, the informal style pleases people who enjoy the sensation of reading an essay without being aware that they are reading and of feeling that ideas are flowing from the writer's brain into their own without mental friction.\u2014\u200a\nAsimov was his own secretary, typist, indexer, proofreader, and literary agent. He wrote a typed first draft composed at the keyboard at 90 words per minute; he imagined an ending first, then a beginning, then \"let everything in-between work itself out as I come to it\". (Asimov used an outline only once, later describing it as \"like trying to play the piano from inside a straitjacket\".) After correcting a draft by hand, he retyped the document as the final copy and only made one revision with minor editor-requested changes; a word processor did not save him much time, Asimov said, because 95% of the first draft was unchanged.\nAfter disliking making multiple revisions of \"Black Friar of the Flame\", Asimov refused to make major, second, or non-editorial revisions (\"like chewing used gum\"), stating that \"too large a revision, or too many revisions, indicate that the piece of writing is a failure. In the time it would take to salvage such a failure, I could write a new piece altogether and have infinitely more fun in the process\". He submitted \"failures\" to another editor.\nAsimov's fiction style is extremely unornamented. In 1980, science fiction scholar James Gunn wrote of \"I, Robot\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAsimov addressed such criticism in 1989 at the beginning of \"Nemesis\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I made up my mind long ago to follow one cardinal rule in all my writing\u2014to be 'clear'. I have given up all thought of writing poetically or symbolically or experimentally, or in any of the other modes that might (if I were good enough) get me a Pulitzer prize. I would write merely clearly and in this way establish a warm relationship between myself and my readers, and the professional critics\u2014Well, they can do whatever they wish.\nGunn cited examples of a more complex style, such as the climax of \"Liar!\". Sharply drawn characters occur at key junctures of his storylines: Susan Calvin in \"Liar!\" and \"Evidence\", Arkady Darell in \"Second Foundation\", Elijah Baley in \"The Caves of Steel\", and Hari Seldon in the \"Foundation\" prequels.\nOther than books by Gunn and Joseph Patrouch, there is relatively little literary criticism on Asimov (particularly when compared to the sheer volume of his output). Cowart and Wymer's \"Dictionary of Literary Biography\" (1981) gives a possible reason:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;His words do not easily lend themselves to traditional literary criticism because he has the habit of centering his fiction on plot and clearly stating to his reader, in rather direct terms, what is happening in his stories and why it is happening. In fact, most of the dialogue in an Asimov story, and particularly in the Foundation trilogy, is devoted to such exposition. Stories that clearly state what they mean in unambiguous language are the most difficult for a scholar to deal with because there is little to be interpreted.\nGunn's and Patrouch's studies of Asimov both state that a clear, direct prose style is still a style. Gunn's 1982 book comments in detail on each of Asimov's novels. He does not praise all of Asimov's fiction (nor does Patrouch), but calls some passages in \"The Caves of Steel\" \"reminiscent of Proust\". When discussing how that novel depicts night falling over futuristic New York City, Gunn says that Asimov's prose \"need not be ashamed anywhere in literary society\".\nAlthough he prided himself on his unornamented prose style (for which he credited Clifford D. Simak as an early influence), and said in 1973 that his style had not changed, Asimov also enjoyed giving his longer stories complicated narrative structures, often by arranging chapters in nonchronological ways. Some readers have been put off by this, complaining that the nonlinearity is not worth the trouble and adversely affects the clarity of the story. For example, the first third of \"The Gods Themselves\" begins with Chapter 6, then backtracks to fill in earlier material. (John Campbell advised Asimov to begin his stories as late in the plot as possible. This advice helped Asimov create \"Reason\", one of the early \"Robot\" stories). Patrouch found that the interwoven and nested flashbacks of \"The Currents of Space\" did serious harm to that novel, to such an extent that only a \"dyed-in-the-kyrt Asimov fan\" could enjoy it. In his later novel \"Nemesis\" one group of characters lives in the \"present\" and another group starts in the \"past\", beginning 15 years earlier and gradually moving toward the time of the first group.\nAlien life.\nAsimov once explained that his reluctance to write about aliens came from an incident early in his career when \"Astounding\"'s editor John Campbell rejected one of his science fiction stories because the alien characters were portrayed as superior to the humans. The nature of the rejection led him to believe that Campbell may have based his bias towards humans in stories on a real-world racial bias. Unwilling to write only weak alien races, and concerned that a confrontation would jeopardize his and Campbell's friendship, he decided he would not write about aliens at all. Nevertheless, in response to these criticisms, he wrote \"The Gods Themselves\", which contains aliens and alien sex. The book won the Nebula Award for Best Novel in 1972, and the Hugo Award for Best Novel in 1973. Asimov said that of all his writings, he was most proud of the middle section of \"The Gods Themselves\", the part that deals with those themes.\nIn the Hugo Award\u2013winning novelette \"Gold\", Asimov describes an author, based on himself, who has one of his books (\"The Gods Themselves\") adapted into a \"compu-drama\", essentially photo-realistic computer animation. The director criticizes the fictionalized Asimov (\"Gregory Laborian\") for having an extremely nonvisual style, making it difficult to adapt his work, and the author explains that he relies on ideas and dialogue rather than description to get his points across.\nRomance and women.\nIn the early days of science fiction some authors and critics felt that the romantic elements were inappropriate in science fiction stories, which were supposedly to be focused on science and technology. Isaac Asimov was a supporter of this point of view, expressed in his 1938\u20131939 letters to \"Astounding\", where he described such elements as \"mush\" and \"slop\". To his dismay, these letters were met with a strong opposition.\nAsimov attributed the lack of romance and sex in his fiction to the \"early imprinting\" from starting his writing career when he had never been on a date and \"didn't know anything about girls\". He was sometimes criticized for the general absence of sex (and of extraterrestrial life) in his science fiction. He claimed he wrote \"The Gods Themselves\" (1972) to respond to these criticisms, which often came from New Wave science fiction (and often British) writers. The second part (of three) of the novel is set on an alien world with three sexes, and the sexual behavior of these creatures is extensively depicted.\nViews.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There is a perennial question among readers as to whether the views contained in a story reflect the views of the author. The answer is, \"Not necessarily\u2014\" And yet one ought to add another short phrase \"\u2014but usually.\"\u2014\u200a\nReligion.\nAsimov was an atheist, and a humanist. He did not oppose religious conviction in others, but he frequently railed against superstitious and pseudoscientific beliefs that tried to pass themselves off as genuine science. During his childhood, his parents observed the traditions of Orthodox Judaism less stringently than they had in Petrovichi; they did not force their beliefs upon young Isaac, and he grew up without strong religious influences, coming to believe that the \"Torah\" represented Hebrew mythology in the same way that the \"Iliad\" recorded Greek mythology. When he was 13, he chose not to have a bar mitzvah. As his books \"Treasury of Humor\" and \"Asimov Laughs Again\" record, Asimov was willing to tell jokes involving God, Satan, the Garden of Eden, Jerusalem, and other religious topics, expressing the viewpoint that a good joke can do more to provoke thought than hours of philosophical discussion.\nFor a brief while, his father worked in the local synagogue to enjoy the familiar surroundings and, as Isaac put it, \"shine as a learned scholar\" versed in the sacred writings. This scholarship was a seed for his later authorship and publication of \"Asimov's Guide to the Bible\", an analysis of the historic foundations for the Old and New Testaments. For many years, Asimov called himself an atheist; he considered the term somewhat inadequate, as it described what he did not believe rather than what he did. Eventually, he described himself as a \"humanist\" and considered that term more practical. Asimov continued to identify himself as a secular Jew, as stated in his introduction to Jack Dann's anthology of Jewish science fiction, \"Wandering Stars\": \"I attend no services and follow no ritual and have never undergone that curious puberty rite, the Bar Mitzvah. It doesn't matter. I am Jewish.\"\nWhen asked in an interview in 1982 if he was an atheist, Asimov replied,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I am an atheist, out and out. It took me a long time to say it. I've been an atheist for years and years, but somehow I felt it was intellectually unrespectable to say one was an atheist, because it assumed knowledge that one didn't have. Somehow it was better to say one was a humanist or an agnostic. I finally decided that I'm a creature of emotion as well as of reason. Emotionally I am an atheist. I don't have the evidence to prove that God doesn't exist, but I so strongly suspect he doesn't that I don't want to waste my time.\nLikewise, he said about religious education: \"I would not be satisfied to have my kids choose to be religious without trying to argue them out of it, just as I would not be satisfied to have them decide to smoke regularly or engage in any other practice I consider detrimental to mind or body.\"\nIn his last volume of autobiography, Asimov wrote,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If I were not an atheist, I would believe in a God who would choose to save people on the basis of the totality of their lives and not the pattern of their words. I think he would prefer an honest and righteous atheist to a TV preacher whose every word is God, God, God, and whose every deed is foul, foul, foul.\nThe same memoir states his belief that Hell is \"the drooling dream of a sadist\" crudely affixed to an all-merciful God; if even human governments were willing to curtail cruel and unusual punishments, wondered Asimov, why would punishment in the afterlife not be restricted to a limited term? Asimov rejected the idea that a human belief or action could merit infinite punishment. If an afterlife existed, he claimed, the longest and most severe punishment would be reserved for those who \"slandered God by inventing Hell\".\nAsimov said about using religious motifs in his writing:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I tend to ignore religion in my own stories altogether, except when I absolutely have to have it. ... and, whenever I bring in a religious motif, that religion is bound to seem vaguely Christian because that is the only religion I know anything about, even though it is not mine. An unsympathetic reader might think that I am \"burlesquing\" Christianity, but I am not. Then too, it is impossible to write science fiction and really ignore religion.\nPolitics.\nAsimov became a staunch supporter of the Democratic Party during the New Deal, and thereafter remained a political liberal. He was a vocal opponent of the Vietnam War in the 1960s and in a television interview during the early 1970s he publicly endorsed George McGovern. He was unhappy about what he considered an \"irrationalist\" viewpoint taken by many radical political activists from the late 1960s and onwards. In his second volume of autobiography, \"In Joy Still Felt\", Asimov recalled meeting the counterculture figure Abbie Hoffman. Asimov's impression was that the 1960s' counterculture heroes had ridden an emotional wave which, in the end, left them stranded in a \"no-man's land of the spirit\" from which he wondered if they would ever return.\nAsimov vehemently opposed Richard Nixon, considering him \"a crook and a liar\". He closely followed Watergate, and was pleased when the president was forced to resign. Asimov was dismayed over the pardon extended to Nixon by his successor Gerald Ford: \"I was not impressed by the argument that it has spared the nation an ordeal. To my way of thinking, the ordeal was necessary to make certain it would never happen again.\"\nAfter Asimov's name appeared in the mid-1960s on a list of people the Communist Party USA \"considered amenable\" to its goals, the FBI investigated him. Because of his academic background, the bureau briefly considered Asimov as a possible candidate for known Soviet spy ROBPROF, but found nothing suspicious in his life or background.\nAsimov appeared to hold an equivocal attitude towards Israel. In his first autobiography, he indicates his support for the safety of Israel, though insisting that he was not a Zionist. In his third autobiography, Asimov stated his opposition to the creation of a Jewish state, on the grounds that he was opposed to having nation-states in general, and supported the notion of a single humanity. Asimov especially worried about the safety of Israel given that it had been created among Muslim neighbors \"who will never forgive, never forget and never go away\", and said that Jews had merely created for themselves another \"Jewish ghetto\".\nSocial issues.\nAsimov believed that \"\"science\" fiction ... serve[s] the good of humanity\". He considered himself a feminist even before women's liberation became a widespread movement; he argued that the issue of women's rights was closely connected to that of population control. Furthermore, he believed that homosexuality must be considered a \"moral right\" on population grounds, as must all consenting adult sexual activity that does not lead to reproduction. He issued many appeals for population control, reflecting a perspective articulated by people from Thomas Malthus through Paul R. Ehrlich.\nIn a 1988 interview by Bill Moyers, Asimov proposed computer-aided learning, where people would use computers to find information on subjects in which they were interested. He thought this would make learning more interesting, since people would have the freedom to choose what to learn, and would help spread knowledge around the world. Also, the one-to-one model would let students learn at their own pace. Asimov thought that people would live in space by 2019.\nIn 1983 Asimov wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Computerization will undoubtedly continue onward inevitably...\nThis means that a vast change in the nature of education must take place, and entire populations must be made \"computer-literate\" and must be taught to deal with a \"high-tech\" world.\nHe continues on education: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Education, which must be revolutionized in the new world, will be revolutionized by the very agency that requires the revolution \u2014 the computer.\nSchools will undoubtedly still exist, but a good schoolteacher can do no better than to inspire curiosity which an interested student can then satisfy at home at the console of his computer outlet.\nThere will be an opportunity finally for every youngster, and indeed, every person, to learn what he or she wants to learn, in his or her own time, at his or her own speed, in his or her own way.\nEducation will become fun because it will bubble up from within and not be forced in from without.\nSexual harassment.\nAsimov would often fondle, kiss and pinch women at conventions and elsewhere without regard for their consent. According to Alec Nevala-Lee, author of an Asimov biography and writer on the history of science fiction, he often defended himself by saying that far from showing objections, these women cooperated. In a 1971 satirical piece, \"The Sensuous Dirty Old Man\", Asimov wrote: \"The question then is not whether or not a girl should be touched. The question is merely where, when, and how she should be touched.\"\nAccording to Nevala-Lee, however, \"many of these encounters were clearly nonconsensual.\" He wrote that Asimov's behavior, as a leading science-fiction author and personality, contributed to an undesirable atmosphere for women in the male-dominated science fiction community. In support of this, he quoted some of Asimov's contemporary fellow-authors such as Judith Merril, Harlan Ellison and Frederik Pohl, as well as editors such as Timothy Seldes. Additional specific incidents were reported by other people including Edward L. Ferman, long-time editor of \"The Magazine of Fantasy &amp; Science Fiction\", who wrote \"...instead of shaking my date's hand, he shook her \"left breast\"\".\nEnvironment and population.\nAsimov's defense of civil applications of nuclear power, even after the Three Mile Island nuclear power plant incident, damaged his relations with some of his fellow liberals. In a letter reprinted in \"Yours, Isaac Asimov\", he states that although he would prefer living in \"no danger whatsoever\" to living near a nuclear reactor, he would still prefer a home near a nuclear power plant to a slum on Love Canal or near \"a Union Carbide plant producing methyl isocyanate\", the latter being a reference to the Bhopal disaster.\nIn the closing years of his life, Asimov blamed the deterioration of the quality of life that he perceived in New York City on the shrinking tax base caused by the middle-class flight to the suburbs, though he continued to support high taxes on the middle class to pay for social programs. His last nonfiction book, \"Our Angry Earth\" (1991, co-written with his long-time friend, science fiction author Frederik Pohl), deals with elements of the environmental crisis such as overpopulation, oil dependence, war, global warming, and the destruction of the ozone layer. In response to being presented by Bill Moyers with the question \"What do you see happening to the idea of dignity to human species if this population growth continues at its present rate?\", Asimov responded:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It's going to destroy it all ... if you have 20 people in the apartment and two bathrooms, no matter how much every person believes in freedom of the bathroom, there is no such thing. You have to set up, you have to set up times for each person, you have to bang at the door, aren't you through yet, and so on. And in the same way, democracy cannot survive overpopulation. Human dignity cannot survive it. Convenience and decency cannot survive it. As you put more and more people onto the world, the value of life not only declines, but it disappears.\nOther authors.\nAsimov enjoyed the writings of J. R. R. Tolkien, and used \"The Lord of the Rings\" as a plot point in a Black Widowers story, titled \"Nothing like Murder\". In the essay \"All or Nothing\" (for \"The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction,\" Jan 1981), Asimov said that he admired Tolkien and that he had read \"The Lord of the Rings\" five times. (The feelings were mutual, with Tolkien saying that he had enjoyed Asimov's science fiction. This would make Asimov an exception to Tolkien's earlier claim that he rarely found \"any modern books\" that were interesting to him.)\nHe acknowledged other writers as superior to himself in talent, saying of Harlan Ellison, \"He is (in my opinion) one of the best writers in the world, far more skilled at the art than I am.\" Asimov disapproved of the New Wave's growing influence, stating in 1967 \"I want science fiction. I think science fiction isn't really science fiction if it lacks science. And I think the better and truer the science, the better and truer the science fiction\".\nThe feelings of friendship and respect between Asimov and Arthur C. Clarke were demonstrated by the so-called \"Clarke\u2013Asimov Treaty of Park Avenue\", negotiated as they shared a cab in New York. This stated that Asimov was required to insist that Clarke was the best science fiction writer in the world (reserving second-best for himself), while Clarke was required to insist that Asimov was the best science writer in the world (reserving second-best for himself). Thus, the dedication in Clarke's book \"Report on Planet Three\" (1972) reads: \"In accordance with the terms of the Clarke\u2013Asimov treaty, the second-best science writer dedicates this book to the second-best science-fiction writer.\"\nIn 1980, Asimov wrote a highly critical review of George Orwell's \"1984\". Though dismissive of his attacks, James Machell has stated that they \"are easier to understand when you consider that Asimov viewed 1984 as dangerous literature. He opines that if communism were to spread across the globe, it would come in a completely different form to the one in 1984, and by looking to Orwell as an authority on totalitarianism, 'we will be defending ourselves against assaults from the wrong direction and we will lose'.\"\nAsimov became a fan of mystery stories at the same time as science fiction. He preferred to read the former because \"I read every [science fiction] story keenly aware that it might be worse than mine, in which case I had no patience with it, or that it might be better, in which case I felt miserable\". Asimov wrote \"I make no secret of the fact that in my mysteries I use Agatha Christie as my model. In my opinion, her mysteries are the best ever written, far better than the Sherlock Holmes stories, and Hercule Poirot is the best detective fiction has seen. Why should I not use as my model what I consider the best?\" He enjoyed Sherlock Holmes, but considered Arthur Conan Doyle to be \"a slapdash and sloppy writer.\"\nAsimov also enjoyed humorous stories, particularly those of P. G. Wodehouse.\nIn non-fiction writing, Asimov particularly admired the writing style of Martin Gardner, and tried to emulate it in his own science books. On meeting Gardner for the first time in 1965, Asimov told him this, to which Gardner answered that he had based his own style on Asimov's.\nInfluence.\nPaul Krugman, holder of a Nobel Prize in Economics, stated Asimov's concept of psychohistory inspired him to become an economist.\nJohn Jenkins, who has reviewed the vast majority of Asimov's written output, once observed, \"It has been pointed out that most science fiction writers since the 1950s have been affected by Asimov, either modeling their style on his or deliberately avoiding anything like his style.\" Along with such figures as Bertrand Russell and Karl Popper, Asimov left his mark as one of the most distinguished interdisciplinarians of the 20th century. \"Few individuals\", writes , \"understood better than Isaac Asimov what synoptic thinking is all about. His almost 500 books\u2014which he wrote as a specialist, a knowledgeable authority, or just an excited layman\u2014range over almost all conceivable subjects: the sciences, history, literature, religion, and of course, science fiction.\"\nIn 2024, DARPA named one of its programs after Asimov, inspired by his \u201cThree Laws of Robotics.\u201d The program, Autonomy Standards and Ideals with Military Operational Values (ASIMOV), aims to develop benchmarks objectively and quantitatively assessing the ethical challenges and readiness of utilizing autonomous systems for military operations.\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Over a space of 40 years, I published an average of 1,000 words a day. Over the space of the second 20 years, I published an average of 1,700 words a day.\u2014\u200a\nDepending on the counting convention used, and including all titles, charts, and edited collections, there may be currently over 500 books in Asimov's bibliography\u2014as well as his individual short stories, individual essays, and criticism. For his 100th, 200th, and 300th books (based on his personal count), Asimov published \"Opus 100\" (1969), \"Opus 200\" (1979), and \"Opus 300\" (1984), celebrating his writing. An extensive bibliography of Isaac Asimov's works has been compiled by Ed Seiler. His book writing rate was analysed, showing that he wrote faster as he wrote more.\nAn online exhibit in West Virginia University Libraries' virtually complete Asimov Collection displays features, visuals, and descriptions of some of his more than 600 books, games, audio recordings, videos, and wall charts. Many first, rare, and autographed editions are in the Libraries' Rare Book Room. Book jackets and autographs are presented online along with descriptions and images of children's books, science fiction art, multimedia, and other materials in the collection.\nScience fiction.\n\"Greater Foundation\" series.\nThe \"Robot\" series was originally separate from the \"Foundation\" series. The Galactic Empire novels were published as independent stories, set earlier in the same future as \"Foundation\". Later in life, Asimov synthesized the \"Robot\" series into a single coherent \"history\" that appeared in the extension of the \"Foundation\" series.\nAll of these books were published by Doubleday &amp; Co, except the original Foundation trilogy which was originally published by Gnome Books before being bought and republished by Doubleday.\nLucky Starr series (as Paul French).\nAll published by Doubleday &amp; Co\nNorby Chronicles (with Janet Asimov).\nAll published by Walker &amp; Company\nNovels not part of a series.\nNovels marked with an asterisk (*) have minor connections to \"Foundation\" universe.\nNonfiction.\nPopular science.\nCollections of Asimov's essays for \"F&amp;SF\".\nThe following books collected essays which were originally published as monthly columns in \"The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction\" and collected by Doubleday &amp; Co\nLiterary works.\nAll published by Doubleday\nHistory.\nAll published by Houghton Mifflin except where otherwise stated\nReferences.\nExplanatory footnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n \"In Memory Yet Green\" (1979), New York: Avon, .\n \"In Joy Still Felt\" (1980), New York: Avon .\n \"I. Asimov: A Memoir\" (1994), (hc), (pb).\n \"Yours, Isaac Asimov\" (1996), edited by Stanley Asimov. New York: Doubleday .\n \"It's Been a Good Life\" (2002), edited by Janet Asimov. .\n \"Isaac Asimov: The Foundations of Science Fiction\" (1982). .\n \"The Science of Science-Fiction Writing\" (2000). .\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14575", "revid": "35689054", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14575", "title": "Izabella Scorupco", "text": "Polish-Swedish actress, singer and model (born 1970)\nIzabella Scorupco (born Izabela Dorota Skorupko; 4 June 1970) is a Polish-born Swedish-American actress, singer and model. She is best known for having played a Bond girl, Natalya Simonova, in the 1995 James Bond film \"GoldenEye\". She is also known for her cover of the Shirley &amp; Company song \"Shame, Shame, Shame\" which was released in 1992 and became a European hit.\nLife.\nScorupco was born to Lech, a musician, and Magdalena Skorupko, a doctor, in Bia\u0142ystok, Poland, in 1970. When she was one year old, her parents separated, and she remained with her mother. In 1978, they moved to Bred\u00e4ng in Stockholm, Sweden, where Scorupco learned to speak Swedish, English and French.\nOn 25 December 1996, Scorupco married Polish ice hockey player Mariusz Czerkawski. They had one daughter together. They divorced in 1998.\nOn 30 January 2003, Scorupco married an American, Jeffrey Raymond; they have a son, Jakob (born 24 July 2003). They divorced in 2015. She now lives in Los Angeles and New York City. Since 2017, Scorupco has been in a relationship with Karl Rosengren. They married on 6 October 2019. In 2014, Scorupco became an American citizen.\nCareer.\nIn the late 1980s, Scorupco travelled throughout Europe working as a model, and appeared on the cover of \"Vogue\". In 1987, she was discovered by director Staffan Hildebrand and starred in the film \"Ingen kan \u00e4lska som vi\" (\"Nobody can love like us\"). In the early 1990s, she had a brief but successful career as a pop singer, releasing the album \"IZA\", which was certified gold in Sweden in 1991. Her 1992 cover version of \"Shame, Shame, Shame\" was a hit in several European countries.\nIn 2011, Scorupco reprised her singing career, duetting with Swedish musician Peter J\u00f6back in his single \"Jag Har Dig Nu\" and featuring in the song's music video. She also starred in J\u00f6back's short extension film \"La vie, L'amour, La mort\". Scorupco went on to host the spring 2012 series of \"Sweden's Next Top Model\" but did not continue it for a second series.\nScorupco moved into comedy in July 2013 when she was named to a lead role in a Swedish romantic comedy film, \"Micke &amp; Veronica\", alongside David Hellenius. It premiered on 25 December 2014.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14576", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14576", "title": "Irrationalism and Aestheticism", "text": ""}
{"id": "14579", "revid": "21470661", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14579", "title": "Indonesia", "text": "Country in Southeast Asia and Oceania\nIndonesia, officially the Republic of Indonesia, is a country in Southeast Asia and Oceania, between the Indian and Pacific oceans. Comprising over 17,000 islands, including Sumatra, Java, Sulawesi, and parts of Borneo and New Guinea, Indonesia is the world's largest archipelagic state and the 14th-largest country by area, at . With over 280 million people, Indonesia is the world's fourth-most-populous country and the most populous Muslim-majority country. Java, the world's most populous island, is home to more than half of the country's population.\nIndonesia operates as a presidential republic with an elected legislature and consists of 38 provinces, nine of which have special autonomous status. Jakarta, the largest city, is the world's second-most-populous urban area. Indonesia shares with Papua New Guinea, Timor-Leste, and East Malaysia, as well as maritime borders with Singapore, Peninsular Malaysia, Vietnam, Thailand, the Philippines, Australia, Palau, and India. Despite its large population and densely populated regions, Indonesia has vast areas of wilderness that support one of the world's highest levels of biodiversity.\nThe Indonesian archipelago has been a valuable region for trade since at least the seventh century, when Sumatra's Srivijaya and later Java's Majapahit kingdoms engaged in commerce with entities from mainland China and the Indian subcontinent. Over the centuries, local rulers assimilated foreign influences, leading to the flourishing of Hindu and Buddhist kingdoms. Sunni traders and Sufi scholars later brought Islam, and European powers fought one another to monopolise trade in the Spice Islands of Maluku during the Age of Discovery. Following three and a half centuries of Dutch colonialism, Indonesia proclaimed its independence on 17 August 1945. Since then, it has faced challenges such as separatism, corruption, and natural disasters, alongside democratisation and rapid economic growth.\nIndonesian society comprises hundreds of ethnic and linguistic groups, with Javanese being the largest. The nation's identity is unified under the motto \"Bhinneka Tunggal Ika\", defined by a national language, cultural and religious pluralism, a history of colonialism, and rebellion against it. A newly industrialised country, Indonesia's economy ranks as the world's 17th-largest by nominal GDP and the 7th-largest by PPP. As the world's third-largest democracy and a middle power in global affairs, the country is a member of several multilateral organisations, including the United Nations, World Trade Organization, G20, MIKTA, BRICS and a founding member of the Non-Aligned Movement, Association of Southeast Asian Nations, East Asia Summit, APEC and the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Indonesia\" derives from the Greek words () and (), meaning \"Indian islands\". The name dates back to the 19th century, far predating the formation of independent Indonesia. In 1850, George Windsor Earl, an English ethnologist, proposed the terms \"Indunesians\"\u2014and, his preference, \"Malayunesians\"\u2014for the inhabitants of the \"Indian Archipelago or Malay Archipelago\". In the same publication, one of his students, James Richardson Logan, used \"Indonesia\" as a synonym for \"Indian Archipelago\". Dutch academics writing in East Indies publications were reluctant to use \"Indonesia\". They preferred \"Malay Archipelago\" (); the \"Netherlands East Indies\" (), popularly ; \"the East\" (); and .\nAfter 1900, \"Indonesia\" became more common in academic circles outside the Netherlands, and native nationalist groups adopted it for political expression. Adolf Bastian of the University of Berlin popularised the name through his book . The first native scholar to use the name was Ki Hajar Dewantara, who established a press bureau in the Netherlands, , in 1918.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThe Indonesian archipelago has been inhabited since the time of \"Homo erectus\" or \"Java Man,\" with fossils dating back 2 million to 500,000 BCE. Fossils of \"Homo floresiensis\", found on Flores, date around 700,000 to 60,000 BCE, while \"Homo sapiens\" arrived around 50,000 BCE. Sulawesi and Borneo are home to the world's oldest known cave paintings, dating back 40,000 to 60,000 years, and megalithic sites such as western Java's \"Gunung Padang\", Sulawesi's \"Lore Lindu\", as well as Sumatra's Nias and Sumba reflect early human settlements and ceremonial practices.\nAround 2,000 BCE, Austronesian peoples began arriving in Southeast Asia from the island of Taiwan, gradually displacing native Melanesians to the far eastern part of the archipelago as they spread east, and would eventually form the majority of Indonesia's modern population. Favourable agricultural conditions and advancements like wet-field rice cultivation by the 8th century BCE enabled the growth of villages and kingdoms by the first century CE. The archipelago's strategic location fostered inter-island and international exchange with civilisations from the Indian subcontinent and mainland China, profoundly influencing Indonesian history and culture through trade.\nBy the 7th century CE, the Srivijaya naval kingdom thrived on trade, adopting Hindu and Buddhist influences. The 8th to 10th centuries saw the rise and decline of the Buddhist Sailendra and Hindu Mataram dynasties, leaving monumental legacies like the Borobudur and Prambanan temples. After the failed Mongol invasion of Java in the late 13th century, the Hindu Majapahit kingdom rose to dominate much of the archipelago under Gajah Mada's leadership\u2014a period often called the \"Golden Age\" of Indonesian history. Islam arrived in the 13th century in northern Sumatra, and following gradual adoption in other islands, it became the dominant religion in Java and Sumatra by the 16th century, blending with pre-existing traditions to form a distinct Islamic culture, particularly in Java.\nColonial era.\nIn 1512, Europeans began arriving in the archipelago, led by Portuguese traders under Francisco Serr\u00e3o, to seek a monopoly of the lucrative spice trade in the Maluku Islands. Dutch and British traders soon followed, with the former establishing the Dutch East India Company (\"Verenigde Oostindische Compagnie\", VOC) in 1602, which eventually became the dominant European power for almost two centuries. After the VOC's dissolution in 1799 during the French Revolutionary Wars, the Dutch East Indies was established as a nationalised colony, marking the beginning of formal colonial rule by the Netherlands.\nOver the next century and a half, Dutch control over the archipelago was tenuous, as they faced continuous rebellions from local leaders like Prince Diponegoro in central Java, Imam Bonjol in central Sumatra, Pattimura in Maluku, and fighters in Aceh. Dutch dominance only extended to Indonesia's modern boundaries in the early 20th century, with the establishment of Dutch posts in New Guinea.\nDuring World War II, the Japanese invasion and occupation of the Indies ended Dutch rule and encouraged Indonesia's independence movement. Only two days after Japan's surrender in August 1945, Sukarno and Mohammad Hatta issued the Proclamation of Indonesian Independence, and they became the country's first president and vice-president, along with Sutan Sjahrir as Prime Minister. The Netherlands attempted to re-establish their rule, prompting the start of Indonesia's war of independence against the Dutch. The conflict lasted until 1949, when the Dutch recognised Indonesian independence in the Dutch\u2013Indonesian Round Table Conference following international pressure. Despite political, social, and sectarian divisions, Indonesians found unity in their fight for independence.\nPost-World War II.\nSukarno shifted Indonesia from democracy to authoritarianism and maintained power by balancing the opposing forces of political Islam, the military, and the Communist Party of Indonesia (PKI). Tensions between the latter two culminated in an attempted coup in 1965, leading to a violent anti-communist purge led by the Army's Major General Suharto that killed at least 500,000 people and imprisoned around a million more. The PKI was blamed for the coup and destroyed, weakening Sukarno's power. Suharto capitalised on this, becoming President in 1968 and establishing a US-backed \"New Order\" military dictatorship, which fostered foreign direct investment and drove three decades of substantial economic growth.\nIn 1975, Indonesia's invasion and subsequent occupation of former Portuguese colony East Timor drew international condemnation. Indonesia was the country worst affected by the 1997 Asian financial crisis, which brought out widespread discontent with the New Order's corruption and political suppression and ultimately ended Suharto's rule. In 1999, East Timor seceded after a 24-year military occupation that some scholars classified as genocide.\nIn the post-Suharto era since 1998, the country has strengthened its democracy by granting regional autonomy and holding the first direct presidential election in 2004. Political, economic and social instability and terrorism were persistent in the 2000s. The economy has performed strongly since 2007, although corruption remains a chronic issue. Relations among the diverse population are mostly harmonious, but sectarian discontent and violence remain problematic in some areas. A political settlement to a separatist insurgency in Aceh was achieved in 2005.\nGeography.\nThe southernmost country in Asia, Indonesia lies between latitudes 11\u00b0S and 6\u00b0N and longitudes 95\u00b0E and 141\u00b0E. It is also a transcontinental country, spanning Southeast Asia and Oceania and is the world's largest archipelagic state, stretching from east to west and from north to south. The exact number of Indonesia's islands varies according to different sources, usually ranging from 13,000 to 17,000, with around 922 permanently inhabited. Its five main islands are Sumatra, Java, Borneo (shared with Brunei and Malaysia), Sulawesi, and New Guinea (shared with Papua New Guinea).\nThe country features diverse topography, including towering mountains, vast lakes, and extensive river systems. At , Puncak Jaya is Indonesia's highest peak, while Lake Toba in Sumatra, covering , is the largest lake. The country's major rivers, primarily in Kalimantan, include Kapuas, Barito and Mahakam, serving as vital transportation and communication routes for remote riverine communities.\nClimate.\nIndonesia's equatorial position ensures a relatively stable climate year-round, characterised by two main seasons: the dry season from May to October and the wet season from November to April, with no extremes of summer and winter. The climate is predominantly tropical rainforest, with cooler climates in higher areas over above sea level. In highland regions, the climate is cooler and wetter than in the lowlands. Areas near tropical rainforests tend to receive consistent rainfall year-round (\"K\u00f6ppen: Cfb\"), while those closer to monsoon and savanna regions have more distinct dry seasons (\"K\u00f6ppen: Cwb\").\nThere is a variation in rainfall patterns, with regions like western Sumatra, Java, and the interiors of Kalimantan and Papua receiving more precipitation, while areas closer to Australia, such as Nusa Tenggara, are drier. The warm waters covering 81% of Indonesia's area keep land temperatures stable, with high humidity (70\u201390%) and moderate, predictable winds influenced by monsoon cycles. Major weather hazards include strong currents in straits, such as the Lombok and Sape Straits, rather than typhoons or storms.\nSeveral studies consider Indonesia to be at severe risk from the projected effects of climate change, including a temperature rise of by 2050 due to unreduced emissions. This warming could intensify droughts, disrupt rainfall patterns critical to agriculture, and increase occurrences of food shortages, diseases, and wildfires. Rising sea levels would also threaten densely populated coastal regions, and impoverished communities are expected to be disproportionately affected by climate change.\nGeology.\nIndonesia's geology is shaped by its position on the Pacific Ring of Fire, namely a subduction zone where three tectonic plates collide: the Eurasian plate, the Indo-Australian plate, and the Pacific plate. This tectonic activity makes the region highly unstable with volcanoes and earthquakes. Around 130 volcanoes are classified as active, stretching from Sumatra through Java, Bali and the Lesser Sunda Islands, and the Banda Islands to northeastern Sulawesi. Although volcanic ash is harmful to agriculture, it has also created fertile soils that have historically sustained the high population densities of areas near volcanoes. Between 1972 and 1991, Java experienced a total of 29 volcanic eruptions.\nThe archipelago has witnessed several powerful volcanic eruptions with global repercussions. A massive supervolcano erupted with a maximum volcanic explosivity index (VEI) of 8 at present-day Lake Toba around 74,000 BCE, causing a global volcanic winter, cooling the climate, and possibly influencing human evolution. The eruption of Mount Tambora in 1815, the most recently confirmed VEI-7 eruption, made much of the Northern Hemisphere without summer in 1816. The eruption of Mount Krakatoa in 1883, a VEI-6 eruption, produced the loudest sound in recorded history, with additional effects around the world years after the event. Recent catastrophic disasters due to seismic activity include the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and the 2018 Sulawesi earthquake.\nBiodiversity.\nRecognised by Conservation International as one of 17 megadiverse countries, Indonesia hosts one of the world's highest levels of biodiversity due to its tropical climate, large size, and archipelagic geography. The country's flora and fauna include a mix of Asian and Australasian species. The Sunda Shelf islands (Sumatra, Java, and Borneo) have a wealth of Asian fauna as they were once linked to mainland Asia, while Sulawesi, Lesser Sunda Islands, Maluku and Papua evolved unique ecosystems due to their separation from the continental landmasses. In terms of total endemic species, the Indonesian archipelago ranks among the highest globally.\nThe country also boasts of coastline, featuring diverse sea and coastal ecosystems, such as dunes and mangroves, as well as coral reefs in the Coral Triangle that harbour the highest diversity of coral reef fish globally, with over 2,000 species. The Wallace Line, described by English naturalist Alfred Russel Wallace, marks the biogeographical divide between Asian and Australasian species, with the region between the Wallace and Weber Lines (called Wallacea) hosting unique biodiversity as described in Wallace's 1869 book, \"The Malay Archipelago\". Eighty-three percent of Southeast Asia's old-growth forests are located in Indonesia.\nIndonesia faces severe environmental challenges due to extensive deforestation, peatland destruction, and over-exploitation of resources, driven by industries such as logging, plantations and agriculture since the 1970s, and in most recent years, palm oil. Forest cover declined from 87% in 1950 to 47.7% in 2023, highlighting the country as a leading forest-based emitter of greenhouse gases. These issues are often given a lower priority due to high poverty levels and weak, under-resourced governance. They also threaten indigenous and endemic species, with the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) listing many as critically endangered, such as the Bali myna, Sumatran orangutan, and Javan rhinoceros. Environmental degradation has prompted some academics to label these activities as ecocide.\nConservation.\nAs of 2023, Indonesia has designated 21.3% of its land as protected areas and aims to align its strategy with the 2022 Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework. Additionally, 411 marine reserves account for 9% of the country's maritime area, with a target to increase this to 30% by 2045. However, a recent study highlights that the current efforts are off track and existing marine reserves are poorly managed. Approximately 390 marine areas are managed by government bodies, communities, and other sectors, with potential for classification as other effective area-based conservation measures (OECMs), though there is no national mechanism for reporting them.\nIndonesia's conservation framework includes 55 national parks, covering around 9% of the country's surface area. Among these, nine are predominantly marine parks, with six recognised as World Heritage Sites, seven as part of the World Network of Biosphere Reserves and five wetlands of international importance under the 1971 Ramsar Convention. Notably, Indonesia has over 100 marine protected areas spanning 15.7 million hectares as of 2012, and these are managed by the Ministry of Forestry and local governments. Previous targets included reaching 20 million hectares by 2020 under former President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono's 2009 initiative and 10% of territorial waters, or 31 million hectares.\nGovernment and politics.\nIndonesia is a presidential republic. Following the fall of the New Order in 1998, sweeping amendments to the Constitution of Indonesia restructured the state's executive, legislative, and judicial branches while maintaining a balance between its unitary state framework and greater decentralisation to regional governments. The president serves as head of state, head of government, and commander-in-chief of the Indonesian National Armed Forces (\"Tentara Nasional Indonesia\", TNI) and oversees domestic and foreign policies. Presidents may serve up to two consecutive five-year terms.\nThe People's Consultative Assembly (\"Majelis Permusyawaratan Rakyat\", MPR) is Indonesia's highest representative body, responsible for amending the constitution, inaugurating and impeaching the president, and formalising state policies. It consists of two houses: the People's Representative Council (\"Dewan Perwakilan Rakyat\", DPR), which has 580 members and handles legislation and executive oversight, and the Regional Representative Council (\"Dewan Perwakilan Daerah\", DPD), which has 152 members and focuses on regional matters. Since 1998, reforms have significantly enhanced the DPR's governance functionality. The DPD represents the interests of the diverse regions of Indonesia.\nIndonesia's judiciary includes several key institutions. The Supreme Court (\"Mahkamah Agung\") is the highest judicial authority, handling final appeals and case reviews. The Constitutional Court (\"Mahkamah Konstitusi\") addresses constitutional and political matters, while the country's Religious Court (\"Pengadilan Agama\") oversees Islamic personal law cases. Additionally, the Judicial Commission (\"Komisi Yudisial\") monitors judicial performance.\nParties and elections.\nSince 1999, Indonesia has operated under a multi-party system, wherein no single political party has secured an outright majority of seats in the legislative elections. Political parties are generally classified into two categories: secular and nationalist parties, and Islamic parties. Indonesia's political scene is characterised by a preference for pragmatism over ideological orthodoxy to fit the prevailing political climate, extensive power-sharing among parties, and oversized governing coalitions. Unlike many other democracies, pre-election party alliances are the norm in Indonesia.\nIn 1955, the first general election was held to elect members of the DPR and the Constitutional Assembly (\"Konstituante\"). At the most recent elections in 2024, eight political parties secured representation in the DPR, with a parliamentary threshold of 4% of the national vote. At the national level, Indonesians did not elect a President until 2004. Since then, the President has been elected for a five-year term, as are the party-aligned members of the DPR and the non-partisan DPD. Due to the country's sprawling geography, national elections have gained a reputation for being among the most logistically complex in the world, involving the transport of ballots and other electoral goods by various means of transportation to reach difficult areas, such as mountains and small islands.\nAdministrative divisions.\nIndonesia is divided into several administrative levels. At the first level are the provinces, each with a legislature (\"Dewan Perwakilan Rakyat Daerah\", DPRD) and an elected governor. The number of provinces has grown from 8 in 1945 to 38 today, with the most recent one, Southwest Papua, established in 2022. The second level includes regencies () and cities (), led by regents () and mayors (), respectively, both supported by legislatures (). Below this are districts (, called in Papua), and the fourth level comprises villages, known by various names like , , , (in West Sumatra), or (in Aceh). Villages are subdivided into community groups (, RW) and neighbourhood groups (, RT), with further subdivisions like hamlets ( or ) in Java.\nThe village level is the lowest administrative unit but significantly influences daily life. Village governments are led by elected heads ( or ) and handle local matters. Since the start of regional autonomy implementation in 1999, regencies and cities have become key administrative units responsible for most government services. Nine provinces are granted a special autonomous status () from the central government. A conservative Islamic territory, Aceh has the right to apply aspects of sharia law. Yogyakarta uniquely retains its pre-colonial monarchy, with its Sultan and Duke serving as governor and vice governor, while the provinces in Papua are granted special autonomy to address separatist tensions, accelerate development, and provide Papuans with greater self-governance.\nForeign relations.\nIndonesia follows an \"independent and active\" (\"bebas aktif\") foreign policy, a term coined in 1948 by the country's first vice-president, Mohammad Hatta. With this policy, the country aims to navigate great power politics, maintain autonomy, and avoid alignment with major powers. The President holds the ultimate authority in determining foreign policy directions, while the Foreign Affairs Ministry is responsible for formulating and implementing foreign policy. Meanwhile, the Parliament (DPR) provides oversight and ratifies international treaties. Indonesia is considered to be a middle power in global politics.\nAs the largest country in Southeast Asia and a founding member of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), Indonesia considers ASEAN the cornerstone of its foreign policy. Outside of its immediate region, Indonesia has actively supported Palestine while refraining from formal diplomatic relations with Israel. However, the two countries maintain discreet ties. Since the start of the 21st century, Indonesia has developed close relations with China, primarily relating to investments in infrastructure and trade, while at the same time maintaining a strategic partnership with the United States, focusing on economic cooperation, security, and counterterrorism efforts.\nIndonesia has been a member of the United Nations since 1950 and is a founding member of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) and the East Asia Summit. Indonesia is also a signatory to the ASEAN Free Trade Area agreement, the Cairns Group, and the World Trade Organization (WTO). Indonesia has been a humanitarian and development aid recipient since the late 1960s, but it recently established its own foreign aid agency in 2019. The country also plays a role in maintaining international peace and security, deploying thousands of military and police personnel to multiple United Nations peacekeeping missions since 1957, including in Lebanon, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and Mali.\nMilitary.\nThe Indonesian National Armed Forces (TNI) consists of the Army (TNI-AD), Navy (TNI-AL) (including the Marine Corps), and Air Force (TNI-AU), with active personnel numbering approximately 300,400 in the Army, 65,000 in the Navy, and 30,100 in the Air Force. Established during the Indonesian National Revolution, the TNI initially engaged in guerrilla warfare alongside informal militias. Its territorial structure focuses on maintaining domestic stability and deterring foreign threats. Though political reforms in 1998 removed TNI's formal legislative role, it continues to wield political influence, albeit reduced from its peak during the New Order. Defence spending in 2023 was 0.7% of GDP, with controversies surrounding military-owned commercial ventures.\nSince independence, Indonesia has struggled to maintain unity against separatist movements and insurgencies, notably in Aceh and Papua. While the former ended peacefully in 2005, the latter has continued amid the implementation of regional autonomy and well-documented human rights abuses by the TNI, including extrajudicial killings, forced disappearances and restrictions on freedom of expression, as reported by Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch, and the UNHRC. Indonesia's historical military engagements include conflicts with the Netherlands over Dutch New Guinea, opposition to the British-backed creation of Malaysia (\"Konfrontasi\"), the anti-communist mass killings, and the invasion of East Timor, which was Indonesia's largest military operation.\nLaw enforcement and human rights.\nLaw enforcement in Indonesia is primarily handled by the Indonesian National Police (POLRI), supported by other agencies under the President, ministries, or state-owned companies. These agencies perform specific policing duties and are supervised and trained by the POLRI, which serves as the country's national civilian police force responsible for maintaining law and order.\nIndonesia has a documented history of racial discrimination and conflicts, particularly against Chinese Indonesians and Papuans, which have at times escalated into violence, notably the anti-Chinese riots in 1998 and the ongoing Papua conflict since 1962. Other minorities, such as the LGBTQ, also face challenges, where a rapid surge of anti-LGBTQ rhetoric has been observed since the mid-2010s after relative obscurity on the topic in the decades prior. Discrimination against religious minorities is also common.\nIssues regarding free speech and the right to assembly are prevalent despite constitutional protections. Laws such as the Electronic Information and Transactions (\"Informasi dan Transaksi Elektronik\", ITE) Law are often used to criminalise dissent, with critics and activists facing charges for expressing opinions online. Peaceful protests, particularly those addressing sensitive issues such as indigenous rights in Papua, politics or environmental concerns, are frequently met with a heavy-handed response from law enforcement. The government occasionally imposes restrictions on assembly permits, particularly for those critical of authorities or advocating rights.\nEconomy.\nIndonesia operates a mixed economy where the private sector and the government play significant roles. As the only G20 member state in Southeast Asia, it has the region's largest economy and is classified as a newly industrialised country. In 2025, its nominal GDP was , ranking 17th globally, while its GDP at purchasing power parity (PPP) was , ranking 7th, with per capita values of (PPP) and (nominal). In 2021, services dominate the economy in terms of employment (49.2%), followed by agriculture (28.9%) and industry (21.7%), while in terms of share of GDP in 2022, both services and industry dominate (roughly 41% each), followed by manufacturing (18.3%) and agriculture (12.4%).\nThe economic structure has shifted significantly over time, transitioning from agriculture in the 1950s and 1960s to gradual industrialisation and urbanisation from the late 1960s to the 1980s. Falling oil prices in the 1980s prompted diversification into manufactured exports, resulting in substantial economic growth (the GDP rose at an average rate of 7.1%) and poverty reduction from 40% to 11%. However, the economy took a severe hit during the Asian economic crisis in the late 1990s, when the GDP fell by 13%, inflation reached 78% and GDP grew by only 0.8% in 1999. \nEntering the 2000s, the country instituted a host of reforms, including prudent banking regulations, better monetary and fiscal policies, and flexible exchange rates. These measures resulted in steady recovery, with growth rates consistently between 4% and 6% since 2004. Along with strong domestic consumption, they also helped Indonesia weather the 2008 financial crisis. The COVID-19 pandemic in the early 2020s caused a recession, but the economy rebounded within a year.\nIndonesia's abundant natural resources, including nickel, coal, and petroleum, dominate its export portfolio. It imports refined and crude petroleum and vehicle parts, with major trade partners including China, the United States, Japan, South Korea, India, and ASEAN neighbours. The country is also a major agricultural producer, leading in palm oil, rubber, coffee, rice, and tobacco, supported by ample rainfall, sunshine and fertile soil.\nA range of structural challenges in the economy remain. Inequality in wealth and opportunity is pronounced, particularly between the western and eastern regions. Joblessness and low labor productivity persist, while a majority of the workforce is still employed in the informal sector. Infrastructure deficiencies, especially outside major cities, hinder equitable development. The business climate is often undermined by, among other things, regulatory uncertainty and weak law enforcement, which deters investment. Moreover, heavy reliance on commodity exports leaves the economy vulnerable to global price fluctuations and environmental damage, notably deforestation.\nTourism.\nTourism plays a significant role in Indonesia's economy, contributing to GDP and drawing 11.6 million international visitors in 2023. Australia, Singapore, Malaysia, China, and India are among the top five sources of visitors to Indonesia.\nThe tourism industry thrives on Indonesia's natural and cultural wealth. The country boasts a well-preserved natural ecosystem, with rainforests covering 57% of its land area (225 million acres). Popular natural destinations include the rainforests of Sumatra and Kalimantan, particularly the Orangutan wildlife reserves. Indonesia also has one of the world's longest coastlines, stretching . Cultural tourism features prominently, with attractions like the ancient Borobudur and Prambanan temples, the Toraja highlands, and the cultural festivals of Bali.\nIndonesia is home to ten UNESCO World Heritage Sites, including Komodo National Park and the Cosmological Axis of Yogyakarta. Additionally, 21 other sites are on the tentative list, such as Bunaken National Park and the Raja Ampat Islands. Historical tourism is also a major draw, with attractions like the colonial heritage of the Dutch East Indies in Jakarta and Semarang, as well as the royal palaces of Pagaruyung and Ubud.\nScience and technology.\nGovernment spending on research and development is relatively low at 0.28% of GDP in 2020. Despite being ranked 55th among 133 countries on the 2025 Global Innovation Index, the country performs above expectations for its upper middle-income status. Historical innovations include the \"pinisi\" boats of the Bugis and Makassar people, while the most recent ones include the Sosrobahu road construction technique developed by Tjokorda Raka Sukawati, and the Fast Fourier Transform-based signal processing technique used in 4G Long-Term Evolution (LTE), co-developed by Khoirul Anwar. Indonesia also produces passenger trains and freight wagons through its state-owned Indonesian Railway Industry (\"Industri Kereta Api\", INKA), which exports trains abroad.\nIndonesia has a long history of manufacturing both commuter and military aircraft and is the only country in Southeast Asia with an indigenous aircraft industry. Its state-owned aerospace company, Indonesian Aerospace (\"PT. Dirgantara Indonesia\", PTDI), has supplied components to Boeing and Airbus and co-developed the CN-235 with Spain's CASA. Former President B. J. Habibie, an aerospace engineer before getting into politics, played a key role in advancing the country's aerospace research. Recently, Indonesia has been collaborating with South Korea on the 4.5-generation fighter jet KAI KF-21 Boramae.\nIndonesia's space program, formerly managed by the National Institute of Aeronautics and Space (\"Lembaga Penerbangan dan Antariksa Nasional\", LAPAN), launched its first satellite (\"Palapa\") in 1976 with assistance from the United States, making Indonesia the first developing country with a satellite system. Since 2003, LAPAN has developed and launched micro-satellites under the LAPAN-TUBSAT program to conduct Earth-observation and technology-development experiments. These efforts were followed by the domestically developed LAPAN-A series (A1, A2, A3), which expanded national capabilities in remote sensing and maritime monitoring. LAPAN has also carried out suborbital rocket tests under its RX program, at the Pameungpeuk launch site in Garut Regency, West Java.\nInfrastructure.\nTransport.\nIndonesia's transport system reflects its archipelagic geography and population distribution, which is heavily concentrated on Java. As of 2022, the predominant road network spanned , including Transjakarta, which operates the world's longest bus rapid transit system. Common urban transport includes rickshaws like \"bajaj\" and \"becak\" and shared taxis such as \"angkot\" and minibuses.\nRailways are primarily located in Java and parts of Sumatra and Sulawesi, serving freight and passenger transport, including commuter and inter-city rail services like those in Greater Jakarta and Yogyakarta. In the late 2010s, rapid transit systems were introduced in Jakarta and South Sumatra, and in collaboration with China, Indonesia inaugurated its first high-speed rail (\"Whoosh\") in 2023, connecting Jakarta and Bandung. It was the first such system in Southeast Asia and the Southern Hemisphere.\nAir and sea transport also play significant roles. Soekarno\u2013Hatta International Airport, Indonesia's largest, served 54\u00a0million passengers in 2024, followed by Ngurah Rai and Juanda International Airports. Garuda Indonesia, the national flag carrier since 1949, is recognised by Skytrax as one of the world's few 5-star airlines and is a member of the global airline alliance SkyTeam. The Port of Tanjung Priok, the country's busiest and most advanced, handles over 50% of Indonesia's trans-shipment cargo traffic.\nEnergy.\nIndonesia is a major energy producer and consumer, producing and consuming worth of energy in 2023. The country's total installed power generation capacity in 2022 is approximately 83.8 gigawatts (GW), primarily from coal (61%). Other significant sources include natural gas, oil, and renewables such as geothermal, hydropower, and solar. The state-owned State Electricity Company (\"Perusahaan Listrik Negara\", PLN) holds a monopoly on electric power distribution in the country.\nIndonesia's energy mix is still dominated by non-renewable sources, with coal being the majority, followed by natural gas and oil. Renewables, including geothermal (5%), hydropower (7%), and solar (1%), make up a smaller but growing share. The potential for renewable energy is immense, particularly geothermal, where the country ranks as one of the world's largest producers. The country is one of the world's largest producers and exporters of coal and a significant exporter of liquefied natural gas (LNG).\nThe government plans to transition towards greener energy sources and achieve net-zero carbon emissions by 2050. In the latest energy plan in early 2025, the government aims for a 71-gigawatt expansion in power capacity by 2034, with a focus on renewables. However, the country has insufficient infrastructure for renewable energy, faces difficulties in providing electricity access to remote areas, and continues to rely heavily on coal.\nDemographics.\nAccording to the 2020 census, Indonesia had a population of 270.2\u00a0million, making it the world's fourth most populous country. The population grew at a rate of 1.25% between 2010 and 2020. Java, the world's most populated island, is home to 56% of Indonesia's population. The overall population density stands at , but Java's density is significantly higher, reaching . Indonesia's first post-colonial census in 1961 recorded a population of 97 million, and projections estimate it will grow to 335 million by 2050. The country maintains a relatively young demographic, with a median age of 31.5 years as of 2024.\nIndonesia's population distribution is highly uneven, reflecting its diverse geography and varying levels of development. It ranges from the bustling megacity of Jakarta to remote and uncontacted tribes in Papua. As of 2024, approximately 59% of Indonesians live in urban areas, with Jakarta as the country's primate city and the second-most populous urban area globally, housing more than 30\u00a0million people. Additionally, about 8 million Indonesians reside overseas, with large communities in Malaysia, the Netherlands, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Taiwan, Hong Kong, the United States, the United Kingdom, and Australia.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEthnic groups and languages.\nIndonesia is home to around 600 distinct native ethnic groups, predominantly descended from Austronesian peoples speaking Proto-Austronesian languages, likely from modern-day Taiwan. The Melanesians, who inhabit eastern Indonesia, represent another significant ethnic grouping. The Javanese, making up 40% of the population, are the largest ethnic group and the politically dominant one, primarily residing in central and eastern Java, with sizeable numbers in other provinces. Other major groups include the Sundanese, Malay, Batak, Madurese, Betawi, Minangkabau, and Bugis. A sense of Indonesian nationhood exists alongside strong regional identities.\nThe official language, Indonesian, is a standardized variety of Malay based on its prestige dialect originating around the Riau-Johor region, which became the archipelago's \"lingua franca\" over the course of centuries. It was first promoted by nationalists in the 1920s and gained official status in 1945, following independence, under the name \"Bahasa Indonesia\", and has since been widely adopted due to its use in education, media, business, and governance. While nearly all Indonesians speak \"Bahasa\", most also speak one of over 700 local languages, often as their first language. These are predominantly from the Austronesian family, with over 270 Papuan languages in eastern Indonesia. Javanese is the most widely spoken local language and holds co-official status in Yogyakarta.\nThe Dutch and other European-descended populations like the Indos, though significant during colonial times, always represented a small fraction of the population, numbering only around 200,000 in 1930. The Dutch language never gained substantial traction due to the Dutch colonial focus on commerce rather than cultural integration. Dutch fluency exists today in small numbers among some older generations and legal professionals, as specific legal codes remain available only in that language.\nReligion.\nIndonesia officially recognises six religions: Islam, Protestantism, Roman Catholicism, Hinduism, Buddhism, and Confucianism, while acknowledging religious freedom in the constitution. As of 2023, 87.1% of the population (244 million Indonesians) are Muslims, making Indonesia the world's most populous Muslim-majority country, with Sunnis constituting 99% of the Muslim population. Christians, comprising 10% of the population, form majorities in several eastern provinces, while Hindus and Buddhists are primarily Balinese and Chinese Indonesians, respectively.\nBefore the arrival of major world religions, Indonesia's natives practised animism and dynamism, worshipping ancestral spirits and believing in the supernatural (\"hyang\") inhabiting natural elements, such as large trees, mountains and forests. Such beliefs are common to the Austronesian peoples. These indigenous traditions, such as Sundanese Sunda Wiwitan, Javanese Kejaw\u00e8n and Dayak's Kaharingan, have profoundly influenced modern religious practices, resulting in a less orthodox and syncretic form of faith like Javanese abangan, Balinese Hinduism and Dayak Christianity.\nHinduism reached the archipelago in the 1st century CE, followed by Buddhism in the 5th century. Through empires such as Majapahit, Srivijaya, and Sailendra, both religions played a major role in shaping Indonesia's religious history and left enduring cultural influences that persist even though neither is a majority faith. Islam arrived as early as the 8th century through Sunni and Sufi traders from the Indian subcontinent and southern Arabian peninsula, mixing with local cultural and religious traditions to form a distinct Islamic culture (\"santri\"). By the 16th century, Islam had become the dominant religion in Java and Sumatra, resulting from the blend of trade, \"dawah\", such as by the Wali Sanga and Chinese explorer Zheng He, and military campaigns by several sultanates.\nCatholicism and Protestantism were later introduced through missionary efforts during European colonisation, such as by Jesuit Francis Xavier, though the spread of the former faced challenges under the VOC and Dutch colonial era policies. The latter's primary branches include Calvinism and Lutheranism, though a multitude of other denominations exist in the country. A small Jewish presence has existed in the archipelago, primarily descendants of Dutch and Iraqi Jews, though their numbers have dwindled since independence in 1945. Only a few Jews remain today, mostly in major cities like Jakarta, Manado and Surabaya. One of the remaining synagogues, Sha'ar Hashamayim, is located in Tondano, North Sulawesi, around 31\u00a0km from Manado.\nReligion is central to the lives of the overwhelming majority of Indonesians, reflecting its integral role in the country's society, culture, and identity. Interfaith relations are significantly shaped by political leadership and civil society, guided by the first principle of Pancasila, which emphasises belief in a supreme deity and religious tolerance. While it promotes harmony, religious intolerance continues to be a recurring issue. Followers of indigenous religions, officially called \"aliran kepercayaan\" or cultural belief systems, have faced a lack of legal and governmental recognition that leads to discrimination as well as uncertainty regarding their exact numbers.\nEducation.\nIndonesia has one of the largest education systems in the world, with over 50 million students, 4 million teachers, and more than 250,000 schools spanning the archipelago. Overseen by the Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education, the Ministry of Higher Education, Science, and Technology and the Ministry of Religious Affairs for Islamic schools, the system follows a 6-3-3-4 structure: six years of elementary school, three years each of junior and senior secondary school, and four years of tertiary education. While the literacy rate is high (96%), it is lower in rural and remote areas. Enrolment rates vary across educational levels, with near-universal enrolment in primary education (97.9%), but drop to 81.7% and 64.2% in lower and upper secondary education and around 42.6% for tertiary education.\nGovernment spending on education accounted for approximately 1.3% of GDP in 2023. In 2022, there were 4,481 higher education institutions in the country, including universities, Islamic institutions, and open universities. The University of Indonesia, Gadjah Mada University, and the Bandung Institute of Technology are the top three universities in the country, all of which rank within the world's top 300 universities.\nIssues regarding quality and equity are persistent, particularly urban-rural disparities, inadequate school infrastructure, and a lack of qualified teachers. The system also lags behind international benchmarks, such as the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA), where Indonesian students consistently rank near the bottom in reading, mathematics, and science. The higher education sector has been struggling with underfunding, low quality, limited research output and a mismatch between graduates' skills and labour market needs.\nHealthcare.\nIndonesia has made significant progress in developing its healthcare system since 1945. Initially, healthcare services were limited, with a shortage of doctors, hospitals, and infrastructure. In the late 1960s, the government began establishing community health centres (\"puskesmas\") to provide basic services in rural areas. With the help of the World Health Organization in the 1970s and 1980s, Indonesia implemented an immunisation program to combat diseases like polio and measles. The system experienced a major transformation in 2014 with the launch of \"Jaminan Kesehatan Nasional\" (JKN), a universal health care managed by the Social Security Agency on Health (\"BPJS Kesehatan\"). It is one of the world's largest single-payer systems, covering over 95% of the population (265 million people) by 2023.\nGovernment spending on healthcare accounted for 2.69% of GDP in 2022. Primary healthcare is delivered through \"puskesmas\", hospitals, and private clinics. While the healthcare system lags behind those in ASEAN neighbours like Malaysia and Singapore, significant public health outcomes have been achieved, such as an increase in life expectancy (from 54.9 years in 1973 to 71.1 years in 2023), a decline in child mortality (from 15.5 deaths per 100 live births in 1972 to 2.1 deaths in 2022), polio eradication in 2014, and decreasing cases of malaria.\nSome chronic health issues persist, including child stunting that affects 21.6% of children under five according to a 2022 data. Low air quality, particularly in major cities, contributes to respiratory illnesses, while maternal and child health indicators remain areas of concern, with a maternal mortality rate the third highest in the region. Additionally, Indonesia has one of the highest smoking rates globally (34.8% of adults), contributing to a high prevalence of non-communicable diseases like cardiovascular issues and lung cancer.\nCulture.\nThe cultural history of Indonesia spans over two thousand years and has been influenced by the Indian subcontinent, China, the Middle East, Europe, Melanesian, and Austronesian peoples. These influences have shaped the country's multicultural, multilingual, and multi-ethnic identity, distinct from its indigenous roots. Indonesia holds 16 items recognised by UNESCO as Intangible Cultural Heritage, including wayang puppet theatre, batik, angklung, the saman dance, and pencak silat. Recent joint nominations added pantun, kebaya, and kolintang to the list.\nArt and architecture.\nIndonesian arts encompass traditional and contemporary forms shaped by influences from India, the Arab world, China, and Europe, driven by cultural exchange and trade. Bali's artistic traditions, such as classical Kamasan and Wayang-style painting, are renowned, originating from visual narratives depicted on candi bas-reliefs from eastern Java. Traditional architecture reflects ethnic diversity, with iconic and traditional houses (\"rumah adat\") like Toraja's \"Tongkonan\", Minangkabau's \"Rumah Gadang\", Java's \"Pendopo\", and Dayak longhouses each showcasing unique customs and histories.\nDiscoveries of megalithic sculptures led to the flourishing of tribal art among the Nias, Batak, Asmat, Dayak, and Toraja communities, who utilised wood and stone as primary sculpting materials. From the 8th to the 15th centuries, the Javanese civilisation excelled in sophisticated stone sculpting and architecture, heavily influenced by the Hindu-Buddhist Dharmic culture. This period produced monumental works like the Borobudur and Prambanan temples.\nMusic, dance and clothing.\nIndonesia's musical heritage predates historical records, with indigenous tribes using chants and traditional instruments like the angklung, gamelan, and sasando in rituals. Influences from other cultures have enriched Indonesian music, such as the gambus and qasida from the Middle East, keroncong from Portugal, and dangdut (one of the country's most popular music genres), which incorporates Hindi, Malay, and Middle Eastern elements. Today, Indonesian music enjoys regional popularity in Malaysia, Singapore, and Brunei due to cultural similarities and language intelligibility.\nWith over 3,000 traditional dances, Indonesian dance forms have their origins in rituals and religious worship, such as the dance of witch doctors and Hudoq, as well as periods of Hindu-Buddhist and Islamic influence. While modern and urban dances shaped by Western and South Korean cultures are gaining popularity, traditional dances like those of Java, Bali, and Dayak remain a living tradition.\nIndonesia's rich cultural history is also reflected in its diverse clothing styles. National costumes like batik and kebaya are widely recognised, with roots in Javanese, Sundanese, and Balinese cultures. Traditional attire varies by region and province, such as the Batak ulos, Malay and Minangkabau songket, and Sasak ikat, and is commonly worn for ceremonies, weddings, and formal events.\nTheatre and cinema.\nTraditional Indonesian theatre, such as wayang shadow puppetry, often depicts Hindu epics like the Ramayana and Mahabharata. Other forms of drama, such as \"Ludruk\", \"Ketoprak\", \"Sandiwara\", \"Lenong\", and Balinese dance dramas, often incorporate humour, music, and audience interaction. Unique traditions like the Minangkabau \"Randai\" combine music, dance, and martial arts (\"silat\"), telling semi-historical legends during traditional ceremonies and festivals. Modern theatre, exemplified by \"Teater Koma\", addresses social and political themes through satire.\nThe first film produced in the archipelago was \"Loetoeng Kasaroeng\" (1926), a silent film by Dutch director L. Heuveldorp, and the film industry expanded post-independence with Usmar Ismail's pioneering work in the 1950s. During the latter part of the Sukarno era in the 1960s, films were used to promote nationalism and anti-Western sentiment, while Suharto's New Order imposed censorship to maintain social order. Film productions peaked in the 1980s with notable titles such as \"Pengabdi Setan\" (1980), \"Tjoet Nja' Dhien\" (1988) and \"Warkop\" comedy films, but the industry declined in the next decade.\nIn the post-Suharto era, the industry saw a resurgence. Independent filmmakers tackled previously censored themes like race, religion, and love, producing notable films such as \"Kuldesak\" (1999) and \"Ada Apa dengan Cinta?\" (2002). The 2025 animated film \"Jumbo\" set box office records, becoming the most-watched Indonesian film with more than 10 million tickets sold. The Indonesian Film Festival (\"Festival Film Indonesia\"), which gives out the Citra Award, has celebrated cinematic achievements since 1955.\nMass media and literature.\nMedia freedom in Indonesia significantly improved after the fall of Suharto's rule, during which the Ministry of Information tightly controlled the media. The early years of the post-Suharto era was marked by a proliferation of print and electronic media amid greater press freedom. Internet development began in the early 1990s, with the first commercial Internet service provider, PT. Indo Internet, starting operations in 1994. Rapid growth in internet penetration since 2000 led to a major digital shift in the 2010s, as traditional media declined and social media and mass adoption of smartphones transformed how Indonesians consumed media. By 2023, the country had 210 million internet users, with mobile phones as the primary point of access.\nIndonesian literature has roots in Sanskrit inscriptions from the 5th century and a strong oral tradition, while early modern literature originates in the Sumatran tradition. Traditional forms such as \"syair\", \"pantun\", \"hikayat\", and \"babad\" dominate early prose and poetry, with notable works such as \"Syair Abdul Muluk\", \"Hikayat Hang Tuah\", \"Sulalatus Salatin\", and \"Babad Tanah Jawi\". The establishment of \"Balai Pustaka\" in 1917 marked a push to develop indigenous literature, leading to a literary Golden Age in the 1950s and 1960s. Influenced by the country's political and social landscape dynamics, modern literature includes works from notable figures like Chairil Anwar, Pramoedya Ananta Toer, and Ayu Utami.\nCuisine.\nIndonesian cuisine has many regional cuisines, often based upon indigenous culture and foreign influences such as Chinese, African, European, Middle Eastern, and Indian precedents. Rice is the leading staple food and is served with side dishes of meat and vegetables. Spices (notably chilli), coconut milk, fish, and chicken are fundamental ingredients.\nSome popular dishes, such as \"nasi goreng\", \"gado-gado\", \"mie ayam\", \"bakso\", \"sate\", and \"soto\", are ubiquitous and considered national dishes. The Ministry of Tourism, however, chose \"tumpeng\" in 2014 as an icon of Indonesian traditional cuisine representing the nation's diverse food cultures. Other popular dishes include \"rendang\", one of the many Minangkabau cuisines, along with \"dendeng\" and \"gulai\". Another fermented food is \"oncom\", which is similar in some ways to \"tempeh\" but uses a variety of bases (not only soy), created by different fungi, and is prevalent in West Java.\nSports.\nAssociation football is the most popular sport in Indonesia in terms of nationwide engagement and interest, while badminton is the country's most successful sport. Indonesia is among the few countries that have won the Thomas and Uber Cup, the world team championship of men's and women's badminton. Along with weightlifting, badminton is the sport that contributes the most to Indonesia's Olympic medal tally. The Super League is the country's premier football league. On the international stage, Indonesia was the first Asian team to participate in the FIFA World Cup in 1938 as the Dutch East Indies. On a regional level, Indonesia won a bronze medal at the 1958 Asian Games as well as three gold medals at the 1987, 1991, and 2023 Southeast Asian Games (SEA Games). Indonesia's first appearance at the AFC Asian Cup was in 1996.\nOther popular sports include boxing and basketball, which were part of the first National Games (\"Pekan Olahraga Nasional\", PON) in 1948. \"Sepak takraw\" and \"karapan sapi\" (bull racing) in Madura are some examples of Indonesia's traditional sports. In areas with a history of tribal warfare, mock fighting contests are held in, such as \"caci\" in Flores and \"pasola\" in Sumba. \"Pencak silat\" is an Indonesian martial art that became one of the sporting events in the 2018 Asian Games, with Indonesia appearing as one of the leading competitors. In Southeast Asia, Indonesia topped the SEA Games medal table ten times since 1977, most recently in 2011.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
