{"id": "16507", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16507", "title": "Jeroboam II", "text": "Israeli monarch\nJeroboam II (, \"Y\u0101ro\u1e07\u02bf\u0101m\"; ; ), also referred to as Jeroboam son of Jehoash, was the successor of Jehoash (alternatively spelled Joash) and the thirteenth king of the ancient Kingdom of Israel, over which he ruled for forty-one years in the eighth century BC. His reign was contemporary with those of Amaziah and Uzziah, kings of Judah. Jeroboam is the fourth king of the House of Jehu and the longest-reigning king of the kingdom of Israel in Samaria. He is described as a military commander who fought Syria.\nHistory.\nWilliam F. Albright has dated his reign to 786\u2013746 BC, while E. R. Thiele says he was coregent with Jehoash 793 to 782 BC and sole ruler 782 to 753 BC.\nHe extended Israel to its former limits, from \"the entering of Hamath to the sea of the plain\".\nIn 1910, G. A. Reisner found sixty-three inscribed potsherds while excavating the royal palace at Samaria, which were later dated to the reign of Jeroboam II and mention regnal years extending from the ninth to the 17th of his reign. These ostraca, while unremarkable in themselves, contain valuable information about the script, language, religion and administrative system of the period. During the excavations at Megiddo in 1904, an 8th century BCE Hebrew seal was found with the image of a roaring lion and the inscription \"Belonging to Shema, servant of Jeroboam.\" In 2020, a number of scholars claimed to have authenticated an unprovenanced bulla belonging to the same official, but others hold that it is a forgery based on the Megiddo seal.\nArchaeological evidence confirms the biblical account of his reign as the most prosperous that the northern kingdom of Israel had yet known. By the late 8th century BC, the territory of Israel was the most densely settled in the entire Levant, with a population of about 350,000. This prosperity was built on trade in olive oil, wine, and possibly horses, with Egypt and especially Assyria providing the markets. According to the prophet Amos, the triumphs of the king had engendered a haughty spirit of boastful overconfidence at home. Oppression and exploitation of the poor by the mighty, luxury in palaces of unheard-of splendor, and a craving for amusement were some of the internal fruits of these external triumphs. Archaeologist Israel Finkelstein has argued that many of the stories of King Solomon's rule over a large, prosperous kingdom were inspired by memories or records of the reign of Jeroboam II. For example, Finkelstein claimed that a list of districts in 1 Kings 4 supposedly under Solomonic rule actually matches the geographic boundaries of the Kingdom of Israel in the time of Jeroboam II. Thomas R\u00f6mer has argued that Jeroboam I may not have existed and that Deuteronomistic redactors transferred the reign of Jeroboam II to Jeroboam I, although Lester L. Grabbe finds this theory unlikely.\nUnder Jeroboam II, the God of Israel was worshiped at Dan and Beth-el and at other old Israelite shrines, through actual images, such as the golden calf. These services at Dan and Beth-el, at Gilgal and Beer-sheba, were of a nature to arouse the indignation of the prophets, and the foreign cults, both numerous and degrading, contributed still further to arousing of the prophetic spirit. Jeroboam's reign was the period of the prophets Hosea, Joel, Amos and Jonah, all of whom condemned the materialism and selfishness of the Israelite elite of their day: \"Woe unto those who lie upon beds of ivory ... eat lambs from the flock and calves ... [and] sing idle songs ...\" The Book of Kings condemns Jeroboam for doing \"evil in the eyes of the Lord\", meaning both the oppression of the poor and his continuing support of the cult centres of Dan and Bethel, in opposition to the temple in Jerusalem. He was allowed to reign for 41 years because he protected the prophet Amos.\nEarthquake in Israel c. 760 BC.\nA major earthquake had occurred in Israel c. 760 BC, which may have been during the time of Jeroboam II, towards the end of his rule. This earthquake is mentioned in the Book of Amos as having occurred during the rule of \"Jeroboam son of Jehoash\".\nGeologists believe they have found evidence of this big earthquake in sites throughout Israel and Jordan. Archeologists Yigael Yadin and Israel Finkelstein dated the earthquake level at Tel Hazor to 760 BC based on stratigraphic analysis of the destruction debris. Similarly, David Ussishkin arrived at the same date based on the \"sudden destruction\" level at Lachish.\nAccording to Steven A. Austin, the magnitude of this earthquake may have been at least 7.8, but more likely as high as 8.2. \"This magnitude 8 event of 750 B.C. appears to be the largest yet documented on the Dead Sea transform fault zone during the last four millennia.\"\nThe epicenter of this earthquake may have been 200\u2013300\u00a0km north of present-day Israel.\nMultiple biblical references exist to this earthquake in the Book of Amos, and also in Zechariah 14:5.\nRecent excavations by Aren Maeir in ancient Gath have revealed evidence of a major earthquake.\n\"Based on the tight stratigraphic context, this can be dated to the mid-8th cent. BCE\" ...\nIn the Bible.\nHis name occurs in the Old Testament only in 2 Kings; 1 Chronicles; Book of Hosea; and Book of Amos. In all other passages it is Jeroboam I, the son of Nebat that is meant.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16508", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16508", "title": "JTF-CNO", "text": ""}
{"id": "16509", "revid": "494861", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16509", "title": "Joan of Arc", "text": "French folk heroine and saint (1412\u20131431)\nJoan of Arc ( ; ; c.\u20091412\u00a0\u2013 30 May 1431) is a patron saint of France, honored as a defender of the French nation for her role in the siege of Orl\u00e9ans and her insistence on the coronation of Charles VII of France during the Hundred Years' War. Claiming to be acting under divine guidance, she became a military leader who gained recognition as a savior of France.\nJoan was born to a propertied peasant family at Domr\u00e9my in northeast France. In 1428, she requested to be taken to Charles VII, later testifying that she was guided by visions from the archangel Michael, Saint Margaret, and Saint Catherine to help him save France from English domination. Convinced of her devotion and purity, Charles sent Joan, who was about seventeen years old, to Orl\u00e9ans as part of a relief army. She arrived at the city in April 1429, wielding her banner and bringing hope to the demoralized French army. Nine days after her arrival, the English abandoned the siege. Joan encouraged the French to aggressively pursue the English during the Loire Campaign, which culminated in another decisive victory at Patay, opening the way for the French army to advance on Reims unopposed, where Charles was crowned as the king of France with Joan at his side. These victories boosted French morale, paving the way for their final triumph in the Hundred Years' War several decades later.\nAfter Charles's coronation, Joan participated in the unsuccessful siege of Paris in September 1429 and the failed siege of La Charit\u00e9 in November. Her role in these defeats reduced the court's faith in her. In early 1430, Joan organized a company of volunteers to relieve Compi\u00e8gne, which had been besieged by the Burgundians\u2014French allies of the English. She was captured by Burgundian troops on 23 May. After trying unsuccessfully to escape, she was handed to the English in November. She was put on trial by Bishop Pierre Cauchon on accusations of heresy, which included blaspheming by wearing men's clothes, acting upon visions that were demonic, and refusing to submit her words and deeds to the judgment of the church. She was declared guilty and burned at the stake on 30 May 1431, aged about nineteen.\nIn 1456, an inquisitorial court reinvestigated Joan's trial and overturned the verdict, declaring that it was tainted by deceit and procedural errors. Joan has been described as an obedient member of the Catholic Church, an early feminist, and a symbol of freedom and independence. She is popularly revered as a martyr. After the French Revolution, she became a national symbol of France. In 1920, Joan of Arc was canonized by Pope Benedict XV and, two years later, was declared one of the patron saints of France. She is portrayed in numerous cultural works, including literature, music, paintings, sculptures, and theater.\nName.\nJoan of Arc's name was written in a variety of ways. There is no standard spelling of her name before the sixteenth century; her last name was usually written as \"Darc\" without an apostrophe, but there are variants such as \"Tarc\", \"Dart\" or \"Day\". Her father's name was written as \"Tart\" at her trial. She was called \"Jeanne d'Ay de Domr\u00e9my\" in Charles VII's 1429 letter granting her a coat of arms. Joan may never have heard herself called \"Jeanne d'Arc\". The first written record of her being called by this name is in 1455, 24 years after her death.\nShe was not taught to read and write in her childhood, and so dictated her letters. She may later have learned to sign her name, as some of her letters are signed, and she may even have learned to read. Joan referred to herself in the letters as (\"Joan the Maiden\") or as (\"the Maiden\"), emphasizing her virginity, and she signed \"Jehanne\". In the sixteenth century, she became known as the \"Maid of Orleans\".\nBirth and historical background.\nJoan of Arc was born c.\u20091412 in Domr\u00e9my, a small village in the Meuse valley now in the Vosges department in the north-east of France. Her date of birth is unknown and her statements about her age were vague. Her parents were Jacques d'Arc and Isabelle Rom\u00e9e. Joan had three brothers and a sister. Her father was a peasant farmer with about of land, and he supplemented the family income as a village official, collecting taxes and heading the local watch.\nShe was born during the Hundred Years' War between England and France, which had begun in 1337 over the status of English territories in France and English claims to the French throne. Nearly all the fighting had taken place in France, devastating its economy. At the time of Joan's birth, France was divided politically. The French king Charles VI had recurring bouts of mental illness and was often unable to rule; his brother Louis, Duke of Orl\u00e9ans, and his cousin John the Fearless, Duke of Burgundy, quarreled over the regency of France. In 1407, the Duke of Burgundy ordered the assassination of the Duke of Orl\u00e9ans, precipitating a civil war. Charles of Orl\u00e9ans succeeded his father as duke at the age of thirteen and was placed in the custody of Bernard, Count of Armagnac; his supporters became known as \"Armagnacs\", while supporters of the Duke of Burgundy became known as \"Burgundians\". The future French king Charles VII had assumed the title of dauphin (heir to the throne) after the deaths of his four older brothers and was associated with the Armagnacs.\nHenry V of England exploited France's internal divisions when he invaded in 1415. The Burgundians took Paris in 1418. In 1419, the Dauphin offered a truce to negotiate peace with the Duke of Burgundy, but the duke was assassinated by the Dauphin's Armagnac partisans during the negotiations. The new duke of Burgundy, Philip the Good, allied with the English. Charles VI accused the Dauphin of murdering the Duke of Burgundy and declared him unfit to inherit the French throne. During a period of illness, Charles's wife Isabeau of Bavaria stood in for him and signed the Treaty of Troyes, which gave their daughter Catherine of Valois in marriage to Henry V, granted the succession of the French throne to their heirs, and effectively disinherited the Dauphin. This caused rumors that the Dauphin was not King Charles VI's son, but the offspring of an adulterous affair between Isabeau and the murdered duke of Orl\u00e9ans. In 1422, Henry V and Charles VI died within two months of each other; the 9-month-old Henry VI of England was the nominal heir of the Anglo-French dual monarchy as agreed in the treaty, but the Dauphin also claimed the French throne.\nEarly life.\nIn her youth, Joan did household chores, spun wool, helped her father in the fields and looked after their animals. Her mother provided Joan's religious education. Much of Domr\u00e9my lay in the Duchy of Bar, whose precise feudal status was unclear; though surrounded by pro-Burgundian lands, its people were loyal to the Armagnac cause. By 1419, the war had affected the area, and in 1425, Domr\u00e9my was attacked and cattle were stolen. This led to a sentiment among villagers that the English must be expelled from France to achieve peace. Joan had her first vision after this raid.\nJoan later testified that when she was thirteen, c.\u20091425, a figure she identified as Saint Michael surrounded by angels appeared to her in the garden. After this vision, she said she wept because she wanted them to take her with them. Throughout her life, she had visions of St. Michael, a patron saint of the Domr\u00e9my area who was seen as a defender of France. She stated that she had these visions frequently and that she often had them when the church bells were rung. Her visions also included St. Margaret and St. Catherine; although Joan never specified, they were probably Margaret of Antioch and Catherine of Alexandria\u2014those most known in the area. Both were known as virgin saints who strove against powerful enemies, were tortured and martyred for their beliefs, and preserved their virtue to the death. Joan testified that she swore a vow of virginity to these voices. When a young man from her village alleged that she had broken a promise of marriage, Joan stated that she had made him no promises, and his case was dismissed by an ecclesiastical court.\nDuring Joan's youth, a prophecy circulating in the French countryside, based on the visions of Marie Robine of Avignon, promised an armed virgin would come forth to save France. Another prophecy, attributed to Merlin, stated that a virgin carrying a banner would put an end to France's suffering. Joan implied she was this promised maiden, reminding the people around her that there was a saying that France would be destroyed by a woman but would be restored by a virgin. In May 1428, she asked her uncle to take her to the nearby town of Vaucouleurs, where she petitioned the garrison commander, Robert de Baudricourt, for an armed escort to the Armagnac court at Chinon. Baudricourt harshly refused and sent her home. In July, Domr\u00e9my was raided by Burgundian forces which set fire to the town, destroyed the crops, and forced Joan, her family and the other townspeople to flee. She returned to Vaucouleurs in January 1429. Her petition was refused again, but by this time she had gained the support of two of Baudricourt's soldiers, Jean de Metz and Bertrand de Poulengy. Meanwhile, she was summoned to Nancy under safe conduct by Charles II, Duke of Lorraine, who had heard about Joan during her stay at Vaucouleurs. The duke was ill and thought she might have supernatural powers that could cure him. She offered no cures, but reprimanded him for living with his mistress.\nHenry V's brothers, John of Lancaster, 1st Duke of Bedford, and Humphrey, Duke of Gloucester, had continued the English conquest of France. Most of northern France, Paris, and parts of southwestern France were under Anglo-Burgundian control. The Burgundians controlled Reims, the traditional site for the coronation of French kings; Charles had not yet been crowned, and doing so at Reims would help legitimize his claim to the throne. In July 1428, the English had started to surround Orl\u00e9ans and had nearly isolated it from the rest of Charles's territory by capturing many of the smaller bridge towns on the Loire River. Orl\u00e9ans was strategically important as the last obstacle to an assault on the remainder of Charles's territory. According to Joan's later testimony, it was around this period that her visions told her to leave Domr\u00e9my to help the Dauphin Charles. \nBaudricourt agreed to a third meeting with Joan in February 1429, around the time the English captured an Armagnac relief convoy at the Battle of the Herrings during the Siege of Orl\u00e9ans. Their conversations, along with Metz and Poulengy's support, convinced Baudricourt to allow her to go to Chinon for an audience with the Dauphin. Joan traveled with an escort of six soldiers. Before leaving, Joan put on men's clothes, which were provided by her escorts and the people of Vaucouleurs. She continued to wear men's clothes for the remainder of her life.\nChinon.\nCharles VII met Joan for the first time at the Royal Court in Chinon in late February or early March 1429, when she was seventeen and he was twenty-six. She told him that she had come to raise the siege of Orl\u00e9ans and to lead him to Reims for his coronation. They had a private exchange that made a strong impression on Charles; Jean Pasquerel, Joan's confessor, later testified that Joan told him she had reassured the Dauphin that he was Charles VI's son and the legitimate king.\nCharles and his council needed more assurance, sending Joan to Poitiers to be examined by a council of theologians, who declared that she was a good person and a good Catholic. They did not render a decision on the source of Joan's inspiration, but agreed that sending her to Orl\u00e9ans could be useful to the king and would test whether her inspiration was of divine origin. Joan was then sent to Tours to be physically examined by women directed by Charles's mother-in-law Yolande of Aragon, who verified her virginity. This was to establish if she could indeed be the prophesied virgin savior of France, to show the purity of her devotion, and to ensure she had not consorted with the Devil.\nThe Dauphin, reassured by the results of these tests, commissioned plate armor for her. She designed her own banner and had a sword brought to her from under the altar in the church at Sainte-Catherine-de-Fierbois. Around this time she began calling herself \"Joan the Maiden\", emphasizing her virginity as a sign of her mission.\nBefore Joan's arrival at Chinon, the Armagnac strategic situation was bad but not hopeless. The Armagnac forces were prepared to endure a prolonged siege at Orl\u00e9ans, the Burgundians had recently withdrawn from the siege due to disagreements about territory, and the English were debating whether to continue. Nonetheless, after almost a century of war, the Armagnacs were demoralized. Once Joan joined the Dauphin's cause, her personality began to raise their spirits, inspiring devotion and the hope of divine assistance. Her belief in the divine origin of her mission turned the longstanding Anglo-French conflict over inheritance into a religious war. Before beginning the journey to Orl\u00e9ans, Joan dictated a letter to the Duke of Bedford warning him that she was sent by God to drive him out of France.\nMilitary campaigns.\nOrl\u00e9ans.\nIn the last week of April 1429, Joan set out from Blois as part of an army carrying supplies for the relief of Orl\u00e9ans. She arrived there on 29 April and met the commander Jean, the Bastard of Orl\u00e9ans and future Count of Dunois. Orl\u00e9ans was not completely cut off, and the Bastard of Orl\u00e9ans got her into the city, where she was greeted enthusiastically. Joan was initially treated as a figurehead to raise morale, flying her banner on the battlefield. She was not given any formal command or included in military councils but quickly gained the support of the Armagnac troops. She always seemed to be present where the fighting was most intense, she frequently stayed with the front ranks, and she gave them a sense she was fighting for their salvation. Armagnac commanders would sometimes accept the advice she gave them, such as deciding what position to attack, when to continue an assault, and how to place artillery.\nOn 4 May, the Armagnacs went on the offensive, attacking the outlying (fortress of Saint Loup). Once Joan learned of the attack, she rode out with her banner to the site of the battle, a mile east of Orl\u00e9ans. She arrived as the Armagnac soldiers were retreating after a failed assault. Her appearance rallied the soldiers, who attacked again and took the fortress. On 5 May, no combat occurred since it was Ascension Thursday, a feast day. She dictated another letter to the English warning them to leave France and had it tied to a bolt, which was fired by a crossbowman.\nThe Armagnacs resumed their offensive on 6 May, capturing Saint-Jean-le-Blanc, which the English had deserted. The Armagnac commanders wanted to stop, but Joan encouraged them to launch an assault on \"les Augustins\", an English fortress built around a monastery. After its capture, the Armagnac commanders wanted to consolidate their gains, but Joan again argued for continuing the offensive. On the morning of 7 May, the Armagnacs attacked the main English stronghold, \"les Tourelles\". Joan was wounded by an arrow between the neck and shoulder while holding her banner in the trench on the south bank of the river but later returned to encourage the final assault that took the fortress. The English retreated from Orl\u00e9ans on 8 May, ending the siege.\nAt Chinon, Joan had declared that she was sent by God. At Poitiers, when she was asked to show a sign demonstrating this claim, she replied that it would be given if she were brought to Orl\u00e9ans. The lifting of the siege was interpreted by many people to be that sign. Prominent clergy such as Jacques G\u00e9lu, Archbishop of Embrun, and the theologian Jean Gerson wrote treatises in support of Joan after this victory. In contrast, the English saw the ability of this peasant girl to defeat their armies as proof she was possessed by the devil.\nLoire Campaign.\nAfter the success at Orl\u00e9ans, Joan insisted that the Armagnac forces should advance promptly toward Reims to crown the Dauphin. Charles allowed her to accompany the army under the command of John II, Duke of Alen\u00e7on, who collaboratively worked with Joan and regularly heeded her advice. Before advancing toward Reims, the Armagnacs needed to recapture the bridge towns along the Loire: Jargeau, Meung-sur-Loire, and Beaugency. This would clear the way for Charles and his entourage, who would have to cross the Loire near Orl\u00e9ans to get from Chinon to Reims.\nThe campaign to clear the Loire towns began on 11 June when the Armagnac forces led by Alen\u00e7on and Joan arrived at Jargeau and forced the English to withdraw inside the town's walls. Joan sent a message to the English to surrender; they refused and she advocated for a direct assault on the walls the next day. By the end of the day, the town was taken. The Armagnac took few prisoners and many of the English who surrendered were killed. During this campaign, Joan continued to serve in the thick of battle. She began scaling a siege ladder with her banner in hand but before she could climb the wall, she was struck by a stone which split her helmet.\nAlen\u00e7on and Joan's army advanced on Meung-sur-Loire. On 15 June, they took control of the town's bridge, and the English garrison withdrew to a castle on the Loire's north bank. Most of the army continued on the south bank of the Loire to besiege the castle at Beaugency.\nMeanwhile, the English army from Paris under the command of Sir John Fastolf had linked up with the garrison in Meung and traveled along the north bank of the Loire to relieve Beaugency. Unaware of this, the English garrison at Beaugency surrendered on 18 June. The main English army retreated toward Paris; Joan urged the Armagnacs to pursue them, and the two armies clashed at the Battle of Patay later that day. The English had prepared their forces to ambush an Armagnac attack with hidden archers, but the Armagnac vanguard detected and scattered them. A rout ensued that decimated the English army. Fastolf escaped with a small band of soldiers, but many of the English leaders were captured. Joan arrived at the battlefield too late to participate in the decisive action, but her encouragement to pursue the English had made the victory possible.\nCoronation and siege of Paris.\nAfter the destruction of the English army at Patay, some Armagnac leaders argued for an invasion of English-held Normandy, but Joan remained insistent that Charles must be crowned. The Dauphin agreed, and the army left Gien on 29 June to march on Reims. The advance was nearly unopposed. The Burgundian-held town of Auxerre surrendered on 3 July after three days of negotiations, and other towns in the army's path returned to Armagnac allegiance without resistance. Troyes, which had a small garrison of English and Burgundian troops, was the only one to resist. After four days of negotiation, Joan ordered the soldiers to fill the city's moat with wood and directed the placement of artillery. Fearing an assault, Troyes negotiated a surrender.\nReims opened its gates on 16 July 1429. Charles, Joan, and the army entered in the evening, and Charles's consecration took place the following morning. Joan was given a place of honor at the ceremony, and announced that God's will had been fulfilled.\nAfter the consecration, the royal court negotiated a truce of fifteen days with the Duke of Burgundy, who promised he would try to arrange the transfer of Paris to the Armagnacs while continuing negotiations for a definitive peace. At the end of the truce, Burgundy reneged on his promise. Joan and the Duke of Alen\u00e7on favored a quick march on Paris, but divisions in Charles's court and continued peace negotiations with Burgundy led to a slow advance.\nAs the Armagnac army approached Paris, many of the towns along the way surrendered without a fight. On 15 August, the English forces under the Duke of Bedford confronted the Armagnacs near Mont\u00e9pilloy in a fortified position that the Armagnac commanders thought was too strong to assault. Joan rode out in front of the English positions to try to provoke them to attack. They refused, resulting in a standoff. The English retreated the following day. The Armagnacs continued their advance and launched an assault on Paris on 8 September. During the fighting, Joan was wounded in the leg by a crossbow bolt. She remained in a trench beneath the city walls until she was rescued after nightfall. The Armagnacs had suffered 1,500 casualties. The following morning, Charles ordered an end to the assault. Joan was displeased and argued that the attack should be continued. She and Alen\u00e7on had made fresh plans to attack Paris, but Charles dismantled a bridge approaching Paris that was necessary for the attack and the Armagnac army had to retreat.\nAfter the defeat at Paris, Joan's role in the French court diminished. Her aggressive independence did not agree with the court's emphasis on finding a diplomatic solution with Burgundy, and her role in the defeat at Paris reduced the court's faith in her. Scholars at the University of Paris argued that she failed to take Paris because her inspiration was not divine. In September, Charles disbanded the army, and Joan was not allowed to work with the Duke of Alen\u00e7on again.\nCampaign against Perrinet Gressart.\nIn October, Joan was sent as part of a force to attack the territory of Perrinet Gressart, a mercenary who had served the Burgundians and English. The army besieged Saint-Pierre-le-Mo\u00fbtier, which fell after Joan encouraged a direct assault on 4 November. The army then tried unsuccessfully to take La-Charit\u00e9-sur-Loire in November and December and had to abandon their artillery during the retreat. This defeat further diminished Joan's reputation.\nJoan returned to court at the end of December, where she learned that she and her family had been ennobled by Charles as a reward for her services to him and the kingdom. Before the September attack on Paris, Charles had negotiated a four-month truce with the Burgundians, which was extended until Easter 1430. During this truce, the French court had no need for Joan.\nSiege of Compi\u00e8gne and capture.\nThe Duke of Burgundy began to reclaim towns which had been ceded to him by treaty but had not submitted. Compi\u00e8gne was one such town of many in areas which the Armagnacs had recaptured over the previous few months. Joan set out with a company of volunteers at the end of March 1430 to relieve the town, which was under siege. This expedition did not have the explicit permission of Charles, who was still observing the truce. Some writers suggest that Joan's expedition to Compi\u00e8gne without documented permission from the court was a desperate and treasonable action, but others have argued that she could not have launched the expedition without the financial support of the court.\nIn April, Joan arrived at Melun, which had expelled its Burgundian garrison. As Joan advanced, her force grew as other commanders joined her. Joan's troops advanced to Lagny-sur-Marne and defeated an Anglo-Burgundian force commanded by the mercenary Franquet d'Arras who was captured. Typically, he would have been ransomed or exchanged by the capturing force, but Joan allowed the townspeople to execute him after a trial.\nJoan reached Compi\u00e8gne on 14 May. After defensive forays against the Burgundian besiegers, she was forced to disband the majority of the army because it had become too difficult for the surrounding countryside to support. Joan and about 400 of her remaining soldiers entered the town.\nOn 23 May 1430, Joan accompanied an Armagnac force which sortied from Compi\u00e8gne to attack the Burgundian camp at Margny, northeast of the town. The attack failed, and Joan was captured; she agreed to surrender to a pro-Burgundian nobleman named Lyonnel de Wandomme, a member of Jean de Luxembourg's contingent. who quickly moved her to his castle at Beaulieu-les-Fontaines, near Noyes. After her first attempt to escape, she was transferred to Beaurevoir Castle. She made another escape attempt while there, jumping from a window of a tower and landing in a dry moat; she was injured but survived. In November, she was moved to the Burgundian town of Arras.\nThe English and Burgundians rejoiced that Joan had been removed as a military threat. The English negotiated with their Burgundian allies to pay Joan's ransom and transfer her to their custody. Bishop Pierre Cauchon of Beauvais, a partisan supporter of the Duke of Burgundy and the English crown, played a prominent part in these negotiations, which were completed in November. The final agreement called for the English to pay 10,000 livres tournois to obtain her from Luxembourg. After the English paid the ransom, they moved Joan to Rouen, their main headquarters in France. There is no evidence that Charles tried to save Joan once she was transferred to the English.\nTrials and execution.\nTrial.\nJoan was put on trial for heresy in Rouen on 9 January 1431. She was accused of having blasphemed by wearing men's clothes, of acting upon visions that were demonic, and of refusing to submit her words and deeds to the church because she claimed she would be judged by God alone. Joan's captors downplayed the secular aspects of her trial by submitting her judgment to an ecclesiastical court, but the trial was politically motivated. Joan testified that her visions had instructed her to defeat the English and crown Charles, and her success was argued to be evidence she was acting on behalf of God. If unchallenged, her testimony would invalidate the English claim to the rule of France and undermine the University of Paris, which supported the dual monarchy ruled by an English king.\nThe verdict was a foregone conclusion. Joan's guilt could be used to compromise Charles's claims to legitimacy by showing that he had been consecrated by the act of a heretic. Cauchon served as the ordinary judge of the trial. The English subsidized the trial, including payments to Cauchon and Jean Le Ma\u00eetre, who represented the Inquisitor of France. All but 8 of the 131 clergy who participated in the trial were French and two thirds were associated with the University of Paris, but most were pro-Burgundian and pro-English.\nCauchon attempted to follow correct inquisitorial procedure, but the trial had many irregularities. Joan should have been in the hands of the church during the trial and guarded by women, but instead was imprisoned by the English and guarded by male soldiers under the command of the Duke of Bedford. Contrary to canon law, Cauchon had not established Joan's infamy before proceeding with the trial. Joan was not read the charges against her until well after her interrogations began. The procedures were below inquisitorial standards, subjecting Joan to lengthy interrogations without legal counsel. One of the trial clerics stepped down because he felt the testimony was coerced and its intention was to entrap Joan; another challenged Cauchon's right to judge the trial and was jailed. There is evidence that the trial records were falsified.\nDuring the trial, Joan showed great control. She induced her interrogators to ask questions sequentially rather than simultaneously, refer back to their records when appropriate, and end the sessions when she requested. Witnesses at the trial were impressed by her prudence when answering questions. For example, in one exchange she was asked if she knew she was in God's grace. The question was meant as a scholarly trap, as church doctrine held that nobody could be certain of being in God's grace. If she answered positively, she would have been charged with heresy; if negatively, she would have confessed her own guilt. Joan avoided the trap by stating that if she was not in God's grace, she hoped God would put her there, and if she was in God's grace then she hoped she would remain so. One of the court notaries at her trial later testified that the interrogators were stunned by her answer. To convince her to submit, Joan was shown the instruments of torture. When she refused to be intimidated, Cauchon met with about a dozen assessors (clerical jurors) to vote on whether she should be tortured. The majority decided against it.\nIn early May, Cauchon asked the University of Paris to deliberate on twelve articles summarizing the accusation of heresy. The university approved the charges. On 23 May, Joan was formally admonished by the court. The next day, she was taken out to the churchyard of the abbey of Saint-Ouen for public condemnation. As Cauchon began to read Joan's sentence, she agreed to submit. She was presented with an abjuration document, which included an agreement that she would not bear arms or wear men's clothing. It was read aloud to her, and she signed it.\nExecution.\nPublic heresy was a capital crime, in which an unrepentant or relapsed heretic could be given over to the judgment of the secular courts and punished by death. Having signed the abjuration, Joan was no longer an unrepentant heretic but could be executed if convicted of relapsing into heresy.\nAs part of her abjuration, Joan was required to renounce wearing men's clothes. She exchanged her clothes for a woman's dress and allowed her head to be shaved. She was returned to her cell and kept in chains instead of being transferred to an ecclesiastical prison.\nWitnesses at the rehabilitation trial stated that Joan was subjected to mistreatment and rape attempts, including one by an English noble, and that guards placed men's clothes in her cell, forcing her to wear them. Cauchon was notified that Joan had resumed wearing male clothing. He sent clerics to admonish her to remain in submission, but the English prevented them from visiting her.\nOn 28 May, Cauchon went to Joan's cell, along with several other clerics. According to the trial record, Joan said that she had gone back to wearing men's clothes because it was more fitting that she dress like a man while being held with male guards, and that the judges had broken their promise to let her go to mass and to release her from her chains. She stated that if they fulfilled their promises and placed her in a decent prison, she would be obedient. When Cauchon asked about her visions, Joan stated that the voices had blamed her for abjuring out of fear, and that she would not deny them again. As Joan's abjuration had required her to deny her visions, this was sufficient to convict her of relapsing into heresy and to condemn her to death. The next day, forty-two assessors were summoned to decide Joan's fate. Two recommended that she be abandoned to the secular courts immediately; the rest recommended that the abjuration be read to her again and explained. In the end, they voted unanimously that Joan was a relapsed heretic and should be abandoned to the secular power, the English, for punishment.\nAt about the age of nineteen, Joan was executed on 30 May 1431. In the morning, she was allowed to receive the sacraments despite the court process requiring they be denied to heretics. She was then taken to Rouen's Vieux-March\u00e9 (Old Marketplace), where she was publicly read her sentence of condemnation. At this point, she should have been turned over to the appropriate authority, the bailiff of Rouen, for secular sentencing, but instead was delivered directly to the English and tied to a tall plastered pillar for execution by burning. She asked to view a cross as she died, and was given one by an English soldier made from a stick, which she kissed and placed next to her chest. A processional crucifix was fetched from the church of Saint-Saveur. She embraced it before her hands were bound, and it was held before her eyes during her execution. After her death, her remains were thrown into the Seine River.\nAftermath and rehabilitation trial.\nThe military situation was not changed by Joan's execution. Her triumphs had raised Armagnac morale, and the English were not able to regain momentum. Charles remained king of France, despite a rival coronation held for the ten-year-old Henry VI of England at Notre-Dame cathedral in Paris in 1431. In 1435, the Burgundians signed the Treaty of Arras, abandoning their alliance with England. Twenty-two years after Joan's death, the war ended with a French victory at the Battle of Castillon in 1453, and the English were expelled from all of France except Calais.\nJoan's execution created a political liability for Charles, implying that his consecration as the king of France had been achieved through the actions of a heretic. On 15 February 1450, a few months after he regained Rouen, Charles ordered Guillaume Bouill\u00e9, a theologian and former rector of the University of Paris, to open an inquest. In a brief investigation, Bouill\u00e9 interviewed seven witnesses of Joan's trial and concluded that the judgment of Joan as a heretic was arbitrary. She had been a prisoner of war treated as a political prisoner, and was put to death without basis.\nBouill\u00e9's report could not overturn the verdict but it opened the way for the later retrial.\nIn 1452, a second inquest into Joan's trial was opened by Cardinal Guillaume d'Estouteville, papal legate and relative of Charles, and Jean Br\u00e9hal, the recently appointed Inquisitor of France, who interviewed about 20 witnesses. The inquest was guided by 27 articles describing how Joan's trial had been biased. Immediately after the inquest, d'Estouteville went to Orl\u00e9ans on 9 June and granted an indulgence to those who participated in the ceremonies in Joan's honor on 8 May commemorating the lifting of the siege.\nFor the next two years d'Estouteville and Br\u00e9hal worked on the case. Br\u00e9hal forwarded a petition from Joan's mother, Isabelle, and Joan's two brothers Jean and Pierre, to Pope Nicholas V in 1454. Br\u00e9hal submitted a summary of his findings to theologians and lawyers in France and Italy, as well as a professor at the University of Vienna, most of whom gave opinions favorable to Joan. After Nicholas V died in early 1455, the new pope Callixtus III gave permission for a rehabilitation trial, and appointed three commissioners to oversee the process: Jean Juv\u00e9nal des Ursins, archbishop of Reims; Guillaume Chartier, bishop of Paris; and Richard Olivier de Longueil, bishop of Coutances. They chose Br\u00e9hal as Inquisitor.\nThe rehabilitation trial began on 7 November 1455 at Notre Dame Cathedral when Joan's mother publicly delivered a formal request for her daughter's rehabilitation, and ended on 7 July 1456 at Rouen Cathedral, having heard from about 115 witnesses. The court found that the original trial was unjust and deceitful; Joan's abjuration, execution and their consequences were nullified. In his summary of the trial, Br\u00e9hal suggested that Cauchon and the assessors who supported him might be guilty of malice and heresy. To emphasize the court's decision, a copy of the Articles of Accusation was formally torn up. The court ordered that a cross should be erected on the site of Joan's execution.\nVisions.\nJoan's visions played an important role in her condemnation, and her admission that she had returned to heeding them led to her execution. Theologians of the era believed that visions could have a supernatural source. The assessors at her trial focused on determining the specific source of Joan's visions, using an ecclesiastical form of (discernment of spirits). Because she was accused of heresy, they sought to show that her visions were false. The rehabilitation trial nullified Joan's sentence, but did not declare her visions authentic. In 1894, Pope Leo XIII pronounced that Joan's mission was divinely inspired.\nModern scholars have discussed possible neurological and psychiatric causes for her visions. Her visions have been described as hallucinations arising from epilepsy or a temporal lobe tuberculoma. Others have implicated ergot poisoning, schizophrenia, delusional disorder, or creative psychopathy induced by her early childhood rearing. One of the Promoters of the Faith at her 1903 canonization trial argued that her visions may have been manifestations of hysteria. Other scholars argue that Joan created some of the visions' specific details in response to the demands of the interrogators at her trial.\nMany of these explanations have been challenged;\n the trial records designed to demonstrate that Joan was guilty of heresy are unlikely to provide the objective descriptions of symptoms needed to support a medical diagnosis.\nJoan's firm belief in the divinity of her visions strengthened her confidence, enabled her to trust herself, and gave her hope during her capture and trial.\nClothing.\nJoan's cross-dressing was the topic of five of the articles of accusation against her during the trial. In the view of the assessors, it was the emblem of her heresy. Her final condemnation began when she was found to have resumed wearing men's clothes, which was taken as a sign that she had relapsed into heresy.\nFrom the time of her journey to Chinon to her abjuration, Joan usually wore men's clothes and cropped her hair in a male fashion. When she left Vaucouleurs to see the Dauphin in Chinon, Joan was said to have worn a black doublet, a black tunic, and a short black cap. By the time she was captured, she had acquired more elaborate outfits. At her trial, she was accused of wearing breeches, a mantle, a coat of mail, a doublet, hose joined to the doublet with twenty laces, tight boots, spurs, a breastplate, buskins, a sword, a dagger, and a lance. She was also described as wearing furs, a golden surcoat over her armor, and sumptuous riding habits made of precious cloth.\nDuring the trial proceedings, Joan is not recorded as giving a practical reason why she cross-dressed. She stated that it was her own choice to wear men's clothes, and that she did so not at the request of men but by the command of God and his angels. She stated she would return to wearing women's clothes when she fulfilled her calling.\nAlthough Joan's cross-dressing was used to justify her execution, the church's position on it was not clear. In general, it was seen as a sin, but there was no agreement about its severity. Thomas Aquinas stated that a woman may wear a man's clothes to hide herself from enemies or if no other clothes were available, and Joan did both, wearing them in enemy territory to get to Chinon, and in her prison cell after her abjuration when her dress was taken from her. Soon after the siege of Orl\u00e9ans was lifted, Jean Gerson said that Joan's male clothes and haircut were appropriate for her calling, as she was a warrior and men's clothes were more practical.\nCross-dressing may have helped her maintain her virginity by deterring rape: witnesses at the nullification trial stated that Joan gave this as one of the reasons for returning to men's clothes after she had abjured wearing them. However, scholars have stated that when she was imprisoned, wearing men's clothes would only have been a minor deterrent to rape as she was shackled most of the time. For most of her active life, Joan did not cross-dress to hide her gender. Rather, it may have functioned to emphasize her unique identity as , a model of virtue that transcends gender roles and inspires people.\nLegacy.\nJoan is one of the most studied people of the Middle Ages, partly because her two trials provided a wealth of documents. Her image, changing over time, has included being the savior of France, an obedient member of the Catholic Church, an early feminist, and a symbol of freedom and independence.\nMilitary leader and symbol of France.\nJoan's reputation as a military leader who helped drive the English from France began to form before her death. Just after Charles's coronation, Christine de Pizan wrote the poem \"Diti\u00e9 de Jehanne D'Arc\", celebrating Joan as a supporter of Charles sent by Divine Providence and reflecting French optimism after the triumph at Orl\u00e9ans. As early as 1429, Orl\u00e9ans began holding a celebration in honor of the raising of the siege on 8 May.\nAfter Joan's execution, her role in the Orl\u00e9ans victory encouraged popular support for her rehabilitation. Joan became a central part of the annual celebration, and by 1435, a play, (Mystery of the Siege of Orl\u00e9ans), portrayed her as the vehicle of the divine will that liberated Orl\u00e9ans. The Orl\u00e9ans festival celebrating Joan continues in modern times.\nLess than a decade after her rehabilitation trial, Pope Pius II wrote a brief biography describing her as the maid who saved the kingdom of France. Louis XII commissioned a full-length biography of her c.\u20091500.\nJoan's early legacy was closely associated with the divine right of the monarchy to rule France. During the French Revolution, her reputation came into question because of her association with the monarchy and religion, and the festival in her honor held at Orl\u00e9ans was suspended in 1793. In 1803, Napoleon Bonaparte authorized its renewal and the creation of a new statue of Joan at Orl\u00e9ans, stating, \"The illustrious Joan\u00a0... proved that there is no miracle which French genius cannot accomplish when national independence is threatened.\"\nSince then, she has become a prominent symbol as the defender of the French nation. After the French defeat in the Franco-Prussian War, Joan became a rallying point for a new crusade to reclaim Lorraine, the province of her birth. The Third Republic held a patriotic civic holiday in her honor on 8 May to celebrate her victory at Orl\u00e9ans. During World War I, her image was used to inspire victory. In World War II, all sides of the French cause appealed to her legacy: she was a symbol for Philippe P\u00e9tain in Vichy France, a model for Charles de Gaulle's leadership of the Free French, and an example for the Communist resistance. More recently, her association with the monarchy and national liberation has made her a symbol for the French far right, including the monarchist movement Action Fran\u00e7aise and the National Front Party. Joan's image has been used by the entire spectrum of French politics, and she is an important reference in political dialogue about French identity and unity.\nSaint and heroic woman.\nJoan is a saint in the Catholic Church. She was viewed as a religious figure in Orl\u00e9ans after the siege was lifted, and an annual panegyric was pronounced there on her behalf until the 1800s. In 1849, the Bishop of Orl\u0117ans F\u00e9lix Dupanloup delivered an oration that attracted international attention and in 1869, petitioned Rome to begin beatification proceedings. She was beatified by Pope Pius X in 1909, and canonized on 16 May 1920 by Pope Benedict XV. Her feast day is 30 May, the anniversary of her execution. In an apostolic letter, Pope Pius XI declared Joan one of the patron saints of France on 2 March 1922.\nJoan was canonized as a Virgin, not as a Christian martyr because she had been put to death by a canonically constituted court, which executed her not for her faith in Christ, but for her private revelation. Nevertheless, she has been popularly venerated as a martyr since her death: one who suffered for her modesty and purity, her country, and the strength of her convictions. Joan is also remembered as a visionary in the Church of England with a commemoration on 30 May. She is revered in the pantheon of the Cao Dai religion.\nDuring her lifetime, Joan was already being compared to biblical women heroes, such as Esther, Judith, and Deborah. Her claim of virginity, which signified her virtue and sincerity, was upheld by women of status from both the Armagnac and Burgundian-English sides of the Hundred Years' War: Yolande of Aragon, Charles's mother-in-law, and Anne of Burgundy, Duchess of Bedford.\nJoan has been described as a model of an autonomous woman who challenged traditions of masculinity and femininity to be heard as an individual in a patriarchal culture\u2014setting her own course by heeding the voices of her visions. She fulfilled the traditionally male role of a military leader, while maintaining her status as a valiant woman. Merging qualities associated with both genders, Joan has inspired numerous artistic and cultural works for many centuries. In the nineteenth century, hundreds of works of art about her\u2014including biographies, plays, and musical scores\u2014were created in France, and her story became popular as an artistic subject in Europe and North America. By the 1960s, she was the topic of thousands of books. Her legacy has become global, and inspires novels, plays, poems, operas, films, paintings, children's books, advertising, computer games, comics and popular culture across the world.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBooks\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nJournal articles, dissertations, and exhibition booklets\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOnline sources\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPrimary sources\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTranscripts of Joan of Arc's trial and the rehabilitation trial\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16510", "revid": "4796325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16510", "title": "Johannes Nicolaus Br\u00f8nsted", "text": "Danish physical chemist (1879\u20131947)\nJohannes Nicolaus Br\u00f8nsted (; 22 February 1879 \u2013 17 December 1947) was a Danish physical chemist who is best known for developing the Br\u00f8nsted\u2013Lowry acid\u2013base theory; he developed the theory at the same time as (but independently of) Martin Lowry.\nBiography.\nBr\u00f8nsted was born in Varde, Denmark on 22 February 1879. His mother died shortly after his birth, and his father died when Br\u00f8nsted was 14 years old; he then moved to Copenhagen with his older sister and his stepmother. In 1897, Br\u00f8nsted began his studies as a chemical engineer at the Polytechnic Institute in\nCopenhagen. After his first degree, Br\u00f8nsted changed fields and received his magister degree in chemistry in 1902 from the University of Copenhagen. In 1905, he became an assistant at the Chemical Institute and obtained his doctoral degree in 1908. In the same year, Br\u00f8nsted became a professor of physical and inorganic chemistry at the University of Copenhagen.\nIn 1929, Br\u00f8nsted was a visiting professor at Yale University. His research gained worldwide recognition, resulting in four Nobel Prize nominations, a gold H. C. \u00d8rsted Medal and being appointed as a fellow of the Royal Society and a member of the National Academy of Sciences.\nBr\u00f8nsted married Charlotte Warberg, whom he met during his first degree. The couple had four children. In World War II, Br\u00f8nsted's opposition to the Nazis led to his election to the Danish parliament in 1947, but he was too ill to take his seat and died shortly after the election.\nResearch.\nEarly in his career, Br\u00f8nsted studied chemical thermodynamics and later studied electrolyte solutions and carried out an extensive series of solubility measurements. These measurements led him to establish general laws which were later confirmed when the Debye\u2013H\u00fcckel theory was proposed.\nBr\u00f8nsted is best known for his work on reaction kinetics, in particular acid\u2013base reactions. In 1923, he recognized that acid\u2013base reactions involved the transfer of a proton, from the acid (proton donor) to the base (proton acceptor). Almost simultaneously and independently, the British chemist Martin Lowry arrived at the same conclusion, thus the name Br\u00f8nsted\u2013Lowry acid\u2013base theory. Also in 1923, Gilbert N. Lewis proposed an electronic theory of acid\u2013base reactions, but both theories remain commonly used.\nLater in his career, Br\u00f8nsted kept studying reaction kinetics, with a special focus on reactions taking place in non-aqueous solutions. He also developed some work about the effect of molecular size on the thermodynamical properties of hydrocarbons, polymers and colloids. He also worked with the Nobel prize winner George de Hevesy on isotope separation by fractional distillation.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16511", "revid": "247414", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16511", "title": "Janus kinase", "text": "Family of intracellular tyrosine kinases\nJanus kinase (JAK) is a family of intracellular, non-receptor tyrosine kinases that transduce cytokine-mediated signals via the JAK-STAT pathway. They were initially named \"just another kinase\" 1 and 2 (since they were just two of many discoveries in a PCR-based screen of kinases), but were ultimately published as \"Janus kinase\". The name is taken from the two-faced Roman god of beginnings, endings and duality, Janus, because the JAKs possess two near-identical phosphate-transferring domains. One domain exhibits the kinase activity, while the other negatively regulates the kinase activity of the first.\nFamily.\nThe four JAK family members are:\nTransgenic mice that do not express JAK1 have defective responses to some cytokines, such as interferon-gamma. JAK1 and JAK2 are involved in type II interferon (interferon-gamma) signalling, whereas JAK1 and TYK2 are involved in type I interferon signalling. Mice that do not express TYK2 have defective natural killer cell function.\nFunctions.\nSince members of the type I and type II cytokine receptor families possess no catalytic kinase activity, they rely on the JAK family of tyrosine kinases to phosphorylate and activate downstream proteins involved in their signal transduction pathways. The receptors exist as paired polypeptides, thus exhibiting two intracellular signal-transducing domains.\nJAKs associate with a proline-rich region in each intracellular domain that is adjacent to the cell membrane and called a box1/box2 region. After the receptor associates with its respective cytokine/ligand, it goes through a conformational change, bringing the two JAKs close enough to phosphorylate each other. The JAK autophosphorylation induces a conformational change within itself, enabling it to transduce the intracellular signal by further phosphorylating and activating transcription factors called STATs (Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription, or Signal Transduction And Transcription). The activated STATs dissociate from the receptor and form dimers before translocating to the cell nucleus, where they regulate transcription of selected genes.\nSome examples of the molecules that use the JAK/STAT signaling pathway are colony-stimulating factor, prolactin, growth hormone, and many cytokines. Janus Kinases have also been reported to have a role in the maintenance of X chromosome inactivation.\nClinical significance.\nJAK inhibitors are used for the treatment of atopic dermatitis and rheumatoid arthritis. They are also being studied in psoriasis, polycythemia vera, alopecia, essential thrombocythemia, ulcerative colitis, myeloid metaplasia with myelofibrosis and vitiligo. Examples are tofacitinib, baricitinib, upadacitinib and filgotinib.\nIn 2014 researchers discovered that oral JAK inhibitors, when administered orally, could restore hair growth in some subjects and that applied to the skin, effectively promoted hair growth.\nStructure.\nJAKs range from 120-140 kDa in size and have seven defined regions of homology called Janus homology domains 1 to 7 (JH1-7). JH1 is the kinase domain important for the enzymatic activity of the JAK and contains typical features of a tyrosine kinase such as conserved tyrosines necessary for JAK activation (e.g., Y1038/Y1039 in JAK1, Y1007/Y1008 in JAK2, Y980/Y981 in JAK3, and Y1054/Y1055 in Tyk2). Phosphorylation of these dual tyrosines leads to the conformational changes in the JAK protein to facilitate binding of substrate. JH2 is a pseudokinase domain, a domain structurally similar to a tyrosine kinase and essential for a normal kinase activity, yet lacks enzymatic activity. This domain may be involved in regulating the activity of JH1, and was likely a duplication of the JH1 domain which has undergone mutation post-duplication. The JH3-JH4 domains of JAKs share homology with Src-homology-2 (SH2) domains. The amino terminal (NH2) end (JH4-JH7) of Jaks is called a FERM domain (short for band 4.1, ezrin, radixin and moesin); this domain is also found in the focal adhesion kinase (FAK) family and is involved in association of JAKs with cytokine receptors and/or other kinases.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16514", "revid": "1599985", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16514", "title": "Jacob Grimm", "text": "German linguist, jurist and mythologist\nJacob Ludwig Karl Grimm (4 January 1785\u00a0\u2013 20 September 1863), also known as Ludwig Karl, was a German author, linguist, philologist, jurist, and folklorist. He formulated Grimm's law of linguistics, and was the co-author of the \"Deutsches W\u00f6rterbuch\", the author of \"Deutsche Mythologie\", and the editor of \"Grimms' Fairy Tales\". He was the older brother of Wilhelm Grimm; together, they were the literary duo known as the Brothers Grimm.\nLife and books.\nJacob Grimm was born 4 January 1785, in Hanau in Hesse-Kassel. His father, Philipp Grimm, was a lawyer who died while Jacob was a child, and his mother Dorothea was left with a very small income. Her sister was the lady of the chamber to the Landgravine of Hesse, and she helped to support and educate the family. Jacob was sent to the public school at Kassel in 1798 with his younger brother Wilhelm.\nIn 1802, he went to the University of Marburg, where he studied law, a profession for which he had been intended by his father. His brother joined him at Marburg a year later, having just recovered from a severe illness, and likewise began the study of law.\nHe then later with his brother, Wilhelm Grimm, wrote Grimms' Fairy Tales.\nMeeting von Savigny.\nJacob Grimm became inspired by the lectures of Friedrich Carl von Savigny, a noted expert of Roman law; Wilhelm Grimm, in the preface to the \"Deutsche Grammatik\" (German Grammar), credits Savigny with giving the brothers an awareness of science. Savigny's lectures also awakened in Jacob a love for historical and antiquarian investigation, which underlies all his work. It was in Savigny's library that Grimm first saw Bodmer's edition of the Middle High German minnesingers and other early texts, which gave him a desire to study their language.\nAt the beginning of 1805, he was invited by Savigny to Paris, to help him in his literary work. There Grimm strengthened his taste for the literature of the Middle Ages. Towards the close of the year, he returned to Kassel, where his mother and brother had settled after Wilhelm finished his studies. The following year, Jacob obtained a position in the war office with a small salary of 100 thalers. He complained that he had to exchange his stylish Paris suit for a stiff uniform and pigtail, but the role gave him spare time for the pursuit of his studies.\nLibrarianship.\nIn 1808, soon after the death of his mother, he was appointed superintendent of the private library of J\u00e9r\u00f4me Bonaparte, King of Westphalia, into which Hesse-Kassel had been incorporated by Napoleon. Grimm was appointed an auditor to the state council, while retaining his superintendent post. His salary rose to 4000 francs and his official duties were nominal. In 1813, after the expulsion of Bonaparte and the reinstatement of an elector, Grimm was appointed Secretary of Legation accompanying the Hessian minister to the headquarters of the allied army. In 1814, he was sent to Paris to demand restitution of books taken by the French, and he attended the Congress of Vienna as Secretary of Legation in 1814\u20131815. Upon his return from Vienna, he was sent to Paris again to secure book restitutions. Meanwhile, Wilhelm had obtained a job at the Kassel library, and Jacob was made second librarian under Volkel in 1816. Upon the death of Volkel in 1828, the brothers both expected promotion, and they were dissatisfied when the role of the first librarian was given to Rommel, the keeper of the archives. Consequently, they moved the following year to the University of G\u00f6ttingen, where Jacob was appointed professor and librarian, and Wilhelm under-librarian. Jacob Grimm lectured on legal antiquities, historical grammar, literary history, and diplomatics, explained Old German poems, and commented on the \"Germania\" of Tacitus.\nLater work.\nGrimm joined other academics, known as the G\u00f6ttingen Seven, who signed a protest against the King of Hanover's abrogation of the liberal constitution which had been established some years before. As a result, he was dismissed from his professorship and banished from the Kingdom of Hanover in 1837. He returned to Kassel with his brother, who had also signed the protest. They remained there until 1840 when they accepted King Frederick William IV's invitation to move to the University of Berlin, where they both received professorships and were elected members of the Academy of Sciences. Grimm was not under any obligation to lecture, and seldom did so; he spent his time working with his brother on their dictionary project. During their time in Kassel, he regularly attended the meetings of the academy and read papers on varied subjects, including Karl Konrad Friedrich Wilhelm Lachmann, Friedrich Schiller, old age, and the origin of language. He described his impressions of Italian and Scandinavian travel, interspersing more general observations with linguistic details. He was elected a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1857.\nGrimm died in Berlin at the age of 78, working until the very end of his life. He describes his own work at the end of his autobiography:\nNearly all my labours have been devoted, either directly or indirectly, to the investigation of our earlier language, poetry and laws. These studies may have appeared to many, and may still appear, useless; to me they have always seemed a noble and earnest task, definitely and inseparably connected with our common fatherland, and calculated to foster the love of it. My principle has always been in these investigations to under-value nothing, but to utilize the small for the illustration of the great, the popular tradition for the elucidation of the written monuments.\nLinguistic work.\n\"History of the German Language\".\nGrimm's \"Geschichte der deutschen Sprache\" (History of the German Language) explores German history hidden in the words of the German language and is the oldest linguistic history of the Teutonic tribes. He collected scattered words and allusions from classical literature and tried to determine the relationship between the German language and those of the Getae, Thracians, Scythians, and other nations whose languages were known only through Greek and Latin authors. Grimm's results were later greatly modified by a wider range of available comparisons and improved methods of investigation. Many questions that he raised remain obscure due to the lack of surviving records of the languages, but his book's influence was profound.\n\"German Grammar\".\nGrimm's famous \"Deutsche Grammatik\" (German Grammar) was the outcome of his purely philological work. He drew on the work of past generations, from the humanists onwards, consulting an enormous collection of materials in the form of text editions, dictionaries, and grammars, mostly uncritical and unreliable. Some work had been done in the way of comparison and determination of general laws, and the concept of a comparative Germanic grammar had been grasped by the Englishman George Hickes by the beginning of the 18th century, in his \"Thesaurus\". Ten Kate in the Netherlands had made valuable contributions to the history and comparison of Germanic languages. Grimm himself did not initially intend to include all the languages in his \"Grammar\", but he soon found that Old High German postulated Gothic, and that the later stages of German could not be understood without the help of other West Germanic varieties including English, and that the literature of Scandinavia could not be ignored. The first edition of the first part of the \"Grammar\", which appeared in 1819, treated the inflections of all these languages, and included a general introduction in which he vindicated the importance of a historical study of the German language against the quasi-philosophical methods then in vogue.\nIn 1822 the book appeared in a second edition (really a new work, for, as Grimm himself says in the preface, he had to \"mow the first crop down to the ground\"). The considerable gap between the two stages of Grimm's development of these editions is shown by the fact that the second volume addresses phonology in 600 pages \u2013 more than half the volume. Grimm had concluded that all philology must be based on rigorous adherence to the laws of sound change, and he subsequently never deviated from this principle. This gave to all his investigations a consistency and force of conviction that had been lacking in the study of philology before his day.\nHis advances have been attributed mainly to the influence of his contemporary Rasmus Christian Rask. Rask was two years younger than Grimm, but the Icelandic paradigms in Grimm's first editions are based entirely on Rask's grammar; in his second edition, he relied almost entirely on Rask for Old English. His debt to Rask is shown by comparing his treatment of Old English in the two editions. For example, in the first edition he declines \"d\u00e6g, d\u00e6ges\", plural \"d\u00e6gas\", without having observed the law of vowel-change pointed out by Rask. (The correct plural is \"dagas.\") The appearance of Rask's Old English grammar was probably the primary impetus for Grimm to recast his work from the beginning. Rask was also the first to clearly formulate the laws of sound-correspondence in the different languages, especially in the vowels (previously ignored by etymologists).\nThe \"Grammar\" was continued in three volumes, treating principally derivation, composition and syntax, the last of which was unfinished. Grimm then began a third edition, of which only one part, comprising the vowels, appeared in 1840, his time being afterwards taken up mainly by the dictionary. The \"Grammar\" is noted for its comprehensiveness, method and fullness of detail, with all his points illustrated by an almost exhaustive mass of material, and it has served as a model for all succeeding investigators. Diez's grammar of the Romance languages is founded entirely on Grimm's methods, which have had a profound influence on the wider study of the Indo-European languages in general.\nGrimm's law.\nJacob is recognized for enunciating Grimm's law, the Germanic Sound Shift, which was first observed by the Danish philologist Rasmus Christian Rask. Grimm's law, also known as the \"Rask-Grimm Rule\" or the First Germanic Sound Shift, was the first law in linguistics concerning a non-trivial sound change. It was a turning point in the development of linguistics, enabling the introduction of a rigorous methodology to historic linguistic research. It concerns the correspondence of consonants between the ancestral Proto-Indo-European language and its Germanic descendants, Low Saxon and High German, and was first fully stated by Grimm in the second edition of the first part of his \"Grammar\". The correspondence of single consonants had been more or less clearly recognized by several of his predecessors, including Friedrich von Schlegel, Rasmus Christian Rask and Johan Ihre, the last having established a considerable number of \"literarum permutationes\", such as b for f, with the examples \"b\u0153ra\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"ferre\" (\"to bear\"), \"befwer\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"fibra\" (\"fiber\"). Rask, in his essay on the origin of the Icelandic language, gave the same comparisons, with a few additions and corrections, and even the same examples in most cases. As Grimm in the preface to his first edition expressly mentioned Rask's essay, there is every probability that it inspired his own investigations. But there is a wide difference between the isolated permutations described by his predecessors and his own comprehensive generalizations. The extension of the law to High German in any case is entirely Grimm's work.\nThe idea that Grimm wished to deprive Rask of his priority claims is based on the fact that he does not expressly mention Rask's results in his second edition, but it was always his plan to refrain from all controversy or reference to the works of others. In his first edition, he calls attention to Rask's essay and praises it ungrudgingly. Nevertheless, a certain bitterness of feeling afterwards sprang up between Grimm and Rask, after Rask refused to consider the value of Grimm's views when they clashed with his own.\n\"German Dictionary\".\nGrimm's monumental dictionary of the German Language, the \"Deutsches W\u00f6rterbuch\", was started in 1838 and first published in 1854. The Brothers anticipated it would take 10 years and encompass some six to seven volumes. However, it was undertaken on so large a scale as to make it impossible for them to complete it. The dictionary, as far as it was worked on by Grimm himself, has been described as a collection of disconnected antiquarian essays of high value. It was finally finished by subsequent scholars in 1961 and supplemented in 1971. At 33 volumes at some 330,000 headwords, it remains a standard work of reference to the present day. A current project at the Berlin-Brandenburg Academy of Sciences and Humanities is underway to update the \"Deutsches W\u00f6rterbuch\" to modern academic standards. Volumes A\u2013F were planned for completion in 2012 by the Language Research Centre at the Berlin-Brandenburg Academy of Sciences and Humanities and the University of G\u00f6ttingen.\nLiterary work.\nThe first work Jacob Grimm published, \"\u00dcber den altdeutschen Meistergesang\" (1811), was of a purely literary character. Yet even in this essay, Grimm showed that \"Minnesang\" and \"Meistergesang\" were really one form of poetry, of which they merely represented different stages of development, and also announced his important discovery of the invariable division of the \"Lied\" into three strophic parts.\nGrimm's text-editions were mostly prepared in conjunction with his brother. In 1812 they published the two ancient fragments of the \"Hildebrandslied\" and the \"Wei\u00dfenbrunner Gebet\", Jacob having discovered what until then had never been suspected \u2014 namely the alliteration in these poems. However, Jacob had little taste for text editing, and, as he himself confessed, working on a critical text gave him little pleasure. He therefore left this department to others, especially Lachmann, who soon turned his brilliant critical genius, trained in the severe school of classical philology, to Old and Middle High German poetry and metre.\nBoth Brothers were attracted from the beginning by all national poetry, whether in the form of epics, ballads or popular tales. They published In 1816\u20131818 a collection of legends culled from diverse sources and published the two-volume \"Deutsche Sagen\" (German Legends). At the same time they collected all the folktales they could find, partly from the mouths of the people, partly from manuscripts and books, and published in 1812\u20131815 the first edition of those \"Kinder- und Hausm\u00e4rchen\" (Children's and Household Tales), which has carried the name of the brothers Grimm into every household of the western world. The closely related subject of the satirical beast epic of the Middle Ages also held great charm for Jacob Grimm, and he published an edition of the \"Reinhart Fuchs\" in 1834. His first contribution to mythology was the first volume of an edition of the Eddaic songs, undertaken jointly with his brother, and was published in 1815. However, this work was not followed by any others on the subject.\nThe first edition of his \"Deutsche Mythologie\" (German Mythology) appeared in 1835. This work covered the whole range of the subject, attempting to trace the mythology and superstitions of the old Teutons back to the very dawn of direct evidence, and following their evolution to modern-day popular traditions, tales, and expressions.\nLegal scholarship.\nGrimm's work as a jurist was influential for the development of the history of law, particularly in Northern Europe.\nHis essay \"Von der Poesie im Recht\" (\"Poetry in Law\", 1816) developed a far-reaching, suprapositivist Romantic conception of law. The \"Deutsche Rechtsalterth\u00fcmer\" (\"German Legal Antiquities\", 1828) was a comprehensive compilation of sources of law from all Germanic languages, whose structure allowed an initial understanding of older German legal traditions not influenced by Roman law. Grimm's \"Weisth\u00fcmer\" (4 vol., 1840\u201363), a compilation of partially oral legal traditions from rural Germany, allows research of the development of written law in Northern Europe.\nPolitics.\nJacob Grimm's work tied in strongly with his views on Germany and its culture. His work on both fairy tales and philology dealt with the country's origins. He wished for a united Germany, and, like his brother, supported the Liberal movement for a constitutional monarchy and civil liberties, as demonstrated by their involvement in the G\u00f6ttingen Seven protest. In the German revolution of 1848, he was elected to the Frankfurt National Parliament. The people of Germany had demanded a constitution, so the Parliament, formed of elected members from various German states, met to form one. Grimm was selected for the office largely because of his part in the University of G\u00f6ttingen's refusal to swear to the king of Hanover. In Frankfurt, he made some speeches and was adamant that the Danish-ruled but German-speaking duchy of Holstein be under German control. Grimm soon became disillusioned with the National Assembly and asked to be released from his duties to return to his studies.\nHe was elected to the American Philosophical Society in 1863.\nDeath.\nJacob Grimm died on 20 September 1863, in Berlin, Germany from disease, at the age of 78.\nWorks.\nThe following is a complete list of Grimm's separately published works. Those he published with his brother are marked with a star (*). For a list of his essays in periodicals, etc., see vol. V of his \"Kleinere Schriften\", from which the present list is taken. His life is best studied in his own \"Selbstbiographie\", in vol. I of the \"Kleinere Schriften\". There is also a brief memoir by Karl Goedeke in \"G\u00f6ttinger Professoren\" (Gotha (Perthes), 1872).\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16516", "revid": "5230605", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16516", "title": "Jamiroquai", "text": "English acid jazz band\nJamiroquai ( ) are an English acid jazz and funk band from London. Formed in 1992, they are fronted by vocalist Jay Kay, and were prominent in the London-based funk and acid jazz movement of the 1990s. They built on their acid jazz sound in their early releases and later drew from rock, disco, electronic and Latin music genres. Lyrically, the group have addressed social and environmental justice. Kay has remained the only constant member through several line-up changes.\nThe band made their debut under Acid Jazz Records but subsequently found mainstream success under Sony. While under this label, three of their albums have charted at number one in the UK, including \"Emergency on Planet Earth\" (1993), \"Synkronized\" (1999), \"A Funk Odyssey\" (2001), and the band's single, \"Deeper Underground\" (1998).\nAs of 2017[ [update]], Jamiroquai had sold more than 26million albums worldwide. Their third album, \"Travelling Without Moving\" (1996), received a \"Guinness World Record\" as the best-selling funk album in history. The music video for its second single, \"Virtual Insanity\", also contributed to the band's success. The song was named Video of the Year at the 1997 MTV Video Music Awards and earned the band a Grammy Award in 1998.\nHistory.\n1992\u20131995: Formation, \"Emergency on Planet Earth\" and \"The Return of the Space Cowboy\".\nJay Kay was sending songs to record companies, including a hip-hop single released in 1986 under the label StreetSounds. During this time, Kay was influenced by Native American and First Nation peoples and their philosophies; this led to the creation of \"When You Gonna Learn\", a song covering social issues. After he had it recorded, Kay fought with his producer, who took out half of the lyrics and produced the song based on what was charting at the time. With the track restored to his preference, the experience helped Kay realise he \"wanted a proper live band with a proper live sound\". The band would be named \"Jamiroquai\", a portmanteau of the words \"jam\" and the slightly-altered name of the Native American confederacy known as the Iroquois. He was signed to Acid Jazz Records in 1991 after he sent a demo tape of himself covering a song by the Brand New Heavies. Kay gradually gathered band members, including Wallis Buchanan, who played the didgeridoo. Kay's manager scouted keyboardist Toby Smith, who joined the group as Kay's songwriting partner. In 1992, Jamiroquai began their career by performing in the British club scene. They released \"When You Gonna Learn\" as their debut single, charting outside the UK Top 50 on its initial release. In the following year, Stuart Zender became the band's bassist by audition.\nAfter the success of \"When You Gonna Learn\", the band were offered major-label contracts. Kay signed a one-million-dollar, eight-album record deal with Sony Soho2. He was the only member under contract, but he would share his royalties with his band members in accordance to their contributions as musicians. Their label for US releases would be under the Work Group. The band's debut album \"Emergency on Planet Earth\" entered atop the UK albums chart. Kevin L. Carter of \"The Philadelphia Inquirer\" commented that the album \"is full of upbeat, multi-hued pop tunes based heavily in acid jazz, '70s fusion, funk and soul, reggae and world music\". With it, the band continued to build their acid-jazz sound in the following years. The album's ecologically charged concept gave Kay press coverage, although Mark Jenkins of \"The Washington Post\" found the record's sloganeering \"as crude as the music is slick\".\nThe band's original drummer, Nick van Gelder, was replaced in 1993 by Derrick McKenzie, who recorded with the group in one take for his audition. They issued their second album, \"The Return of the Space Cowboy\", in 1994, which reached number 2 in the UK chart. During its recording, Kay was in a creative block, worsened by his increasing drug use at the time, which resulted in its complex songwriting. However, the record was said to have \"capture[ed] this first phase of Jamiroquai at their very best\", according to Daryl Easlea of BBC Music. Josef Woodard from \"Entertainment Weekly\" wrote that its \"syncopated grooves and horn-lined riffs\" were \"played by humans, not samplers\".\n1996\u20132000: \"Travelling Without Moving\", peak of fame and \"Synkronized\".\nReleased in 1996, \"Travelling Without Moving\" reached number 24 in the \"Billboard\" 200 and number 2 in the UK albums chart. With more than 8 million copies sold worldwide, it has been listed in the \"Guinness World Records\" as the best-selling funk album in history since 2001. The album's lead single, \"Virtual Insanity\", gained popularity for its music video, which was heavily played on MTV. Containing symphonic and jungle elements, Kay aimed for a more accessible sound. Ted Kessler of \"NME\" saw \"Travelling Without Moving\" as an improvement from previous albums, while critic Stephen Thomas Erlewine commented that it did not have \"uniform consistenc[ies]\" in comparison.\nWhile the group were preparing their fourth album, \"Synkronized\" (1999), Zender left Jamiroquai due to internal conflicts with Kay. While Zender had not been involved in the album's songwriting, the group chose to scrap his recorded tracks to avoid lawsuits, and Nick Fyffe was recruited for new sessions. This resulted in what was thought to be both a \"tighter, more angry collection of songs\" for \"Synkronized\", and a change of musical direction from \"creating propulsive collections of looooong [\"sic\"] tunes, speaking out against injustice\". Some of the album's tracks, including \"Canned Heat\", display a hi-NRG and house style, while slower tempos on others were said to \"ease the pressure for [Kay's] more romantic musings\". The album reached number 1 in the UK albums chart and number 28 in the US \"Billboard\" 200. A year prior to \"Synkronized\", \"Deeper Underground\" was released as a single for the and reached number one in the UK singles chart.\n2001\u20132009: \"A Funk Odyssey\", \"Dynamite\" and subsequent activities.\nThe group issued their follow-up, \"A Funk Odyssey\", a disco record exploring Latin music influences, in 2001. It introduced guitarist Rob Harris, whose playing in the album \"melts seductively into a mix that occasionally incorporates lavish orchestration\", according to Jim Abbot of \"Orlando Sentinel\". \"Slant Magazine\"'s Sal Cinquemani claimed: \"Like its predecessors, \"Odyssey\" mixes self-samplage with Jamiroquai's now-signature robo-funk.\" The album topped the chart in the UK. In the US, under Epic Records, it reached number 44 in the US \"Billboard 200\". It was the last album to feature Smith, who left the band in the following year to spend more time with his family.\nTheir sixth album, \"Dynamite\", was released in 2005 and reached number 3 in the UK; in the same year, Paul Turner replaced Fyffe as the band's new bassist. Rashod D. Ollison of \"The Baltimore Sun\" said the album \"boasts a harder digital edge\u00a0... With heavier beats, manipulated guitar lines and odd digital textures, \"Dynamite\" is less organic than Jamiroquai's other efforts\". Its tracks \"Feels Just Like It Should\" and \"Love Blind\" were characterised as \"[having] a fatter, dirtier sound than usual\". In 2006, Kay's contract with Sony ended, which led to the issue of the band's greatest hits collection, \"\". It charted at number one in the UK after its first week of release. The following year, Jamiroquai performed at the Gig in the Sky, a concert held on a private Boeing 757 in association with Sony Ericsson. The band thus currently hold the \"Guinness World Record\" for \"fastest concert\", performed on the aircraft whilst travelling at 1,017\u00a0km/h (632\u00a0mph).\n2010\u20132019: \"Rock Dust Light Star\" and \"Automaton\".\n\"Rock Dust Light Star\" was released in 2010 under Mercury Records, where it charted at number 7 in the UK. Kay considered the album as \"a real band record\" that \"capture[s] the flow of our live performances\". Critics have seen this as a return to their organic funk and soul style, as it forgoes \"the electro textures that followed the band into the new millennium\", according to Luke Winkie of \"MusicOMH\". It also has a sound Thomas H. Green of \"The Telegraph\" described as \"Californian Seventies funk rock\".\nJamiroquai released their 2017 album, \"Automaton\", through Virgin EMI. It was their eighth studio album and the first in seven years, reaching number 4 in the UK. It was produced by Kay and band keyboardist Matt Johnson, and it \"carefully balance[s] their signature sound with... EDM, soul and trap sounds\", according to Ryan Patrick of \"Exclaim!\". Craig Jenkins of \"Vulture\" writes: \"Arrangements that used to spill out over horn, flute, didgeridoo, and string accompaniments now lean closer to French house\". By 2018, the group's line-up consisted of Kay, Harris, McKenzie, Johnson, Turner, percussionist Sola Akingbola, Nate Williams on guitar and keyboards and Howard Whiddett with Ableton Live.\n2021-present: \"The Heels of Steel Tour\" and upcoming ninth studio album.\nKay announced on the back notes of their 2021 re-released single \"Everybody's Going to the Moon\" that the band were working on a new album. On 19 March 2024, Kay announced that recording sessions for the new album were underway. On 18 November 2024, Jamiroquai announced their upcoming UK and Europe 2025 tour, The Heels of Steel Tour, which is set to commence 6 November running through 12 December 2025. It will be their first live tour since 2019.\nOn November 6, 2025, The Heels of Steel Tour kicked off in Barcelona, Spain. During the concert, Jamiroquai debuted three new songs: \"Disco Stays the Same\", \"Shadow in the Night\" and \"Queen Machine\".\nArtistry.\nMusical style and influences.\nJamiroquai's music is generally termed acid jazz, funk, jazz-funk, disco, soul, house, and R&amp;B. Their sound has been described by J. D. Considine as having an \"anything-goes attitude, an approach that leaves the band open to anything\". Tom Moon wrote that the band \"embrac[es] old-school funk, Philly-soul strings, the crisp keyboard sounds of the '70s and even hints of jazz fusion\", blending these with \"agitated, aggressive dance rhythms to create an easygoing feel that looks both backward and forward\". Ben Sisario facetiously commented that Jay Kay and Toby Smith as songwriters, \"studied \"Innervisions\"-era [Stevie] Wonder carefully, and just about everything the group has recorded sounds like it could in fact have been played by [Wonder] himself.\"\nKay is the primary songwriter of Jamiroquai. When composing, he sings melodies and beats for band members to transcribe to their instrumentation. The band relies on analog sounds, such as running keyboards through vintage effects pedals \"to get the warmth and the clarity of those instruments\". Parry Gettelman of the \"Orlando Sentinel\" described Kay's vocals as \"not identifiably male or female, black or white\". Other writers said Toby Smith's keyboard arrangements were \"psychedelic and soulful\", and compared Stuart Zender's bass playing to the work of Marcus Miller. Wallis Buchanan on didgeridoo was met with either praise or annoyance from critics.\nKay was influenced by Roy Ayers, Herbie Hancock, Lou Donaldson, Grant Green, Sly Stone, Gil Scott-Heron, and hip-hop and its culture. He was introduced to much of these influences by British club DJs within the rare groove scene in the 1980s. \"I'd been into Stevie and all that... Then I got into the JBs, Maceo Parker and the Meters... I decided around that time to try to make music built around those loose, open grooves.\" A 2003 compilation titled \"\" under Azuli Records, also contains a selection of some of the band's late 1970s R&amp;B, disco and quiet storm influences. Kay and the group have been compared to Stevie Wonder, with some critics accusing the band of copying black artists. In response, Kay said \"we never tried to hide our influences\". The band references them as Kay maintained Jamiroquai's own sound: \"it's about the style of music you aim for, not the exact sound. If you just sample Barry White or Sly Stone, that's one thing; to get their spirit is different.\"\nLyrics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n 'Virtual Insanity'... was a very prescient song I wrote and things like Dolly the Sheep happened right after. I think the ideas in that song are maybe even more relevant today than they were back then.\n\u2014Kay speaking about the track in regard to the group's social topics, 2013\nJamiroquai's lyrics have touched on socially charged themes. With \"Emergency on Planet Earth\" (1993), it revolves around environmental awareness and speaks out against war. \"The Return of the Space Cowboy\" (1994) contains themes of homelessness, Native American rights, youth protests, and slavery.\n \"Virtual Insanity\" from \"Travelling Without Moving\" (1996) is about the prevalence of technology and the replication and simulation of life. The lyrics of \"Automaton\" (2017) allude to dystopian films and compromised relationships within a digital landscape.\nHowever, critics wrote that the band had focused more on \"boy\u2013girl seductions\" and \"having fun\" rather than social justice, and that Kay's interest in sports cars contradicts his earlier beliefs. Kay was reluctant to release \"Travelling Without Moving\" (1996), as it adopted a motorcar concept, but he added: \"just because I love to drive a fast car, that doesn't mean I believe in [destroying the environment.]\" He also stated in separate interviews he was tired of being \"[a] troubadour of social conscious[ness]\", and \"after a while you realise that people won't boogie and dance to [politics].\"\nStage and visuals.\nWhile critics said the group tended towards 1970s funk and soul archetypes in their performances, Kay's presence received praise, with critics noting his strong vocals and energetic dance moves on stage. Robert Hilburn said Kay \"establish[es] a rapport with the audience\" and has a \"disarming sense of humor\". Helen Brown of \"The Telegraph\" was more critical, writing of a 2011 concert that there was no \"deeply personal emotion\" in its set list or in Kay's vocals, and \"much of the material is exhilarating in the moment, forgettable thereafter\".\nWith their visual style being described as \"sci-fi and futuristic\", Jamiroquai's music video of \"Virtual Insanity\" made them \"icons of the music-video format\", according to Spencer Kornhaber from \"The Atlantic\". It was directed by Jonathan Glazer, and depicted Kay \"perform[ing] in a room where the floors, walls and furniture all moved simultaneously.\"\nKay has worn elaborate headgear, some he designed himself. He said that the headgear give him a spiritual power described by the Iroquois as \"orenda\". The illuminating helmet that appears in the music video for \"Automaton\" was designed by Moritz Waldemeyer for Kay to control its lights and movements and to portray him as an endangered species. Kay has also worn Native American head-dresses, in which he was accused of culturally appropriating sacred regalia of the First Nations.\nLegacy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Miraculously, Jamiroquai managed to survive the acid-jazz crash of the early 90's, when kids traded mellow sounds like the Brand New Heavies, Young Disciples and Guru for the bed-of-nails wails of Nirvana, Soundgarden and Pearl Jam.\n \u2014\"Paper\", 1997\nAs a prominent component of the London-based funk and acid-jazz movement of the 1990s, writer Kenneth Prouty said: \"few acid jazz groups have reached the level of visibility in the pop music mainstream as London-born Jamiroquai\". The success of the 1996 single \"Virtual Insanity\" led to the climax of \"1970s soul and funk that early acid jazz artists had initiated\". The band were also credited for popularising the didgeridoo. Artists who mention the group as an influence include Chance the Rapper, SZA, Kamaal Williams, the Internet, Calvin Harris, Tyler, the Creator, and Dua Lipa. In June 2025, Kay made a guest appearance with Dua Lipa at Wembley Stadium, where they performed \"Virtual Insanity\". \nAccording to Johnny Sharp of BBC Music, Kay \"[became] one of those artists whose music seems somehow fashion-proof, because it's never been in or out of it.\" Ian Gittins of \"The Guardian\" said that the group \"have long been shunned by music's tastemakers for a perceived naffness, and have shown their utter disregard for this critical snobbery by getting bigger and bigger\". Sisario gave a negative review of the band's discography in \"The Rolling Stone Album Guide\" in 2004, finding much of their material to be identical.\nJamiroquai were the third-best-selling UK act of the 1990s, after the Spice Girls and Oasis. As of April 2017, they have sold more than 26 million albums worldwide. Despite becoming one of the most popular bands in the UK with high-charting albums, the band did not find as much success in the United States. The band's studio albums became less frequently released. Kay said in 2013: \"I will only put out an album now when I am inspired to do so\".\nTheir song \"Use the Force\" was featured on the soundtrack to the 1998 movie \"Sliding Doors\".\nAwards and nominations.\nJamiroquai have received 15 Brit Award nominations. In 1999, the band won an Ivor Novello Award for an Outstanding Song Collection. Front-man Kay was given a BMI Presidents Award \"in recognition of his profound influence on songwriting within the music industry.\" Jamiroquai received a nomination for Best Pop Album at the 1998 Grammy Awards and won Best Performance by a Duo Or Group for \"Virtual Insanity\". The band were also nominated for Best Short Form Music Video for \"Feels Just Like It Should\" at the 2005 Grammy Awards. For their \"Virtual Insanity\" music video, Jamiroquai had ten nominations at the 1997 MTV Video Music Awards and four wins: Best Visual Effects, Best Cinematography, Best Breakthrough Video and Video of the Year.\nMembers.\nCurrent members\nFormer members\nTimeline\nDiscography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16517", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16517", "title": "John Sutter", "text": "Swiss pioneer of California\nJohn Augustus Sutter (February 23, 1803 \u2013 June 18, 1880), born Johann August Sutter and known in Spanish as Don Juan Sutter, was a Swiss immigrant who became a Mexican and later an American citizen, known for establishing Sutter's Fort in the area that would eventually become Sacramento, California, the state's capital. His employee James W. Marshall discovered gold, leading to the founding of the mill-making team at Sutter's Mill. Sutter, however, saw his own business ventures fail during the California gold rush, though those of his elder son, John Augustus Sutter Jr., were more successful.\nEarly life.\nSutter was born on February 23, 1803, in Kandern, Baden in present-day Germany, to Johann Jakob Sutter, a foreman at a paper mill, and Christina Wilhelmine Sutter (n\u00e9e Stober). His father came from the nearby town of R\u00fcnenberg, in the canton of Basel in Switzerland, and his maternal grandfather was a pastor from Grenzach, on the Swiss-German border.\nAfter attending school in Kandern, Sutter studied at Saint-Blaise from 1818 to 1819. He then worked as an apprentice at the Thurneysen printing and publishing house in Basel until 1823. From 1823 to 1828, he was employed as a clerk in clothing shops in Aarburg and Burgdorf. At age 21, Sutter married the daughter of a wealthy widow. He briefly operated a store but spent more time indulging his interests than managing the business. Facing mounting debts and legal charges that could lead to imprisonment, he fled to America to avoid trial, adopting the name Captain John Augustus Sutter.\nIn May 1834, he left his wife and five children behind in Burgdorf, Switzerland, and with a French passport, he boarded the ship \"Sully\", which traveled from Le Havre, France, to New York City, where it arrived on July 14, 1834.\nThe New World.\nIn North America, John Augustus Sutter (as he would call himself for the rest of his life) undertook extensive travels. Before he went to the United States, he had learned Spanish, English, and French. He and 35 Germans traveled from the St. Louis area to Santa Fe, New Mexico (then a province of Mexico), before eventually settling in Westport (modern-day Kansas City). On April 1, 1838, he joined a group of missionaries, led by the fur trapper Andrew Drips, and traveled the Oregon Trail to Fort Vancouver in Oregon Territory, which they reached in October. Sutter originally planned to cross the Siskiyou Mountains during the winter, but acting chief factor James Douglas convinced him that such an attempt would be perilous. Douglas charged Sutter \u00a321 to arrange transportation on the British bark \"Columbia\" for himself and his eight followers.\nThe \"Columbia\" departed Fort Vancouver on November 11 and sailed to the Hawaiian Kingdom, reaching Honolulu on December 9. Sutter had missed the only ship outbound for Alta California, and had to remain in the kingdom for four months. Over the months, Sutter developed friendly relations with the European-American community, dining with Consuls of the United States of America and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, John Coffin Jones and Richard Charlton, as well as merchants like American Faxon Atherton. The brig \"Clementine\" was eventually hired by Sutter to take freight provisions and general merchandise for New Archangel (now known as Sitka), the capital of the Russian-American Company colonies in Russian America. Joining the crew as unpaid supercargo, Sutter, 10 Native Hawaiian laborers, and several other followers embarked on April 20, 1839. Staying at New Archangel for a month, Sutter joined several balls hosted by Governor Kupreyanov, who likely gave help in determining the course of the Sacramento River. The \"Clementine\" then sailed for Alta California, arriving on July 1, 1839, at Yerba Buena (now San Francisco), which at that time was only a small seaport town.\nBeginnings of Sutter's Fort.\nAt the time of Sutter's arrival, Alta California was a province of Mexico and had a population of Native Americans estimated at 100,000\u2013700,000. Sutter had to go to the capital at Monterey to obtain permission from the governor, Juan Bautista Alvarado, to settle in the territory. Alvarado saw Sutter's plan of establishing a colony in Central Valley as useful in \"buttressing the frontier which he was trying to maintain against Indians, Russians, Americans and British.\" Sutter persuaded Governor Alvarado to grant him 48,400 acres of land for the sake of curtailing American encroachment on the Mexican territory of California. This stretch of land was called New Helvetia and Sutter was given the right to \"represent in the Establishment of New Helvetia all the laws of the country, to function as political authority and dispenser of justice, in order to prevent the robberies committed by adventurers from the United States, to stop the invasion of savage Indians, and the hunting and trading by companies from the Columbia (river).\"\nThe governor required Sutter to meet certain conditions to qualify for land ownership. These included residing in the territory for one year and becoming a Mexican citizen, which Sutter fulfilled on August 29, 1840. After receiving the land grant and building his fort, Sutter did not strictly adhere on his initial agreement to deter European settlers. Instead, he actively supported the migrations of Europeans to California. Sutter later stated, \"I gave passports to those entering the country\u2026 and this (Bautista) did not like it\u2026 I encouraged immigration, while they discouraged it. I sympathized with the Americans while they hated them.\"\nConstruction began on August 1839 on a fortified settlement which Sutter named New Helvetia, or \"New Switzerland,\" after his homeland. In order to elevate his social standing, Sutter impersonated a Swiss guard officer who had been displaced by the French Revolution and identified himself accordingly as 'Captain Sutter of the Swiss Guard'. When the settlement was completed on June 18, 1841, he received title to on the Sacramento River. The site is now part of the California state capital of Sacramento.\nRelationship with Native Americans.\nSutter's Fort had a central building made of adobe bricks, surrounded by a high wall with protection on opposite corners to guard against attack. It also had workshops and stores that produced necessary goods for the New Helvetia settlement.\nSutter employed or enslaved Native Americans of the Miwok, Maidu, Nisenan, and Ohlone tribes, the Hawaiians (Kanakas) he had brought, and also employed some Europeans at his compound. He envisioned creating an agricultural utopia, and for a time the settlement was in fact quite large and prosperous. Prior to the Gold Rush, it was the destination for most immigrants entering California via the high passes of the Sierra Nevada, including the ill-fated Donner Party of 1846, for whose rescue Sutter contributed supplies.\nIn order to build his fort and develop a large ranching/farming network in the area, Sutter relied on Indian labor. Some Native Americans worked voluntarily for Sutter (e.g. Nisenans, Miwoks, Ochecames), but others were subjected to varying degrees of coercion that resembled slavery or serfdom. Sutter believed that Native Americans had to be kept \"strictly under fear\" in order to serve white landowners. Housing and working conditions at the fort were very poor, and have been described as \"enslavement\", with uncooperative Indians being \"whipped, jailed, and executed.\" Sutter's Native American \"employees\" slept on bare floors in locked rooms without sanitation, and ate from troughs made from hollowed tree trunks. Housing conditions for workers living in nearby villages and rancher\u00edas was described as being more favorable. Pierson Reading, Sutter's fort manager, wrote in a letter to a relative that \u201cthe Indians of California make as obedient and humble slaves as the Negro in the South\". If Indians refused to work for him, Sutter responded with violence. Observers accused him of using \"kidnapping, food privation, and slavery\" in order to force Indians to work for him, and generally stated that Sutter held the Indians under inhumane conditions. Theodor Cordua, a German immigrant who leased land from Sutter, wrote:\n\"When Sutter established himself in 1839 in the Sacramento Valley, new misfortune came upon these peaceful natives of the country. Their services were demanded immediately. Those who did not want to work were considered as enemies. With other tribes the field was taken against the hostile Indian. Declaration of war was not made. The villages were attacked usually before daybreak when everybody was still asleep. Neither old nor young was spared by the enemy, and often the Sacramento River was colored red by the blood of the innocent Indians, for these villages usually were situated at the banks of the rivers. During a campaign one section of the attackers fell upon the village by way of land. All the Indians of the attacked village naturally fled to find protection on the other bank of the river. But there they were awaited by the other half of the enemy and thus the unhappy people were shot and killed with rifles from both sides of the river. Seldom an Indian escaped such an attack, and those who were not murdered were captured. All children from six to fifteen years of age were usually taken by the greedy white people. The village was burned down and the few Indians who had escaped with their lives were left to their fate.\"\nHeinrich Lienhard, a Swiss immigrant that served as Sutter's majordomo, wrote of the treatment of the enslaved once captured:\n\"As the room had neither beds nor straw, the inmates were forced to sleep on the bare floor. When I opened the door for them in the morning, the odor that greeted me was overwhelming, for no sanitary arrangements had been provided. What these rooms were like after ten days or two weeks can be imagined, and the fact that nocturnal confinement was not agreeable to the Indians was obvious. Large numbers deserted during the daytime, or remained outside the fort when the gates were locked.\"\nLienhard also claimed that Sutter was known to rape his Indian captives, even girls as young as 12 years old. Despite the procurement of fertile agriculture, Sutter fed his Native American work force in pig troughs, where they would eat gruel with their hands in the sun on their knees. Numerous visitors to Sutter's Fort noted the shock of this sight in their diaries, alongside their discontent for his kidnapping of Indian children who were sold into bondage to repay Sutter's debts or given as gifts. American explorer and mountain man James Clyman reported in 1846 that:\n\"The Capt. [Sutter] keeps 600 to 800 Indians in a complete state of Slavery and as I had the mortification of seeing them dine I may give a short description. 10 or 15 Troughs 3 or 4 feet long were brought out of the cook room and seated in the Broiling sun. All the Labourers grate [sic] and small ran to the troughs like so many pigs and fed themselves with their hands as long as the troughs contained even a moisture.\"\nDr. Waseurtz af Sandels, a Swedish explorer who visited California in 1842\u20131843, also wrote about Sutter's brutal treatment of Indian slaves in 1842:\n\"I could not reconcile my feelings to see these fellows being driven, as it were, around some narrow troughs of hollow tree trunks, out of which, crouched on their haunches, they fed more like beasts than human beings, using their hands in hurried manner to convey to their mouths the thin porage [sic] which was served to them. Soon they filed off to the fields after having, I fancy, half satisfied their physical wants.\"\nThese concerns were even shared by Juan Bautista Alvarado, then Governor of Alta California, who deplored Sutter's ill-treatment of indigenous Californians in 1845:\n\"The public can see how inhuman were the operations of Sutter who had no scruples about depriving Indian mothers of their children. Sutter has sent these little Indian children as gifts to people who live far from the place of their birth, without demanding of them any promises that in their homes the Indians should be treated with kindness.\"\nDespite his promises to the Mexican government, Sutter was hospitable to American settlers entering the region, and provided an impetus for many of them to settle there. The hundreds of thousands of acres which these men took from the Native Americans had been an important source of food and resources. As the White settlers were ranching two million head of livestock, shooting wild game in enormous numbers, and replacing wilderness with wheat fields, available food for Indians in the region diminished. In response, some Indians took to raiding the cattle of White ranchers. In August 1846, an article in \"The Californian\" declared that in respect to California Indians, \"The only effectual means of stopping inroads upon the property of the country, will be to attack them in their villages.\" On February 28, 1847 Sutter ordered the Kern and Sutter massacres in retaliation.\nMuch of Sutter's labor practices were illegal under Mexican law. However, in April 22, 1850, following the annexation of California by the United States, the California state legislature passed the \"Act for the Government and Protection of Indians,\" legalizing the kidnapping and forced servitude of Indians by White settlers. In 1851, the civilian governor of California declared, \"That a war of extermination will continue to be waged ... until the Indian race becomes extinct, must be expected.\" This expectation soon found its way into law. An 1851 legislative measure not only gave settlers the right to organize lynch mobs to kill Indians, but allowed them to submit their expenses to the government. By 1852, the state had authorized over a million dollars in such claims.\nIn 1856, a \"San Francisco Bulletin\" editorial stated, \"Extermination is the quickest and cheapest remedy, and effectually prevents all other difficulties when an outbreak [of Indian violence] occurs.\" In 1860, the legislature passed a law expanding the age and condition of Indians available for forced slavery. A \"Sacramento Daily Union\" article of the time accused high-pressure lobbyists interested in profiting off enslaved Indians of pushing the law through, gave examples of how wealthy individuals had abused the law to acquire Indian slaves from the reservations, and stated, \"The Act authorizes as complete a system of slavery, without any of the checks and wholesome restraints of slavery, as ever was devised.\"\n'Red Star' and 'Bear Flag' revolts.\nLone star rebellion.\nIn 1844\u20131845, there was a revolt of the Mexican colony of California against the army of the mother country.\nTwo years earlier, in 1842, Mexico had removed California Governor Juan Bautista Alvarado, and sent Brigadier General Manuel Micheltorena to replace him. It also sent an army.\nThe army had been recruited from Mexico's worst jails, and the soldiers soon began stealing Californians' chickens and other property. Micheltorena's army was described as descending on California \"like a plague of locusts, stripping the countryside bare.\" Californians complained that the army was committing robberies, beatings, and rapes.\nIn late 1844, the Californios revolted against Micheltorena. He had appointed Sutter as \"commandante militar.\" Sutter, in turn, recruited men, one of whom was John Marsh, a medical doctor and owner of the large Rancho los Meganos. Marsh, who sided with the Californios, wanted no part of this effort. However, Sutter gave Marsh a choice: either join the army or be arrested and put in jail.\nIn 1845, Sutter's forces met the Californio forces at the Battle of Providencia (also known as the Second Battle of Cahuenga Pass). The battle consisted primarily of an artillery exchange, and during the battle Marsh secretly went over to parley with the other side. There was a large number of Americans fighting on both sides. Marsh met with them and convinced the Americans on both sides that there was no reason for Americans to be fighting each other.\nThe Americans agreed and quit the fight, and as a result, Sutter\u2019s forces lost the battle. The defeated Micheltorena took his army back to Mexico, and Californian Pio Pico became governor.\nMexico's loss in the Mexican\u2013American War.\nDuring the Mexican-American War, Mexico's control over Alta California weakened significantly. Sutter, who identified himself as a French citizen, reportedly considered organizing muster British, Canadian, and American immigrants, along with Indigenous peoples, to declare New Helvetia an independent republic under French protection. Sutter wrote to US Counsel Jacob Leese in Yerba Buena: \"Very curious reports come to me from below but the poor wretches do not know what they do. The first French frigate that comes here will do me justice. The first step they do against me I will make a declaration of Independence and proclaim California a Republic independent of Mexico.\"\nOn July 7, 1846, following the Bear Flag Revolt and the Battle of Monterey, Commodore John B. Montgomery raised the American flag in Monterey. Four days later, on July 11, 1846, Sutter raised an American flag at his fort after receiving it from a messenger sent by Montgomery. In August 1846, Sutter formally transferred control of the fort to the United States after receiving a commission as a lieutenant under US Army Captain John C. Fr\u00e9mont. In March 1847, command returned to Sutter.\nBeginning of the Gold Rush.\nIn 1848, gold was discovered at Sutter's Mill, by one of Sutter's employees, James W. Marshall. It started when Sutter hired Marshall, a New Jersey native who had served with John C. Fr\u00e9mont in the Bear Flag Revolt, to build a water-driven sawmill in Coloma, along the American River. Sutter was intent on building a city on his property (not yet named ), including housing and a wharf on the Sacramento River, and needed lumber for the construction. One morning, as Marshall inspected the tailrace for silt and debris, he noticed some gold nuggets and brought them to Sutter's attention. Together, they read an encyclopedia entry on gold and performed primitive tests to confirm whether it was precious metal. Sutter concluded that it was, in fact, gold, but he was very anxious that the discovery not disrupt his plans for construction and farming. At the same time, he set about gaining legitimate title to as much land near the discovery as possible.\nSutter's attempt at keeping the gold discovery quiet failed when merchant and newspaper publisher Samuel Brannan returned from Sutter's Mill to San Francisco with gold he had acquired there and began publicizing the find. Large crowds of people overran the land and destroyed nearly everything Sutter had worked for. To avoid losing everything, Sutter deeded his remaining land to his eldest son, John Augustus Sutter Jr., who had come from Switzerland to join his father in September 1848.\nWhen Sutter Jr. arrived, Sutter Sr. asked his fellow Swiss majordomo Heinrich Lienhard to lend him his half of the gold he had mined, so that the elder Sutter could impress his son with a large amount of the precious metal. However, when Lienhard later went to the Fort, Sutter Jr., having taken charge of his father's debt-ridden business, was unable to return his share of the gold to Lienhard, who finally accepted Sutter's flock of sheep as payment.\nThe younger Sutter saw the commercial possibilities of the land and promptly started plans for building a new town he named Sacramento, after the Sacramento River. The elder Sutter deeply resented this; he had wanted the town named Sutterville (for both of them) and for it to be built near New Helvetia.\nSutter gave up New Helvetia to pay the last of his debts. He rejoined his family and lived on Hock Farm (north of Sacramento along the Feather River).\nIn 1853, the California legislature made Sutter a major general in the California Militia.\nLand grant challenge.\nSutter's El Sobrante (Spanish for leftover) land grant was challenged by the Squatters' Association, and in 1858 the US Supreme Court denied its validity.\nSutter got a letter of introduction to the Congress of the United States from the governor of California. He moved to Washington, D.C. at the end of 1865, after Hock Farm was destroyed by fire in June of that year. Sutter sought reimbursement of his losses associated with the Gold Rush, and received a pension of US$250 a month as a reimbursement of taxes paid on the El Sobrante grant at the time that Sutter considered it his own.\nHe and wife Annette moved to Lititz, Pennsylvania in 1871. The proximity to Washington along with the reputed healing qualities of Lititz Springs appealed to the aging Sutter. He also wanted three of his grandchildren (he had grandchildren in Acapulco, Mexico, as well) to have the benefits of the fine private Moravian Schools. Sutter built his home across from the Lititz Springs Hotel (renamed in 1930 as the General Sutter Inn and subsequently as the Lititz Springs Inn &amp; Spa).\nAfter prospectors had destroyed his crops and slaughtered cattle leaving him only his own gold, Sutter spent the rest of his life trying to get the government to pay him for his losses, without success. He continually petitioned Congress for restitution but little was done. On June 16, 1880, Congress adjourned, once again, without action on a bill that would have given Sutter US$50,000 (~$ in 2024). Two days later, Sutter died in the Mades Hotel in Washington. His body was returned to Lititz and buried adjacent to God's Acre, the Moravian Graveyard; Annette Sutter died the following January and is buried with him.\nLegacy.\nThere are numerous California landmarks bearing the name of Sutter: Sutter Street in San Francisco; the Sutterville Bend of the Sacramento River; the non-profit hospital system Sutter Health; the cities of Sutter Creek and Sutter; the Sutter Buttes, a mountain range near Yuba City, California; and Sutter County. In Sacramento, Sutter's Landing; Sutterville Road; Sutter Middle School (renamed Miwok Middle School in 2023); Sutter's Mill School; and Sutterville Elementary School are all named after him. California Governor Jerry Brown, elected to a third term in 2010, had a Welsh corgi named Sutter Brown, affectionately referred to as the First Dog of California.\nBeyond California, the property that used to belong to John Augustus Sutter Jr. in Acapulco, Mexico became the Hotel Sutter. The Johann Agust Sutter House in Lititz, Pennsylvania was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1982. The 'Sutter's Gold' rose, an orange blend hybrid tea rose bred by Herbert C. Swim, was named after him.\nSutter's treatment of Native Americans has received renewed criticism from historians and activists. During the George Floyd protests in 2020, the statue of John Sutter outside the Sutter Medical Center in Sacramento, California was vandalized with red paint. On June 15, 2020, amidst the removal of many monuments associated with racial injustice, the statue was removed by the hospital \"out of respect for some community members' viewpoints, and in the interest of public safety for patients and staff.\" In Sutter's hometown of Lititz, Pennsylvania, General Sutter's Inn removed their statue of John Sutter in solidarity and rebranded in October 2020, dropping 'Sutter' from their name.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16518", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16518", "title": "John Adams (composer)", "text": "American composer (born 1947)\nJohn Coolidge Adams (born February 15, 1947) is an American composer and conductor. Among the most regularly performed composers of contemporary classical music, he is particularly noted for his operas, many of which center around historical events. Apart from opera, his oeuvre includes orchestral, concertante, vocal, choral, chamber, electroacoustic, and piano music.\nBorn in Worcester, Massachusetts, Adams grew up in a musical family and was exposed to classical music, jazz, musical theatre, and rock music. He attended Harvard University, studying with Leon Kirchner, Roger Sessions, and David Del Tredici, among others. His earliest work was aligned with modernist music, but he began to disagree with its tenets upon reading John Cage's \"\". Teaching at the San Francisco Conservatory of Music, Adams developed a minimalist aesthetic first fully realized in \"Phrygian Gates\" (1977) and later in the string septet \"Shaker Loops\". Adams became increasingly active in San Francisco's contemporary music scene, and his orchestral works \"Harmonium\" (1980\u20131981) and \"Harmonielehre\" (1985) first gained him national attention. Other popular works from this time include the fanfare \"Short Ride in a Fast Machine\" (1986) and the orchestral work \"El Dorado\" (1991).\nAdams's first opera was \"Nixon in China\" (1987), which recounts Richard Nixon's 1972 visit to China and was the first of many collaborations with theatre director Peter Sellars. Though the work's reception was initially mixed, it has become increasingly respected since its premiere, receiving performances worldwide. Begun soon after \"Nixon in China\", the opera \"The Death of Klinghoffer\" (1991) was based on the Palestinian Liberation Front's 1985 hijacking and murder of Leon Klinghoffer and incited considerable controversy for its subject matter. His next notable works include a Chamber Symphony (1992), a Violin Concerto (1993), the opera-oratorio \"El Ni\u00f1o\" (2000), the orchestral piece \"My Father Knew Charles Ives\" (2003), and the six-string electric violin concerto \"The Dharma at Big Sur\" (2003). Adams won a Pulitzer Prize for Music for \"On the Transmigration of Souls\" (2002), a piece for orchestra and chorus commemorating the victims of the September 11, 2001 attacks. Continuing with historical subjects, Adams wrote the opera \"Doctor Atomic\" (2005), based on J. Robert Oppenheimer, the Manhattan Project, and the building of the first atomic bomb. Later operas include \"A Flowering Tree\" (2006), \"Girls of the Golden West\" (2017), and \"Antony and Cleopatra\" (2022).\nIn many ways, Adams's music is developed from the minimalist tradition of Steve Reich and Philip Glass, but he tends to more readily engage in the immense orchestral textures and climaxes of late Romanticism in the vein of Wagner and Mahler. His style is to a considerable extent a reaction against the modernism and serialism of the Second Viennese and Darmstadt Schools. In addition to the Pulitzer, Adams has received the Erasmus Prize, a Grawemeyer Award, five Grammy Awards, the Harvard Arts Medal, France's Ordre des Arts et des Lettres, and six honorary doctorates.\nLife and career.\nYouth and early career.\nJohn Coolidge Adams was born in Worcester, Massachusetts, on February 15, 1947. As an adolescent, he lived in Woodstock, Vermont, for five years before moving to East Concord, New Hampshire, and his family spent summers on the shores of Lake Winnipesaukee, where his grandfather ran a dance hall. Adams's family did not own a television, and did not have a record player until he was ten. But both his parents were musicians, his mother a singer with big bands, and his father a clarinetist. He grew up with jazz, Americana, and Broadway musicals, once meeting Duke Ellington at his grandfather's dance hall. Adams also played baseball as a boy.\nIn the third grade, Adams took up the clarinet, initially taking lessons from his father, Carl Adams, and later with Boston Symphony Orchestra bass clarinetist Felix Viscuglia. He also played in various local orchestras, concert bands, and marching bands while a student. Adams began composing at age ten and first heard his music performed as a teenager. He graduated from Concord High School in 1965.\nAdams next enrolled in Harvard University, where he earned a bachelor of arts, magna cum laude, in 1969 and a master of arts in 1971, studying composition with Leon Kirchner, Roger Sessions, Earl Kim, Harold Shapero, and David Del Tredici. As an undergraduate, he conducted Harvard's student ensemble, the Bach Society Orchestra, for a year and a half; his ambitious programming drew criticism in the student newspaper, where one of his concerts was called \"the major disappointment of last week's musical offerings\". Adams also became engrossed by the strict modernism of the 20th century (such as that of Boulez) while at Harvard, and believed that music had to continue progressing, to the extent that he once wrote a letter to Leonard Bernstein criticizing the supposed stylistic reactionism of \"Chichester Psalms\". But by night, Adams enjoyed listening to The Beatles, Jimi Hendrix, and Bob Dylan, and has said he once stood in line at eight in the morning to purchase a copy of \"Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band.\"\nAdams was the first Harvard student to be allowed to write a musical composition for his senior thesis. For his thesis, he wrote \"The Electric Wake\" for \"electric\" (i.e., amplified) soprano accompanied by an ensemble of \"electric\" strings, keyboards, harp, and percussion. A performance could not be put together at the time, and Adams has never heard the piece performed.\nAfter graduating, Adams received a copy of John Cage's book \"\" from his mother. Largely shaken of his loyalty to modernism, he was inspired to move to San Francisco, where he worked at the San Francisco Conservatory of Music from 1972 until 1982, teaching classes and directing the school's New Music Ensemble. In the early 1970s, Adams wrote several pieces of electronic music for a homemade modular synthesizer he called the \"Studebaker\". He also wrote \"American Standard\", comprising three movements, a march, a hymn, and a jazz ballad, which was recorded and released on Obscure Records in 1975.\n1977 to \"Nixon in China\".\nIn 1977, Adams wrote the half-hour-long solo piano piece \"Phrygian Gates\", which he later called \"my first mature composition, my official 'opus one'\", as well as its much shorter companion piece, \"China Gates\". The next year, he finished \"Shaker Loops\", a string septet based on an earlier, unsuccessful string quartet called \"Wavemaker\". In 1979, he finished his first orchestral work, \"Common Tones in Simple Time\", which the San Francisco Conservatory of Music Orchestra premiered with Adams conducting.\nIn 1979, Adams became the San Francisco Symphony's New Music Adviser and created the symphony's \"New and Unusual Music\" concerts. A commission from the symphony resulted in Adams's large, three-movement choral symphony \"Harmonium\" (1980\u201381), setting texts by John Donne and Emily Dickinson. He followed this with the three-movement orchestral piece (without strings) \"Grand Pianola Music\" (1982). That summer, he wrote the score for \"Matter of Heart\", a documentary about psychoanalyst Carl Jung, a score he later derided as \"of stunning mediocrity\". In the winter of 1982\u201383, Adams worked on the electronic score for \"Available Light\", a dance choreographed by Lucinda Childs with sets by architect Frank Gehry. Without dance, the electronic piece alone is called \"Light Over Water\".\nAfter an 18-month period of writer's block, Adams wrote his orchestral piece \"Harmonielehre\" (1984\u201385), which he called \"a statement of belief in the power of tonality at a time when I was uncertain about its future\". Like many of Adams's pieces, it was inspired by a dream, in this case, one in which he was driving across the San Francisco\u2013Oakland Bay Bridge and saw an oil tanker on the surface of the water abruptly turn upright and take off like a Saturn V rocket.\nFrom 1985 to 1987, Adams composed his first opera, \"Nixon in China\", with a libretto by Alice Goodman, based on Richard Nixon's 1972 visit to China. The opera marked the first collaboration between Adams and theatre director Peter Sellars, who had proposed it to Adams in 1983. Adams worked with Sellars on all his operas until \"Antony and Cleopatra\" (2022).\nDuring this time, Adams also wrote \"The Chairman Dances\" (1985), which he described as an \"'out-take' of Act III of \"Nixon in China\"\", to fulfill a long-delayed commission for the Milwaukee Symphony. He also wrote the short orchestral fanfare \"Short Ride in a Fast Machine\" (1986).\n1988 to \"Doctor Atomic\".\nAdams wrote two orchestral pieces in 1988: \"Fearful Symmetries\", a 25-minute work in the same style as \"Nixon in China\", and \"The Wound-Dresser\", a setting of Walt Whitman's 1865 poem of that title, written when Whitman was volunteering at a military hospital during the American Civil War. \"The Wound-Dresser\" is scored for baritone voice, two flutes (or two piccolos), two oboes, clarinet, bass clarinet, two bassoons, two horns, trumpet (or piccolo trumpet), timpani, synthesizer, and strings.\nDuring this time, Adams established an international career as a conductor. From 1988 to 1990, he served as conductor and music advisor for the Saint Paul Chamber Orchestra. He has also served as artistic director and conductor of the Ojai and Cabrillo Music Festivals in California. He has conducted orchestras around the world, including the New York Philharmonic, the Chicago Symphony, the Cleveland Orchestra, the Los Angeles Philharmonic, the London Symphony Orchestra, and the Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra, performing pieces by Debussy, Copland, Stravinsky, Haydn, Reich, Zappa, Wagner, and himself.\nAdams completed his second opera, \"The Death of Klinghoffer\", in 1991, again working with Goodman and Sellars. It is based on the 1985 hijacking of the Italian cruise ship \"Achille Lauro\" by Palestinian terrorists and details the murder of passenger Leon Klinghoffer, a retired, physically disabled Jewish American. The opera has generated controversy, including allegations that it is antisemitic and glorifies terrorism.\nAdams's next piece, \"Chamber Symphony\" (1992), is for a 15-member chamber orchestra. In three movements, the work is inspired by an unlikely combination of sources: Arnold Schoenberg's Chamber Symphony No. 1, Op. 9 (which Adams was studying at the time) and the \"hyperactive, insistently aggressive and acrobatic\" music of the cartoons his young son was watching.\nThe next year, he wrote his Violin Concerto for American violinist Jorja Fleezanis. Lasting a little more than half an hour, it is also in three movements: a \"long extended rhapsody for the violin\" is followed by a slow chaconne (titled \"Body through which the dream flows\", a phrase from a poem by Robert Hass), and then an energetic toccare. Adams received the Grawemeyer Award for Music Composition for the concerto.\nIn 1995, he completed \"I Was Looking at the Ceiling and Then I Saw the Sky\", a stage piece with libretto by poet June Jordan and staging by Sellars. Inspired by musicals, Adams called the piece a \"songplay in two acts\". The main characters are seven young Americans from different social and ethnic backgrounds, all living in Los Angeles, with stories that take place around the 1994 Northridge earthquake.\n\"Hallelujah Junction\" (1996) is a three-movement composition for two pianos that employs variations of a repeated two-note rhythm. The intervals between the notes remain the same for much of the piece. Adams used the same phrase for the title of his 2008 memoir.\nWritten to celebrate the millennium, \"El Ni\u00f1o\" (2000) is an \"oratorio about birth in general and about the Nativity in specific\". The piece incorporates a wide range of texts, including biblical texts as well as poems by Hispanic poets like Rosario Castellanos, Sor Juana In\u00e9s de la Cruz, Gabriela Mistral, Vicente Huidobro, and Rub\u00e9n Dar\u00edo,\nAfter the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, the New York Philharmonic commissioned Adams to write a memorial piece for the victims. The result, \"On the Transmigration of Souls\", was premiered around the first anniversary of the attacks. \"On the Transmigration of Souls\" is for orchestra, chorus, and children's choir, accompanied by taped readings of the names of the victims mixed with the sounds of the city. It won the 2003 Pulitzer Prize for Music and the 2005 Grammy Award for Best Contemporary Composition.\nCommissioned by the San Francisco Symphony, Adams's orchestral piece \"My Father Knew Charles Ives\" (2003) has three movements: \"Concord\", \"The Lake\", and \"The Mountain\". Though his father did not actually know American composer Charles Ives, Adams saw many similarities between the two men's lives and between their lives and his own, including their love of small-town New England life and their unfulfilled musical dreams.\nWritten for the Los Angeles Philharmonic to celebrate the opening of Disney Hall in 2003, \"The Dharma at Big Sur\" (2003) is a two-movement work for solo electric six-string violin and orchestra. Adams wrote that with \"Dharma\", he \"wanted to compose a piece that embodied the feeling of being on the West Coast \u2013 literally standing on a precipice overlooking the geographic shelf with the ocean extending far out to the horizon\". Inspired by the music of Lou Harrison, the piece calls for some instruments (harp, piano, samplers) to use just intonation, a tuning system in which intervals sound pure, rather than equal temperament, the common Western tuning system in which all intervals except the octave are impure.\nAdams's third opera, \"Doctor Atomic\" (2005), is about physicist J. Robert Oppenheimer, the Manhattan Project, and the creation and testing of the first atomic bomb. The work premiered at the San Francisco Opera in October 2005. Its libretto, by Sellars, draws on original source material, including personal memoirs, recorded interviews, technical manuals of nuclear physics, declassified government documents, and the poetry of the \"Bhagavad Gita\", John Donne, Charles Baudelaire, and Muriel Rukeyser. It takes place in June and July 1945, mainly over the last few hours before the first atomic bomb explodes at the test site in New Mexico. Characters include Oppenheimer and his wife Kitty, Edward Teller, General Leslie Groves, and Robert Wilson. Two years later, Adams extracted music from the opera to create the \"Doctor Atomic Symphony\".\nIn 2018, The Santa Fe Opera performed \"Doctor Atomic\" in its summer season. The production took place in Santa Fe, 33 miles away from the Los Alamos Laboratory, the Manhattan Project's research and development facility. This proximity forged a deeper connection between the production and the people of Los Alamos, fostering a new relationship with the pueblo communities. According to Andrew Martinez, this association \"became an opportunity to confront the histories and present-day experiences of pain and suffering that New Mexico citizens have endured since that rainy summer night in July 1945 when the first atomic bomb was detonated\". The production also featured a 2,400-pound silver orb hanging from the ceiling, representing the bomb. This single set piece stood on an otherwise empty stage, set against the backdrop of the Sangre de Cristo Mountains.\nAfter \"Doctor Atomic\".\nAdams's next opera, \"A Flowering Tree\" (2006), with a libretto by Adams and Sellars, is based on a folktale from the Kannada language of southern India translated by A. K. Ramanujan about a young girl who discovers she has the magic ability to transform into a flowering tree. The opera was commissioned as part of the Vienna New Crowned Hope Festival to celebrate the 250th anniversary of Mozart's birth, and has many parallels with Mozart's \"The Magic Flute\", including its themes of \"magic, transformation and the dawning of moral awareness\".\nAdams wrote three pieces for the St. Lawrence String Quartet: his First Quartet (2008), his concerto for string quartet and orchestra, \"Absolute Jest\" (2012), and his Second Quartet (2014). Both \"Absolute Jest\" and the Second Quartet are based on fragments from Beethoven, with \"Absolute Jest\" using music from his late quartets (specifically Opus 131, Opus 135 and the \"Gro\u00dfe Fuge\") and the Second Quartet drawing from Beethoven's Opus 110 and 111 piano sonatas.\nFrom 2011 to 2013, Adams wrote his two-act Passion oratorio, \"The Gospel According to the Other Mary\", a decade after his Nativity oratorio, \"El Ni\u00f1o\". The work focuses on the final few weeks of the life of Jesus from the point of view of \"the other Mary\", Mary of Bethany (sometimes misidentified as Mary Magdalene), her sister Martha, and her brother, Lazarus. Sellars's libretto draws from the Bible and from Rosario Castellanos, Rub\u00e9n Dar\u00edo, Dorothy Day, Louise Erdrich, Hildegard von Bingen, June Jordan, and Primo Levi.\n\"Scheherazade.2\" (2014) is a four-movement \"dramatic symphony\" for violin and orchestra. Written for violinist Leila Josefowicz, who frequently performed Adams's Violin Concerto and \"The Dharma at Big Sur\", the work was inspired by the character Scheherazade (from \"One Thousand and One Nights\") who, after being forced into marriage, recounts tales to her husband in order to delay her death. Adams associated modern examples of suffering and injustice toward women, with acts in Tahrir Square during the Egyptian revolution of 2011, Kabul, and comments from \"The Rush Limbaugh Show\".\nAdams's seventh opera, \"Girls of the Golden West\" (2017), with a libretto by Sellars based on historical sources, is set in mining camps during the California Gold Rush of the 1850s. Sellars described the opera this way: \"These true stories of the Forty-Niners are overwhelming in their heroism, passion and cruelty, telling tales of racial conflicts, colorful and humorous exploits, political strife and struggles to build anew a life and to decide what it would mean to be American.\"\nIn 2022, Adams completed his eighth opera, \"Antony and Cleopatra\", based on Shakespeare's play of the same name.\nOn June 14, 2023, the Library of Congress announced that it was acquiring Adams's manuscripts and papers for its Music Division, which also includes the papers of Bernstein, Copland, George and Ira Gershwin, Martha Graham, Charles Mingus, and Neil Simon, among others.\nPersonal life.\nAdams was married to Hawley Currens, a music teacher, from 1970 to 1974. He is married to photographer Deborah O'Grady, with whom he has a daughter, Emily, and a son, the composer Samuel Carl Adams.\nMusical style.\nAdams's music is usually categorized as minimalist or post-minimalist, although in an interview he said that his music is part of the \"post-style\" era at the end of the 20th century. He employs minimalist techniques, such as repeating patterns, but is not a strict follower of the movement. Adams adopted much of the minimalist technique of Steve Reich and Philip Glass, but his work synthesizes this with the orchestral textures of Wagner, Mahler, and Sibelius. Comparing \"Shaker Loops\" to the minimalist composer Terry Riley's piece \"In C\", Adams remarked:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;rather than set up small engines of motivic materials and let them run free in a kind of random play of counterpoint, I used the fabric of continually repeating cells to forge large architectonic shapes, creating a web of activity that, even within the course of a single movement, was more detailed, more varied, and knew both light and dark, serenity and turbulence.\nMany of Adams's ideas are a reaction to the philosophy of serialism and its depictions of \"the composer as scientist\". The Darmstadt School of twelve-tone composition was dominant while Adams was in college, and he compared class to a \"mausoleum where we would sit and count tone-rows in Webern\".\nAdams experienced a musical epiphany after reading John Cage's 1961 book \"Silence\", which he said \"dropped into my psyche like a time bomb\", causing him to drop out of academia, \"pack his belongings into a VW Bug, and drive to California\". Cage posed fundamental questions about what music was, and regarded all types of sounds as viable sources of music. This perspective offered Adams a liberating alternative to serialism's rule-based techniques. But Adams found Cage's music equally restricting. He began to experiment with electronic music, and his experiences are reflected in the writing of \"Phrygian Gates\" (1977\u201378), in which the constant shifting between modules in Lydian mode and Phrygian mode refers to activating electronic gates rather than architectural ones. Adams explained that working with synthesizers caused a \"diatonic conversion\", a reversion to the belief that tonality was a force of nature.\nSome of Adams's compositions amalgamate different styles. \"Grand Pianola Music\" (1981\u201382) is a humorous piece that purposely draws its content from musical cliches. In \"The Dharma at Big Sur,\" Adams draws from literary texts such as Jack Kerouac, Gary Snyder, and Henry Miller to illustrate the California landscape. He has professed his love of genres other than classical music; his parents were jazz musicians, and he has also listened to rock music, albeit only passively. Adams once claimed that originality was not an urgent concern for him the way it was for minimalists, and compared his position to that of Gustav Mahler, J. S. Bach, and Johannes Brahms, who \"were standing at the end of an era and were embracing all of the evolutions that occurred over the previous thirty to fifty years\".\nLike other minimalists of his time, Adams used a steady pulse to define and control his music. The pulse was best known from Terry Riley's early composition \"In C\", and more and more composers used it as a common practice. Jonathan Bernard highlighted this adoption by comparing \"Phrygian Gates\", from 1977, and \"Fearful Symmetries\", from 1988.\nIn the late 1980s and early 1990s, Adams started to add a new character to his music, which he called \"the Trickster\". The Trickster allowed Adams to use the repetitive style and rhythmic drive of minimalism while simultaneously poking fun at it. When Adams commented on his own characterization of particular minimalist music, he said that he went joyriding on \"those Great Prairies of non-event\".\nCritical reception.\nOverview.\nAdams won the Pulitzer Prize for Music in 2003 for \"On the Transmigration of Souls\". Response to his output as a whole has been more divided, and Adams's works have been called both brilliant and boring in reviews that stretch across both ends of the rating spectrum. \"Shaker Loops\" has been called \"hauntingly ethereal\", while 1999's \"Na\u00efve and Sentimental Music\" has been called \"an exploration of a marvelously extended spinning melody\". \"The New York Times\" called 1996's \"Hallelujah Junction\" \"a two-piano work played with appealingly sharp edges\", and 2001's \"American Berserk\" \"a short, volatile solo piano work\".\nThe most critically divisive pieces in Adams's collection are his historical operas. At first release, \"Nixon in China\" received mostly negative press. In \"The New York Times\", Donal Henahan called the Houston Grand Opera world premiere of the work \"worth a few giggles but hardly a strong candidate for the standard repertory\" and \"visually striking but coy and insubstantial\". In the \"St. Louis Post-Dispatch\", James Wierzbicki called Adams's score the weak point in an otherwise well-staged performance, describing it as \"inappropriately placid\", \"clich\u00e9-ridden in the abstract\" and trafficking \"heavily in Adams's worn-out Minimalist clich\u00e9s\". But with time, the opera has come to be revered. In \"Music and Vision\", Robert Hugill called a production \"astonishing ... nearly twenty years after its premier\", while \"The Guardian\"'s Fiona Maddocks praised the score's \"diverse and subtle palette\" and Adams's \"rhythmic ingenuity\".\nMore recently, \"New York Times\" critic Anthony Tommasini commended a 2007 American Composers Orchestra concert celebrating Adams's 60th birthday, calling Adams a \"skilled and dynamic conductor\" and the music \"gravely beautiful yet restless\".\nKlinghoffer controversy.\nThe opera \"The Death of Klinghoffer\" has been criticized as antisemitic by some, including the Klinghoffer family. Leon Klinghoffer's daughters, Lisa and Ilsa, after attending the opera, released a statement saying: \"We are outraged at the exploitation of our parents and the coldblooded murder of our father as the centerpiece of a production that appears to us to be anti-Semitic.\" In response to these accusations of antisemitism, composer and Oberlin College professor Conrad Cummings wrote a letter to the editor defending \"Klinghoffer\" as \"the closest analogue to the experience of Bach's audience attending his most demanding works\", and noted that, as a person of Jewish descent, he \"found nothing anti-Semitic about the work\".\nAfter the September 11 attacks in 2001, performances by the Boston Symphony Orchestra of excerpts from \"Klinghoffer\" were canceled. BSO managing director Mark Volpe said of the decision: \"We originally programmed the choruses from John Adams' \"The Death of Klinghoffer\" because we believe in it as a work of art, and we still hold that conviction. ... [Tanglewood Festival Chorus members] explained that it was a purely human reason, and that it wasn't in the least bit a criticism of the work.\" Adams and \"Klinghoffer\" librettist Alice Goodman criticized the decision, and Adams rejected a request to substitute a performance of \"Harmonium\", saying: \"The reason that I asked them not to do \"Harmonium\" was that I felt that \"Klinghoffer\" is a serious and humane work, and it's also a work about which many people have made prejudicial judgments without even hearing it. I felt that if I said, 'OK, \"Klinghoffer\" is too hot to handle, do \"Harmonium\", that in a sense I would be agreeing with the judgment about \"Klinghoffer\".'\" In response to an article by the \"San Francisco Chronicle\"'s David Wiegand denouncing the BSO decision, musicologist and critic Richard Taruskin accused the work of catering to \"anti-American, anti-Semitic and anti-bourgeois\" prejudices.\nA 2014 revival by the Metropolitan Opera reignited debate. Former New York City mayor Rudy Giuliani, who marched in protest against the production, wrote: \"This work is both a distortion of history and helped, in some ways, to foster a three decade long feckless policy of creating a moral equivalency between the Palestinian Authority, a corrupt terrorist organization, and the state of Israel, a democracy ruled by law.\" Mayor Bill de Blasio criticized Giuliani's participation in the protests, and Oskar Eustis, the artistic director of The Public Theater, said: \"It is not only permissible for the Met to do this piece \u2013 it's required for the Met to do the piece. It is a powerful and important opera.\" A week after watching a Met performance of the opera, Supreme Court Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg said \"there was nothing antisemitic about the opera\" and characterized the portrayal of the Klinghoffers as \"very strong, very brave\" and the terrorists as \"bullies and irrational\".\nAwards and recognition.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n Major awards \nGrammy awards\nOther awards\nMemberships\nHonorary Doctorates\nOther\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nSpecific operas\nInterviews"}
{"id": "16521", "revid": "1318694598", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16521", "title": "Jon Voight", "text": "American actor (born 1938)\nJonathan Vincent Voight (; born December 29, 1938) is an American actor. Throughout his career, he has received numerous accolades, including an Academy Award, a British Academy Film Award, and four Golden Globe Awards as well as nominations for four Primetime Emmy Awards. In 2019, he was awarded the National Medal of Arts. Films in which Voight has appeared have grossed more than $5.2 billion worldwide.\nAssociated with the angst and unruliness that typified the late 1960s counterculture, Voight won the Academy Award for Best Actor for his portrayal of a paraplegic Vietnam veteran in \"Coming Home\" (1978). His other Oscar nominations are for playing Joe Buck, a would-be gigolo, in \"Midnight Cowboy\" (1969); ruthless bank robber Oscar \"Manny\" Manheim in \"Runaway Train\" (1985); and sportscaster Howard Cosell in \"Ali\" (2001). His other notable films include \"Deliverance\" (1972), \"The Champ\" (1979), \"Heat\" (1995), \"\" (1996), \"The Rainmaker\" (1997), \"Enemy of the State\" (1998), \"Pearl Harbor\", \"Zoolander\" (both 2001), \"Holes\" (2003), \"Glory Road\" (2006), \"Transformers\" (2007), and \"Pride and Glory\" (2008). He is also known for his role in the \"National Treasure\" film series.\nVoight is also known for his television roles, including as Nazi officer J\u00fcrgen Stroop in \"Uprising\" (2001) and Pope John Paul II on the eponymous miniseries (2005). His role as Mickey Donovan on the Showtime drama series \"Ray Donovan\" brought him newfound acclaim and attention among critics and audiences, as well as his fourth Golden Globe win in 2014. He also appeared on the thriller series \"24\" in its seventh season.\nDespite earlier having liberal views, Voight has gained attention in his later years for his outspoken conservative and religious beliefs. He is the father of actress Angelina Jolie and actor James Haven.\nEarly life and education.\nJonathan Vincent Voight was born on December 29, 1938, in Yonkers, New York, to Barbara (n\u00e9e\u00a0Kamp) and Elmer Voight (n\u00e9\u00a0Voytka), a professional golfer. He has two brothers, Barry Voight, a former volcanologist at Pennsylvania State University, and James Wesley Voight, known as Chip Taylor, a singer-songwriter who wrote \"Wild Thing\" and \"Angel of the Morning\". Voight's paternal grandfather and his paternal grandmother's parents were Slovak immigrants, while his maternal grandfather and his maternal grandmother's parents were German immigrants. Political activist Joseph P. Kamp was his great-uncle through his mother.\nVoight was raised as a Catholic and attended the Catholic boys' Archbishop Stepinac High School in White Plains, New York, where he first took an interest in acting. Following his graduation in 1956, he enrolled at Catholic University of America in Washington, D.C., where he majored in art and graduated with a B.A. degree in 1960. After graduation, Voight moved to New York City, where he pursued an acting career. He graduated from the Neighborhood Playhouse School of the Theatre, where he studied under Sanford Meisner.\nCareer.\n1961\u20131969: Early roles and breakthrough.\nVoight started his off-Broadway career in a revue called \"O Oysters\", which ran in early 1961. He made his Broadway debut in the fall of 1961 as Rolf in \"The Sound of Music\". In the early 1960s, Voight found work in television, appearing in several episodes of \"Gunsmoke\", between 1963 and 1968, as well as guest spots on \"Naked City\" and \"The Defenders\", both in 1963, and \"Twelve O'Clock High\", in 1966 and \"Cimarron Strip\" in 1968. Voight's theater career took off in January 1965, playing Rodolfo in Arthur Miller's \"A View from the Bridge\" in an Off-Broadway revival. Voight's film debut did not come until 1967, when he took a part in Phillip Kaufman's crimefighter spoof, \"Fearless Frank\". He also took a small role in 1967's western, \"Hour of the Gun\", directed by veteran helmer John Sturges. In 1968 he took a role in director Paul Williams's \"Out of It\".\nIn 1968, Voight was cast in the groundbreaking \"Midnight Cowboy\" (1969), the film that would make his career. He played Joe Buck, a na\u00efve male hustler from Texas, adrift in New York City. He comes under the tutelage of Dustin Hoffman's Ratso Rizzo, a tubercular petty thief and con artist. The film explored late 1960s New York and the development of an unlikely, but poignant friendship between the two main characters. Directed by John Schlesinger and based on a novel by James Leo Herlihy, the film struck a chord with critics and audiences. Because of its controversial themes, the film was released with an X rating and would make history by being the only X-rated feature to win Best Picture at the Academy Awards. Both Voight and Hoffman were nominated for Best Actor, but lost out to John Wayne in\" True Grit.\"\n1970\u20131989: Stardom and acclaim.\nIn 1970, Voight appeared in Mike Nichols' adaptation of \"Catch-22\", and re-teamed with director Paul Williams to star in \"The Revolutionary\", as a left-wing college student struggling with his conscience. Voight next starred in 1972's \"Deliverance.\" Directed by John Boorman, from a script that James Dickey had helped to adapt from his own novel of the same name, it tells the story of a canoe trip in a feral, backwoods America. Both the film and the performances of Voight and co-stars Burt Reynolds and Ned Beatty received great critical acclaim, and were popular with audiences. Voight also appeared at the Studio Arena Theater, in Buffalo, New York, in the Tennessee Williams play \"A Streetcar Named Desire\" from 1973 to 1974 as Stanley Kowalski.\nVoight played a directionless young boxer in 1973's \"The All American Boy\", then appeared in the 1974 film \"Conrack\", directed by Martin Ritt. Based on Pat Conroy's autobiographical novel \"The Water Is Wide\", Voight portrayed the title character, an idealistic young schoolteacher sent to teach underprivileged black children on a remote South Carolina island. The same year he appeared in \"The Odessa File\", based on Frederick Forsyth's thriller, as Peter Miller, a young German journalist who discovers a conspiracy to protect former Nazis still operating within Germany. This film first teamed him with the actor-director Maximilian Schell, who acted out a character named and based on the \"Butcher of Riga\" Eduard Roschmann, and for whom Voight would appear in 1975's \"End of the Game\", a psychological thriller co-starring Jacqueline Bisset and based on a story by Swiss novelist and playwright Friedrich D\u00fcrrenmatt.\nAccording to Joseph McBride's biography of Steven Spielberg, Voight was Spielberg's first choice for the role of Matt Hooper in the 1975 film \"Jaws\" and he turned down the role, which was ultimately played by Richard Dreyfuss. However, in interview with Dr. Ben Carson on September 6, 2024, Voight was asked if he turned down the part of Quint in Jaws; Voight said that the offer of a part in Jaws is \"a myth\" and that Spielberg had actually offered him a part in a different, less successful film, a role that he turned down because he thought it was a \"repeat of the character from Midnight Cowboy\". In 1978, Voight portrayed the Vietnam veteran Luke Martin in Hal Ashby's film \"Coming Home,\" and was awarded Best Actor at the Cannes Film Festival, for his portrait of a cynical, yet noble paraplegic, reportedly based on real-life Vietnam veteran-turned-antiwar-activist Ron Kovic, with whom Jane Fonda's character falls in love. The film included a much-talked-about love scene between the two. Fonda won her second Best Actress award for her role, and Voight won for Best Actor in a Leading Role at the Oscars. In 1979, Voight once again put on boxing gloves, starring as an alcoholic ex-heavyweight in Franco Zeffirelli's \"The Champ\" with Faye Dunaway and Ricky Schroder. The film was an international success, but less popular with American audiences.\nHe next reteamed with director Ashby in 1982's \"Lookin' to Get Out\", in which he played Alex Kovac, a con man who has run into debt with New York mobsters and hopes to win enough in Las Vegas to pay them off. Voight both co-wrote the script and also co-produced. He also produced and acted in 1983's \"Table for Five\", in which he played a widower bringing up his children by himself. Also in 1983, Voight was slated to play Robert Harmon in John Cassavetes' Golden Bear-winning \"Love Streams\", having performed the role on stage in 1981. However, a few weeks before shooting began, Voight announced that he also wanted to direct the picture and was consequently dropped. In 1985, Voight teamed up with Russian writer and director Andrei Konchalovsky to play the role of escaped con Oscar \"Manny\" Manheim in \"Runaway Train\". The script was based on a story by Akira Kurosawa, and paired Voight with Eric Roberts as a fellow escapee, and Rebecca De Mornay as an assistant locomotive engineer. Voight received an Academy Award nomination for Best Actor and won the Golden Globe's award for Best Actor. Roberts was also honored for his performance, receiving an Academy Award nomination for Best Supporting Actor. Voight followed up this and other performances with a role in the 1986 film, \"Desert Bloom\", and reportedly experienced a \"spiritual awakening\" toward the end of the decade. In 1989, Voight starred in and helped write \"Eternity\", which dealt with a television reporter's efforts to uncover corruption.\n1990\u20132012: Established actor.\nHe made his first acting debut into television films, acting in 1991's \"\", followed by \"The Last of his Tribe\", in 1992. He followed with 1992's \"The Rainbow Warrior\" for ABC, the story of the ill-fated Greenpeace ship sunk by French operatives in Auckland Harbour. For the remainder of the decade, Voight would alternate between feature films and television movies, including a starring role in the 1993 miniseries \"Return to Lonesome Dove\", a continuation of Larry McMurtry's western saga, 1989's \"Lonesome Dove\". Voight played Captain Woodrow F. Call, the part played by Tommy Lee Jones in the original miniseries. Voight made a cameo appearance as himself on the \"Seinfeld\" episode \"The Mom &amp; Pop Store\" airing November 17, 1994, in which George Costanza buys a car that appears to be owned by Jon Voight. Voight described the process leading up to the episode in an interview on the Red Carpet at the 2006 BAFTA Emmy Awards:\nWell what happened was I was asked to be on Seinfeld. They said: \"Would you do a Seinfeld?\" And I said, and I just happened to know to see a few Seinfelds and I knew these guys were really tops; they were really, really clever guys, and I liked the show. And so I said \"Sure!\" and I thought they would ask me to do a walk-on, the way it came: \"Would you come be part of the show?\" And I said \"Yeah, sure I'll do it.\" You know what I mean? Then I got the script and my name was on every page because it was about my car. And I laughed; it was hysterically funny. So I was really delighted to do it. The writer came up to me and he said \"Jon, would you come take a look at my car to see if you ever owned it?\", because the writer wrote it from a real experience where someone sold him the car based on the fact that it was my car. And I went down and I looked at the car and I said \"No, I never had this car.\" So unfortunately I had to give him the bad news. But it was a funny episode.\nIn 1992, Voight appeared in the HBO film \"The Last of His Tribe\". In 1995, Voight played the role of \"Nate\", a sophisticated fence, in the crime drama film \"Heat\", directed by Michael Mann, and appeared in the television films \"Convict Cowboy\" and \"The Tin Soldier\", also directing the latter film. Voight next appeared in 1996's blockbuster film \"\", directed by Brian De Palma and starring Tom Cruise. Voight played the role of spymaster James Phelps, a role originated by Peter Graves in the television series. In 1997, Voight appeared in six films, beginning with \"Rosewood\", based on the 1923 destruction of the primarily black town of Rosewood, Florida, by the white residents of nearby Sumner. Voight played John Wright, a white Rosewood storeowner who follows his conscience and protects his black customers from the white rage. He next appeared in \"Anaconda\", set in the Amazon; he played Paul Sarone, a snake hunter obsessed with a fabled giant anaconda, who hijacks an unwitting National Geographic film crew who are looking for a remote Indian tribe. Voight next appeared in a supporting role in Oliver Stone's \"U Turn\", portraying a blind man. He took a supporting role in \"The Rainmaker\", adopted from the John Grisham novel and directed by Francis Ford Coppola. He played an unscrupulous lawyer representing an insurance company, facing off with a neophyte lawyer played by Matt Damon. His last film of 1997 was \"Boys Will Be Boys\", a family comedy directed by Dom DeLuise.\nThe following year, Voight had the lead role in the television film \"The Fixer\", in which he played Jack Killoran, a lawyer who crosses ethical lines in order to \"fix\" things for his wealthy clients. A near-fatal accident awakens his dormant conscience and Killoran soon runs afoul of his former clients. He also took a substantial role in Tony Scott's 1998 political thriller, \"Enemy of the State,\" in which he played Will Smith's character's stalwart antagonist from the NSA. Voight was reunited with director Boorman in 1998's \"The General\". Set in Dublin, Ireland, the film tells the true-life story of the charismatic leader of a gang of thieves, Martin Cahill, at odds with both the police and the Provisional IRA. Voight portrays Inspector Ned Kenny, determined to bring Cahill to justice. He next appeared in 1999's \"Varsity Blues\". He played a blunt, autocratic football coach, pitted in a test of wills against his star player, portrayed by James Van Der Beek. Produced by fledgling MTV Pictures, the film became a surprise hit and helped connect Voight with a younger audience. Voight played Noah in the 1999 television production \"Noah's Ark\", and appeared in \"Second String,\" also for TV. He also appeared with Cheryl Ladd in the feature \"A Dog of Flanders\", a remake of a popular film set in Belgium.\nVoight next portrayed President Franklin D. Roosevelt in 2001's action/war film \"Pearl Harbor\", having accepted the role when Gene Hackman declined (his performance was received favorably by critics). Also that year, he appeared as Lord Croft, father of the title character of \"\". Based on the popular video game, the digital adventuress was played on the big screen by Voight's own real-life daughter Angelina Jolie. That year, he also appeared in \"Zoolander\", directed by Ben Stiller who starred as the title character, a vapid supermodel with humble roots. Voight appeared as Zoolander's coal-miner father. The film extracted both pathos and cruel humor from the scenes of Zoolander's return home, when he entered the mines alongside his father and brothers and Voight's character expressed his unspoken disgust at his son's chosen profession. Also in 2001, Voight joined Leelee Sobieski, Hank Azaria and David Schwimmer in the made-for-television film \"Uprising\", which was based on the uprising in the Warsaw ghetto. Voight played Major-General Juergen Stroop, the German officer responsible for the destruction of the Jewish resistance, and received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Limited Series or Movie.\nDirector Michael Mann tagged Voight for a supporting role in the 2001 biopic \"Ali\", which starred Will Smith as the controversial former heavyweight champ, Muhammad Ali. Voight was almost unrecognizable under his make-up and toup\u00e9e, as he impersonated the sports broadcaster Howard Cosell. Voight received his fourth Academy Award nomination, this time for Best Actor in a Supporting Role, for his performance. Also in 2001, he appeared in the television mini-series \"\" along with Vanessa Redgrave, Matthew Modine, Richard Attenborough, and Mia Sara. In 2003, he played the role of Marion Seville/Mr. Sir in \"Holes\". In 2004, Voight joined Nicolas Cage, in \"National Treasure\" as Patrick Gates, the father of Cage's character. In 2005, he played the title role in the second part of CBS' miniseries, \"Pope John Paul II\".\nIn 2006, he was Kentucky Wildcats head coach Adolph Rupp in the Disney hit \"Glory Road\". In 2007, he played United States Secretary of Defense John Keller in the summer blockbuster \"Transformers\", reuniting him with \"Holes\" star Shia LaBeouf. Also in 2007, Voight reprised his role as Patrick Gates in '. He appeared in \"Bratz\" with his goddaughter Skyler Shaye. In 2008, he appeared as Creighton Kinkaid in the Christmas film \"Four Christmases\". In 2009, Voight played Jonas Hodges, the American antagonist, in the seventh season of the hit Fox drama \"24\", a role that many argue is based on real life figures Alfried Krupp, Johann Rall and Erik Prince. Voight plays the chief executive officer of a fictional private military company based in northern Virginia called \"Starkwood\", which has loose resemblances to Academi and ThyssenKrupp. Voight made his first appearance in the two-hour prequel episode ' on November 23. He then went on to recur for 10 episodes of Season 7. He joined Dennis Haysbert as the only two actors ever to have been credited with the \"Special Guest Appearance\" card on \"24\".\nThat same year Voight also lent his voice talents in the Thomas Nelson audio Bible production known as \"The Word of Promise\". In this dramatized audio, Voight played the character of Abraham. The project also featured a large ensemble of other well-known Hollywood actors including Jim Caviezel, Louis Gossett Jr., John Rhys-Davies, Luke Perry, Gary Sinise, Jason Alexander, Christopher McDonald, Marisa Tomei and John Schneider.\n2013\u20132024: Later career.\nIn 2013, Voight made his much-acclaimed appearance on \"Ray Donovan\" as Mickey Donovan, the main character's conniving father. The role earned him a Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor \u2013 Series, Miniseries or Television Film in 2014 as well as nominations for two Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series. He reprised his role in the 2022 film \"\". He played Henry Shaw Sr. in \"Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them\" (2016). The following year he acted in the Christian drama \"Same Kind of Different as Me\" alongside Greg Kinnear and Ren\u00e9e Zellweger. On March 26, 2019, Voight was appointed to a six-year term on the Board of Trustees of the Kennedy Center in Washington DC. He portrayed Supreme Court Justice Warren E. Burger in the film \"Roe v. Wade\" (2020). In 2022 he participated in the documentary film \"Desperate Souls, Dark City and the Legend of Midnight Cowboy\" with Bob Balaban, Brian De Palma and Brenda Vaccaro. It premiered at the 79th Venice International Film Festival and was later shortlisted for the Academy Award for Best Documentary Feature at the 96th Academy Awards. In 2022, Voight was cast in the science fiction epic \"Megalopolis\", directed by Francis Ford Coppola. In \"Reagan\", Jon Voight is cast as Viktor Ivanov, a former KGB agent. The film, starring Dennis Quaid as Ronald Reagan, was theatrically released in the United States on August 30, 2024.\n2025\u2013present: Special Ambassador to Hollywood.\nOn January 16, 2025, it was announced by president-elect Donald Trump that Voight would serve in a new role as a Special Ambassador to Hollywood, sharing the role with fellow actors Mel Gibson and Sylvester Stallone. Trump stated that he wants these actors to make Hollywood \"stronger than ever before\" by bringing back business lost to \"foreign countries\". According to \"Deadline\", by May 2025, Voight had held meetings with both Hollywood unions and executives on issues with domestic film production. Stallone and Gibson were not involved and have not held similar talks of their own.\nPolitical views.\nIn his early life, Voight's political views aligned with American liberal views, and he supported President John F. Kennedy, describing his assassination as traumatizing to people at that time. He also worked alongside Jane Fonda, Tina Sinatra, and Cicely Tyson for the George McGovern campaign, assisting with voter registration efforts in the inner city areas of Los Angeles. Voight actively protested against the Vietnam War. In the 1970s, he made public appearances alongside Jane Fonda and Leonard Bernstein in support of the leftist Popular Unity group in Chile.\nIn a July 28, 2008, op-ed in \"The Washington Times,\" Voight wrote that he regretted his youthful anti-war activism, and claimed that the peace movement of that time was driven by \"Marxist propaganda\". He also claimed that the radicals in the peace movement were responsible for the communists coming to power in Vietnam and Cambodia and for failing to stop the subsequent slaughter of 1.5 million people in the Killing Fields.\nIn the same op-ed, Voight also criticized the Democratic Party and Barack Obama's bid to become president, claiming that the Democrats had created \"a propaganda campaign with subliminal messages, creating a God-like figure (Obama)\" who would \"demoralize this country and help create a socialist America.\" He claimed that Obama had grown up with the teachings of very angry, militant white and black people around him.\nVoight endorsed Republican presidential nominees Mitt Romney and Donald Trump in the 2012 and 2016 presidential elections respectively. Speaking at an inauguration rally for Trump in January 2017, Voight said, \"God answered all our prayers\" by granting Trump the White House. In May 2019, Voight released a short two-part video on Twitter supporting Trump's policies, and calling him \"the greatest president since Abraham Lincoln.\"\nIn November 2020, after the United States presidential election, Voight released a statement through his Twitter account, in which he stated he was very angry that Joe Biden had won the election. He further implied that Biden had committed electoral fraud and proclaimed that the United States was engaged in \"our greatest fight since the Civil War \u2013 the battle of righteousness versus Satan, because these leftists are evil, corrupt, and they want to tear down this nation.\" He finished the statement by imploring his followers to not let the 2020 presidential election be certified without attempting to make sure it was accurate first. After the January 6 United States Capitol attack, and after Biden's victory was confirmed in Congress on January 7, Voight released one more video on his Twitter account for his followers, telling them to cease protesting.\nIn 2022, following a mass shooting at an elementary school in Uvalde, Texas, Voight posted a video in support of gun control, arguing that \"proper qualifications\" and \"testing\" should be necessary for gun ownership. In November 2023, Voight expressed disappointment in his daughter Angelina Jolie, criticizing her views on the Gaza war and accusing her of spreading misinformation. Whereas Jolie had called for a ceasefire, Voight emphasized Israel's right to protect its people, stating that the conflict was about preserving the Holy Land and the Jewish people. Reportedly this was one factor leading Jolie to once again cut off contact with him. Voight again endorsed Donald Trump's candidacy for president in 2024.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1962, Voight married actress Lauri Peters, whom he met when they both appeared in the original Broadway production of \"The Sound of Music\". They divorced in 1967. He married actress Marcheline Bertrand in 1971. They separated in 1976, filed for divorce in 1978, and finalized it in 1980. Their children, James Haven (born 1973) and Angelina Jolie (born 1975), went on to enter the film business as actors and producers. Through Jolie, he has six grandchildren.\nVoight has not remarried since the divorce from his second wife. Over the decades, he has dated Linda Morand, Rebecca De Mornay, Eileen Davidson, Barbra Streisand, Nastassja Kinski, and Diana Ross.\nVoight is a Kentucky Colonel.\nActing credits and accolades.\nOver his career Voight has received several accolades, including an Academy Award, a BAFTA Award, and four Golden Globe Awards as well as nominations for four Primetime Emmy Awards and a Screen Actors Guild Award. In 2019 he was awarded with the National Medal of Arts.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16522", "revid": "1319596239", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16522", "title": "John Climacus", "text": "6th\u20137th-century Christian monk\nJohn Climacus (; ; ), also known as John of the Ladder, John Scholasticus and John Sinaites, was a 6th\u20137th century Christian monk at the monastery on Mount Sinai. He is revered as a saint by the Eastern Orthodox Church and Catholic Church.\nHistory.\nFew details on his life are known. There exists an ancient \"vita\" (life) of the saint by a monk named Daniel of the Raithu monastery, which is the principal source about the life of John. Daniel, though claiming to be a contemporary, admits to no knowledge of John's origins\u2014any detail on John's birth is the result of much later speculation, and is confined to references in the Menologion. Daniel also does not provide any chronology and his knowledge of the life of John is both scanty and vague. If Daniel's \"Life\" is trustworthy (there is nothing against which to judge its accuracy), then John came to the \"Vatos\" Monastery at Mount Sinai, now Saint Catherine's Monastery, and became a novice when he was about 16 years old. He was taught about the spiritual life by the more senior monk, Martyrius. After the death of Martyrius, John, wishing to practice greater asceticism, withdrew to a hermitage at the foot of the mountain. In this isolation he lived for some twenty years, constantly studying the lives of the saints and thus becoming one of the most learned Church Fathers.\nIn the meantime, the above tradition has been proven to be historically implausible. The artful rhetorical figures in his writings, as well as philosophical forms of thought indicate a solid academic education, as was customary for a profession in administration and law during his epoch. Such training could not have been acquired in Sinai.\nFurthermore, biographical observations indicate that he probably lived by the sea, probably in Gaza, and apparently practiced Law there. It was only after his wife's death, in his early forties, that he entered the Sinai Monastery. These findings also explain the horizon and the literary quality of his writings, which have a clear philosophical background. The legend of his renunciation of the world at the age of 16, found also in other biographies of saints, is to suggest his having been untouched by secular education. Blurred deliberately would have been any roots in theological and philosophical educational traditions.\nWhen he was about 65 years of age, the monks of Sinai persuaded him to become their hegumen. He acquitted himself of his functions as abbot.\nOf John's literary output, we know only the \"\u039a\u03bb\u1fd6\u03bc\u03b1\u03be\" () or \"The Ladder of Divine Ascent\". This was composed in the early 7th century at the request of John, Abbot of Raithu, a monastery situated on the shores of the Red Sea. Also surviving to the present day is a shorter work \"To the Pastor\" (Latin: \"Liber ad Pastorem\"), most likely a sort of appendix to the \"Ladder\". It is in the \"Ladder\" that we hear of the ascetic practice of carrying a small notebook to record the monk's thoughts during contemplation.\nThe \"Ladder\" describes how to raise one's soul and body to God through the acquisition of ascetic virtues. Climacus uses the analogy of Jacob's Ladder as the framework for his spiritual teaching. Each chapter is referred to as a \"step\", and deals with a separate spiritual subject. There are thirty Steps of the ladder, which correspond to the age of Jesus at his baptism and the beginning of his earthly ministry. Within the general framework of a 'ladder', Climacus' book falls into three sections. The first seven Steps concern general virtues necessary for the ascetic life, while the next nineteen (Steps 8\u201326) give instruction on overcoming vices and building their corresponding virtues. The final four Steps concern the higher virtues toward which the ascetic life aims. The final rung of the ladder\u2014beyond prayer (\u03c0\u03c1\u03bf\u03c3\u03b5\u03c5\u03c7\u03ae), stillness (\u1f21\u03c3\u03c5\u03c7\u03af\u03b1), and even dispassion (\u1f00\u03c0\u03ac\u03b8\u03b5\u03b9\u03b1)\u2014is love (\u1f00\u03b3\u03ac\u03c0\u03b7).\nOriginally written simply for the monks of a neighbouring monastery, the \"Ladder\" swiftly became one of the most widely read and much-beloved books of Byzantine spirituality. This book remains one of the most widely read among Orthodox Christians, especially during the season of Great Lent which immediately precedes Pascha (Easter). It is often read in the \"trapeza\" (refectory) in Orthodox monasteries, and in some places it is read in church as part of the Daily Office on Lenten weekdays, being prescribed in the \"Triodion\".\nAn icon known by the same title, \"Ladder of Divine Ascent\", depicts a ladder extending from earth to heaven. Several monks are depicted climbing a ladder; at the top is Jesus, prepared to receive them into Heaven. Also shown are angels helping the climbers, and demons attempting to drag down the climbers or shoot them with arrows, no matter how high up the ladder they may be. Most versions of the icon show at least one person falling. Often, in the lower right corner John Climacus himself is shown, gesturing towards the ladder, with rows of monks behind him.\nSaint John's feast day is 30 March in both the East and West. The Eastern Orthodox Church and the Byzantine Catholic churches also commemorate him on the Fourth Sunday of Great Lent. Many churches are dedicated to him in Russia, including a church and belltower in the Moscow Kremlin. John Climacus was also known as \"Scholasticus\", but he is not to be confused with John Scholasticus, Patriarch of Constantinople.\nSeveral translations into English have been made, including one by Holy Transfiguration Monastery (Boston, 1978). This volume contains the \"Life of St. John\" by Daniel, \"The Ladder of Divine Ascent\", and \"To the Pastor\", and provides footnotes explaining many of the concepts and terminology used from an Orthodox perspective, as well as a General Index.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16523", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16523", "title": "John of the Ladder", "text": ""}
{"id": "16524", "revid": "49769069", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16524", "title": "Jerome Callet", "text": "American musical artist (1930\u20132019)\nJerome Callet (April 24, 1930 \u2013 May 13, 2019) was a brass embouchure clinician, and designer of brass instruments and mouthpieces.\nCallet rediscovered the original brass embouchure technique utilized in Europe during the baroque era, which at the time was only passed on verbally from trumpet guild members to their sons, and subsequently, by the great classical and jazz players of the first half of the 20th century. While this technique was described in written form within the first brass instruction books published in France in the late 1800s, as well as some American trumpet method books from the early 20th century, the instructions were mistranslated by subsequent generations of teachers, altering the trajectory and quality of brass playing and instruction for the past 100 years. Callet subsequently began creating and manufacturing his own line of trumpets and mouthpieces, for he believed that most modern trumpet equipment was designed to compensate for the failures of modern trumpet playing and teaching.\nBorn April 24, 1930, in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, Callet began his trumpet studies at age thirteen after being inspired by two fellow students, Cal Massey and Tommy Turrentine, at Herron Hill Junior High School in Pittsburgh. Although he subsequently studied with several well known and accomplished trumpet instructors in the Pittsburgh area and dedicated himself laboriously to mastering the instrument, by the age of thirty Callet could still not play a high C. In 1947, after many years of struggle, Callet began researching the physical elements necessary to develop a \"Super Power Embouchure\", such as those developed by players such as Harry James, Charlie Shavers, Horst Fischer, Maurice Andre, and Maynard Ferguson. In 1970, at the age of 40, and after much trial and error, Callet had developed his new embouchure, and named it Superchops. The Superchops embouchure methodology eventually led him on the quest to design and produce the best trumpets and mouthpieces available.\nCallet's involvement with the business of instruments began with sixteen years in sales (1953\u20131968) for Elden Benge, followed by eight years of experience with Dominick Calicchio (1968\u20131975). He absorbed much of his knowledge of trumpet making from these two brilliant men. With this rich background and his talent as an accomplished machinist, Mr. Callet was able to release his first line of trumpet mouthpieces in 1973, and his first trumpet under his own brand name in 1984. In 1973, he also developed a line of mouthpieces to complement his embouchure theories. In the meantime, he taught embouchure technique in Pittsburgh (1960) and New York (from 1972 to April 2019).\nThe fulfillment of his quest to create the best brass instruments possible culminated with his \"New York Soloist\" B\u266d trumpet, released in 2013 (built by Kanstul), and his 1ss, 1sc, and 1sb trumpet mouthpieces, released in 2017 (built by Jim New). Callet's historical legacy of trumpet manufacturing is represented by his \"Sima Bb\", \"Sima C\", \"Sima D/Eb\", \"Jazz Bb\", \"Superchops Bb\", \"Symphonique Bb\", \"Symphonique C\", \"Stratosphere Bb\", and previous \"Soloist Bb\" trumpets, as well as his \"Grand Prix\" flugelhorn, his earlier \"Jazz\" and \"NY\" flugelhorns, and his \"Jazz\" trombone. More than 6,000 Callet trumpets and 15,000 Callet mouthpieces were manufactured overall. \nCallet published five books on trumpet embouchure and technique, including \"Trumpet Secrets\" (2002), \"Beyond Arban\" (1991), \"Superchops\" (1987), \"Brass Power and Endurance\" (1974), and \"Trumpet Yoga\" (1971), as well as the \"Master Superchops\" DVD (2007). Callet also conducted brass embouchure clinics in the United States, Canada, Germany, Finland, Switzerland, France, Denmark, Hungary and Japan.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16527", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16527", "title": "Java coffee", "text": ""}
{"id": "16528", "revid": "1152308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16528", "title": "History of Java", "text": "History of Java may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "16529", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16529", "title": "Java (board game)", "text": "Board game\nJava is a German-style board game designed by Wolfgang Kramer and Michael Kiesling, illustrated by Franz Vohwinkel, and published in 2000 by Ravensburger in German and by Rio Grande Games in English. In the game, players build the island of Java to set up palace festivals and gain victory points. Upon its release, the game received several awards.\nGameplay.\nThe game provides the atmosphere of the island of Java on a hexagonal board. Players build the island and score by setting up palace festivals at opportune moments. When players run out of hexagons to build the island, the game is over. A final scoring phase now takes place and a winner is declared.\nReception.\nBernhard Fischer, reviewing from \"Spieletest\", praised the game\u2019s strategy and tactics. However, he criticised its poor appeal for intermediate players and complex rules. \"Java\" also placed 9th place in the 2001 \"Deutscher Spiele Preis\" award and the \"Games Magazine\" Best Advanced Strategy Game in 2002. It is the second game in the Mask Trilogy, following \"Tikal\" and followed by \"Mexica\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16530", "revid": "47109983", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16530", "title": "John Radcliffe (physician, born 1650)", "text": "English physician, academic and politician (1650\u20131714)\nJohn Radcliffe (1650 \u2013 1 November 1714) was an English physician, academic and politician. A number of landmark buildings in Oxford, including the Radcliffe Camera (in Radcliffe Square), the Radcliffe Infirmary, the Radcliffe Science Library, Radcliffe Primary Care and the Radcliffe Observatory were named after him. The John Radcliffe Hospital, a large tertiary hospital in Headington, is also named after him.\nLife.\nRadcliffe was born the son of George Radcliffe and Anne Loader, in Wakefield, Yorkshire, where he was baptised on 1 May 1650. He was educated at Queen Elizabeth Grammar School, Wakefield and Northallerton Grammar School and graduated from the University of Oxford, where he was an exhibitioner at University College tutored by Obadiah Walker, to become a Fellow of Lincoln College. He obtained his MD in 1682 and moved to London shortly afterwards. There he enjoyed great popularity and became royal physician to William III and Mary II.\nIn 1690 he was elected Member of Parliament for Bramber, Sussex and in 1713 member for Buckingham.\nOn his death in the following year, his property was bequeathed to various charitable causes, including St Bartholomew's Hospital, London and University College, Oxford, where the Radcliffe Quad is named after him. The charitable trust founded by his will of 13 September 1714 still operates as a registered charity.\nAnecdotes of Radcliffe.\n1. Among the many singularities related of Radcliffe, it has been noticed that, when he was in a convivial party, he was unwilling to leave it, even though sent for by persons of the highest distinction. Whilst he was thus deeply engaged at a tavern, he was called on by a grenadier, who desired his immediate attendance on his \"colonel\"; but no entreaties could prevail on the physician to postpone his revelry.\n\"Sir,\" the soldier was quoted as saying, \"my orders are to bring you to the boss.\" And being a very powerful man, he took him up in his arms, and carried him off per force. He had betrayed his loyal friend. After traversing some dirty lanes, the doctor and his escort arrived at a narrow alley.\n\"What the Devil is all this,\" said Radcliffe, \"your colonel doesn't live here?\"\n\"No,\" said his military friend, \"my colonel does not live here \u2013 but my comrade does, and he's worth two of the colonel, so by God, doctor, if you don't do your best for \"him\", it will be the worst for \"you!\"\"\n2. To confer medical authority upon themselves, doctors of the day often published their theories, clinical findings, and pharmacopoeia (collections of \"receipts\" or prescriptions). Radcliffe, however, not only wrote little but also took a certain iconoclastic pride in having read little, remarking once of some vials of herbs and a skeleton in his study: \u201cThis is Radcliffe\u2019s library.\u201d However, he bequeathed a substantial sum of money to Oxford for the founding of the Radcliffe Library, an endowment which, Samuel Garth quipped, was \"about as logical as if a eunuch should found a seraglio.\"\n3. Physician to King William III until 1699, when Radcliffe offended the King by remarking \"Why truly, I would not have your Majesty's two legs for your three kingdoms.\"\nLegacy.\nThere are a number of buildings and places named after John Radcliffe.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16532", "revid": "41690", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16532", "title": "Flow through nozzles", "text": ""}
{"id": "16533", "revid": "41740712", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16533", "title": "Joual", "text": "Sociolect of Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois French originating amongst the working class\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nJoual () is an accepted name for the linguistic features of Quebec French that are associated with the French-speaking working class in Montreal which has become a symbol of national identity for some. \"Joual\" has historically been stigmatized by some, and celebrated by others. While \"Joual\" is often considered a sociolect of the Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois working class, many feel that perception is outdated, with \"Joual\" becoming increasingly present in the arts.\nSpeakers of Quebec French from outside Montreal usually have other names to identify their speech, such as Magoua in Trois-Rivi\u00e8res, and Chaouin south of Trois-Rivi\u00e8res. Linguists tend to eschew this term, but historically some have reserved the term \"Joual\" for the variant of Quebec French spoken in Montreal.\nBoth the upward socio-economic mobility among the Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois, and a cultural renaissance around \"Joual\" connected to the Quiet Revolution in the Montreal East-End have resulted in \"Joual\" being spoken by people across the educational and economic spectrum. Today, many Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois who were raised in Quebec during the 20th century (command of English notwithstanding) can understand and speak at least some \"Joual. Joual\" is also commonly spoken in a few Francophone communities in Ontario, such as Hearst.\nHistory.\nThe creation of \"Joual\" can be traced back to the \"era of silence\", the period from the 1840s to the 1960s and the start of the Quiet Revolution. The \"era of silence\" was marked with stark stigmatization of the common working man. Written documents were not shared with the typical working class man, and the very strict form of French that was used by elites excluded a majority of the population. The Quiet Revolution during the 1960s was a time of awakening, in which the Quebec working class demanded more respect in society, including wider use of Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois in literature and the performing arts. Michel Tremblay is an example of a writer who deliberately used \"Joual\" and Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois to represent the working class populations of Quebec. \"Joual\", a language of the working class, quickly became associated with slang and vulgar language. Despite its continued use in Canada, there are still ideologies present which place a negative connotation on the use of \"Joual\".\nOrigin of the name.\nAlthough coinage of the name \"joual\" is often attributed to French-Canadian journalist Andr\u00e9 Laurendeau, who in October 1959 wrote an article in \"Le Devoir\" criticizing the quality of the French language spoken by French Canadian students, the usage of this term throughout French-speaking Canada likely predates this text.\nThe actual word \"Joual\" is the representation of how the word \"cheval\" (Standard French: , 'horse') is pronounced by those who speak \"Joual\". (\"Horse\" is used in a variation of the phrase 'to speak French like a cow', i.e. to speak French terribly; hence, a put-down of the Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois dialect.) The weak schwa vowel disappeared. Then the voiceless was voiced to , thereby creating . Next, the at the beginning of a syllable in some regional dialects of French or even in very rapid speech in general weakened to become the semi-vowel written \u27e8ou\u27e9. The end result is the word transcribed as \"Joual\".\nMost notable or stereotypical linguistic features.\nDiphthongs are normally present where long vowels would be present in standard French. There is also the usage of \"sontaient, sont\u00e9\" (\"ils \u00e9taient, ils ont \u00e9t\u00e9\").\nAlthough \"mo\u00e9\" and \"to\u00e9\" are today considered substandard slang pronunciations of \"moi\" and \"toi\", these were the original pronunciations of \"ancien r\u00e9gime\" French used in all provinces of Northern France, by the royalty, aristocracy, and common people. After the 1789 French Revolution, the standard pronunciation in France changed to that of a previously-stigmatized form in the speech of Paris, but Quebec French continued to evolve from the historically older dialects, having become isolated from France following the 1760 British conquest of New France.\n\"Joual\" shares many features with modern O\u00efl languages, such as Norman, Gallo, Picard, Poitevin and Saintongeais though its affinities are greatest with the 17th century koin\u00e9 of Paris. Speakers of these languages of France predominated among settlers to New France.\nIt could be argued that at least some aspects of more modern \"Joual\" are further linguistic contractions of standard French. \"D'la\" (\"de la\") is an example where the word \"de\" has nearly fallen out of usage over time and has become contracted. This argument does apply to other words, and this phenomenon has become widespread throughout contemporary French language.\nA defining characteristic of the sociolect is the deliberate use of the pronoun \"tu\" to indicate a question. The pronoun maintains its traditional usage, that of representing the second person singular, but is also used in conjunction with a verb, to indicate a question. \"Tu\" is used, for this purpose, regardless of the technically relevant grammatical person. This is because \"tu\", in this use-case, is a contraction of the antiquated \"t-il\" particle originating from 13th century France, which was used to indicate a question. For example, in metropolitan french, a question may be asked as simply \"Veut-il manger?\" whereas in Joual, it may be asked as \"Il veux-tu manger?\"\nAnother significant characteristic of \"Joual\" is the liberal use of profanities called \"sacre\" in everyday speech.\nWords of English origin.\nThere are a number of English loanwords in \"Joual\", although they have been stigmatized since the 1960s, instead favoring alternative terms promoted by the \"Office qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois de la langue fran\u00e7aise\". The commonality of English loanwords in \"Joual\" is attributed to the unilingually anglophone nature of the factory owners, business higher-ups, and industrial supervisors which employed the majority of French-speaking blue-collar workers throughout 20th century. This need to use English in workplace environments, when referring to technical elements of the worker's labour, caused the gradual integration of English loanwords into French. These words would eventually come to be conjugated and integrated as though they were traditionally French words (such as \"Check\" becoming the verb \"Chequer\"). The usage of deprecated anglicisms varies both regionally and historically. In the table below are a few common \"Joual\" words of English origin. \nSome words were also previously thought to be of English origin, although modern research has shown them to be from regional French dialects:\nIn popular culture.\nThe two-act play \"Les Belles-s\u0153urs\" by Canadian writer Michel Tremblay premiered in 1968 at the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre du Rideau Vert in Montreal. Many consider it to have had a profound impact on Canadian culture, as it was one of the first times \"Joual\" was seen on a national stage. The play follows a working-class woman named Germaine in Montr\u00e9al. After winning a million trading stamps, she invites her friends over to help paste them into booklets to redeem them. But Germaine is unsuspecting of her jealous friends who are envious of her winnings. The fact that the play was originally written in \"Joual\" is very important to the socio-linguistic aspect of the women. The characters all come from the working class and for the most part, speak in \"Joual\", which at the time was not seen on the main stage. The play was cited at the time as a \"radical element among Quebec critics as the dawn of a new era of liberation, both political and aesthetic\".\nWhen \"Les Belles-s\u0153urs\" premiered in Paris, France in 1973 as it was originally written, in \"Joual\", it was met with some initial criticism. One critic described it as difficult to understand as ancient Greek. Tremblay responded, \"a culture should always start with speak to herself. The ancient Greeks spoke to each other\". The popularity of the play has since caused it to be translated into multiple languages, raising controversies in the translation community over retaining the authenticity of \"Les Belles-s\u0153urs\" even when not performed in the original dialect of \"Joual\".\nWriting in \"Joual\" gave Tremblay an opportunity to resist cultural and linguistic \"imperialism\" of France, while signifying the secularization of Qu\u00e9bec culture.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16534", "revid": "46376176", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16534", "title": "Jacob and Esau", "text": "Story in the Book of Genesis\nThe biblical Book of Genesis speaks of the relationship between fraternal twins Jacob and Esau, sons of Isaac and Rebekah. The story focuses on Esau's loss of his birthright to Jacob and the conflict that ensued between their descendant nations because of Jacob's deception of their aged and blind father, Isaac, in order to receive Esau's birthright/blessing from Isaac.\nThis conflict was paralleled by the affection the parents had for their favored child: \"Isaac, who had a taste for wild game, loved Esau, but Rebekah loved Jacob.\" Even since conception, their conflict was foreshadowed: \"And the children struggled together within her; and she said, If it be so, why am I thus? And she went to inquire of the Lord. And the Lord said unto her, Two nations are in thy womb, and two manner of people shall be separated from thy bowels; and the one people shall be stronger than the other people; and the elder shall serve the younger.\"\nGenesis 25:26 states that Esau was born before Jacob, who came out holding on to his older brother's heel as if he was trying to pull Esau back into the womb so that he could be firstborn. The name Jacob means \"he grasps the heel\" which is a Hebrew idiom for deceptive behavior.\nBirthright.\nIn Genesis, Esau returned to his brother, Jacob, being famished from the fields. He begged his twin brother to give him some \"red pottage\" (paralleling his nickname, , \"adom\", meaning \"red\"). Jacob offered to give Esau a bowl of stew in exchange for his birthright (the right to be recognized as firstborn) and Esau agreed.\nThe birthright (\"bekorah\") has to do with both position and inheritance. By birthright, the firstborn son inherited the leadership of the family and the judicial authority of his father. Deuteronomy 21:17 states that he was also entitled to a double portion of the paternal inheritance.\nIn the interpretation of Daniel J. Elazar, Esau acts impulsively: \"Esau demonstrates that he does not deserve to be the one who continues Abraham's responsibilities and rewards under God's covenant, since he does not have the steady, thoughtful qualities which are required... Jacob shows his willingness as well as his greater intelligence and forethought... What he does is not quite honorable, though not illegal. The title that he gains is at least partially valid, although he is insecure enough about it to conspire later with his mother to deceive his father so as to gain the blessing for the first-born as well.\"\nLater, Esau marries two wives, both Hittite women, that is, locals, in violation of Abraham's (and God's) injunction not to take wives from among the Canaanite population. Again, one gets the sense of a headstrong person who acts impulsively, without sufficient thought. His marriage is described as a vexation to both Rebekah and Isaac. Even his father, who has strong affection for him, is hurt by his act. According to Daniel J. Elazar this action alone forever rules out Esau as the bearer of patriarchal continuity. Esau could have overcome the sale of his birthright; Isaac was still prepared to give him the blessing due the firstborn. But acquiring foreign wives meant the detachment of his children from the Abrahamic line. Despite the deception on the part of Jacob and his mother to gain Isaac's patriarchal blessing, Jacob's vocation as Isaac's legitimate heir in the continued founding of the Jewish people is reaffirmed.\nElazar suggests the Bible indicates that a bright, calculating person, even if he is less than honest at times, is preferable as a founder over a bluff, impulsive one who cannot make discriminating choices.\nBlessing of the firstborn.\nPronouncing the blessing was considered to be the act formally acknowledging the firstborn as the principal heir.\nIn Genesis 27:5\u20137, Rebecca overhears Isaac tell Esau, \"Bring me venison and prepare a savoury food, that I may eat, and bless thee before the LORD before my death.\" Rebecca counsels Jacob to pretend to be Esau, in order to obtain the blessing in his brother's stead. He dressed himself in Esau's best clothes and disguised himself by covering his arms in lamb skin so that if his blind father touched him, he would think Jacob his more hirsute brother. Jacob brought Isaac a dish of goat meat prepared by Rebecca to taste like venison. Isaac then bestowed the blessing (\"bekhorah\"), which confers a prophetic wish for fertility (vv. 27\u201328) and dominion (v.29), on Jacob before Esau's return.\nEsau is furious and vows to kill Jacob as soon as their father has died. Rebecca intervenes to save her younger son Jacob from being murdered by her elder son, Esau. At Rebecca's urging, Jacob flees to a distant land to work for his mother's brother, Laban. She explains to Isaac that she has sent Jacob to find a wife among her own people.\nJacob does not immediately receive his father's inheritance. Jacob, having fled for his life, leaves behind the wealth of Isaac's flocks and land and tents in Esau's hands. Jacob is forced to sleep out on the open ground and then work for wages as a servant in Laban's household. Jacob, who had deceived his father, is in turn deceived and cheated by his uncle Laban concerning Jacob's seven years of service (lacking money for a dowry) for the hand of Laban's daughter Rachel, receiving his older daughter Leah instead. However, despite Laban, Jacob eventually becomes so rich as to incite the envy of Laban and Laban's sons.\nReconciliation.\nGenesis 32-33 tells of Jacob and Esau's eventual meeting according to God's commandment in Genesis 31:3 and 32:10 after Jacob had spent more than 20 years staying with Laban in Padan-Aram. The two men prepare for their meeting like warriors about to enter into battle. Jacob divides his family into two camps such that if one is taken the other might escape. Jacob sends messengers to Esau, as well as gifts meant to appease him.\nJacob gets the name \"Israel\" after he wrestles with the Angel of God as he is traveling to Esau. His hip is knocked out of joint but he keeps on wrestling and gains the name.\nAfter the encounter with the angel, Jacob crosses over the ford Jabbok and encounters Esau who seems initially pleased to see him, which attitude of favour Jacob fosters by means of his gift. Esau refuses the gift at first but Jacob humbles himself before his brother and presses him to take it, which he finally does. However, Jacob evidently does not trust his brother's favour to continue for long, so he makes excuses to avoid traveling to Mount Seir in Esau's company, and he further evades Esau's attempt to put his own men among Jacob's bands and finally completes the deception of his brother yet again by going to Succoth and then to Shalem, a city of Shechem, instead of following Esau at a distance to Seir. George Savran suggests that Jacob's avoidance of Esau is a metaphor for Israel being separate from their enemies such as Edom or an indicator of Jacob's reserved personality. The next time Jacob and Esau meet is at the burial of their father, Isaac, in Hebron.\nViews of the birthright.\nThe narrative of Esau selling his birthright to Jacob, in Genesis 25, states that Esau despised his birthright. However, it also alludes to Jacob being deceitful.\nIn Esau's mother and father's eyes, the deception may have been deserved. Rebecca later abets Jacob in receiving his father's blessing disguised as Esau. Isaac then refuses to take Jacob's blessing back after learning he was tricked, and does not give this blessing to Esau but, after Esau begs, gives him an inferior blessing.\nJustus Knecht comments that: \"\"The Wisdom of God\", which makes good come out of evil, can be learnt from this story. Almighty God had from the beginning, or rather from all eternity, chosen Jacob to be the heir of His promises. The faults of men (such as Isaac's preference for Esau, Jacob's deceit, and Esau's hatred) could not alter what He had ordained; on the contrary, they served, under the divine guidance, for the accomplishment of it. Jacob, especially, was strengthened in confidence in God, and purified by the very consequences of his deceit, his long exile and servitude. He was by them confirmed in humility and piety, and trained to be a holy man of God, and the worthy heir of the promises.\"\nIn comparative mythology.\nThe common motive of the vast number of world mythologies (especially in the Proto-Indo-European mythology) is a fight between the twins (or just brothers) in which the death of one creates the world or precedes an important event (e.g. Romulus and Remus, Cain and Abel). Moreover, in the Ashanti Region, a story about the supreme god Nyame and his two sons resembles this exact story. He intended to give the more fertile land to his elder son Bia, and the rest to Bia's brother Tano. Nyame sent his goat to tell his sons to come to him for their inheritance. The goat preferred Tano to Bia and told him to disguise himself as Bia and go to Nyame very early in the morning. When Nyame realized what had happened, it was too late to fix the error. Note that the goat soup and the goat skin is mentioned in the Esau and Jacob story. \nThe Soninke people of Mauritania have a story that also resembles the Jacob and Esau narrative. In it, king Mama Dinga sends his servant to bring him his eldest son after midnight so that he could tell him things he needed to know, as he felt he would die soon. As the servant was mistreated by all of his sons, except by the youngest one, he decided to tell him to disguise himself in his brother's robe and wear his arm ring. In this way, he tricked his blind father.\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16535", "revid": "346308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16535", "title": "Joseph Lister", "text": "English scientist, surgeon and antiseptic pioneer (1827\u20131912)\nJoseph Lister, 1st Baron Lister, (5 April 1827 \u2013 10 February 1912) was an English surgeon, medical scientist, experimental pathologist and pioneer of antiseptic surgery and preventive healthcare. Lister revolutionised the craft of surgery by the use of close anatomical observation, in the same manner that John Hunter revolutionised the science of surgery.\nFrom a technical viewpoint, Lister was not an exceptional surgeon, but his research into bacteriology and infection in wounds revolutionised surgery throughout the world.\nLister's contributions were four-fold. Firstly, as a surgeon at the Glasgow Royal Infirmary, he introduced carbolic acid (modern-day phenol) as a steriliser for surgical instruments, patients' skins, sutures, surgeons' hands, and wards, promoting the principle of antiseptics. Secondly, he researched the role of inflammation and tissue perfusion in the healing of wounds. Thirdly, he advanced diagnostic science by analysing specimens using microscopes. Fourthly, he devised strategies to increase the chances of survival after surgery. His most important contribution, however, was recognising that putrefaction in wounds is caused by germs, in connection to Louis Pasteur's then-novel germ theory of fermentation.\nLister's work led to a reduction in post-operative infections and made surgery safer for patients, leading to him being distinguished as the \"father of modern surgery\".\nEarly life.\nLister was born to a prosperous, educated Quaker family in the village of Upton, then near but now in London, England. He was the fourth child and second son of four sons and three daughters born to gentleman scientist and wine merchant Joseph Jackson Lister and school assistant Isabella Lister n\u00e9e Harris. The couple married in a ceremony held in Ackworth, West Yorkshire on 14 July 1818.\nLister's paternal great-great-grandfather, Thomas Lister was the last of several generations of farmers who lived in Bingley in West Yorkshire. Lister joined the Society of Friends as a young man and passed his beliefs on to his son, Joseph Lister. He moved to London in 1720 to open a tobacconist's shop in Aldersgate Street in the City of London. His son, John Lister, was born there. Lister's grandfather was apprenticed to watchmaker Isaac Rogers, in 1752 and followed that trade on his own account in Bell Alley, Lombard Street from 1759 to 1766. He then took over his father's tobacco business, but gave it up in 1769 in favour of working at his father-in-law Stephen Jackson's business as a wine-merchant at No 28 Old Wine and Brandy Values on Lothbury Street, opposite Tokenhouse Yard.\nHis father was a pioneer in the design of achromatic object lenses for use in compound microscopes He spent 30 years perfecting the microscope, and in the process, discovered the Law of Aplanatic Foci, building a microscope where the image point of one lens coincided with the focal point of another. Up until that time, the best higher magnification lenses produced an excessive secondary aberration known as a coma, which interfered with normal use. It was considered a major advance that elevated histology into an independent science. By 1832, Lister's work had built a reputation sufficient to enable his being elected to the Royal Society. His mother, Isabella, was the youngest daughter of master mariner Anthony Harris. Isabella worked at the Ackworth School, a Quaker school for the poor, assisting her widowed mother, the superintendent of the school.\nThe eldest daughter of the couple was Mary Lister. On 21 August 1851, she married the barrister Rickman Godlee of Lincoln's Inn and the Middle Temple, who belonged to the Friends meeting house in Plaistow. The couple had six children. Their second child was Rickman Godlee, a neurosurgeon who became Professor of Clinical Surgery at the University College Hospital and surgeon to Queen Victoria. He became Lister's biographer in 1917. The eldest son of Joseph and Isabella Lister was John Lister, who died of a painful brain tumour. With John's death, Joseph became the heir of the family. The couple's second daughter was Isabella Sophia Lister, who married Irish Quaker Thomas Pim in 1848. Lister's other brother William Henry Lister died after a long illness. The youngest son was Arthur Lister, a wine merchant, botanist and lifelong Quaker, who studied Mycetozoa. He worked alongside his daughter Gulielma Lister to produce the standard monograph on Mycetozoa. By 1898, Lister's work had built a reputation sufficient to enable his election to the Royal Society. Gulielma Lister, a talented artist, later updated the standard monograph with colour drawings. Her work built a reputation sufficient to be elected a fellow of the Linnean Society in 1904. She became its vice-president in 1929. The couple's last child was Jane Lister; she married widower Smith Harrison, a wholesale tea merchant.\nAfter their marriage, the Listers lived at 5 Tokenhouse Yard in Central London for three years until 1822, where they ran a port wine business in partnership with Thomas Barton Beck.\nBeck was the grandfather of the professor of surgery and proponent of the germ theory of disease, Marcus Beck, who would later promote Lister's discoveries in his fight to introduce antiseptics. In 1822, Lister's family moved to Stoke Newington. In 1826, the family moved to Upton House, a long low Queen Anne style mansion that came with 69 acres of land. It had been rebuilt in 1731, to suit the style of the period.\nEducation.\nSchool.\nAs a child, Lister had a stammer and this was possibly why he was educated at home until he was eleven. Lister then attended Isaac Brown and Benjamin Abbott's Academy, a private Quaker school in Hitchin, Hertfordshire. When Lister was thirteen, he attended Grove House School in Tottenham, also a private Quaker School to study mathematics, natural science, and languages. His father was insistent that Lister received a good grounding in French and German, in the knowledge he would learn Latin at school. From an early age, Lister was strongly encouraged by his father and would talk about his father's great influence later in life, particularly in encouraging him in his study of natural history. Lister's interest in natural history led him to study bones and to collect and dissect small animals and fish that were examined using his father's microscope and then drawn using the camera lucida technique that his father had explained to him, or sketched. His father's interests in microscopical research developed in Lister the determination to become a surgeon and prepared him for a life of scientific research. None of Lister's relatives were in the medical profession. According to Godlee, the decision to become a physician seemed to be an entirely spontaneous decision.\nIn 1843 his father decided to send him to university. As Lister was unable to attend either University of Oxford or the University of Cambridge owing to the religious tests that effectively barred him, he decided to apply to the non-sectarian University College London Medical School (UCL), one of only a few institutions in Great Britain that accepted Quakers at that time. Lister took the public examination in the junior class of botany, a required course that would enable him to matriculate. Lister left school in the spring of 1844 when he was seventeen.\nUniversity.\nIn 1844, just before Lister's seventeenth birthday, he moved to an apartment at 28 London Road that he shared with Edward Palmer, also a Quaker. Between 1844 and 1845, Lister continued his pre-matriculation studies, in Greek, Latin and natural philosophy. In the Latin and Greek classes, he won a \"Certificate of Honour\". For the experimental natural philosophy class, Lister won first prize and was awarded a copy of Charles Hutton's \"Recreations in Mathematics and Natural Philosophy\".\nAlthough his father wanted him to continue his general education, the university had demanded since 1837, that each student obtain a Bachelor of Arts (BA) degree before commencing medical training. Lister matriculated in August 1845, initially studying for a BA in classics. Between 1845 and 1846, Lister studied the mathematics of natural philosophy, mathematics and Greek earning a \"Certificate of Honour\" in each class. Between 1846 and 1847, Lister studied both anatomy and atomic theory (chemistry) and won a prize for his essay. On 21 December 1846, Lister and Palmer attended Robert Liston's famous operation where ether was applied by Lister's classmate, William Squire to anaesthetise a patient for the first time. On 23 December 1847, Lister and Palmer moved to 2 Bedford Place and were joined by John Hodgkin, the nephew of Thomas Hodgkin who discovered Hodgkin lymphoma. Lister and Hodgkin had been school friends.\nIn December 1847, Lister graduated with a degree of Bachelor of Arts 1st division, with a distinction in classics and botany. While he was studying, Lister suffered from a mild bout of smallpox, a year after his elder brother died of the disease. The bereavement combined with the stress of his classes led to a nervous breakdown in March 1848. Lister's nephew Godlee used the term to describe the situation and is perhaps indicative that adolescence was just as difficult in 1847, as it is now. Lister decided to take a long holiday to recuperate and this delayed the start of his studies. In late April 1848, Lister visited the Isle of Man with Hodgkin and by 7 June 1848, he was visiting Ilfracombe. At the end of June, Lister accepted an invitation to stay in the home of Thoman Pim, a Dublin Quaker. Using it as his base, Lister travelled throughout Ireland. On 1 July 1848, Lister received a letter full of warmth and love from his father where his last meeting was \"...sunshine after a refreshing shower, following a time of cloud\" and advised him to \"cherish a pious cheerful spirit, open to see and to enjoy the bounties and the beauties spread around us :\u2014not to give way to turning thy thoughts upon thyself nor even at present to dwell long on serious things\". From 22 July 1848, for more than a year, the record is blank.\nMedical student.\nLister registered as a medical student in the winter of 1849 and became active in the University Debating Society and the Hospital Medical Society. In the autumn of 1849, he returned to college with a microscope given to him by his father. After completing courses in anatomy, physiology and surgery, he was awarded a \"Certificate of Honours\", winning the silver medal in anatomy and physiology and a gold medal in botany.\nHis main lecturers were John Lindley professor of botany, Thomas Graham professor of chemistry, Robert Edmond Grant professor of comparative anatomy, George Viner Ellis professor of anatomy and William Benjamin Carpenter professor of medical jurisprudence. Lister often spoke highly of Lindley and Graham in his writings, but Wharton Jones professor of ophthalmic medicine and surgery, and William Sharpey professor of physiology, exercised the greatest influence on him. He was greatly attracted by Dr. Sharpey's lectures, which inspired in him a love of experimental physiology and histology that never left him.\nThomas Henry Huxley praised Wharton Jones for the method and quality of his physiology lectures. As a clinical scientist working in physiological sciences, he was foremost in the number of discoveries he made. He was also considered a brilliant ophthalmic surgeon, his main field. He conducted research into the circulation of blood and the phenomena of inflammation, carried out on the frog's web and the bat's wing, and no doubt suggested this method of research to Lister. Sharpey was called the \"father of modern physiology\" as he was the first to give a series of lectures on the subject. Prior to that the field had been considered part of anatomy. Sharpey studied at Edinburgh University, then went to Paris to study clinical surgery under French anatomist Guillaume Dupuytren and operative surgery under Jacques Lisfranc de St. Martin. Sharpey met Syme while in Paris and the two became life-long friends. After he moved to Edinburgh he taught anatomy with Allen Thomson as his physiological colleague. He left Edinburgh in 1836, to become the first Professor of Physiology.\nClinical instruction.\nTo qualify for his degree, Lister had to complete two years of clinical instruction, and began his residency at University College Hospital in October 1850. as an intern and then house physician to Walter Hayle Walshe, professor of pathological anatomy and author of the 1846 study, \"The Nature and Treatment of Cancer\". Lister in 1850 again received \"Certificates of Honours\" and won two gold medals in anatomy and a silver medal each in surgery and medicine.\nIn his second year in 1851, Lister became first a dresser in January 1851 then a house surgeon to John Eric Erichsen in May 1851. Erichsen was professor of surgery and author of the 1853 \"Science and Art of Surgery\", described as one of the most celebrated English-language textbooks on surgery. The book went through many editions; Marcus Beck edited the eighth and ninth, adding Lister's antiseptic techniques and Pasteur and Robert Koch's germ theory.\nLister's first case notes were recorded on 5 February 1851. As a dresser, his immediate superior was Henry Thompson, who recalled \"..a shy Quaker...I remember that he had a better microscope than any man in the college\".\nLister had only just begun working in his role as dresser to Erichsen in January 1851, when an epidemic of erysipelas broke out in the male ward. An infected patient from an Islington workhouse was left in Erichsen's surgical ward for two hours. The hospital had been free of infection but within days there were twelve cases of infection and four deaths. In his notebook, Lister stated that the disease was a form of surgical fever, and particularly noted that recent surgical patients were infected the worst, but that those with older surgeries with suppurating wounds, 'mostly escaped'. It was while Lister worked for Erichsen, that his interest in the healing of wounds began. Erichsen was a miasmatist who thought the wounds became infected from \"miasmas\" from the wound itself that caused a noxious form of \"bad air\" that spread to other patients in the ward. Erichsen believed that seven patients with an infected wound had saturated of the ward with \"bad air\", which spread to cause gangrene. However Lister saw that some wounds, when debrided and cleaned, would sometimes heal. He believed that something in the wound itself was at fault.\nWhen he became a house surgeon, Lister had patients put in his charge. For the first time, he came into contact face-to-face with various forms of blood-poisoning diseases like pyaemia and hospital gangrene, which rots living tissue with a remarkable rapidity. While examining in an autopsy an excision of the elbow of a little boy who had died of pyaemia, Lister noticed that a thick yellow-pus was present at the seat of the humerus bone, and distended the brachial and axillary veins. He also noticed that the pus advanced in the reverse direction along the veins, bypassing the valves in the veins. He also found suppuration in a knee-joint and multiple abscesses in the lungs. Lister knew that Charles-Emmanuel S\u00e9dillot had discovered that multiple abscesses in the lungs were caused by introducing pus into the veins of an animal. At the time he could not explain the facts but believed the pus in the organs had a metastatic origin. On 2 October 1900, during The Huxley Lecture, Lister described how his interest in the germ theory of disease and how it applied to surgery began with his investigation into the death of that little boy.\nThere was an epidemic of gangrene during his surgeoncy. The treatment method was to chloroform the patient, scrape the soft slough off and burn the necrotic flesh away with mercury pernitrate Occasionally the treatment would succeed, but when a grey film appeared at the edges of the wound, it presaged death. In one patient, the repeated treatment failed several times, so Erichsen amputated the limb, which healed fine. Lister recognised was that the disease was a \"local poison\" and probably parasitic in nature. He examined the diseased tissues under his microscope. He saw peculiar objects that he could not identify, as he had no frame of reference to draw conclusions from these observations. In his notebook he recorded:\nI imagined they might be the materies morbi in the form of some kind of fungus.\nLister wrote two papers on the epidemics; but both were lost: \"Hospital gangrene\" and \"Microscope\". They were read to the Student Medical Society at UCL.\nLister's first operation.\nOn 26 June 2013, medical historian Ruth Richardson and orthopaedic surgeon Bryan Rhodes published a paper in which they described their discovery of Lister's first operation, made while both were researching his career. At 1pm on 27 June 1851, Lister, a second-year medical student working at a casualty ward in Gower Street, conducted his first operation. Julia Sullivan, a mother of eight grown children, had been stabbed in the abdomen by her husband, a drunk and ne'er-do-well, who was taken into custody. On 15 September 1851, Lister was called as a witness to the husband's trial at the Old Bailey. His testimony helped convict the husband, who was transported to Australia for 20 years.\nAbout a yard of small intestine about eight inches across, damaged in two places, protruded from the woman's lower abdomen, which had three open wounds. After cleaning the intestines with blood-warm water, Lister was unable to place them back into the body, so he decided to extend the cut. then placed them back into the abdomen, and sewed and sutured the wounds shut. He administered opium to induce constipation and enable the intestines to recover. Sullivan recovered her health. This was a full decade before his first public operation in the Glasgow Infirmary.\nThis operation was missed by historians. Liverpool consultant surgeon John Shepherd, in his essay on Lister, \"Joseph Lister and abdominal surgery\", written in 1968, failed to mention the operation, and instead started his account from the 1860s onwards. He apparently was unaware of this surgery.\nMicroscope experiments 1852.\nContractile Tissue of the Iris.\nLister's first paper \"Observations on the Contractile Tissue of the Iris\" was written while he was still at university and published in the \"Quarterly Journal of Microscopical Science\" in 1853.\nOn 11 August 1852, Lister attended an operation at University College Hospital by Wharton Jones, who presented him with a fresh slice of human iris. Lister took the opportunity to study the iris. He reviewed existing research and studied tissue from a horse, a cat, a rabbit and a guinea pig as well as six surgical specimens from patients who had undergone eye surgery. Lister was unable to complete his research to his satisfaction, due to his need to pass his final examination. He offered an apology in the paper:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;My engagements do not allow me to carry the inquiry further at present; and my apology for offering the results of an incomplete investigation is that a contribution tending, in however small a degree, to extend our acquaintance with so important an organ as the eye, or to verify observations that may be thought doubtful, may probably be of interest to the physiologist.\nThe paper advanced the work of Swiss physiologist Albert von K\u00f6lliker, demonstrating the existence of two distinct muscles, the dilator and sphincter in the iris. This corrected the convictions of previous researchers that there was no dilator pupillae muscle.\nMuscular Tissue of the Skin.\nHis next paper \"Observations on the Muscular Tissue of the Skin\" was an investigation into goose bumps, that was published on 1 June 1853 in the same journal. Lister was able to confirm K\u00f6lliker's experimental finding that in humans the smooth muscle fibres are responsible for making hair stand out from the skin, in contrast to other mammals, whose large tactile hairs are associated with striated muscle. Lister also demonstrated a new method of creating histological sections from the tissue of the scalp.\nLister's microscopy skills were so advanced that he was able to correct the observations of German histologist Friedrich Gustav Henle, who mistook small blood vessels for muscle fibres. In each of the papers, he created camera lucida drawings so accurate that they could be used to scale and measure the observations.\nBoth papers attracted significant attention in Britain and abroad. Naturalist Richard Owen, an old friend of Lister's father, was particularly impressed by them. Owen contemplated recruiting Lister for his department and forwarded him a thank-you letter on 2 August 1853. K\u00f6lliker was particularly pleased with the analysis that Lister had formulated. K\u00f6lliker made many trips to Britain, and eventually met Lister. They became life-long friends. Their close friendship was described in a letter by K\u00f6lliker on 17 November 1897, that Rickman Godlee chose to use to illustrate their relationship. K\u00f6lliker sent a letter to Lister when he was president of the Royal Society, congratulating him on receiving the Copley medal, fondly remembering old friends who had died, and celebrating his time in Scotland with Syme and Lister. K\u00f6lliker was 80 years old at the time.\nGraduation.\nLister graduated with a Bachelor of Medicine with honours in the autumn of 1852. During his final year, Lister won several prestigious awards heavily contested among the student body of London teaching hospitals. He won the Longridge Prize\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For the greatest proficiency evinced during the three years immediately preceding, on the Sessional Examinations for Honours in the classes of the Faculty of Medicine of the College; and for creditable performance of duties of offices at the Hospital\nthat included a \u00a340 stipend. He was also awarded a gold medal in structural and physiological botany. Lister won two of the four available gold medals in anatomy and physiology as well as surgery, which came with a scholarship of \u00a350 a year for two years, for his second examination in medicine. In the same year, Lister passed the examination for the fellowship of the Royal College of Surgeons, bringing to a close nine years of education.\nSharpey advised Lister to spend a month at the medical practice of his lifelong friend James Syme in Edinburgh and then visit medical schools in Europe for a longer period for training. Sharpey himself had been taught first in Edinburgh and later in Paris. Sharpey had met Syme, a teacher of clinical surgery widely considered the best surgeon in the United Kingdom while he was in Paris. Sharpey had gone to Edinburgh in 1818, along with many other surgeons since, due to the influence of John Hunter. Hunter had taught Edward Jenner, seen as the first surgeon to take a scientific approach to the study of medicine, known as the \"Hunterian method\" Hunter was an early advocate for careful investigation and experimentation, using the techniques of pathology and physiology to give himself a better understanding of healing than many of his colleagues. For example, his 1794 paper, \"A treatise on the blood, inflammation and gun-shot wounds\" was the first systematic study of swelling, discovering that inflammation was common to all diseases. Due to Hunter, surgery, then practised by hobbyists or amateurs, became a true scientific profession. As the Scottish universities taught medicine and surgery from a scientific viewpoint, surgeons who wished to emulate those techniques travelled there for training. Scottish universities had several other features that distinguished them from those in the south. They were inexpensive and did not require religious admissions tests, and thus attracted the most scientifically progressive students in Britain. The most important differentiator was that medical schools in Scotland had evolved from a scholarly tradition, where English medical schools relied on hospitals and practice. Experimental science had no practitioners at English medical schools and while Edinburgh University medical school was large and active at the time, southern medical schools were generally moribund, and their laboratory space and teaching materials inadequate. English medical schools also tended to view surgery as manual labour, not a respectable calling for a gentleman academic.\nSurgical profession 1854.\nBefore Lister's studies of surgery, many people believed that chemical damage from exposure to \"bad air\", or \"miasma\", was responsible for infections in wounds. Hospital wards were occasionally aired out at midday as a precaution against the spread of infection via miasma, but facilities for washing hands or a patient's wounds were not available. A surgeon was not required to wash his hands before seeing a patient; in the absence of any theory of bacterial infection, such practices were not considered necessary. Despite the work of Ignaz Semmelweis and Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr., hospitals practised surgery under unsanitary conditions. Surgeons of the time referred to the \"good old surgical stink\" and took pride in the stains on their unwashed operating gowns as a display of their experience.\nEdinburgh 1853\u20131860.\nJames Syme.\nSyme, a well-established clinical lecturer at Edinburgh University for more than two decades before he met Lister, was considered the boldest and most original surgeon then living in Great Britain. He became a surgical pioneer during his career, preferring simpler surgical procedures, as he detested complexity, in the era that immediately preceded the introduction of anaesthesia.\nIn September 1823, at the age of 24, Syme made a name for himself by first performing an amputation at the hip-joint, the first in Scotland. Considered the bloodiest operation in surgery, Syme completed it in less than a minute, as speed was essential at that time, before anaesthesia. Syme became widely known and acclaimed for developing a surgical operation that became known as \"Syme amputation\", an amputation at the ankle where the foot is removed and the heel pad is preserved. Syme was considered a scientific surgeon, as evidenced by his paper \"On the Power of the Periosteum to form New Bone\", and became one of the first advocates of antiseptics.\nArrival in Edinburgh.\nIn September 1853, Lister arrived in Edinburgh bearing letters of introduction from Sharpey to Syme. Lister was anxious about his first appointment but decided to settle in Edinburgh after meeting Syme, who embraced him with open arms, invited him to dinner, and offered him an opportunity to assist him in his private operations.\nLister was invited to Syme's house \"Millbank\" in Morningside (now part of Astley Ainslie Hospital), where he met, amongst others, Agnes Syme, Syme's daughter from another marriage and granddaughter of physician Robert Willis. While Lister thought that Agnes was not conventionally pretty, he admired her quickness of mind, her familiarity with medical practice, and her warmth. He became a frequent visitor to Millbank and met a much wider group of eminent people than he would have in London.\nIn the same month, Lister began assisting Syme at the University of Edinburgh In a letter to his father, Lister expressed surprise at the size of the infirmary and spoke about his impressions of Syme, \"..is larger than I expected to find it; there are 200 Surgical beds, and a large number in other departments. At University College Hospital there were only about 60 Surgical beds, so altogether a prospect appears to be opening of a very profitable stay here. ...Syme is, I suppose, the first of British surgeons, and to observe the practice and hear the conversation of such a man is of the greatest possible advantage\". By October 1853, Lister decided to spend the winter in Edinburgh. Syme was so impressed by Lister, that after a month Lister became Syme's supernumerary house surgeon at the Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh and his assistant in his private hospital at Minto House in Chambers Street. As house surgeon, Lister assisted Syme during every operation, taking notes. It was a much-coveted position and gave Lister the option of choosing which of the ordinary cases he would attend. During this period, Lister presented a paper at the Royal Edinburgh Medico-Chirurgical Society on the structure of cancellous exostoses that had been removed by Syme, demonstrating that the method of ossification of these growths is the same as that which occurs in epiphyseal cartilage.\nIn September 1854, Lister's house surgeoncy appointment was finished. With the prospect of being out of a job, he spoke to his father about seeking a position at the Royal Free Hospital in London. However, Sharpey had written to Syme warning him that it was unlikely that Lister would be welcome at the Royal Free as he would have likely eclipsed Thomas H. Wakley, whose father held considerable sway at the hospital. Lister then made plans to tour Europe for a year. However, an opportunity presented itself with the death of noted infirmary surgeon and surgical lecturer at the Edinburgh Extramural School of Medicine Richard James Mackenzie. Mackenzie had been seen as a successor to Syme but had contracted cholera in Balbec in Scutari, Istanbul, while on a four-month volunteer sabbatical as field surgeon to the 79th Highlanders during the Crimean War. Lister proposed to Syme that he take over Mackenzie's position and become assistant surgeon to Syme. Syme initially rejected the idea, as Lister was not licensed to operate in Scotland, but later warmed to the idea. In October 1854, Lister was appointed as a lecturerLister successfully transferred the lease held by Mackenzie at his lecture room at 4 High School Yards, to himself. On 21 April 1855, Lister was elected a Fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh and two days later rented a home at 3 Rutland Square. In June 1855, Lister made a hurried trip to Paris to take a course on operative surgery on the dead body and returned in June.\nExtramural lecturing.\nOn 7 November 1855, Lister gave his first extramural lecture on the \"Principles and Practice of Surgery\", in a lecture theatre at 4 High School Yards known as Old Jerusalem, directly located across from the infirmary. His first lecture was read from 21 pages of foolscap folio. Lister's first lectures were based on notes, either read or spoken, but over time he used notes less and less, becoming extempore in his speech, slowly and deliberately forming his argument as he went along. With this deliberate way of speaking, he managed to overcome a slight, occasional stammer which in his early days had been more pronounced.\nHis first student was John Batty Tuke, in a class of nine or ten, mostly consisting of dressers. Within a week, twenty-three people had joined. In the next year, only eight people turned up. In the summer of 1858, Lister had the ignominious experience of reading his lecture to a single student, who arrived ten minutes late. Seven more students arrived later.\nHis first lecture focused on the concept of surgery, giving a definition of disease that linked it to the Hippocratic Oath. He then explained that surgery could have more benefits than medicine, which could only comfort the patient at best. He then explained the attributes a good surgeon should exhibit, before finishing the lecture by recommending Syme's book \"Principles of Surgery\". Lister completed 114 lectures that followed a standard syllabus. Lecture VII described his earliest experiment on inflammation, where he put mustard on his arm and watched the results. Lectures IV to IX dealt with the circulation of blood. Inflammation was discussed in lectures X to XIII. The second half of the course dealt with clinical surgery. For the last four days, he gave two lectures a day, to complete the event before his wedding, with the first course ending on 18 April 1856. In the summer of 1858, Lister started a second, completely separate course, where he lectured on surgical pathology and operative surgery.\nMarriage.\nBy mid-summer 1854, Lister had started to court Agnes Syme. Lister wrote to his parents about his love but they worried about the union, particularly since he was Quaker and Agnes had given no indication that she would change her denomination. At that time when a Quaker married a person of another denomination, it was considered as marrying \"out of the society\". Lister was determined to marry Agnes and sent a further letter to his father, asking him if his financial support would continue should Lister and Agnes marry. Lister's father replied that Agnes not being in the Society of Friends would not affect his pecuniary arrangements and offered his son extra money to buy furniture and suggested that Syme would offer a dowry and that he would negotiate with Syme directly on it. His father suggested that Lister voluntarily resign from the Society of Friends. Lister made up his mind and subsequently left the Quakers to become a Protestant, later joining the congregation of the Saint Paul's Episcopal Church in Jeffrey Street, Edinburgh. In August 1855, Lister became engaged to Agnes Syme and on 23 April 1856 married her in the drawing room of Millbank, Syme's house in Morningside. Agnes's sister stated that this was out of consideration of any Quaker relations. Only the Syme family were present. The Scottish physician and family friend John Brown toasted the couple after the reception.\nThe couple spent a month at Upton and the Lake District, followed by a three-month tour of the leading medical institutes in France, Germany, Switzerland, and Italy. They returned in October 1856. By this time, Agnes was enamoured with medical research and became Lister's partner in the laboratory for the rest of her life. When they returned to Edinburgh, the couple moved into a rented house at 11 Rutland Street in Edinburgh. The house was situated over three floors with a study on the first floor, that was converted into a consulting room for patients and a room with hot and cold taps on the second floor that became his laboratory. The Scottish surgeon Watson Cheyne, who was almost a surrogate son to Lister, stated after his death that Agnes had entered into her work wholeheartedly, had been his only secretary, and that they discussed his work \"on an almost equal footing\".\nLister's books are full of Agnes' careful handwriting. Agnes would take dictation from Lister for\nhours at a stretch. Spaces would be left blank amongst the reams of Agnes' handwriting for small diagrams, that Lister would create using the camera lucida technique and Agnes would later paste in.\nAssistant surgeoncy.\nOn 13 October 1856, he was unanimously elected to the position of Assistant Surgeoncy at Edinburgh Royal Infirmary.\nContributions to physiology and pathology 1853\u20131859.\nBetween 1853 and 1859 in Edinburgh, Lister conducted a series of physiological and pathological experiments. His approach was rigorous and meticulous in both measurement and description. Lister was clearly aware of the latest advances in physiological research in France, Germany, and other European countries and maintained an ongoing discussion of his observations and results with other leading physicians in his peer group including Swiss physiologist Albert von K\u00f6lliker, German physiologists Wilhelm von Wittich, Theodor Schwann, and German pathologist Rudolf Virchow and ensured he correctly cited their work.\nLister's primary instrument of research was his microscope and his primary research subjects were frogs. Before his honeymoon, the couple had visited his uncle's house in Kinross. Lister took his microscope and captured several frogs, intending to use them in the study of inflammation, but they escaped. When he returned from his honeymoon, he used frogs captured from Duddingston Loch in his experiments. Lister carried out his experiments in his laboratory and in the veterinary college abattoir, on animals that were either dead or chloroformed and \"pithed\", to deprive it of sensation. He also used bats, sheep, cats, rabbits, oxen and horses in his experiments. Lister's tirelessness in his pursuit of knowledge was illustrated by his assistant Thomas Annandale, who stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I confess that on more than one occasion our patience was a little tried by the long hours were thus engaged, and more particularly when the dinner hour was many hours overdue, but no one could work with Mr. Lister without imbibing some of his enthusiasm.\nThese experiments resulted in the publication of eleven papers between 1857 and 1859. They included the study of the nervous control of arteries, the earliest stages of inflammation, the early stages of coagulation, the structure of nerve fibres, and the study of the nervous control of the gut with reference to sympathetic nerves. He continued these experiments for three years until he was appointed to a position at the University of Glasgow.\n1855: Beginning of inflammation research.\nIn a letter dated 16 September 1855, Lister recorded the beginnings of his research into inflammation, six weeks before his lectures were to begin. Later in life, Lister stated that he considered his research into inflammation to have been an \"essential preliminary\" to his conception of the antiseptic principle and insisted that these early findings be included in any memorial volume of his work. In 1905, when he was seventy-eight years old, he wrote,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If my works are read when I am gone, these will be the ones most highly thought of.\nInflammation is defined by four symptoms, heat, redness, swelling and pain. Surgeons prior to Lister saw it as the signal for the arrival of suppuration or putrefaction, local or general infection. As the germ theory of disease had not yet been discovered, the concept of infection did not yet exist. However, Lister knew that slowing of the blood through the capillaries seemed to precede inflammation. Joseph Jackson Lister had written a paper with Thomas Hodgkin that described how blood cells behaved prior to a clot, i.e. specifically how the concave cells fitted themselves together into stacks. Lister knew that to observe the next step, it was important that the tissue remain alive so the blood vessels could be observed through the microscope.\nIn September 1855, Lister's first experiment was on the artery of a frog viewed under his microscope, subjected to a water droplet of differing temperatures, to determine the early stage of inflammation. He initially applied a water droplet at which caused the artery to contract for a second and the flow to cease, then dilate as the area turned red and the flow of blood increased. He progressively increased the temperature to . The blood slowed down and then coagulated. He continued the experiment on the wing of a chloroformed bat to widen his research focus. Lister concluded that the contraction of the vessels led to the exclusion of blood cells from the capillaries, not their arrest, and that blood serum continued to flow. This was his first independent discovery.\nThe experiments ceased between October 1855 and continued in September 1856 when the couple moved into Rutland Square. Lister started with mustard as an irritant, then Croton oil, acetic acid, oil of Cantharidin and chloroform and many others. These experiments led to the production of three papers. His first paper grew out of the need to prepare for these extramural lectures and had begun the year before, continuing in development for six weeks after he moved into Rutland Street. The early paper, titled: \"On the early stages of inflammation as observed in the Foot of a Frog\" was read to the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh on 5 December 1856. The last third was read out extempore.\n1856 Beginning of coagulation research.\nLister also conducted research into the process of coagulation during this period. He had observed inflammation in certain cases of septicaemia that affected the blood vessel's lining, and led to intravascular blood clotting, which led to putrefaction and secondary haemorrhage. A simple experiment in December 1856 described by Agnes, where he pricked his own finger to observe the process of coagulation. led to five physiology papers on coagulation between 1858 and 1863.\nSeveral competing theories explained the occurrence of a blood clot, and although the theories were largely abandoned, it was still thought that blood contained a liquifying agent, i.e. fibrin held in a solution of ammonia that became known as the \"Ammonia theory\".\nIn 1824, Charles Scudamore had proposed carbonic acid as the solution. The prevailing theory was from Benjamin Ward Richardson, who won the 1857 Astley Cooper triennial prize for an essay where he postulated that blood remained liquid due to the presence of ammonia. In the same year, Ernst Wilhelm von Br\u00fccke proposed that the vital actions of the vessels inhibited the blood's natural tendency to coagulate.\n1856 On the minute structure of involuntary muscle fibre.\nLister's third paper, published in 1858 in the same journal and read before the Royal Society of Edinburgh on 1 December 1856, concerned the histology and function of the minute structures of involuntary muscle fibres. The experiment, conducted in the autumn of 1856, was designed to confirm K\u00f6lliker's observations on the structure of individual muscle fibres. K\u00f6lliker's description had been criticised, as he had used needles to separate the tissue to observe individual cells, and his critics said that he had observed artefacts from the experiment rather than real muscle cells. Lister proved conclusively that the muscle fibres of blood vessels, described by Lister as slightly flattened and elongated, were similar to those found by K\u00f6lliker in pig intestine, but wrapped spirally and individually around the innermost membrane. He stated that the variations in shape, from long tubular bodies with pointed ends and elongated nuclei to short \"spindles\" with squat nuclei, represented different phases of muscular contraction. During the \"Huxley Lecture\" he stated in retrospect, that he could not imagine a more efficient mechanism to constrict these vessels.\n1857 On the flow of the lacteal fluid in the mesentery of the mouse.\nHis next paper was a short report based on observations that he had made in 1853. This first experiment, as opposed to purely microscope work, determined the nature of the flow of chyle in the lymphatics and whether the lacteals in the gastrointestinal wall could absorb solid granules from the lumen. For the first experiment, a mouse fed beforehand on bread and milk was chloroformed and then had its abdomen opened and a length of intestine placed on glass under a microscope. Lister repeated the experiment several times and each time saw mesenteric lymph flowing in a steady stream, without visible contractions of the lacteals. For the second experiment, Lister dyed some bread with indigo dye and fed it to a mouse, with the result that no indigo particles were ever seen in the chyle. Lister delivered the paper to the 27th meeting of the British Medical Association, held in Dublin 26 August to 2 September 1857. The paper was formally published in 1858 in the \"Quarterly Journal of Microscopical Science\".\nSeven papers on the origin and mechanism of inflammation.\nIn 1858, Lister published seven papers on physiological experiments he conducted on the origin and mechanism of inflammation. Two of these papers were research into the neural control by the nervous system of blood vessels, \"An Inquiry Regarding the Parts of the Nervous System Which Regulate the Contractions of the Arteries\" and \"On the Cutaneous Pigmentary System of the Frog\", while the third and the principal paper in the series was titled: \"On the Early Stages of Inflammation\", which extended the research of Wharton Jones. The three papers were read to the Royal Society of London on 18 June 1857. They had originally been written as one paper and had been sent to Sharpey, John Goodsir and the English pathologist James Paget for review. However, Paget and Goodsir both recommended that it be published as three separate papers.\n1858 Nervous System Regulatation of the Contractions of the Arteries.\nDuring 1856, Lister has been thinking about the nervous control of blood vessels and had been studying the work of various French researchers who were examining the denervation of the sympathetic nerves. Lister thought that how blood vessels behaved when irritated was important to understand the inflammatory process.\nThe experiments on vasomotor control began in the autumn of 1856 and continued until the autumn of the next year. In total, Lister conducted 13 experiments, some of which were repeated to verify the results of other experiments in the series. He used a microscope fitted with an ocular micrometer, a recent invention, to measure the diameter of blood vessels in a common frogs web. In a before and after experiment, he ablated parts of the central nervous system and also before and after, split the sciatic nerve. Lister concluded that blood vessel tone was controlled from the medulla oblongata and the spinal cord. This refuted Wharton's conclusions, in his paper \"Observations on the State of the Blood and the Blood-Vessels in Inflammation.\" who was not able to confirm that the control of blood vessels of the hind legs was dependent upon spinal centres. In June 1858 he published his research \"An Inquiry Regarding the Parts of the Nervous System Which Regulate the Contractions of the Arteries\" in the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society.\nIn October 1857, the referee for \"Philosophical Transactions\" John Goodsir wrote to Sharpey who warned Lister that the experimental conclusions were similar to findings by the German physiologist Eduard Friedrich Wilhelm Pfl\u00fcger. This was to enable Lister to print an acknowledgement. Pfl\u00fcger found that vasomotor control was through nerve fibres connected to the spinal canal which were similar to Lister research showing vaso-motor fibres came from the spinal canal through the sciatic plexus. Although their approaches were similar, Lister used denervation and discovered that even after parts of the spinal cord were removed, the arterioles eventually recovered their contractility.\nThese experiments settled a contemporary dispute between physiologists concerning the origin of the influence exercised over blood vessel diameter (calibre) by the sympathetic nervous system. The dispute began when Albrecht von Haller formulated a new theory known as \"Sensibility and Irritability\" in his 1752 thesis \"De partibus corporis humani sensibilibus et irritabilibus\". The dispute had been debated since the middle of the 18th century. Haller put forward the view that contractability was a power inherent in the tissues which possessed it, and was a fundamental fact of physiology. It concerned the property of \"irratability\", the supposed automatic response of muscular tissue, especially visceral tissue, to external stimulus, that caused them to contract when stimulated. Even as late as 1853, highly respected textbooks, for example William Benjamin Carpenter \"Principles of Human Physiology\" stated the doctrine of 'irritability' was a fact beyond dispute, and this was still considered contentious when John Hughes Bennett created the \"Physiology\" article for the 8th edition of Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica in 1859.\n1858 On the Cutaneous Pigmentary System of the Frog.\nThe second part of the original paper was an experiment into the nature and behaviour of pigment. It had been known for some years that the skin of frogs is capable of varying in colour under different circumstances. The first account of this mechanism was described by Ernst Wilhelm von Br\u00fccke of Vienna in 1832 and later investigated further by Wilhelm von Wittich in 1854 and Emile Harless in 1947.\nLister had noted that the beginning of inflammation was always accompanied by a change of colour in the frog's web. He determined that the pigments consisted of \"very minute pigment-granules\" contained in a network of stellate cells, the branches of which, subdividing minutely and anastomosing freely with one another and with those of neighbouring cells, constitute a delicate network in the substance of the true skin. It had been supposed that the concentration and diffusion of the pigment depended upon the contraction and extension of the branches of the star-shaped cells in which it was contained; and that only these movements of the cells were under the influence of the nervous system. At the time, there was no cell theory of matter nor were there any dyes or fixatives that could used to enhance experimental discovery. Indeed, Lister wrote of this, stating \"The extreme delicacy of the cell wall makes it very difficult to trace it among the surrounding tissue\". Lister observed that it was the pigment granules themselves and not the cells that moved, and that this movement was not merely brought about by the control of the nervous system, but perhaps by the direct action of irritants on the tissues themselves. He believed that the pigment reflected the activity of blood vessels, though it was the slowing of blood flow that initiated the process of inflammation.\n1858 On the early stages of inflammation.\nThe focal study was the longest paper of the three and the last to be published. Like many of his colleagues, Lister was aware that inflammation was the first stage of many postoperative conditions and that excessive inflammation often preceded the onset of a septic condition. Once that happened, the patient would develop a fever. Lister had come to the conclusion that accurate knowledge of the functioning of inflammation could not be obtained by researching the more advanced stages, which were subject to secondary processes. He therefore started in quite a different way from that of almost all his predecessors by directing his enquiry to the very first deviations from health, hoping to find in them \"the essential character of the morbid state most unequivocally stamped\". Essentially, Lister performed these experiments to discover the causes of erythrocyte adhesiveness. As well as experimenting on frogs' web and bats wing, Lister used blood that he had obtained from the end of his own finger that was inflamed and compared it against blood from one of his other fingers. He discovered that after something irritating had been applied to living tissues which did not kill them outright, firstly the blood vessels contracted and their lumen became very small; the part became pale. Secondly, the vessels after an interval, dilated and the part became red. Thirdly, some of the blood in the most injured blood vessels slowed down in its flow and coagulated. Redness occurred which, being solid, could not be pressed away. Lastly, the fluid of the blood passed through the vessel walls and formed a \"blister\" about the seat of injury. He found that each tiny artery was surrounded by a muscle, which enables it to contract and dilate. He found further that this contraction and dilation was not an individual act on its part, but was an act dictated to it by the nervous cells in the spinal cord.\nThe paper was divided into four sections:\n This section deals with the aggregation of the cells of the blood, which occurs during the process of clotting. It shows that when blood is removed from the body this aggregation depends on their possessing a certain degree of mutual adhesiveness, which is much greater in the white blood cells than in the red blood cells. This property, though apparently not depending upon vitality, is capable of remarkable variations, in consequence of very slight chemical changes in the blood plasma.\n This section shows that the arteries regulate, by their contractility, the amount of blood transmitted in a given time through the capillaries, but that neither full dilatation, extreme contraction, nor any intermediate state of the arteries, is capable per se of producing accumulation of blood cells in the capillaries.\nThis section details how the effects are two-fold\n* firstly, a dilatation of the arteries (commonly preceded by a brief period of contraction), which is developed through the nervous system and is not confined to the part brought into actual contact with the irritant, but implicates a surrounding area of greater or less extent; and\n* secondly, an alteration in the tissues upon which the irritant directly acts, which makes them influence the blood in the same manner as does ordinary solid matter. This imparts adhesiveness to both the red and the white blood cells, making them prone to stick to one another and to the walls of the vessels, and so gives rise, if the damage to the tissues be severe, to stagnation of the blood flow and ultimately to obstruction.\n The fourth section describes the effects of irritants upon the tissues. It proves that those which destroy the tissues when they act powerfully, produce by their gentler action only a condition bordering on loss of vitality, i.e. a condition in which the tissues are incapacitated, but from which they may recover, provided the irritation has not been too severe or protracted.\nLister's paper was able to show that capillary action is governed by the constriction and dilation of the arteries. The action is affected by trauma, irritation or reflex action through the central nervous system. He noticed that although the capillary walls lack muscle fibres, they are very elastic and are subject to significant capacity variations that are influenced by arterial blood flow into the circulatory system. Drawings made with a camera lucida were used to depict the experimental reactions. They displayed vascular stasis and congestion in the early stages of the body's reaction to damage. According to Lister, vascular alterations that were initially brought on by reflexes occurring within the nervous system were followed by changes that were brought on by local tissue damage. In the conclusions of the paper, Lister linked his experimental observations to physical clinical conditions, for example skin damage resulting from boiling water and trauma occurring after a surgical incision.\nAfter the paper was read to the Royal Society in June 1857, it was very well received and his name became known outside Edinburgh.\nSpontaneous Gangrene from Arteritis.\nLister's first paper \"On a Case of Spontaneous Gangrene from arteritis, and on the Causes of Coagulation of the Blood in Diseases of the Blood-Vessels\" is an account of a case of spontaneous gangrene in a child. The paper on coagulation was read before the Medico-Chirugical Society of Edinburgh on 18 March 1858. In an account written by Agnes, she states that there was no one at the medical school meeting who was capable of appreciating it, and the remarks made upon it were very poor. There were suggestions for improvement which Lister threw out. There was lots of cheering, proclaiming it a great success. The paper was written up at 7pm, with Lister dictating and Agnes writing it during a 50-minute session, followed by the exposition to the society at George Street hall at 8pm.\nLister first used the amputated legs from sheep and discovered that blood remained liquid in the blood vessels for up to six days and still underwent coagulation, albeit more slowly when the vessel was opened. He also noticed that if vessels remained fresh, the blood would remain fluid. In later experiments he moved to cats. He tried to emulate an inflamed blood vessel by exposing the jugular vein of the animal and applying irritants then constricting and opening the flow, to measure the effect. He noticed that in the damaged vessel the blood would coagulate He eventually came to the conclusion that if there was ammonia in the blood, it was much less important than the condition of the vessel in stopping coagulation. He tested his hypothesis on three cadavers by examining the condition of various veins and arteries and found he was correct. He also concluded that the Ammonia theory did not apply to vessels in the body, but it could apply to blood outside the body. While that was incorrect, his other conclusions were accurate. Specifically that inflammation in the blood vessel lining, results in coagulation occurring. Lister realised that vascular occlusion increased the pressure through the network of small vessels, leading to the formation of \"liquor sanguinis\" that lead to further localised damaged perfusion. Certainly, Lister had no knowledge of the coagulation cascade but his experiments contributed to the current understanding of clotting, the final product of coagulation.\nLister continued experimenting in April, examining vessels and blood from a horse. This resulted in another communication to the society on 7 April. His work in coagulation continued until the end of the year. Lister's second article on coagulation was published in August 1858, and was one of two case histories he published in the Edinburgh Medical Journal in 1858. Titled: \"Case of Ligature of the Brachial Artery, Illustrating the Persistent Vitality of the Tissues\". The history described saving a patient's arm from being amputated which had been constricted by a tourniquet for thirty hours. The second history was titled \"Example of mixed Aortic Aneurysm\" and published in December 1858.\n1858 Functions of the visceral nerves.\nLister continual interest in the nervous control of blood vessels led him to conduct a series of experiments during June and July 1858, where he researched the nervous control of the gut. The research was published in the form of three letters sent to Sharpey. The first two letters were sent on 28 June and 7 July 1858 The last letter was published as the \"Preliminary Account of an Inquiry into the Functions of the Visceral Nerves, with special reference to the so-called Inhibitory System.\".\nHe had been studying the work of Claude Bernard, LJ Budge and Augustus Waller and had become interested in what was known as \"sympathetic action\", where inflammation appeared in a different area from the source of irritation. This led him to study Pfl\u00fcger's 1857 paper titled \"About the inhibitory nervous system for the peristaltic movements of the intestines\", proposed that the splanchnic nerves instead of exciting the intestine muscle layer that they are connected to, inhibit their movement. The German physiologist Eduard Weber made the same claim. Pfl\u00fcger had named these inhibitory nerves \"Hemmungs-Nervensystem\", a name that Syme, at Lister's request thought they should be translated as \"inhibitory nervous system\". Lister dismissed Pfl\u00fcger's idea of inhibitory nerves as not only implausible but not supported by observation, as a mild stimulus caused increased muscle activity which changed to a decreased muscle activity as the incoming stimulus became stronger. Lister believed that it was questionable whether the motions of the heart or the intestines are ever checked by the spinal system, except for very brief periods.\nLister conducted a series of experiments using mechanical irritation and galvanism to stimulate the nerves and spinal cord in rabbits and frogs. He considered rabbits as ideal experimental subjects due to their active gut movement. To ensure their gut reflexes were not impaired, the rabbits were not anaesthetised. Lister conducted three experiments. In the first experiment, an incision was made in the rabbit's side and a section of intestine was pulled through the skin. Lister then connected a magnetic coil battery to the splanchnic nerves in the spinal cord. When the current was applied, the gut completely relaxed but when the current was applied locally, a small localised contraction occurred that did not spread to the bowel. Lister stated that \"this observation is of fundamental importance, since it proves that the inhibitory influence does not operate directly upon the muscular tissue, but upon the nervous apparatus by which its contractions are, under ordinary circumstances, elicited\". In the second experiment, Lister examined the reaction in a section of the bowel, when he restricted the blood supply by tying the vessels and found that there was an increase in peristalsis. When he applied current the gut relaxed. He concluded that activity in the gut was under the control of bowel wall nerves and had been stimulated due to loss of blood. In the third experiment, he removed the nerves from a section of the bowel while ensuring to maintain a good blood supply. This time, stimulation of the section had no effect except when the section would spontaneously contract.\nDuring the histological study of the bowel wall, Lister discovered a plexus of neurons the myenteric plexus, that confirmed the observations made by Georg Meissner in 1857.\nLister concluded, \"...it appears that the intestines possess an intrinsic ganglionic apparatus which is in all cases essential to the peristaltic movements, and, while capable of independent action, is liable to be stimulated or checked by other parts of the nervous system\".\nAlthough Lister did not believe in the inhibitory system, he did conclude that extrinsic nerves controlled the intestinal motor function indirectly through their effect on the plexus. It was not until 1964 that this was proven by Karl\u2010Axel Norberg.\nNotice of further researches on the coagulation of the blood.\nLister's third paper on coagulation was a short article in the form of a communication consisting of five pages that were read before the Medico-Chirugical Society of Edinburgh on 16 November 1859. In the paper, Lister found that the coagulation of blood was not solely dependent on the presence of ammonia, but may also be influenced by other factors. In a demonstration before the society, Lister had a sample of horse's blood that had been shed twenty-nine hours earlier and added acetic acid to it. The blood remained fluid despite being acidified, but it eventually coagulated after being left to stand for 15 minutes. Lister demonstrated that the Ammonia theory was incorrect as the coagulation of the blood was not dependent on the presence of ammonia. He concluded that other factors may influence blood coagulation in addition to or instead of ammonia, and that the Ammonia theory was fallacious.\nGlasgow appointment.\nOn 1 August 1859, Lister wrote to his father to inform him of the ill-health of James Adair Lawrie, Regius Professor of Surgery at the University of Glasgow, believing he was close to death. The anatomist Allen Thomson had written to Syme to inform him of Lawrie's condition and that it was his opinion that Lister was the most suitable person for the position. Lister stated that Syme believed he should become a candidate for the position. He went on to discuss the merits of the post; a higher salary, being able to undertake more surgery and being able to create a bigger private practice. Lawrie died on 23 November 1859. In the following month, Lister received a private communication, although baseless, that confirmed he had received the appointment. However, it was clear the matter was not settled when a letter appeared in the Glasgow Herald on 18 January 1860 that discussed a rumour that the decision had been handed over to the Lord Advocate and officials in Edinburgh. The letter annoyed the members of the governing body of Glasgow University, the Senatus Academicus. The matter was referred to the Vice-Chancellor Thomas Barclay who tipped the decision in favour of Lister. On 28 January 1860, Lister's appointment was confirmed.\nGlasgow 1860\u20131869.\nUniversity life.\nTo be formally inducted into the academic staff, Lister had to deliver a Latin oration before the senatus academicus. In a letter to his father, he described how surprised he was when a letter arrived from Allen Thomson informing him that the thesis had to be presented the next day on 9 March. Lister unable to start the paper until 2 am that night, had only prepared around two-thirds of it, when he arrived in Glasgow. The rest was written at Thomson's house. In the letter, he described the dread he felt being admitted into the room prior to presenting the oration. After the thesis was read and Lister was inducted to the senate, he signed a statement not to act contrary to the wishes of the Church of Scotland. While the contents of his thesis have been lost, the title is known, \"De Arte Chirurgica Recte Erudienda\" (\"On the proper way of teaching the art of surgery\").\nIn early May 1860, the couple made the journey to Glasgow to move into their new house at 17 Woodside Place, at the time on the western edge of the city. In 1860, university life in Glasgow was lived in the grimy quadrangles of the small college on Glasgow High Street, a mile east of the city centre next to Glasgow Royal Infirmary (GRI) and the Cathedral and surrounded by the most squalid part of the old medieval city. The Scottish poet and novelist Andrew Lang wrote of his student days at the college, that while Coleridge could smell 75 different stenches during his student days in Cologne, Lang counted more. The city was so polluted the grass did not grow.\nThe position of Professor of Surgery at Glasgow was peculiar, as it did not carry with it an appointment as surgeon to the Royal Infirmary, as the university was separate from the hospital. The allotment of surgical wards to the care of the Professor of Surgery depended upon the goodwill of the directors of the infirmary. His predecessor Lawrie never held any hospital appointments at all. Having no patients to care for, Lister immediately began a summer lecture course. He discovered that college classrooms were considered too small and had low ceilings for the number of students, which made them unpleasant to be in when filled to overcrowding. Before his first lecture, the couple cleaned and painted the dingy lecture room assigned to them, at their own expense. He inherited a large class of students from his predecessor that grew rapidly.\nAfter his first session, he wrote favourably of Glasgow:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The facilities I have here for prosecuting this course as compared to the difficulties I laboured under in Edinburgh are quite delightful \u2013 museums, abundant material and a good library all at my disposal and my colleague Allen Thompson co-operating in the kindest and most valuable manner\nIn August 1860, Lister was visited by his parents, who took a \"saloon\" carriage on the Great Northern Railway. In September 1860, Marcus Beck came to live with the Listers and their two servants, while he studied medicine at the university. In the closing weeks of the summer, the Listers with Beck, Lucy Syme and Ramsay went on a short holiday to Balloch, Loch Lomond. While the group was visiting Tarbet, Argyll, the men rowed across the loch and ascended Ben Lomond.\nElection to surgeoncy.\nIn August 1860, Lister had been rejected for a post at the Royal Infirmary by David Smith, a shoemaker who was the chairman of the hospital board. When Lister put his case to Smith explaining the need for anatomical demonstrations so the students could understand the practice of surgery, Smith stated his belief that \"the infirmary was a curative institution, not an educational one\". The rejection both annoyed and surprised Lister as he had been promised by Thomson that the position was assured. Indeed, he had informed his father of the fact that the post was guaranteed in his letter to his father.\nIn November 1860, the winter lecture course began. In total 182 students registered for the lectures and according to Godlee it was likely the \"largest class of systematic surgery in Great Britain, if not in Europe\". The class consisting of mostly 4th year students with some 3rd and 2nd year students, was so enthused, that they decided to make Lister the Honorary President of their Medical Society. When the time approached for the election to the surgeoncy in 1861, 161 students signed a petition on parchment supporting his claim for election. Lister was not elected until 5 August 1861, in what was described by Beck as a \"troublesome canvas\". Lister was put in charge of wards XXIV (24) and XXV (25) in October 1861. It was not until November 1861 that he performed his first public operation. Soon after Lister arrived at the GRI, a new surgical block was built and it was here that he conducted many of his trials of antisepsis.\nHolmes System of Surgery.\nBetween the end of his winter lecture course and his appointment, Lister's correspondence contained little of scientific interest. A letter to his father dated 2 August 1861 explained why. He had halted his experiments on coagulation to work on two chapters, \"Amputation\" and \"On \u00c6sthetics\" (On anaesthetics) for the medical reference work \"System of Surgery\" by Timothy Holmes, published in four volumes in 1862. Chloroform was Lister's preferred anaesthetic. He wrote three papers for Holmes in 1861, 1870 and 1882. The science of anaesthesia was in its infancy when Lister first recommended chloroform to Syme in 1855, and he continued to use it until the 1880s. His sister Isabella Sophie first described it to him in 1848 when she had a tooth pulled. He had also used it without complications on three patients with tumours of the jaw in 1854. He classed it along with alcohol and opium as a \"specific irritant\" in \"On the early stages of imflammation\". Lister preferred it to ether, as it was safer to use in artificial light, protected the heart and blood vessels, and, Lister believed, gave the patient \"mental tranquility\" as it was the safest. In the 1871 edition, he reported that there had been no deaths in the Edinburgh or Glasgow infirmaries from chloroform, between 1861 and 1870. Lister described how his assistant applied the chloroform onto a simple handkerchief used as a mask and watched the patient's breathing. In 1870 however Lister updated the chapter to state that he felt apprehension about using chloroform on the \"aged and infirm\". In the same edition he recommended nitrous oxide for tooth extraction and the use of ether to avoid vomiting after abdominal surgery. In the winter of 1873, the English medical journals reported that sulphuric ether should be used instead but Watson Cheyne stated there had been no deaths from chloroform during the winter of 1873. In 1880, the British Medical Association recommended the synthetic gas ethidene dichloride for clinical trials. On 14 November 1881, Paul Bert published the dose-response curve of chloroform but Lister believed that smaller doses were sufficient to anaesthetise the patient. Starting in April 1882, Lister first conducted clinical research using ether and from July to November, lab experiments on chaffinches and then on himself and Agnes, to determine the correct dose. The 1882 chapter continued to recommend chloroform.\nThe chapter on amputation was much more technical than the anaesthesia chapter, for example describing the ways of cutting the skin to produce flaps to close over the wound. In the first edition, Lister examined the history of amputation from Hippocrates to Thomas Pridgin Teale, William Hey, Fran\u00e7ois Chopart, Nikolay Pirogov and Dominique Jean Larrey and the discovery of the tourniquet by Etienne Morel. In the first edition, Lister devoted seven pages to dressings, but by the third edition used only a single sentence to recommend a dry dressing as opposed to the more common water dressing.\nBy the third edition, Lister focused on describing three innovative surgical techniques. The first was a method for amputation through the thigh that he developed between 1858 and 1860, a modification of Henry Douglas Carden's technique for knee amputation. The thigh amputation went through the femoral condyles in a circular fashion with a small posterior flap that enabled a neat scar. The second technique was an aortic tourniquet for controlling blood flow in the abdominal aorta. The vessels of the aorta were too tough to close properly and ligatures either damaged the artery walls or caused premature death if left in too long. The third technique was a method of bloodless operation that he created in 1863\u20131864 by elevating a limb and quickly applying an india rubber tourniquet to stop limb circulation. It became unnecessary with the use of the Esmarch bandage. In 1859, he advocated for the use of silver wire sutures that had been invented by J. Marion Sims, but their use fell out of favour with the introduction of antiseptics.\nCroonian Lecture.\nOn 1 January 1863, Lister returned to the topic of coagulation with the Croonian Lecture titled \"On the coagulation of the blood\", although it contained little that was new. The lecture, given in London at the invitation of the Royal Society and the Royal College of Physicians, began by reconfirming the fallacious nature of the ammonia theory, instead proposing that shed blood coagulates when the solid and fluid elements of the blood meet. His experiments had confirmed that blood plasma (liquor sanguinis) alone does not coagulate, but does when in contact with red blood cells. Lister suggested that living tissues possessed similar properties in relation to blood coagulation. He mentioned the presence of coagulable fluid in the interstices of cellular tissue and described instances of oedema liquid coagulating after emission, possibly due to a slight admixture of red blood cells. Lister highlighted the tendency of inflamed tissues to induce coagulation in their vicinity, suggesting that inflamed tissues temporarily lose their vital properties and behave like ordinary solids, leading to coagulation. He provided examples of inflamed arteries and veins exhibiting coagulation on their interior, like artificially deprived vessels. Lister then noted that inflamed tissues induce coagulation and oedema effusions remain liquid. He hypothesised that the accumulated red blood cells increased pressure in inflamed capillaries and contributed to the loss of healthy condition in capillary walls, leading to coagulation. In closing, Lister said his previous microscopic investigation published in the \"Philosophical Transactions\", supported the view that tissues could be temporarily deprived of vital power by irritants. He proposed that inflammatory congestion arose from the adhesiveness of red blood cells to irritated tissues, like their behaviour outside the body when encountering ordinary solids. In finishing the lecture, Lister said he was satisfied that his previous conclusions on the nature of inflammation were independently confirmed through his research into blood coagulation.\nOn excision of the wrist for caries.\nLister's most original work that he undertook during 1863 and the beginning of 1864 was the development of a surgical technique for the excision of caries from the wrist, i.e., the removal of diseased bone due to tuberculosis. The procedure consisted of removing the ends of the bones entering into an articulation instead of amputating the whole limb, and was considered a recent development in \"conservative surgery\". Several surgeons had attempted the procedure. It was first performed by German surgeons Johann von Dietz in 1839 and Johann Ferdinand Heyfelder in 1849, followed by British surgeon William Fergusson in 1851. While the development of techniques for excision of the elbow was largely successful, similar success for the excision of the wrist was elusive, so amputation was still considered the most appropriate treatment even in 1860. Lister developed a complicated technique that removed the tissue where the disease was likely to occur but preserved the structures used to move the fingers and wrist. The technique was adopted by the profession and the only complaint from surgeons was the length of the operation at 90 minutes. Lister waited almost a year before publishing the paper in March 1865 in The Lancet. The paper presented 15 case histories. In summary, ten people were cured, two had hopes of achieving a cure, two died of causes independent of the operation and Lister considered one operation unsatisfactory, a failure rate of 13%.\nEdinburgh position.\nProfessor of Systematic Surgery in Edinburgh James Miller died in June 1864. The Edinburgh chair, considered the most prestigious within the Scottish medical community, came with an annual stipend of \u00a3700-\u00a3800 per year. Syme and his friends suggested that Lister should apply as his candidature was all but assured. A number of reasons have been advanced for why Lister applied. In a letter to his father, he said that he saw Glasgow as a stepping stone. There were a multitude of reasons to either stay or go. He was drawn to research, his friends were there, and he found the routine tasks in Glasgow to be \"working in a corner\". There was also the fact that his tenure only lasted 10 years. Testimonials from Christison, Paget, Buchanan and Syme followed the application. By the end of June, Lister was convinced the position was his. However, the chair went with James Spence instead. Lister was disappointed and in social settings tended to solipsism in conversation, but by October his father, in a letter said that it was, \"very gratifying to learn thy complete reconcilement to remaining at Glasgow\".\nBefore he received the disappointing news, Lister had been called back to Upton as his mother Isabella was on her deathbed. She died on 3 September 1864. His father now lived alone at Upton as the only daughter left at home had married in 1858. Communication with his children became of paramount importance to Joseph Jackson and he started to send Lister a letter every week, stating in October \"The thought that thou wilt look for letters from thee weekly, and the letters when they come, are alike gratifying to thy poor father.\"\nOn 1 November, Lister began the winter lecture course, divided in two: common tissue and organ conditions, and conditions of physiology. His first lectures were on blood, then nerves, then detailed special nerves which explained the process of inflammation. In introducing the subject, he stated that any injury that did not cause death would result in inflammation with the familiar symptoms of redness, swelling and pain. These symptoms indicated \"inflammatory congestion\", the suspension of vital energy, beginning with red corpuscles adhering together, which was caused by fibrin, which itself was caused by two substances in the blood, one in the blood cells and one in liquor sanguis (plasma). He described two types of inflammation, direct and indirect. He saw direct inflammation as caused by a noxious agent and indirect by \"sympathy\", an indication that his frame of reference was wholly inadequate. He then provided various examples and examined various types of inflammation such as acute, latent and chronic. The following lectures explained how to alleviate the symptoms of inflammation, by for example elevating a limb to enable blood flow, or reducing tension by draining an abscess. The remarkable aspect of Lister's theory of inflammation was that while the details of his observations were correct, his theoretical structure to explain his observations was completely wrong. Lister's error lay in his belief that inflammation was a \"unitary disease\", a single underlying disease, when in effect it was a range of conditions. The second division of the lectures focused on the heart, blood vessels, lymphatic system, bones, joints and nerves.\nOn 13 November 1864, Lister introduced a small instrument to remove foreign bodies from the ear, initially used to remove an iron bead from the ear of a little girl. In the same year, he improved on the technique for fixing Urethral stricture, a surgical procedure last improved upon by Syme. This was the first of three procedures to the improvement of strictures. \nLister and Agnes spent Christmas 1864 with Joseph Jackson at Upton. In January, Lister attended a quite unusual operation by Syme in Edinburgh in which a patient's tongue was removed. A month later, Lister received an interesting letter from Jackson on fees that indicated Lister's growing private practice that he began in 1861. His practice was unusual, as it was solely dedicated to surgery, during a period when operations either took place at the doctor's surgery or at the patient's home. In March 1865, Lister and his colleagues became involved in the case of the murderer Edward William Pritchard who was employed as a doctor in Glasgow. Prichard had broken his oath. In a letter to his father, Lister expressed his sincere hope that he would be hung.\nPasteur.\nAt the end of 1864 or during the spring of 1865 (sources vary) while walking home with Thomas Anderson, the chemistry professor at Glasgow and discussing putrefaction, Anderson drew Lister's attention to the latest research of the French chemist Louis Pasteur, who had discovered living things that caused fermentation and putrefaction. Lister had not been a wide reader of continental literature, but began reading the weekly journal \"Comptes rendus hebdomadaires\" of the French Academy of Sciences in the years 1860-1863 where Pasteur discussed fermentation and putrefaction.\nThe two papers that Anderson recommended to Lister were \"Sur les corpuscules organis\u00e9s qui existent dans l'atmosph\u00e8re, examen de la doctrine des g\u00e9n\u00e9rations spontan\u00e9es\" 1861 (On the organised particles that exist in the atmosphere, examination of the doctrine of spontaneous generations). In this paper, Pasteur disproved the theory of spontaneous generation by proving the hypothesis that life in boiled infusions arose from spores. He also proved that particles in the air could be cultivated; and that if they were introduced from the air into a sterile liquid, they would reappear and multiply in the liquid. The second paper was Pasteur's magnum opus, titled \"Examen du r\u00f4le attribu\u00e9 au gaz oxyg\u00e8ne atmosph\u00e9rique dans la destruction des mati\u00e8res animales et v\u00e9g\u00e9tales apr\u00e8s la mort\" 1863 (Examination of the role attributed to atmospheric oxygen gas in the destruction of animal and plant matter after death), published 29 June 1863. The paper concluded that fermentation, putrefaction and slow combustion destroyed organic matter and these were necessary processes for life to exist. Pasteur learned that slow combustion was related to the anaerobic conditions when microorganisms were present.\nSeveral other papers would directly influence Lister's work on microorganisms. The third paper was the \"M\u00e9moire sur la fermentation appel\u00e9e lactique (Extrait par l'auteur)\" (Memoir on the so-called lactic acid fermentation (Extracted by the author)), published in 1857,\ndescribed the discovery of the microbe responsible for fermentation in beer yeast. The fourth paper was the \"Memoire sur la Fermentation Alcoolique\" (Memoir on Alcoholic Fermentation), published in Annales de chimie et de physique in 1860. Pasteur described living microorganisms in yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, that were responsible for the effervescent change that led to fermentation. The last paper by Pasteur was the \"Animalcules infusoires vivant sans gaz oxyg\u00e8ne libre et d\u00e9terminant des fermentations\", (Animal Infusoria Living in the Absence of Free Oxygen and their fermentations) That paper,\npresented in 1861, was seminal in enabling Lister to understand the nature of sepsis, where the body's response to infections leads to injury of the tissue and organs. Pasteur's research led him to believe the ferment that produced Butyric acid was a microbe that lived in the absence of oxygen. The last paper that Lister found important was \"Recherches sur la putr\u00e9faction\" (Research on putrefaction) that concluded that \"...that putrefecation is determined by living ferments\".\nLister was not the only surgeon interested in Pasteur's research. Thomas Spencer Wells, surgeon to Queen Victoria, had emphasised the significance of Pasteur's work at a meeting of the British Medical Association in 1864, stating \"[By] applying the knowledge for which we are indebted to Pasteur of the presence in the atmosphere of organic germs ... it is easy to understand that some germs find their most appropriate nutriment in the secretions from wounds, or in pus, and that they so modify it as to convert it into a poison when absorbed\". However, Wells did not have an experiment to demonstrate germ theory and was unable to develop the techniques to put it into practice.\nDiscovery.\nThe serendipitous discovery of Pasteur's work at a time when he was struggling to control post-surgical infections provided a simple explanation for a problem he had long experienced. He was now convinced that infection and suppuration of wounds must be due to entry into the wound of minute living airborne creatures. He recognised that contamination was the vector for infection, realising from the first that the surgeon's hands, dressings and instruments would also be contaminated. However, Pasteur's work confirmed the view Lister had always expressed that contamination came from the air. Lister did not realise the vast and diverse amount of microbial life. As Lister's work at that time derived directly from Pasteur's, Lister probably thought that wound infection was due to a single organism. He had no concept, nor indeed did anybody else, of the vast number of types of germs. Reading the papers did spur him to determine how the hands, dressings and instruments he used could be rid of these ubiquitous organisms and how the wound could be cleared of them.\nPasteur suggested three methods to eliminate microorganisms: filtration, exposure to heat, or exposure to chemical solutions. Lister was particularly interested in the efficacy of filtration and repeated many of Pasteur's experiments in modified form for instruction in his class, but eventually excluded the first two techniques as not applicable for the treatment of wounds.\nLister confirmed Pasteur's conclusions with his own experiments and decided to use his findings to develop antiseptic techniques for wounds. In the early months of 1865, he began looking for the most convenient form of antiseptics that could prevent germs from entering the wound. The first of these he tried was Condy's Fluid, a common household disenfectant and a strong oxidising but the patient's limb began to suppurate. He went on to examine a huge range of compounds including Zinc chloride, Salicylic acid, Thymol, Iodine, Mercury cyanide and Zinc cyanide but none were suitable.\nCarbolic acid.\nIn 1834, Friedlieb Ferdinand Runge discovered the germicide phenol, then known as carbolic acid, which he derived in an impure form from coal tar. At that time, there was uncertainty as to the relationship of creosote \u2013 a chemical that had been used as a preservative on the wood used for railway sleeper and ships to protect the wood from rotting \u2013 and carbolic acid. Upon hearing that creosote had been used for treating sewage in Carlisle, Lister obtained a sample from Anderson. Known as \"German creosote\", it was a thick, smelly tarry substance.\nAntiseptic system 1865\u20131867.\nHistory.\nHospitalism.\nThe history of antiseptic surgery in the years before 1847, was preventing or treating infection in accidental wounds, often received in battle.\n1860's surgery and pathological theory.\nIn the 1860s, Lister's assumptions about surgery and theory of pathology were similar to those of his contemporaries.\nEarly experiments.\nIn early March 1865, Lister conducted his first experiment using the acid on a patient whose wrist was being excised due to caries. Although he carefully washed the wound, it became infected and the experiment was a failure.\nOn 21 March 1865, Lister began his second experiment with carbolic acid on a 22-year-old patient named Neil Kelly who had a severe compound fracture of the leg. His treatment consisted of cleaning the wound of all blood clots and then applying the undiluted carbolic acid by the use of forceps across the whole wound. A piece of lint impregnated in the acid was then laid on the leg, overlapping the wound and fixed by an adhesive plaster. A thin metal sheet made of tin or lead and sterilised by the acid was over the lint, to prevent the antiseptic from evaporating. This was fixed with adhesive plaster and packing was used between the limb and the splints to soak up blood or discharges. A crust formed that was not removed except to apply a new antiseptic. While the treatment possessed many of the essential characteristics of the antiseptic dressings that Lister would subsequently introduce, it failed and suppuration began to occur, leading to the death of the patient. Lister blamed himself and noted that the treatment \"..proved unsuccessful, in consequence, as I now believe, of improper management\".\nAntiseptic treatment and dressings.\nThe essential part of the wound treatment was not the application of strong carbolic acid to the wound, although that required careful management to ensure the wound was sterilised, but designing the dressing in such a manner to stop the ingress of airborne infection. This was often misunderstood, even when he was explaining the procedure to fellow doctors at Glasgow who were celebrating him as humanity's benefactor, and it caused him considerable irritation and unhappiness later in life. They were confused by the initial application of the acid and this led to the claim that Lister was advocating for the use of carbolic acid to prevent suppuration.\nThe disadvantages of the first primitive dressings of lint soaked in carbolic acid were soon apparent. The German creosote was also far from ideal, as it irritated the skin, causing ulceration and then suppuration that occasionally resulted in tissue necrosis. It was also almost insoluble in water. Lister began to look for another source of phenol. Lister discovered that Frederick Crace Calvert, an honorary chemistry professor from the Royal Manchester Institution was manufacturing small quantities of phenol at a much finer purity and managed to obtain some. The phenol was in the form of small white crystals which liquified at and were readily soluble in a ratio of 1:20 parts of water and to any extent soluble in oil. The watery solution could be used in a lotion of any strength and be used for disinfection of wounds while the solution in oil that served as a reservoir of antiseptic seemed likely to provide a suitable dressing. Lister began to experiment with the phenol and produced a new dressing made of a putty that consisted of carbonate of lime mixed with phenol mixed with boiled linseed oil in a ratio of 1:4 or 1:6.\nAfter two failures, Lister had no clear experimental design to test the efficacy of carbolic acid. At that point he decided to only experiment on patients with compound fractures, i.e. open wounds where the fractured bone breaks through the skin, leading to extensive loss of blood. In 1865, industrial accidents often led to the patient being thrown to the ground, leading to dirt entering the wound and a risk of deep infection. By the time the patient saw a surgeon several hours later, suppuration had invariably set in. In 1865, amputation was the standard treatment for compound fractures. Lister reasoned that he could experiment on the patient and if the treatment failed, perform the amputation to remove the limb and save the patient's life. He believed this experimental model was both ethically and medically ideal.\nJames Greenlees.\nOn 12 August 1865, Lister achieved success for the first time when he used the crude oily full-strength carbolic acid to disinfect a compound fracture. He applied a piece of lint dipped in carbolic acid solution onto the wound of an 11-year-old boy, James Greenlees, who sustained a compound fracture after a cart wheel passed over his left leg. After washing the wound with carbolic acid dissolved in linseed oil, he applied a dressing of putty mixed with the acid widely over the wound and placed a sheet of tin to cover the wound and protect it. The putty ensured that the acid did not wash out of the wound in blood or lymph fluid. He splinted the leg and bandaged it to hold the lot in place. After four days, he renewed the pad and discovered that no infection had developed. He again dressed it and left it for five days. When he removed the second dressing, he found the skin around the wound was burnt and applied a dressing of gauze soaked in a combination of 5% to 10% acid and olive oil for a further four days. He then applied a water dressing to the wound until it completely healed. After slightly over six weeks, Lister discovered that the boy's bones had fused back together without suppuration. Confident that carbolic acid was the antiseptic that he had been looking for, Lister treated patient after patient at the Royal Infimary in the following months, improving both the wound dressing design and the operating treatment.\nDuring the summer, the Listers never strayed far from Glasgow as he was still monitoring Greenlees. In the same month, he treated two ulcers. Both sores were washed with an acid in oil solution and one was covered with an oiled paper coated with spirit varnish and the second with gutta-percha covered with a water dressing. In both cases the dressing failed and he swapped them for a water dressing covered with cotton. On 11 September 1865, Lister treated the second patient with the acid, Patrick F., a labourer with a compound fracture of the thigh. After the thigh was splinted, the small wound was dressed using lint dipped in carbolic acid and covered in oil paper. After 16 days, the patient had an excellent prognosis. On 22 September, the Listers decided to take a short holiday to Upton and the patient was left with his house surgeon, John Macfee. However, the treatment failed and the limb was amputated after gangrene developed in the wound. When he wrote up his seminal paper, Lister considered the wound size too small to have effectively tested the efficacy of the acid, but he was happy with the outcome. At Christmas 1865, the Lister joined the Symes in Edinburgh. It was eight months before Lister treated another compound fracture. On 22 January 1866 he treated John Austin, a shipwreck survivor with a wound in the leg that had developed into an ulcer. He washed the wound in 20:1 oil-to-acid solution and dressed it with a lint bandage dipped in the solution covered with plaster of paris.\nImproved dressing.\nOn 19 May 1866, the first patient to use the improved method presented at Lister's accident ward with a compound fracture with extensive swelling and bruising. The patient was John Hainy, a 21-year-old casting moulder in an iron foundry, who had been supervising a crane when a chain broke and a metal box, containing a sand mould weighing 12 hundredweight or , fell from a height of four feet and landed obliquely on his left leg. Both leg bones were broken and a wound measuring had bled profusely into the muscles and tissue of the leg. A secondary complication had occurred when air bubbles had mixed with the blood when the man was moved to the hospital. The normal treatment would have been amputation, but Lister decided to treat the wound with phenol. He squeezed the leg to remove as much air and blood as possible, then placed a piece of lint soaked in carbolic acid on the wound and covered it with tin foil. A bloody crust formed over the wound, consisting of a scab free of bacteria. Lister saw for the first time how the scab was gradually converted into living tissue, even when new carbolic acid was being applied - something entirely new. Unfortunately Hainy developed bed sores that became gangrenous. These were treated with nitric acid to remove the necrotic flesh and carbolic acid to sterilise the wounds. Hainy survived the injury. On 27 May, Lister wrote to his father expressing intense satisfaction, stating \"I tried the application of carbolic acid to the wound, to prevent decomposition of the blood and to prevent the fearful mischief of suppuration. It is now eight days since the accident and patient has been going exactly as though the fracture were a simple one.\" Two weeks later another letter followed, reporting \"The great swelling has almost entirely subsided, and the limb is becoming firm\". On 11 June, he wrote a further letter to his father where he describes compound fractures as \"no longer a case of uncertainty\" and his decision to publish the results. On 7 August 1866, Hainy was released from hospital.\nAbscess treatment.\nOn 7 November 1866, Lister began using his technique on abscesses, when he successfully treated 12-year old millworker Mary Phillips. On 17 March 1867, he treated a 5-year-old boy who had a disease of the spine that had developed a large abscess between the umbilicus to the middle of the thigh. Known as psoas abscesses, they were often as result of complication from tuberculosis, where pus collects in the muscles within the abdominable cavity. They tended to grow very large but the relationship between underlying infection in the bone caused by the tuberculosis and the abscess was not understood. The treatment he developed consisted of draining the abscess, placing a piece of lint soaked with carbolic acid in the incision and applying a dressing consisting of layer of the putty then covered with tinfoil. The dressing was changed daily with the lint left in place. Eventually the lint was removed after several days, leaving a scar. In a letter to his father he stated \"...cases of abscess treated in this way is so beautifully in harmony with the theory of the whole subject of suppuration, and besides the treatment is now rendered so simple and easy for any one to put in practice, that it really charms me\".\nMedical discourse.\nDuring his life, Lister never wrote any books and was exhausted by the process of writing. He considered the meaning of each individual word, which would have meant writing a book both extremely time-consuming and a burden. An example of Lister's poor communication was placing the reason for his antiseptic treatment at the end of the first antiseptic paper, instead of in the first paper. Foremost amongst his biographers to examine Lister's writing skills was Joseph Fisher, who pointed to his flatness of expression and his inability to state the obvious, i.e. that he was seeking to prevent putrefaction. Fisher wondered if it was simple \"stylistic ham-handedness\", a statement examined by Connor and Connor in 2008. Lister used the Greek word \"antiseptic\" to describe his new technique. This 1752 term was widely known in the medical community and meant cleaning the wound of dead flesh with an antiseptic fluid. Lister's use resulted in confusion for his readers and slowed the adoption of the new technique. In 2000, medical historian Michael Worboys stated that his surgical contemporaries reported that \"translating his words into action\" was difficult. Connor and Connor analysed Lister's public and private written and spoken communication to determine if this was true. They concluded that Lister was not bad at writing and this was seen in his private letters to his father, describing the textual content as \"clear, concise, informative and concrete\". Although Lister understood the need to remain neutral and objective in his public communication, he struggled to find a suitable ethos that would clearly convey his ideas and that resulted in his writing sounding awkward and unnatural. Sir Charles Scott Sherrington attributed Lister's \"sobriety of expression\" and \"self-restrained statements\" to his Quaker faith.\nCrowther and Dupree writing on Lister's student cohort in 2007 described some of his essays as \"turgid\".\nPerformance perspectives.\nIn 2013, Worboys revisited Lister's writing, by examing it from three different performance perspectives- antiseptic, surgery and professional. Lister published work in antiseptics was written in two ways. First, Lister used case histories to illustrate the principles and practice of his clinical studies. He published a total of 47 case histories between 1867 and 1877. Occasionally he would publish statistics in a before and after scenario to show how antiseptic treatment benefited a patient but believed that case histories were more instructive. Secondly, he used programmatic statements that described the evolution and benefits of his germ theory. These were plans that described how a particular antiseptic technique should be applied, for example the 1 in 20 carbolic solution, or how to prepare dressings.\nElaboration of the antiseptic treatment (1866-1869).\nIn July 1866, while he continued to treat compound fracture cases, he applied for a vacant surgeoncy position at the University College London. It was an attractive position as it came with guaranteed post at University College Hospital. He approached Lord Henry Brougham to prepare a testimonial that included a short description of the antiseptic system, which was the first formal description of his work. However, he lost the election. Lister was confident in achieveing the position. In a letter to his father on 6 August 1866 he described \"The disappointment was at first extremely severe : more so than I had expected\". The position went to John Marshall who had been an assistant surgeon for some 18 years.\n\"On a new method of treating compound fracture, abscess\".\nIn early 1867, Lister began writing the compound fracture case histories of his experiments with carbolic acid in a series of papers, the first to describe his new technique of antiseptics. Titled \"On a New Method of treating Compound Fracture, Abscess, Etc., with Observations on the Conditions of Suppuration\". the paper was published in \"The Lancet\" in five instalments with the first appearing on 10 March 1867. and the last part on abscesses added in July 1867. The paper was divided into a main section dealing with compound fractures, and a short note on the treatment of abscesses.\nLister's theory of inflammation provided the conceptual structure of the article. He stated that the inflammation that appeared immediately after an injury was both necessary and dangerous. It was a precursor to healing, but the fluids which flowed into the wound were akin to dead tissue. Inflammation could trigger putrefaction. Lister described tissues healing by granulation, which he believed was the likely outcome in wounds in compound fractures. Lister believed that cells of granulated tissue were remarkably active and that since they were alive, they were immune to putrefaction and also to secondary inflammation, as they lacked sensory nerves. Airborne putrefaction, \"a danger that was underrated\", was proven by the scabs which appeared to protect small wounds as they healed. Lister then explained how often it appeared in less than 24 hours and had an associated smell. He described the source of putrefaction and how the \"raw surface\" of the wound could putrify before the granulations formed or the liquids on the surface of the granulations putrified. The liquids were extremely acrid and acted on the sensory nerves to initiate indirect inflammation and fever. This led to increased cell turnover and cellular death, increasing the quantity of putrescent material in the wound. Sloughs were produced that resulted in suppuration.\nIn the next section, Lister made his most famous declaration, namely that the decomposition of organic tissue was not caused by the gaseous components in the atmosphere but \"minute particles suspended in [the air], which are the germs of various low forms of life, long since revealed by the microscope, and regarded as merely accidental concomitants of putrescence\" and had been identified by Pasteur as the \"essential cause\" of putrefaction. His idea of germs during this period were not the same as the germs described in later germ theory. This is clearly attributed by his use of the phrasing \"..living organism's \"developed\" from germs\". He described germs as working in the same manner as yeast converts sugar to alcohol. They were scavengers who lived on dead tissue, not parasites on living tissue but as highly adaptable agents whose pathogenic properties depended on where they came from. Like many surgeons of the age, Lister believed that fever was a product of local miasma. In that respect, Lister's paper is open to many interpretations, but in the context of wounds, he believed that living tissue could resist germs. He never made the distinction as to whether germs were living beings for example in erysipelas, that entered the body or were a chemical agent.\nIn the rest of the paper, Lister described using carbolic acid, and how the acid formed a dense crust protecting the wound from the ingress of germs. He then described the detailed case histories of 11 patients. Healing by granulation occurred in all cases except 7,10, and 11, which did not suppurate. Cases 1 and 9 did suppurate. Lister did not regard pus as significant, as it was not associated with inflammation or change in putrefaction. In essence, he had \"attained healing by granulation without inflammation\" in compound fracture cases. He believed that the elimination of suppuration was not a desirable therapeutic outcome, as a small amount of suppuration on a healthy granulation was not a cause for alarm.\nCarcinoma of the breast.\nIn July 1867, Lister discovered that his sister Isabella Pim had breast cancer. Pim had visited Paget and Syme to seek treatment but had such an extensive carcinoma that both surgeons advised against operating. Lister made the difficult decision to perform a radical mastectomy. He consulted Syme in Edinburgh and rehearsed the operation on a dead body. The recovery went smoothly and although there was some suppuration in the wound, Lister's use of antiseptics prevented putrefaction. The next day he wrote to his father, \"I may say the operation was done at least as well as if she was not my sister. But I do not wish to do such a thing again.\" Pim lived for another three years before dying of liver metastasis on 9 August 1870.\nThe Protective.\nLister continued to refine the dressing and perfect the antiseptic treatment on several other compound fracture and patients with abscesses. He would often spend long nights experimenting in his home laboratory. He searched for a germicidal material that could be placed between the wound and the air with the wound protected from the germicidal layer. It would serve to protect the wound from the irritating effects of the acid and stop the ingress of microbes but enable bodily secretions to escape. He initially looked at using caoutchouc but the material allowed the acid to pass right through. He found block tin to be too rigid and tinfoil soon wore away. Gold leaf was found to be too fragile. Lister also looked at very thin toughened glass but it couldn't be obtained. He eventually settled on the use of oiled silk sold under the \"Green oiled silk protective\" brand. The silk surface was painted with one part dextrin, two parts of powdered starch and 16 parts of watery acid in a 20-1 water-acid solution, to ensure a thorough wetting. The sterile silk dressing was an effective barrier between the acid and the tissue. He described the new treatment as \"An antiseptic to exclude putrefaction with a protective to exclude the atmosphere will by their joint action, keep the wound from abnormal stimulus\".\nIn April 1868, Lister described how the protective was used. The protective, a germicidal layer was laid on the wound. On top of the protective was up to eight layers of gauze that overlapped the protective layer. On top of the gauze was the impermeable layer, the block tin to stop the discharges leaking from the wound, followed by another layer of gauze.\nAntiseptic principle of the practice of surgery.\nWithin a few days of the publishing of the last part of the previous paper, Syme asked Lister to attend the British Medical Association meeting in Dublin on 9 August 1867. Lister had some difficulty preparing a new paper, the seminal \"On the Antiseptic Principle in the Practice of Surgery-*\" Lister's second paper on antiseptic surgery. It was later published in the British Medical Journal (BMJ) on 21 September 1867.\nLister claimed that based on experiments on inflammation, the essential cause of suppuration in wounds was decomposition. Several aspects of this claim need to be examined. Firstly, it was specific to wounds, as Lister had other views about suppuration elsewhere on the body. Secondly, he stipulated that decomposition was the \"essential\" cause of suppuration, i.e. not the only cause. Thirdly, decomposition was the cause of pus in wounds. Lister's pronouncement is best described as that he had discovered that the only important cause of suppuration in inflamed wounds is decomposition. Lister was specifically referring to the pathology of pus formation in inflamed tissue, the essential cause of harm in the practice of surgery. His appeal to the reader, in essence, to surgical consensus, was: \"To prevent the occurrence of suppuration, with all its attendant risks, was an object manifestly desirable\", and refers to the surgeon's dread of pus appearing in an inflamed wound. Lister then made the wholly inaccurate statement that \"...oxygen, which was universally regarded as the agent by which putrefaction was effected\" compared to other sources. Lister introduced the work of Pasteur, claiming that decomposition might be avoided by using a dressing that could destroy the minute organisms in the wound. Lister decided to formulate his new surgical technique into a general principle. He termed it the \"antiseptic principle\", thus linking its nomenclature to carbolic acid. His principle was \"that all the local inflammatory mischief and general febrile disturbance which follow severe injuries are due to the irritation, and the reason for this was the carbolic acid induced suppuration but prevented decomposition, which was contrary to normal surgical treatment that saw suppuration as an indication that something was wrong, in Lister's case essentially that the antiseptic treatment had failed.[325] influence of decomposing blood or sloughs.\" He was stating a \"great principle\" \u2013 not that decomposition was the cause of disease in wounds, but that it was the only cause.\nThe paper instructed surgeons to continue treatment even when suppuration appeared. The reason for this was the carbolic acid-induced suppuration but prevented decomposition, which was contrary to normal surgical treatment, which saw suppuration as an indication that something was wrong, in Lister's case essentially that the antiseptic treatment had failed. He noted that he felt it necessary to affirm on \"pathological principles\" that granulation tissue had no inherent tendency to form pus but only did so when \"subjected to a preternatural tendency\". He explained that carbolic acid and decomposing substances were similar, i.e., both caused suppuration by a chemical process but carbolic acid only acted on the surface of the tissue to which it was applied, but decomposition is a \"self-propagating and self-aggravating poison\". Decomposing tissue was a breeding ground for more decomposition that led to putrefaction in the tissue surrounding it.\nLister argued that the pus formed by carbolic acid was acceptable as long as it was not accompanied by inflammation. In this respect, Lister's approach to normal or abnormal healing by granulation was the same as the average surgeon of the period: that healthy healing did not occur when inflammation was present.\nLister paid particular attention to putrefaction. The last part of the paper stating that decomposing wounds were the cause of disease in hospitals, which was not an uncommon belief amongst the surgical community. He described how the two large wards where he offered treatment were the unhealthiest in Glasgow and how since the application of antiseptics, \"wounds and abscesses no longer poison the atmosphere with putrid exhalations\" and the wards completely changed their character. Not a single instance of pyaemia, hospital gangrene, or erysipelas had occurred in them since the new regime of antiseptics had begun. However, Lister did not explain how the \"putrid exhalations\" led to fever.\nIllustrations of the antiseptic system of treatment in surgery.\nOn 21 September 1867, Lister published a new paper, \"Illustrations of the Antiseptic System of Treatment in Surgery\", in \"The Lancet\", his third paper on antisepsis. This paper was supposed be the first in a new series with the next paper to be on wounds with simple incisions but it never appeared.\nThe paper summarised his earlier claims and added further observations on the nature of putrefaction. He stated that the \"character of the decomposition in a given fermentable substance is determined by the nature of the organism that develops in it\". He suggested that the cause of fermentation in food was yeasts and putrefaction was possibly caused by \"Vibrios\" (a type of bacteria). At the end of the paper, he stated that on the basis of his new antiseptic theory \"a really trustworthy treatment for compound fractures and other severe contused wounds has been established for the first time, so far as I am aware, in the history of surgery\".\nFirst reception of antisepsis (1867-1868).\nAlthough Lister was honoured in later life, his ideas about the transmission of infection and the use of antiseptics were widely criticised in his early career. On 24 August 1867, within a month of Lister's publishing his first paper on antiseptics, the editor of \"The Lancet\", Lister's nemesis James G. Wakley, wrote an editorial crediting Pasteur for Lister's research and invited physicians to investigate Lister's claims and report their findings to the journal.\nSimpson's attack.\nOn 21 September 1867, Scottish obstetrician James Young Simpson, professor of medicine and midwifery at Edinburgh University and discoverer of chloroform, published an editorial that attacked Lister in the \"Edinburgh Daily Review\", written under the pen name \"Chirurgicus\", a common practice to signal a personal attack. Simpson's motive was that he was trying to convince the medical community of the efficacy of his acupressure technique, which used needles to halt arterial haemorrhage, counter to Lister's use of ligatures. The editorial letter was the first of many and began a tit-for-tat argument in the press over months and eventually led to the acceptance of antisepsis.\nSimpson claimed that Lister's prior article had copied a continental practice and accused him of plagiarising the work of French doctor and pharmacist Jules Lemaire. Lemaire had described carbolic acid as a constituent of coal tar in 1860 in \"Saponinated coal tar\" and after a long series of investigations had followed up with an 1863 book,\n\"De l'acide ph\u00e9nique, de son action sur les v\u00e9g\u00e9taux, les animaux, les ferments, les venins, les virus, les miasmes et de ses applications \u00e0 l'industrie, \u00e0 l'hygi\u00e8ne, aux sciences anatomiques et \u00e0 la th\u00e9rapeutique\" (Carbolic acid, its action on plants, animals, ferments, venoms, viruses, miasmas and its applications to industry, hygiene, anatomical sciences and therapy) with the second edition in 1865, where he described the antiseptic power of carbolic acid. While Lemaire believed in the germ theory and realised the causes of putrefaction, he made no attempt to develop a process to exclude them from the wound.\nOn 5 October 1867, Lister gave a robust reply to Simpson in a letter \"On the Use of Carbolic Acid\" to \"The Lancet\", denying that he had heard of Lemaire's work and arguing that that work had made little impact on the medical profession. Lister went on to defend his work, stating:\n\"For my own part, I may say that, of all the gentlemen from Great Britain and both continents who have recently visited Glasgow, not one has ever expressed the slightest doubt that the system in question was entirely new; the novelty, I may remark, being, not the surgical use of carbolic acid (which I never claimed), but the methods of its employment with the view of protecting the reparatory processes from disturbance by external agency.\"\nHe unsuccessfully searched all the Glasgow libraries for Lemaires work before finally discovering a copy in the library of Edinburgh University. On 19 October, Lister wrote a follow-up letter to \"The Lancet\" and stated he did not claim to be the first physician to use carbolic acid and that he chose the acid due to its strength as an antiseptic. He also included a letter of support from a Carlisle medical student, Phillip Hair, who had studied in Paris. Hair stated he had seen no treatments there that were as effective as Lister's. Lister's response angered Simpson and two weeks later on 2 November 1867 he published a bitter reply: \"Carbolic acid and its compounds in surgery\" in, \"The Lancet\" under his own name. Simpson reiterated his previous claims about Lemaire's and others' prior use of the acid, mentioning James Spence, who had used the acid to wash amputations, but had abandoned its use. He cited a report by Sampson Gamgee who visited Paris and reported that surgeons were using a solution of 100:1 of water to acid, while Lister recommended 40:1. Simpson exposed his true motives when he compared his preferred technique of acupressure to Lister's use of ligatures. He used the work of William Pirrie, professor of surgery at Aberdeen University, who had used acupressure to stop pus formation during breast cancer operations, to illustrate his point, that there had been no deaths from pyaemia at the hospital, compared to the many deaths in Glasgow and Edinburgh. Simpson was acutely embarrassed when Pirrie replied a week later in \"The Lancet\" in a small article titled \"On the Use of Carbolic Acid in Burns\", recommending its use for burn injuries and believing it proved effective in other treatments. Lister replied with a short note on 9 November to ask the reader to: \"to judge for themselves how far the present attack admits of justification, promising to publish additional articles on his antiseptic technique\".\nIn December, two further letters were published in \"The Lancet\", the first by a young physician Arthur Hensman who credited Lister with an original technique that he considered of a practical use. The second later was more assertive declaring that Lister's technique was not described by the use of that acid but by way it was applied, affirming that the technique was important.\nFirst experimentalist.\nThe first experimentalist surgeon to question the validity of the airborne microorganisms hypothesis, i.e. the Lister germ theory, was professor of clinical medicine at Edinburgh University John Hughes Bennett. In a 17 January 1868 lecture for the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh Bennett advanced \"The Atmospheric Germ Theory\", agreeing with the theories of F\u00e9lix Archim\u00e8de Pouchet, professor of natural history at the University of Rouen, who believed in spontaneous generation of life. Bennett attacked Pasteur's experimental foundations of germ theory and called him a mere chemist. Bennett described his own theory of molecular degeneration to explain how microorganisms transformed old tissue into new tissue by the action of molecules. Bennett taught that molecules rather than cells were the foundational building blocks of tissue and that microorganisms could be spontaneously created from different combinations of molecules. In his view, each molecule had a specific function, i.e. certain molecules were destructive to tissue, while others constructed tissue.\nBennett believed that diseases developed from the physical properties of the air, such as its density or changes in temperature. Bennett believed that the germs that Pasteur captured could not be identified as organic organisms. The components of this dust were also found in minerals and they were either lint, debris from clothing, vegetable matter or pieces of seeds. Bennett particularly disagreed about temperature. Pasteur stated that germs died when heated to 30 degrees above boiling, and also from extreme cold. In the lecture, he referred to Pouchet's experiments duplicating Pasteur's, and refuted Pasteur's conclusions. Bennett did not realise that Pasteur had proved his theory by both isolating the germs and stopping them from reappearing. In his experiments, Bennett reported that he \"proved\" that germs generate spontaneously, so therefore one could never create a germ-free environment.\nIt was likely that Hughes Bennett never adequately sterilised his experimental apparatus correctly. On 8 November 1868, Lister gave a lecture on germ theory, where he elaborated on the origin of germs, as a rebuttal of Bennett's theory.\nReception abroad.\nThe earliest beneficiaries and users of Lister's techniques were his students and his staff. Syme was naturally the first peer of Lister to adopt antisepsis. The first international use of antiseptics was by Boston surgeon George Derby of Boston City Hospital on 21 September 1867 within days of arrival of \"The Lancet\". Derby successfully treated a 9 year old boy who had fallen from a tree, resulting in a compound fracture. Other North American surgeons began adopting the new technique including the Canadian surgeon Archibald Edward Malloch who had studied at Glasgow medical school and became Lister's house surgeon when Lister began using carbolic acid. In February 1969, Malloch by then in private practice in Hamilton, Ontario successfully treated a 7-month old baby that had developed an abscess due to septic arthritis in the right hip. Malloch had collaborated with Lister and understood the germ theory. He had demonstrated a series of fractures cases to Samuel D. Gross a prominent Philadelphia surgeon, who rejected the new technique. Indeed, most North American surgeons were loath to accept the principle, vividly illustrated by David Hayes Agnew who was still using outdated surgical techniques in 1881 when he treated President James Garfield who had been shot.\nThe widest acceptance of Lister's technique was in Germany. Leipzig surgeon Karl Thiersch of St. Jacob's Hospital began practicing the technique in 1867 and taught it to his students. His house surgeon Hermann Georg Joseph had visited Lister in Glasgow and then tested it on 16 patients with abscesses, with favourable results. Joseph wrote a report on his results, and presented it on 21 December 1967. Within 5 years, the antiseptic method was universally accepted in Germany. French surgeons were hestitant in accepting the theory, except for Paris surgeon Just Lucas-Championni\u00e8re of H\u00f4tel-Dieu who adopted the technique when he visited Lister in Glasgow as a medical student in 1868 and became the leading French pioneer of Listerism. In 1875, Lucas-Championni\u00e8re visited Lister a second time and then wrote the first French reference on antiseptics, \"Journal de M\u00e9decine et de chirurgie pratiques\".\nSterility experiment.\nIn October 1867, Lister repeated a modified form of Pasteur's experiment, originally devised by French chemist Chevreul, to support his germ theory and disprove the theory of spontaneous generation. Lister poured urine into four glass flasks, then washed the necks to remove any urine and modified three of them, extending and drawing their necks into a narrow tube bent at an acute angle. The fourth's neck was cut short and left vertical, but with a reduced diameter, smaller than the others' necks. The flasks were then boiled and when the heat was withdrawn, air was allowed to rush into the flask to replace the condensed steam. The flasks were then left undisturbed in the same room, the necks open to the air. Within four days a vegetative mould appeared in the fourth flask while the other three flasks remained clear. In November, he began using the flasks in his class. His dresser John Rudd Leeson described how Lister took the three flasks to London on their laps in a specially reserved first-class cabin, to ensure they survived the journey.\nThe catgut ligature (1867-1869).\nA practical problem in general surgery that Lister researched and developed was absorbable ligatures that were used to tie large vessels during amputation. It had been known for years that gunshot bullets, i.e. smooth metallic objects, could remain inside the body without causing suppuration but suppuration would occur in silk or thread ligatures, which resulted in the ends being left outside the body to enable the ligatures' removal. However, that method left an open path for germs to enter the body alongside the ligating material, and presented a risk of secondary hemorrhage when the ligatures were removed. By late 1867, he understood that ligatures were sources of irritation. Lister also noticed, while treating a patient with a compound fracture, how a piece of dead bone had become live bone again as new blood vessels suffused the fracture. He reasoned that it was possible to find a material that could be absorbed into the body, thereby reducing the ingress of germs. He initially took the standard silk thread and impregnated it with carbolic acid. On 12 December 1867, in the first of a series of experiments, Lister tested the new ligature by tying the carotid artery of a horse. When the horse died six weeks later (of natural causes) it was dissected, and he found dense fibrous tissue had grown over the ligature. But he noticed the silk was being absorbed rather slowly.\nOn 2 February 1868, in a letter to his father he reported using the new ligature on a private patient with a leg aneurysm. The patient recovered completely. On 5 February he expressed his profound excitement at the patient's recovery to his father. However, the lady died 10 months later of another aneurysm due to vascular disease. During the dissection, Lister found that most of the ligature had been absorbed but found a tiny blob of thick pus on the remaining piece, that led him to think an abscess could have formed. He began looking for another material and settled on catgut. On 31 December 1868, while staying at Upton for Christmas, Lister tested the new carbolised catgut on a calf, running the experiment in his father's museum. He again tied the carotid artery and after a month, the calf was dissected. Initially he thought the ligature was still in-situ, but on closer examination saw that living tissue was growing into the structure. In a letter to his father he described his findings :\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I know thee will be anxious to know what I have found in the calf's neck. Well, at first on dissecting down on the artery I was much disappointed to see that the ligatures were still there, as large as ever. But on attempting to isolate them from surrounding parts, I found them inseparably blended with the coats of the artery. And further examination confirmed the conclusion that the substance of the ligatures had been replaced by living tissue, differing in character altogether from that of the gut; being fibrous tissue in process of formation, not perfect tissue like that of the gut or peritoneum.\"\nHowever, the catgut preparation still wasn't suitable as he found it too slippery to use. He accidentally discovered that when a small amount of water was added to the acid and oil mixture, he found the catgut became both stronger and less slippery, rendering it suitable for regular use. He called this process \"Seasoning\" Now proven to work, it was sold in bottles of carbolised oil, a product that was in production for 10 years. It was also sold wound into an oil-tight silver box containing a winder that was kept alongside a bottle of the acid. He continued to refine his catgut ligatures his whole life. \nThe first person to use Lister's catgut was Edward Robert Bickersteth of Liverpool Royal Infirmary. A former student of Syme and follower of antiseptics, he wrote a letter to Syme on 20 April 1869, describing two successful operations, the first on the cartotid artery for aneurysm and the second on the external iliac artery. However there were failures. James Spence had used it to tie the Common carotid artery on a patient who had died. The postmorten found the catgut had changed into a gelatinous state. The surgeon who supplied it admitted incorrectly preparing it properly and was summarily sacked. Bickersteth showed by a simple experiment in \"The Lancet\" that the catgut should have retained its strength for much longer period. By 1870, Lister was using catgut in the Brachiocephalic artery, the largest artery it could be used on.\nWhile working on ligatures, Lister was continuing the development of an improved dressings. The \"cerate dressing\" consisted of 6 parts paraffin, 2 parts wax, 1 parts olive oil and 1/2 or 1/4 carbolic acid mixture on Calico On 8 March 1868, in a letter to his father, he described how his goal of a lighter dressing has been achieved: \"all the inconveniences of the putty are got rid of, along with superior efficiency for some situations, as the new paste can be applied to parts to which it was impossible to apply the putty satisfactorily\". However, the new dressing was too brittle for use. The next dressing Lister created was the \"lac-plaster\" that consisted of 4-parts shellac to 1-part acid coated onto calico. It was found to be too sticky, so Lister coated it with gutta-percha. In a letter to Malloch on 10 September 1868, he had changed the coating to red lead pigment (a poison) that was incorporated into the calico, which made it less sticky. When used, it could be washed in water to restore the original stickiness. \nAddress to the Royal Medico-Chirurgical Society.\nOn 17 April 1868, Lister gave an address to the University of Glasgow Medico-Chirurgical Society. He spoke at length about the atmospheric germ theory and used his flask experiment to illustrate the theory in an effort to disprove the spontaneous generation of life. He also introduced catgut ligature and described five case histories to support his theory. During the two hour talk he gave three prerequisites to ensure success. The first was a belief in the antispetic technique, the second was a belief in the germ theory of disease and the third was that the surgeon must have a dependable antiseptic on hand. \nThe address was the first time that Lister used the phrase \"The germ theory of putrefaction\" that both Lister and Cheyne would frequently use over the next decade. The most significant aspect of the address was that healing by organisation in a blood clot was preferable in complex wounds to first intention healing. Healing by organisation was not well understood during this period. Lister considered it similar to granulation healing that produced less scar tissue. In simple wounds he would bring the edges together and would seek first intention healing, in a manner similar other surgeons of the day. With complex wounds like compound fractures where the wound edges could not be brought together, he wanted a scab to form through healing by organisation. Treatment was simplified in that case and saved a drain being inserted to remove discharges. He tried to avoid a granulating sore forming which put the patient at greater risk. As his theory evolved on how clots healed, he began to consider granulation tissue as a product of \"abnormal stimulation\". He described it thus:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is only when they have been gradually changed under the influence of prolonged abnormal stimulation into that rudimentary form of tissue which, when we see it on the surface of a sore, we term granulations, that they are liable to produce, when still further stimulated, the still more rudimentary pus corpuscle.\nLister believed that antiseptics enabled the wound to heal without granulation.\nBeginning in the spring of 1868, Lister had several more visitors in Glasgow. These included Joseph Bell, a former student of Lister and William MacCormac. In June 1868 Marcus Beck visited Lister and was invited to attended lectures given by Lister on operative surgery. \nDuring this period Lister read several reports in \"'The Lancet\" on the successful use of his technique. One in July 1868 was from Pearson Robert Cresswell (1834-1905), chief surgeon to the Dowlais Ironworks in Merthyr Tydfil. Cresswell reported successfully treating a man who had been shot in the leg. He described the new technique as \"quite a revolution\". In August, the lecture series ended and the couple went on holiday to Ventnor on the Isle of Wight. On 5 September 1968, Wakley who was aware of the report, wondered why London hospitals hadn't adopted antiseptics and posted a sarcastic enquiry on : \"\"Are the conditions of suppuration different here from those in Glasgow or Dowlais? Or is it that the antiseptic treatment is not tried with that care without which Mr. Lister has always pointed out it does not succeed?\". Over the next several months Wakley published a series of brief reports from London surgeons. The first to report were St George's Hospital surgeons, who followed Lister's directions exactly on 26 cases of lacerations but only 7 healed correctly and none by first intention healing. They described how little they understood antiseptics. In November 1868, Thomas William Nunn of Middlesex Hospital had some initial success but other surgeons offered differing opinions to its efficacy of the technique and described the acid as one of several disenfectants that could be used to dress wounds. The surgeons at Guys and St Bartholomew's Hospital had a similar experience. On 5 December 1968, the prominent pathologist James Paget of St Bartholomew's Hospital reported that he found the acid \"useless\" but admitted he might have been applying the technique incorrectly. \nOn 3 April 1869, he published the results of his catgut experiments, \"Observations on Ligature of Arteries on the Antiseptic System\" in The Lancet that reported the experiment on the calf. The Lancet gave a glowing review on the paper. \nDefence of tradition.\nIn July 1869, at the annual conference of the BMA at Leeds, attended by both Simpson and Bennett, the English surgeon Thomas Nunneley mocked Lister's ideas on antisepsis and expressed disbelief in the germ-theory of wound infections. Nunneley was a well respected researcher and expert on erysipelas who proudly boasted during the surgical address that he had not permitted a single patient to be treated by carbolic acid during the three years that his colleagues had used it and achieved no better results that him. He labeled antiseptic treatment as both \"fashionable\" and \"in vogue\", based on \"unsupported fancies which have little other existence than what is found in the imagination of those who believe in them\".\nHowever it was his attack on Lister central premise of the germ theory that was so useful to Lister's detractors; that first intention healing occurred in wounds that were exposed to the air. In his conclusion he stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Suppuration, per se, is not an unhealthy action, nor is pus itself always an injurious substance; but when the process can be prevented by union by the first intention, so much the better for the patient; for, wherever pus or effused blood exist, there is more or less danger of their becoming decomposed, absorption taking place, and the system being poisoned by them... If freely exposed stumps heal up readily and well, it must be at once apparent that those which do so when most elaborately swathed in carbolised wrappings, do so rather in spite of, than as a consequence of, the treatment.\nOn 7 August 1869, Lister forwarded a letter to the British Medical Journal where he accused Nunneley of being dogmatic with an incomplete understanding of the antispectic principle. On 14 August, \"The Lancet\" editor published a letter to encourage Lister's supporters, \"Only experience can determine the actual value of carbolic acid; but Mr. Nunneley has fairly thrown down the gauntlet to those who advocated its use, and we trust that his challenge will not remain unanswered.\" On 24 August, Lister forwarded a letter he had received from Leeds surgeon Thomas Pridgin Teale, a colleague of Nunneley at Leeds, to correct him of a misassumption, by stating he was using antiseptic treatment. Lister added \"\"That he should dogmatically oppose a treatment which he so little understands; and which, by his own admission, he has never tried\". The BMJ intervened to advocate for an end to the dispute and focus on the scientific case, but blamed Nunnely for what they considered a smear campaign. Nunnely then found support in James Morton, a Glasgow surgeon and colleague of Lister's and Donald Campbell Black, Professor of Physiology at Anderson College. Blacks letter to the BMJ on 4 September 1969 poured scorn on Lister's use of carbolic acid, stating it was.. \"the latest toy of medical science so-called\" and referring to the whole thing as \"carbolic acid mania\". Both surgeons drew on the results of the work of Edinburgh surgeon Thomas Keith, an ovariotomy specialist, long considered a dangerous operation who supposedly never used antiseptics. However Kieth replied to the BMJ on 18 September that he had used some antiseptic dressings in his operations. On 9 October, Black repeated his views in \"The Lancet\" by calling the practice of using carbolic acid to sterilise instruments and the surgeons hands as \"...frivolous and unscientific\". He used statistics to validate his claims, stating there was no change in death rates from compound fracture cases between 1860 and 1868. Between 1867 and 1868 33% of amputees died, similar to the figures from 1860 to 1862. From then on, Lister was determined to use statistics to reveal the mortality rates associated with his treatment. Both Black and Morton failed to understand the principles underlying the antiseptic system.\nEdinburgh appointment.\nLister left Glasgow University in October 1869 and was succeeded by George Husband Baird MacLeod. Lister returned to Edinburgh as successor to Syme as professor of surgery at the University of Edinburgh and continued to develop improved methods of antisepsis and asepsis. Amongst those he worked with there, was the senior apothecary and later MD, Alexander Gunn.\nEdinburgh 1869\u20131877.\nWithin a month of Lister's Edinburgh appointment, his father who was 84 became seriously ill. He had been planning a visit to Upton the following week and had written a letter on 12 September, that unbeknownst to him, was his last letter to his father. When his father took a turn for the worse, he rushed south to spend the last few days with him. Joseph Jackson Lister died on 24 October 1869. \nIn October 1969, the Listers moved across to Edinburgh first staying at a furnished house at 7 Abercromby Place before moving to 9 Charlotte Square in the New Town, Edinburgh six months later.\nAddress.\nOn 8 November, Lister held his first lecture as professor, \"An introductory Lecture (On the Causation of Putrefaction and Fermentation)\".\nIn Edinburgh, his primary objectives were to perfect the design of his dressings, improve the reliability of antiseptics and apply his technique to an ever wider class of operations. He selected cases of the repair of bone deformities and rewiring of fractures where the union had malformed while healing.\nOn 1 January 1870, Lister published \"On the Effects of the Antiseptic System of Treatment upon the Salubrity of a Surgical Hospital\". After the death of his father, Lister's writing was no longer tempered by his advice resulting in the paper exhibiting a lack of tact, boastfulness and level of conceit not seen in his previous papers. He described how his wards had underwent a \"striking change\", \"converting them from some of the most unhealthy in the kingdom into models of healthiness\". Lister specifically blamed the hospital administrators for the increasing death rates and for not cleaning his wards correctly. Considered one of his most quoted papers, its purpose was to show if the antiseptic treatment was correctly applied, it would reduce the mortality rate after amputation in even the most unhealthy wards. He compared operative death rates for amputation over a 5 year period, between 1867 and 1869 to the two years between 1864 and 1866. The results showed that 16 of 35 patients died in the first period compared to 6 in 40 deaths for the second period, after the antiseptic treatment was introduced. The results spurred Wakely in \"The Lancet\" to call for the London surgeons to \"fairly and crucially\" test the antiseptic treatment.\nOn 14 February 1870 he published the lecture \"Remarks On A Case Of Compound Dislocation Of The Ankle With Other Injuries ; Illustrating The Antiseptic System Of Treatment\". \nLister's meticulous nature became ever more apparent in his casebooks for wards 4 and 5 at the infirmary.\nOn 14 January 1871, Lister published his first details of \"Gauze and Spray\" in the British Medical Journal.\nSprays.\nTherefore, Lister tested the results of spraying instruments, surgical incisions, and dressings with a solution of carbolic acid. Lister found that the solution swabbed on wounds remarkably reduced the incidence of gangrene.\nAgain, in 1873, the medical journal \"The Lancet\" warned the entire medical profession against his progressive ideas. However, Lister did have some supporters, including Marcus Beck, a consultant surgeon at University College Hospital, who not only practised Lister's antiseptic technique, but included it in the next edition of one of the main surgical textbooks of the time.\nLondon 1877\u20131900.\nOn 10 February 1877, the Scottish surgeon Sir William Fergusson, Chair of Systematic Surgery at King's College Hospital, died. On 18 February, in reply to a tentative approach from a representative of Kings College, Lister stated that he would be willing to accept the chair if he could radically reform the teaching there. There was no doubt that Lister's mission was both evangelical and apostolic and this was his true purpose in moving to London.\nBritish surgeon John Wood, who originally next in line, was elected to the chair. Wood was hostile to Lister obtaining the chair. On 8 March 1877, in a private letter to an associate, Lister contrasted their differing teaching methods and stated in no uncertain terms his opinion of Fergusson, \"The mere fact of Fergusson having held the clinical chair is surely a matter of no great moment\". In a comment to another colleague, Lister stated that his goal in taking the appointment was \"the thorough working of the antiseptic system with a view to its diffusion in the Metropolis\". At a memorial held by his students to persuade him to remain, Lister criticised London teaching. His impromptu speech was heard by a reporter who ensured that it was published in the London and Edinburgh newspapers. This jeopardised Lister's position, as word reached the governing council at King's College, who awarded the chair to John Wood a few weeks later.\nHowever, negotiations were renewed in May and he was finally elected on 18 June 1877 to a newly created Chair of Clinical Surgery. The second Clinical Surgery Chair was created specifically for Lister because the hospital feared the negative publicity that would have resulted had Lister not been elected. Lister remained at King's College Hospital for sixteen years before retiring in 1893 following the death of his wife.\nMoving to Regents Park.\nOn 11 September 1877, Joseph and Aggie moved to London and found a house at 12 Park Crescent in Regent's Park. Lister began teaching on 1 October. The hospital made attendance at Lister's lectures mandatory\nfor all students. Attendance was small, compared to the four hundred students who regularly attended his classes in Edinburgh. Lister's conditions of employment were met, but he was only provided with 24 beds, instead of the 60 beds that he was used to in Edinburgh. Lister stipulated that he should be able to bring from Edinburgh four people who would constitute the core of his new staff at the hospital. These were Watson Cheyne who became his assistant surgeon, John Stewart, an anatomical artist and senior assistant, and W. H. Dobie and James Altham Lister's dressers (surgical assistants who dressed wounds). There was considerable friction at Lister's first lecture, both from students who heckled him and staff. Even the nurses were hostile. This was clearly illustrated in October 1877 when a patient, Lizzie Thomas, who travelled from the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary to be treated for a Psoas abscess, was not admitted due to not having the correct paperwork. Lister could hardly believe that such a lack of sympathy from imperious nurses could exist. More so, such a state of mind was a real danger to his patients, because his system depended on loyal staff to carry out the preparations for antiseptic surgery.\nIntroductory address.\nOn 1 October 1877, Lister held the customary introductory address. His inaugural lecture in London concerned \"The nature of fermentation\". Lister described the fermentation of milk and explained how putrefaction was caused by fermentation of blood and tried to prove that all fermentation was due to microorganisms. To demonstrate, he used a series of test tubes containing milk, loosely covered with glass caps. Although air had entered the test tubes and the milk had not decomposed, demonstrating that air was responsible for fermentation. The experiment had two conclusions, first that unboiled milk had no tendency to ferment and secondly that an organism that Lister had isolated, Bacterium lactis was the cause of lactic acid fermentation.\nThe address was badly received. In defence, John Stewart described it as: \"a brilliant and most hopeful beginning of what we regarded as a campaign in the enemy's country... There seemed to be a colossal apathy, an inconceivable indifference to the light which, to our minds, shone so brightly, a monstrous inertia to the force of new ideas.\"\nWiring of fractured patellas.\nIn October 1877, Lister performed an operation on a patient, Francis Smith, that was not considered life-threatening. The open operation on a fractured patella, in front of 200 students, involved wiring the two fragments together and was likely the first time a healthy knee-joint was ever opened.\nIn October 1883, St Clair Thomson gathered together and examined Lister's first seven knee surgery patients at the Medical Society of London meeting.\nHe also developed a method of repairing kneecaps with metal wire and improved mastectomy technique. He also became known for being the first surgeon to use catgut ligatures, sutures and rubber drains, and developed an aortic tourniquet. He introduced a diluted spray of carbolic acid combined for surgical use. However he abandoned carbolic acid sprays in the late 1890s after he saw that they provided no beneficial change in the outcomes of the surgeries. The only reported reactions were minor symptoms that did not affect the surgical outcome as a whole, like coughing, irritation of the eye, and minor tissue damage among his patients who were exposed to the carbolic acid sprays during the surgery.\nReception abroad (1870\u20131876).\nIn 1869, Mathias Saxtorph from the University of Copenhagen visited Lister in Glasgow to adopt his methods. In July 1870, Saxtorph recognised Lister's technique as being effective in a letter to Lister where he stated:\nThe Frederick Hospital, to which I am head surgeon is a very old building and I have 150 patients in the surgical wards. Foremerly, there used to be every year several cases of death from pyaemia, sometime, arising from the most trivial injuries. Now, I have had the satisfaction that not a single case of pyaemia has occurred since I came home last year, which result is certainly owing to the introduction of your antiseptic treatment.\nGermany.\nThe first use of Lister's method in Germany was by Karl Thiersch in Leipzig in 1867. Thiersch practised Lister's approach since its introduction and never published his results, but did teach it to his students. His house surgeon Hermann Georg Joseph tested it on 16 patients with abscesses, with favourable results. Joseph wrote a thesis on his results, proving the value of the Lister method, and presented in Leipzig the following year. In January 1870, Heinrich Adolf von Bardeleben presented a paper to the Berlin Medical Society that described the results but provided no statistical evaluation of them.\nThe adoption of Listerism on the European continent halted during the Franco-Prussian War, but it became the greatest opportunity to advance Lister's ideas. At the start of the war, Lister had written a pamphlet known as \"A Method of Antiseptic Treatment Applicable To Wounded Soldiers in the Present War\" that described a simplified technique of antiseptic that could be used on the battlefield and military hospital. The pamphlet was immediately translated into German, but never made a material difference.\nBy far the most important advocate for Lister's antiseptic system in Germany was surgeon and osteotomy specialist Richard von Volkmann, who taught at the University of Halle. In August 1870, he became surgeon-general during the Franco-Prussian War and was responsible for 12 army hospitals and 1442 beds. When he returned to his own hospital in the winter of 1871, he found large numbers of patients with infectious diseases throughout the ward. He wrote of the experience:\nThe mortality after large amputations and complicated fractures grew year by year. In the summer of 1871, during my absence on the battlefield, the clinic was crowded by a large amount of injured. For eight months, in the winter of 1871 to 1872, the numbers of blood poisoning and rose disease victims were so great, that I considered applying for a temporary closure of the facility. Without a morgue, the dead stayed in the cellar beneath the wards\nIn 1872, Volkmann sent his assistant Max Schede to visit Lister at his clinic, to learn his new techniques. Once Schede returned in the autumn of 1872, Volkmann began to use Lister's new techniques. On 16 February 1873, in a letter to Theodor Billroth, Volkmann wrote:\nsince autumn of last year (1872), I have been experimenting with Lister's method... Already, the first trials in the old 'contaminated' house, show wounds healing, uneventful, without fever and pus.\nIn April 1874, Volkmann presented a lecture titled: \"About antiseptic occlusive bandages and their influence on the healing process of wounds\" where he detailed the influence of Lister. The lecture became famous in Germany, to such an extent that Lister's antiseptics were established in Germany, faster than in any other developed country. At the German Congress of Surgery, the members were so enthused with the results of Lister's work, that they invited him to visit Germany and see first-hand the results of his work. Lister decided to accept the invitation to a continental tour.\nIn the spring of 1875, Lister along with Agnes, his sister-in-law and two nieces left Edinburgh. The group spent several weeks in a tour that began in Cannes in France, visited several cities in Italy and finished with a four-day visit to Venice. The first place in Germany that Lister visited was the \"Allgemeines Krankenhaus\" (general hospital) in Munich, which was run by Nussbaum. A celebratory dinner was held in Munich for Lister, with seventy guests. Lister received his most glorious reception in Leipzig, where Karl Thiersch held a banquet for three to four hundred guests. Lister then visited Volkmann in Halle before visiting Berlin, where the group was entertained by Heinrich Adolf von Bardeleben, who worked at the Charit\u00e9 hospital and was one of the earliest adopters of antiseptics.\nLater life.\nIn December 1892, Lister attended a celebration of the 70th birthday of Pasteur at the Sorbonne in Paris, The theatre, designed to hold 2500 people, was crowded and included the university governing staff, ministers of state, ambassadors, the President of France Sadi Carnot and representatives from the Institut de France. Lister, invited to give the address, received a great ovation when he stood up. He spoke of the debt that he and surgery owed to Pasteur. In a scene captured later by Jean-Andr\u00e9 Rixens, Pasteur strode forward and kissed Lister on both cheeks. In January 1896, Lister was present when Pasteur's body was laid in his tomb at the Pasteur Institute.\nIn 1893, four days into a spring holiday in Rapallo, Agnes Lister died from acute pneumonia. While still responsible for the wards at Kings College Hospital, Lister's private practice ceased along with an appetite for experimental work. He severely curtailed social gatherings, studying and writing lost appeal for him, and he sank into religious melancholy. Lister retired from Kings College Hospital in 1893. Lister was presented with a portrait painted by Scottish artist John Henry Lorimer, in a small presentation, held in recognition of the affection and esteem that felt by his colleagues.\nDespite suffering a stroke, he still came into the public light from time to time. He had for several years been a Surgeon Extraordinary to Queen Victoria, and from March 1900 was appointed the Serjeant Surgeon to the Queen, thus becoming the senior surgeon in the Medical Household of the Royal Household of the sovereign. After her death the following year, he was re-appointed as such to her successor, King Edward VII.\nOn 24 June 1902, with a 10-day history of appendicitis with a distinct mass on the right lower quadrant, Edward was operated on by Sir Frederick Treves two days before his scheduled coronation. Like all internal surgery at the time, the appendectomy needed by the King still posed an extremely high risk of death by post-operational infection, and surgeons did not dare operate without consulting Britain's leading surgical authority. Lister obligingly advised them in the latest antiseptic surgical methods (which they followed to the letter), and the King survived, later telling Lister, \"I know that if it had not been for you and your work, I wouldn't be sitting here today.\"\nIn 1908, Lister left London to live in the coastal village of Walmer at Park House.\nDeath.\nLord Lister died on 10 February 1912 at his country home at the age of 84. The first part of Lister's funeral was a large public service held at Westminster Abbey, which took place at 1.30 pm on 16 February 1912. His body was moved from his house and taken to the Chapel of St. Faith and a wreath of orchids and lilies was placed by the German ambassador Count Paul Wolff Metternich on behalf of the German Emperor Wilhelm II. Before the start of the service, Frederick Bridge played the music of Henry Purcell, the \"funeral march\" by Chopin and Beethoven's \"Tres Aequili\". The body was then placed on a high catafalque, where his Order of Merit, Prussian Pour le M\u00e9rite and Grand Cross of the Order of the Dannebrog were placed. It was then borne by several pallbearers including John William Strutt, Archibald Primrose, Rupert Guinness, Archibald Geikie, Donald MacAlister, Watson Cheyne, Godlee and Francis Mitchell Caird where the catafalque was conveyed to Hampstead Cemetery in London, reaching it at 4pm. Lister's body was then buried in a plot in the south-east corner of the central chapel, attended by a small group of his family and friends. Many tributes from learned societies all over the world were published in \"The Times\" on that day. A memorial service was held in St Giles' Cathedral in Edinburgh on the same day. Glasgow University held a memorial service in Bute Hall on 15 February 1912.\nA marble medallion of Lister was placed in the north transept of Westminster Abbey, which sits alongside four other noted men of science, Darwin, Stokes, Adams, and Watt.\nLister Memorial Fund.\nFollowing his death, the Lord Lister Memorial Fund was established by the Royal Society as a public subscription to raise monies for the public good in honour of Lord Lister. It led to the founding of the Lister Medal, considered the most prestigious prize that can be awarded to a surgeon.\nAwards and honours.\nOn 26 December 1883, Queen Victoria created Lister a baronet, of Park Crescent in the parish of St Marylebone in the county of Middlesex.\nIn 1885, he was awarded the \"Pour le M\u00e9rite\", the highest Prussian order of merit. The order was restricted to 30 living Germans and as many foreigners.\nOn 8 February 1897, he was further honoured when Her Majesty raised him to the peerage as Baron Lister, of Lyme Regis in the county of Dorset.\nIn the 1902 Coronation Honours list published on 26 June 1902 (the original day of King Edward VII's coronation), Lord Lister was appointed a privy counsellor and one of the original members of the new Order of Merit (OM). He received the order from the King on 8 August 1902, and was sworn a member of the Privy Council at Buckingham Palace on 11 August 1902. In December 1902, the King of Denmark bestowed upon Lister the Knight of the Grand Cross of the Order of the Dannebrog, an Order of chivalry that gave him more pleasure than any of his later honours.\nMedals.\nThroughout his life, Lister was awarded a number of medals for his achievements.\nIn May 1890, Lister was awarded the Cameron Prize for Therapeutics of the University of Edinburgh, that included the delivery of a short \"oration\" or lecture, that was held at the Synod Hall in Edinburgh. In November 1902, Lister was awarded the Copley Medal by the Royal Society \"for sustained, outstanding achievements in any field of science\".\nAcademic societies.\nLister was a member of the Royal College of Surgeons of England between 1880 and 1888.\nIn 1877, Lister was awarded the Cothenius Medal of the German Society of Naturalists. In 1886, he was elected vice president of the college, but declined the nomination for office of president, as he wished to devote his remaining time to further research. In 1887, Lister presented the Bradshaw lecture with a lecture titled \"On the Present Position of Antiseptic Treatment in Surgery\". In 1897, Lister was awarded the College Gold Medal, their highest honour.\nLister was elected to the Royal Society in 1860. He served as a trustee on the Royal Society council between 1881 and 1883. Ten years later, in November 1893 Lister was elected for two years, to the position of foreign secretary of the society, succeeding the Scottish geologist Sir Archibald Geikie. In 1895, he was elected president of the Royal Society succeeding Lord Kelvin. He held the position until 1900.\nIn March 1893, Lister received a telegram from Pasteur, F\u00e9lix Guyon and Charles Bouchard that informed him he had been elected an associate of the Acad\u00e9mie des Sciences.\nLister was elected an International Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1893, an International Member of the American Philosophical Society in 1897, and an International Member of the United States National Academy of Sciences. \nMonuments and legacy.\nIn 1903, the British Institute of Preventive Medicine was renamed Lister Institute of Preventive Medicine in honour of Lister. The building, along with another adjacent building, forms what is now the Lister Hospital in Chelsea, which opened in 1985. The building at Glasgow Royal Infirmary which houses the cytopathology, microbiology, and pathology departments was named in Lister's honour to recognise his work at the hospital. The Lister Hospital in Stevenage, Hertfordshire is named after him.\nLister's name is one of 23 people featured on the frieze of the London School of Hygiene &amp; Tropical Medicine \u2013 although the committee which chose the names to include on the frieze did not provide documentation about why certain names were chosen and others were not.\nOnly two British surgeons have public monuments in London, Lister and John Hunter. The statue of Lister, created by Thomas Brock in bronze in 1924, stands at the north end of Portland Place. A bronze statue of Lister, mounted on a granite base in Glasgow's Kelvingrove Park, was sculpted by George Henry Paulin in 1924. It sits next to a statue of Lord Kelvin.\nThe \"Discovery\" Expedition of 1901\u20131904 named the highest point in the Royal Society Range, Antarctica, Mount Lister.\nIn 1879 Joseph Lawrence, the American inventor of Listerine antiseptic, developed as a surgical antiseptic but nowadays best known as a mouthwash, named it after Lister.\nMicroorganisms named in his honour include the pathogenic \"Listeria\" bacterial genus named by J. H. H. Pirie, typified by the food-borne pathogen \"Listeria monocytogenes\", and \"Listerella\" slime mould genus first described by in 1906.\nTwo postage stamps were issued in September 1965 to honour Lister on the centenary of his antiseptic surgery at the Glasgow Royal Infirmary of Greenlees, the first ever recorded instance of such treatment.\nReference volumes.\nThe following three books are the earliest reference volumes on the antiseptic surgery:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBooks and monographs.\nJoseph Lister.\nTwo quarto volumes of Lister's collected papers, that were prepared by Sir Hector Charles Cameron, Sir W. Watson Cheyne, Rickman J. Godlee, C. J. Martin and Dawson Williams:"}
{"id": "16537", "revid": "48523215", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16537", "title": "Johann Homann", "text": "German geographer and cartographer\nJohann Baptist Homann (20 March 1664 \u2013 1 July 1724) was a German geographer and cartographer, who also made maps of the Americas.\nLife.\nHomann was born in Oberkammlach near Kammlach in the Electorate of Bavaria. Although educated at a Jesuit school, and preparing for an ecclesiastical career, he eventually converted to Protestantism and from 1687 worked as a civil law notary in Nuremberg. He soon turned to engraving and cartography; in 1702 he founded his own publishing house.\nHomann acquired renown as a leading German cartographer, and in 1715 was appointed Imperial Geographer by Holy Roman Emperor Charles VI. Giving such privileges to individuals was an added right that the Holy Roman Emperor enjoyed. In the same year he was also named a member of the Prussian Academy of Sciences in Berlin. Of particular significance to cartography were the imperial printing privileges (Latin: \"privilegia impressoria\"). These protected for a time the authors in all scientific fields such as printers, copper engravers, map makers and publishers. They were also very important as a recommendation for potential customers.\nIn 1716 Homann published his masterpiece \"Grosser Atlas ueber die ganze Welt\" (Grand Atlas of all the World). Numerous maps were drawn up in cooperation with the engraver Christoph Weigel the Elder, who also published \"Siebmachers Wappenbuch\".\nHomann died in Nuremberg in 1724. He was succeeded by his son Johann Christoph (1703\u20131730). The company carried on upon his death as \"Homann heirs\" company, managed by Johann Michael Franz and Johann Georg Ebersberger. After subsequent changes in management the company folded in 1852. The company was known as \"Homann Erben\", \"Homanniani Heredes\", or \"Heritiers de Homann\" abroad.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16539", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16539", "title": "J.R.R. Tolkein", "text": ""}
{"id": "16540", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16540", "title": "J. R. R. Tolkein", "text": ""}
{"id": "16542", "revid": "40103329", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16542", "title": "Jadavpur University", "text": "Public technical and research university in Kolkata, India\nJadavpur University (abbr. JU) is a public state funded technical and research university with its main campus located at Jadavpur, Kolkata, West Bengal, India. It was established on 25 July in 1906 as \"Bengal Technical Institute\" and was converted into Jadavpur University on 24 December in 1955. As of the 2025 NIRF rankings, Jadavpur University has been ranked 9th among universities, 1st among state public universities, 18th among engineering institutes, and 18th overall in India. Also Nature Index ranked Jadavpur University in 1st among universities in India and 22nd overall in India in terms of research output (2023\u20132024). The university has been recognized by the UGC as an institute with \"Potential for Excellence\" and accredited an \"A+\" grade by the National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC).\nHistory.\nOn 25 July 1906, Bengal Technical Institute was founded by Society for the Promotion of Technical Education by at 92, Upper Circular Road. On 7 July 1910, the Society for the Promotion of Technical Education in Bengal was merged with the National Council of Education (NCE). The institute became College of Engineering and Technology, Bengal looked after by NCE. After Independence, on 24 December 1955, Jadavpur University was officially established by the Government of West Bengal with the concurrence of the Government of India.\nCampuses.\nMain campus.\nJadavpur University main campus map (as of 2015)\nJadavpur University's main campus is at Jadavpur, spread over 60 acres. The campus contains major engineering, arts and science departments.\nThe main campus have 7 auditoriums: H.L. Roy Auditorium, Triguna Sen Auditorium, K.P. Basu Memorial Hall, Vivekananda Hall, Anita Banerjee Memorial Hall and Gandhi Bhavan. The campus also has an Open Air Theatre with a seating capacity of around 3000.\nThe 6 Acres sports complex have Badminton court, Tennis court, Kabaddi court and playground for other organising sports like cricket and football.\nAdditionally the university has a six canteens, amenities center, and guest house, cafeteria, health centre, gymnasium, Pwd centre and other facilities like banks, post office, book shops etc.\nSalt Lake campus.\nJadavpur University has its second campus on 26 Acres area in Bidhannagar (Salt Lake) Sector-III. There are 5 departments in the campus namely Construction Engineering, Instrumentation Engineering, Printing Engineering, Information Technology and Power Engineering. The Eastern Regional Offices of the UGC and the Inter-University Consortium for Atomic Energy are also located on this campus. Jadavpur University Campus Ground is located in this campus.\nWest Annexe campus at Jadavpur.\nOn 1 January 2009, Jadavpur University took over National Instruments Limited, a former PSU under Department of Heavy industries, GOI on a 297-year lease. From 2014, the campus is used as a research hub of the university and known as West Annexe campus. Research institutes like DRDO and CSIR also operate from the campus.\nA portion of land and building of the campus is leased out to DRDO for long term, which is the 40 percent of the space. At that, the \"Jagadish Chandra Bose Centre for Advanced Technology\" (JCBCAT) is established by collaboration of JU and DRDO.\nThe regional centre of \"National Afforestaion &amp; Eco-Development Board\" is also located in the campus.\nNew Town campus.\nIn 2018, state Government announced to provide 5 acre land parcel in New Town, Kolkata for creating another campus. In January 2021, the land was handed over to Jadavpur University. In July 2024, a committee was formed and DPR preparation started. Funds were requested for its implementation. State-of-the-art facilities along with research laboratories, a convention centre, international hostel and AI laboratory are planned on the campus.\nAdministration.\nThe administrative framework operates under a combination of statutory bodies, executive leadership, faculty councils, and various specialized cells. The university's top-level decision-making body is the Executive Council, which, along with the Court and the Faculty Councils, forms the legislative backbone of the university's governance. Governor of West Bengal is the Chancellor of the university. Rest administration includes Vice-Chancellor, Pro-Vice-Chancellors, registrar, Controller of Examinations, Chief University Engineer etc. Each academic department also maintains internal committees such as the Academic Audit Cell, Departmental Purchase Committees, and Program Quality Improvement Cells (PAQIC). Other administrative positions include dean of students, Director of Youth Welfare. Specialized offices and units include Placement and Training Office, Medical Superintendent and Health Unit, RTI Cell and Documentation Office, Internal Complaints Committee (ICC), Equal Opportunity Cell and SC/ST/OBC Cells, Entrepreneurship Development Cell.\nAffiliated institutes.\nIn addition to being a unitary university, other institutes like the J. D. Birla Institute, and the Institute of Business Management are affiliated to it, which operate out of independent campuses. While these institutes have their own independent curriculum as well as examination systems, the final degree is awarded by Jadavpur University.\nJadavpur University also offers Ph.D. degree to the following institutes: Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics; School of Tropical Medicine, Kolkata; VECC (Bhabha Atomic Research Centre), Kolkata; Indian Institute of Chemical Biology; Central Glass and Ceramic Research Institute; Bose Institute; Kolkata; Jute Technological Research Laboratory; Chittaranjan National Cancer Research Centre; S. N. Bose National Centre for Basic Sciences.\nAcademics.\nDepartments and schools.\nAs of 2023, Jadavpur University has 37 Departments and 21 Schools of interdisciplinary studies.\nTo facilitate interdisciplinary learning and research in diverse fields, there are a number of schools.\nCentre for Studies.\nTo facilitate interdisciplinary learning and higher research in diverse fields, there are nearly fifty Centre for Studies.\nLibrary.\nThe Central Library at Jadavpur campus occupies and houses 6,46,296 books, 80,700 bound volumes of journals, and 13000 theses and dissertations, 37,000 items of non-book materials such as reports pamphlets, maps and micro-forms and 1159 print and 1448 online journals. The library also has access to around 3000 online journals more through INFLIBNET and INDEST Consortia. In total, the University Library has access to around 11000 Journals. The library subscribes to 30 databases which include Scopus, Econlit etc. and also about 10000+ E-books (as of 2018). The Salt Lake campus has a library with 65,00 sq. ft. of space.\nThey also feature a scholarly journal in collaboration with Sage Publications known as the https://.\nRecognition and notable works.\nScience and technology.\nIn the 2025 edition of the \"List of top 2% global scientists\" published by the Stanford University, Jadavpur University has 51 scientists in the list, which is third highest number of faculties selected from any university in India.\nTwo professors from Jadavpur University were involved in a soft-landing project named \"RESPOND\" for a planetary mission sponsored by Indian Space Research Organisation. Jadavpur University also contributes to the satellite launch vehicle programme of ISRO and LCA programme of DRDO.\nNature Index ranked Jadavpur University in 1st among universities in India and 22th overall in India (2023\u20132024). Additionally, it is ranked 19th among all Indian institutes in the field of Physical Science taking into account publications in 82-select high-quality science journals (2020\u20132021).\nJadavpur University's High Energy Physics Group, Nuclear &amp; Particle Physics Research Centre which comes under Department of \nPhysics has been awarded the status of \"Associate Membership\" of ALICE \u2013 INDIA Collaboration and CERN (European Council for Nuclear Research) \u2013 ALICE (A Large Ion Collider Experiment) Collaboration \nand received a grant of Rs. 1.115 crores. In 2025, the group won \"2025 Breakthrough Prize in Fundamental Physics\" along with $3 million.\nThe Global Change Programme at Jadavpur University (GCP-JU) is active at the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). It has also worked with Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change towards the preparation of NATCOM (National Communication) for United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). A joint open energy modelling project was initiated \nby GCP-JU in collaboration with Indian Institute of Science (Bengaluru), and the \nEnvironmental Defense Fund (US). Since 2020, they are also collectively developing a comprehensive energy model and evaluate alternative decarbonization strategies and pathways for future India.\nSome major research ventures undertaken by \"School of Environmental Studies\" are highlighting the presence of arsenic in groundwater in countries like India and Bangladesh and the development of the first alcohol based car by the School of Automobile Engineering.\nIn March 2011, Indian American scientist Manick Sorcar assisted in the opening of a laser animation lab under the School of Illumination Science, Engineering and Design. The https:// at Jadavpur University has been involved in Cheminformatics/QSAR research since 2002, and the https:// has developed techniques like q-RASAR, ARKA descriptors in QSAR, ETA (a topological index) and many QSAR tools which are hosted in https:// and https:// site.\nIndustry.\nJadavpur University's Innovation Council (IIC) was established in 2018 to promote innovations and startups in the campus. IIC arranges awareness programmes, seminars and workshops on innovation and entrepreneurship and organises visits to industries and start-ups for the first year students. The university hosted \na HULT event. IIC participated in Bengal Global Business Summit (BGBS) 2022, Smart India Hackathon (SIH) 2022. Three \nalumni members from JU has successfully established their startups by enlisting in startup MSME venture. Four Memorandum of \nUnderstandings (MOUs) have been signed with companies like Garden Reach Shipbuilders and Engineers, Haldia Petrochemicals Limited, MCPI Private Limited and Nexgen Plasma Private Limited for student internships. Jadavpur University organised \"SERB-INAE Hackathon 2022\", in which nearly 100 students from all over India participated.\nThe university also has an Industry-Institute Partnership Cell (IIPC) in which consultancy and testing services are provided to industry, service sectors and other public or private organizations. During 2022\u20132023, the IIPC generated a revenue of Rs 13.5 crores. Up to 2023, the IIPC has worked with around 161 leading industries or organisations. They include organisations like Tata Steel, RITES, Airport Authority of India, Kolkata Port Trust, Bajaj Electricals, L&amp;T, KMC and \nKMDA, Rail Vikas Nigam Ltd., CPCB, CESC etc.\nNational and international rankings.\nThe rankings of Jadavpur University by various National and International organisations are as follows:\nControversies and Criticism.\n2014 Jadavpur University Protests.\nIn 2014 a series of protests broke out in response to the alleged molestation of a female student and beating of a male student by 10 other students on 28 August 2014. Her family and ultimately the student body were unsatisfied by the response of the Vice Chancellor to the allegations. Protests began on 10 September. On 16 September students gheraoed several officials in their offices, demanding that the Vice Chancellor make a statement on the status of a fair probe. Police were summoned, and later that night the police allegedly attacked and beat the student demonstrators. 30 to 40 students were injured; some had to be hospitalized. Reaction was nationwide, with supportive protests at multiple other cities including New Delhi, Hyderabad and Bangalore. On 20 September, Governor Keshari Nath Tripathi, who is also the chancellor of the university, met with student representatives and promised to conduct an impartial inquiry. However, students said they will continue to boycott classes until the Vice Chancellor resigns.\nOn 26 September, a State Government inquiry panel submitted its report, confirming that the female student had indeed been sexually abused on 28 August 2014. On 26 September, police summoned two Jadavpur University students to come to the Lalbazar Police HQ for questioning at 4 pm on Friday. They were arrested at 6 pm. \"The arrests were made after evidence was found, prima facie, against the duo. Further investigation is on,\" said joint CP-crime Pallab Kanti Ghosh. Mr Ghosh also stated, \"(Two names) were arrested because we had enough evidence to prove that they were present at the spot and had carried out the crime as alleged in the victim's complaint.\" The duo were booked under Sections of 354 (assault or use of criminal force on a woman with the intent to outrage her modesty), 342 (wrongful confinement), 323 (voluntarily causing hurt) and 114 (abettor present when offence is committed) of the IPC.\n2018 Scrapping Entrance Tests.\nJU got embroiled in controversy on 4 July 2018, when the executive council announced its decision to scrap entrance tests for six humanities subjects which was met with protests from the Jadavpur University Teacher's Association and the student unions along with other academics and university students due speculations that state education ministry had influenced this decision.\n2023 ragging allegations.\nIn August 2023, Swapnadeep Kundu, a 17 year old freshman student studying an Honours course in Bengali fell from the balcony of the second floor of the Jadavpur University Hostel \u2013 either by suicide or by murder \u2013 after intense ragging. The Kolkata Police arrested several students and alumni who were suspected to have been involved. The incident left a deep impact on the general public, leading to an outcry. Media attention was also given to the need for strengthening security measures within the university, a suggestion that was vehemently opposed by certain sections of Jadavpur University's political circles. Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee, directed the Higher Education Committee of West Bengal to form a team to investigate the incident. As the student happened to be a minor, the incident was also taken up by the West Bengal Commission for Protection of Child Rights (WBCPCR). Amidst the investigation, Jadavpur University students protested against ragging.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16543", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16543", "title": "Jewel", "text": "Jewel refers to a gemstone or a gem.\nJewel may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "16544", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16544", "title": "James L. Jones", "text": "Retired US Marine Corps general and National Security Advisor\nJames Logan Jones Jr. (born December 19, 1943) is a retired United States Marine Corps four-star general and consultant who served as the 21st United States National Security Advisor from 2009 to 2010. During his military career, he served as the 32nd Commandant of the Marine Corps from July 1999 to January 2003, and Commander, United States European Command and Supreme Allied Commander Europe from 2003 to 2006. Jones retired from the Marine Corps on February 1, 2007, after 40 years of service.\nAfter retiring from the Marine Corps, Jones remained involved in national security and foreign policy issues. In 2007, Jones served as chairman of the Congressional Independent Commission on the Security Forces of Iraq, which investigated the capabilities of the Iraqi police and armed forces. In November 2007, he was appointed by the U.S. Secretary of State as special envoy for Middle East security. He served as chairman of the Atlantic Council from June 2007 to January 2009, when he assumed the post of National Security Advisor which he held until resigning in November 2010.\nJones owns the consulting firms Ironhand Security LLC and Jones Group International LLC.\nEarly life and education.\nJones was born in Kansas City, Missouri, on December 19, 1943. He is the son of Charlotte Ann (n\u00e9e Ground) and James L. Jones Sr., a decorated Marine in World War II who was an officer in the Observer Group and the commanding officer of its successor, the Amphibious Reconnaissance Battalion. Having spent his formative years in France, where he attended the American School of Paris, he returned to the United States, graduating from Groveton High School in Fairfax County, Virginia, then attended Georgetown University Edmund A. Walsh School of Foreign Service, from which he received a Bachelor of Science degree in 1966. Jones, who is tall, played forward on the 1963\u201364 Georgetown Hoyas men's basketball team.\nMilitary career.\nIn January 1967, Jones was commissioned a second lieutenant in the United States Marine Corps. Upon completion of The Basic School at Marine Corps Base Quantico, Virginia, in October 1967, he was ordered to South Vietnam, where he served as a platoon and company commander with Golf Company, 2nd Battalion, 3rd Marines. While overseas, he was promoted to first lieutenant in June 1968.\nReturning to the United States in December 1968, Jones was assigned to Marine Corps Base Camp Pendleton, California, where he served as a company commander until May 1970. He then received orders to Marine Barracks, Washington, D.C., for duties as a company commander, serving in this assignment until July 1973. While at this post, he was promoted to captain in December 1970. From July 1973 until June 1974, he was a student at the Amphibious Warfare School, Marine Corps University, Marine Corps Base Quantico, Virginia.\nIn November 1974, Jones received orders to report to the 3rd Marine Division at Marine Corps Base Camp Smedley D. Butler, Okinawa, Japan, where he served as the commander of Company H, 2nd Battalion, 9th Marines, until December 1975.\nFrom January 1976 to August 1979, Jones served in the Officer Assignments Section at Headquarters Marine Corps, Washington, D.C. During this assignment, he was promoted to major in July 1977. Remaining in Washington, his next assignment was as the Marine Corps liaison officer to the United States Senate, where he served until July 1984. In this assignment, his first commander was John McCain, then a United States Navy captain. He was promoted to lieutenant colonel in September 1982.\nSenior staff and command.\nJones was selected to attend the National War College in Washington, D.C. Following graduation in June 1985, he was assigned to command the 3rd Battalion, 9th Marines, 1st Marine Division, at Camp Pendleton, California, from July 1985 to July 1987.\nIn August 1987, Jones returned to Headquarters Marine Corps, where he served as senior aide to the Commandant of the Marine Corps. He was promoted to colonel in April 1988, and became the Military Secretary to the Commandant of the Marine Corps in February 1989. During August 1990, Jones was assigned as the commanding officer of the 24th Marine Expeditionary Unit (24th MEU) at Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune, North Carolina.\nDuring his tour with the 24th MEU, Jones participated in Operation Provide Comfort in Northern Iraq and Turkey. He was advanced to brigadier general on April 23, 1992. Jones was assigned to duties as deputy director, J-3, United States European Command in Stuttgart, Germany, on July 15, 1992. During this tour of duty, he was reassigned as chief of staff, Joint Task Force Provide Promise, for operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina and North Macedonia.\nReturning to the United States, Jones was advanced to the rank of major general in July 1994 and was assigned as commanding general, 2nd Marine Division, Marine Forces Atlantic, Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune. Jones next served as director, Expeditionary Warfare Division (N85), Office of the Chief of Naval Operations, during 1996, then as the deputy chief of staff for plans, policies, and operations, Headquarters Marine Corps, Washington, D.C. He was advanced to lieutenant general on July 18, 1996. His next assignment was as the military assistant to the Secretary of Defense.\nCommandant.\nOn April 21, 1999, Jones was nominated for appointment to the grade of general and assignment as the 32nd Commandant of the Marine Corps. He was promoted to general on June 30, 1999, and assumed the post on July 1, 1999. He served as commandant until January 2003, turning over the reins to General Michael Hagee.\nAmong other innovations during his tenure as Marine Corps commandant, Jones oversaw the Marine Corps' development of MARPAT camouflage uniforms, and the adoption of the Marine Corps Martial Arts Program. These replaced M81 Woodland uniforms and the LINE combat system, respectively.\nSupreme Allied Commander Europe.\nJones assumed duties as the commander of United States European Command (EUCOM) on January 16, 2003, and Supreme Allied Commander Europe (SACEUR) the following day. He was the first Marine Corps general to serve as SACEUR/EUCOM commander.\nThe Marine Corps had only recently begun to take on a larger share of high-level assignments in the Department of Defense. In December 2006, Jones was one of five serving Marine Corps four-star general officers who outranked the Commandant of the Marine Corps, General James T. Conway in terms of seniority and time in grade\u2014the others being Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General Peter Pace; former commandant General Michael Hagee; commander of United States Strategic Command General James E. Cartwright; and Assistant Commandant General Robert Magnus.\nAs SACEUR, Jones led the Allied Command Operations (ACO), comprising NATO's military forces in Europe, from the Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe in Mons, Belgium. Jones relinquished command as SACEUR on December 7, 2006, and was succeeded by United States Army General John Craddock. Jones was reported to have declined an opportunity to succeed General John P. Abizaid as commander of United States Central Command. He retired from the Marine Corps on February 1, 2007.\nAwards and decorations.\nJones' personal decorations include (foreign and non-U.S. personal and unit decorations are in order of precedence based on military guidelines and award date):\nSilver Star citation.\nThe President of the United States of America takes pleasure in presenting the Silver Star to First Lieutenant James Logan Jones, Jr. (MCSN: 0-102030), United States Marine Corps Reserve, for conspicuous gallantry and intrepidity in action while serving as Commanding Officer of Company F, Second Battalion, Third Marines, THIRD Marine Division, in connection with operations against the enemy in the Republic of Vietnam. On the night of 27 May 1968, while occupying a defensive position near Khe Sanh, Company F, came under heavy attack by a numerically superior North Vietnamese Army force. During the ensuing fire fight, the company defensive perimeter was penetrated by enemy. Realizing the seriousness of the situation, First Lieutenant Jones unhesitatingly exposed himself to intense fire and fearlessly maneuvered across the fire-swept terrain while rapidly readjusting his defensive lines. Ignoring the enemy rockets and hand grenades impacting around him, he boldly directed supporting artillery fire on his position to halt the hostile force's attack. Continuing his determined efforts, he directed the delivery of accurate suppressive fire which repulsed numerous enemy attacks during the remainder of the night. His heroic actions and outstanding leadership inspired all who served with him and were instrumental in his unit accounting for 230 North Vietnamese soldiers confirmed killed. By his courage, aggressive fighting spirit and unwavering devotion to duty in the face of great personal danger, First Lieutenant Jones upheld the highest traditions of the Marine Corps and of the United States Naval Service.\nOther recognition.\nIn 2000, Jones received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement.\nPost-military career.\nBusiness roles.\nFollowing his retirement from the military, Jones became president of the Institute for 21st Century Energy, an affiliate of the US Chamber of Commerce; he also served as chair of the board of directors of the Atlantic Council of the United States from June 2007 until January 2009, when he assumed the post of National Security Advisor. Jones also served as a member of the guiding coalition for the Project on National Security Reform, as well as chairman of the Independent Commission on the Iraqi Security Forces. He was a member of the board of directors of The Boeing Company from June 21, 2007, to December 15, 2008, serving on the company's Audit and Finance Committees. Jones was also a member of the board of directors of Cross Match Technologies, a privately held biometric solutions company, from October 2007 to January 2009.\nJones was employed on the board of trustees of the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), a bipartisan think-tank, from 2007 to 2008, and then began serving again in 2011. He was a member of the board of directors of Chevron Corporation from May 28, 2008, to December 5, 2008, serving on the Board Nominating and Governance and Public Policy Committees.\nAccording to the first report since Jones re-entered government service in January 2009, Jones earned a salary and bonus of $900,000 from the US Chamber, as well as director fees of $330,000 from the Boeing Company and $290,000 from the Chevron Corporation.\nAfter leaving the Obama administration, Jones returned as a Fellow at the US Chamber in 2011.\nThe board of directors of General Dynamics has elected Jones to be a director of the corporation, effective August 3, 2011. Also, on January 13, 2012, Jones joined Deloitte Consulting LLP as a senior adviser who will work with Federal and commercial consulting clients within Deloitte's Department of Defense and Intel segments. In early 2013, Jones joined OxiCool Inc's Advisory Board.\nJones established the consulting firms Ironhand Security LLC and Jones Group International LLC. The firms have worked for foreign governments, including Saudi Arabia. After the murder of Jamal Khashoggi by the Saudi regime, Jones downplayed his firms' work with the Saudi government and said that the remaining contract with them was about to expire. However, Jones's firms subsequently expanded its partnership with the Saudi regime. By 2022, his firms had four contracts with the Saudi government and employed 53 Americans in Riyadh, eight of whom were retired generals and admirals.\nDiplomatic roles.\nSecretary of State Condoleezza Rice asked Jones twice to be Deputy Secretary of State after Robert Zoellick resigned. He declined.\nOn May 25, 2007, Congress created an Independent Commission on the Security Forces of Iraq to investigate for 120 days the capabilities of the Iraq armed forces and police. Jones served as chairman of that commission and reported on Congress on September 6, 2007, noting serious deficiencies in the Iraq Interior Ministry and in the Iraq National Police.\nRice appointed Jones as a special envoy for Middle East security on November 28, 2007, to work with both Israelis and Palestinians on security issues.\nJones serves as a Senior Fellow at the Bipartisan Policy Center (BPC), where he works on a variety of national security and energy-related issues. Jones is also a co-chair of BPC's Energy Project.\nJones is an Advisory Board Member of Spirit of America, a 501(c)(3) organization that supports the safety and success of Americans serving abroad and the local people and partners they seek to help.\nNational Security Advisor.\nOn December 1, 2008, President-elect Obama announced Jones as his selection for National Security Advisor. The National Security Advisor is appointed by the president without confirmation by the United States Senate.\nThe selection surprised people because, as Michael Crowley reported, \"The two men didn't meet until Obama's foreign policy aide, Mark Lippert, arranged a 2005 sit-down, and, as of this October, Jones had only spoken to Obama twice\". Crowley speculated that Jones' record suggests he is \"someone who, unencumbered by strong ideological leanings, can evaluate ideas dispassionately whether they come from left or right\", and, \"This is probably why Obama picked him\". Jones was also picked because he is well respected and likely to possess the skills to navigate the other prestigious and powerful cabinet members.\nThough he did not know Gates especially well, both men shared long experience in the national security establishment (Gates was in the Air Force and previously headed the CIA). Jones and Clinton had a more direct connection from her tenure on the Senate Armed Services Committee. The two were said to have particularly clicked at a 2005 conference on security policy in Munich. Jones hosted a small private dinner that included Clinton and South Carolina Republican Senator Lindsey Graham, among others; at the end of the convivial evening, according to one person present, Jones followed Clinton out to her car to visit in private.\nJones assumed the post when Obama was sworn into office on January 20, 2009. He announced his resignation as National Security Advisor on October 8, 2010, and was succeeded by Thomas E. Donilon.\nAdvocate for Iranian dissidents.\nIn March 2013, Jones was quoted comparing the conditions for Iranians in a US camp in Iraq with the conditions of detention for captives held in the Guantanamo Bay detention camps. While addressing the Iranian American Cultural Society of Michigan, Jones said Guantanamo captives \"are treated far better\" than the Iranian internees. Jones criticized other aspects of the Obama administration's policy on Iran. \"Foreign Policy\" magazine noted that Jones had not volunteered whether he had been paid for this speaking engagement.\nMiddle East consultancy.\nIn March 2017, Jones reportedly began working as a paid consultant for the Ministry of Defense (Saudi Arabia). In 2019, he began working for the government of Libya, but stopped after a few months at the request of the State Department.\nPersonal life.\nFormer Secretary of Defense William Cohen, who hired Jones as his military assistant, said that Jones has a placid demeanor and a \"methodical approach to problems\u2014he's able to view issues at both the strategic and tactical level\".\nJones was also responsible for convincing country music artist Toby Keith that he should record and publish his popular concert hit \"Courtesy of the Red, White, &amp; Blue (The Angry American)\".\nJones is married. He and his wife Diane are the parents of three sons and one daughter.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16545", "revid": "10199389", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16545", "title": "James Lovelock", "text": "English scientist (1919\u20132022)\nJames Ephraim Lovelock (26 July 1919 \u2013 26 July 2022) was an English independent scientist, environmentalist and futurist. He is best known for proposing the Gaia hypothesis, which postulates that the Earth functions as a self-regulating system.\nWith a PhD in the chemistry of disinfection, Lovelock began his career performing cryopreservation experiments on rodents, including successfully thawing and reviving frozen specimens. His methods were influential in the theories of cryonics (the cryopreservation of humans). He invented the electron capture detector and, using it, became the first to detect the widespread presence of chlorofluorocarbons in the atmosphere. While designing scientific instruments for NASA, he developed the Gaia hypothesis.\nIn the 2000s, he proposed a method of climate engineering to restore carbon dioxide\u2013consuming algae. He was an outspoken member of Environmentalists for Nuclear Energy, asserting that fossil fuel interests have been behind opposition to nuclear energy, citing the effects of carbon dioxide as being harmful to the environment and warning of global warming due to the greenhouse effect. He wrote several environmental science books based upon the Gaia hypothesis from the late 1970s.\nHe also worked for MI5, the British security service, for decades. Bryan Appleyard, writing in \"The Sunday Times\", described him as \"basically Q in the \"James Bond\" films\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEarly life and education.\nJames Lovelock was born in Letchworth Garden City to Tom Arthur Lovelock and his second wife Nellie. Nell, his mother, was born in Bermondsey and won a scholarship to a grammar school but was unable to take it up, and started work at thirteen in a pickle factory. She was described by Lovelock as a socialist and suffragist, who was also anti-vaccine, and did not allow Lovelock to receive his smallpox inoculation as a child. His father, Tom, was born in Fawley, Berkshire, had served six months hard labour for poaching in his teens, and was illiterate until attending technical college, later running a bookshop. Lovelock was brought up a Quaker and imbued with the notion that \"God is a still, small voice within rather than some mysterious old gentleman way out in the universe\", which he thought was a helpful way of thinking for inventors, but he would eventually end up as being non-religious. The family moved to London, where his dislike of authority made him, by his own account, an unhappy pupil at Strand School in Tulse Hill, south London.\nLovelock could not at first afford to go to university, something which he believed helped prevent him from becoming overspecialised and aided the development of Gaia theory.\nCareer.\nAfter leaving school Lovelock worked at a photography firm, attending Birkbeck College during the evenings, before being accepted to study chemistry at the University of Manchester, where he was a student of the Nobel Prize laureate professor Alexander R. Todd. Lovelock worked at a Quaker farm before a recommendation from his professor led to him taking up a Medical Research Council post, working on ways of shielding soldiers from burns. Lovelock refused to use the shaved and anaesthetised rabbits that were used as burn victims, and exposed his skin to heat radiation instead, an experience he describes as \"exquisitely painful\". His student status enabled temporary deferment of military service during the Second World War. Still, he registered as a conscientious objector. He later abandoned his conscientious objection in the light of Nazi atrocities and tried to enlist in the armed forces but was told that his medical research was too valuable for the enlistment to be approved.\nIn 1948, Lovelock received a PhD degree at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine. He spent the next two decades working at London's National Institute for Medical Research. In the United States, he conducted research at Yale, Baylor College of Medicine and Harvard University Medical School.\nIn the mid-1950s, Lovelock experimented with the cryopreservation of rodents, determining that hamsters could be frozen and revived successfully. Hamsters were frozen with 60% of the water in the brain crystallised into ice with no adverse effects recorded. Other organs were shown to be susceptible to damage.\nA lifelong inventor, Lovelock created and developed many scientific instruments, some of which were designed for NASA in its planetary exploration program. While working as a NASA consultant, Lovelock developed the Gaia hypothesis, for which he is most widely known.\nIn early 1961, Lovelock was engaged by NASA to develop sensitive instruments for the analysis of extraterrestrial atmospheres and planetary surfaces. The Viking program, which visited Mars in the late 1970s, was motivated in part to determine whether Mars supported life, and some of the sensors and experiments that were ultimately deployed aimed to resolve this issue. During work on a precursor of this program, Lovelock became interested in the composition of the Martian atmosphere, reasoning that many life forms on Mars would be obliged to make use of it (and, thus, alter it). However, the atmosphere was found to be in a stable condition close to its chemical equilibrium, with very little oxygen, methane, or hydrogen, but with an overwhelming abundance of carbon dioxide. To Lovelock, the stark contrast between the Martian atmosphere and chemically dynamic mixture of the Earth's biosphere was strongly indicative of the absence of life on Mars. However, when they were finally launched to Mars, the Viking probes still searched (unsuccessfully) for extant life there. Further experiments to search for life on Mars have been carried out by additional space probes, for instance, by NASA's Perseverance rover, which landed in 2021.\nLovelock invented the electron capture detector, which ultimately assisted in discoveries about the persistence of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and their role in stratospheric ozone depletion. After studying the operation of the Earth's sulphur cycle, Lovelock and his colleagues, Robert Jay Charlson, Meinrat Andreae and Stephen G. Warren developed the CLAW hypothesis as a possible example of biological control of the Earth's climate.\nLovelock was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1974. He served as the president of the Marine Biological Association (MBA) from 1986 to 1990 and was an Honorary Visiting Fellow of Green Templeton College, Oxford (formerly Green College, Oxford) from 1994.\nAs an independent scientist, inventor and author, Lovelock worked out of a barn-turned-laboratory he called his \"experimental station\" located in a wooded valley on the Devon\u2013Cornwall border in South West England.\nIn 1988 he made an extended appearance on the Channel 4 television programme \"After Dark\", alongside Heathcote Williams and Petra Kelly, among others.\nOn 8 May 2012, he appeared on the Radio Four series \"The Life Scientific\", talking to Jim Al-Khalili about the Gaia hypothesis. On the programme, he mentioned how his ideas had been received by various people, including Jonathon Porritt. He also said how he had a claim for inventing the microwave oven. He later explained this claim in an interview with \"The Manchester Magazine\". Lovelock said that he did create an instrument during his time studying causes of damage to living cells and tissue, which had, according to him, \"almost everything you would expect in an ordinary microwave oven\". He invented the instrument to heat frozen hamsters in a way that caused less suffering to the animals, as opposed to the traditional way, which involved putting red-hot spoons on the animals' chests to heat them. He believed that, at the time, nobody had gone that far and made an embodiment of an actual microwave oven. However, he did not claim to have been the first person to have the idea of using microwaves for cooking.\nCFCs.\nAfter developing his electron capture detector, in the late 1960s, Lovelock was the first to detect the widespread presence of CFCs in the atmosphere. He found a concentration of 60 parts per trillion of CFC-11 over Ireland and, in a partially self-funded research expedition in 1972, went on to measure the concentration of CFC-11 from the northern hemisphere to the Antarctic aboard the research vessel . He found the gas in each of the 50 air samples that he collected but, not realising that the breakdown of CFCs in the stratosphere would release chlorine that posed a threat to the ozone layer, concluded that the level of CFCs constituted \"no conceivable hazard\". He later stated that he meant \"no conceivable toxic hazard\".\nHowever, the experiment did provide the first useful data on the ubiquitous presence of CFCs in the atmosphere. The damage caused to the ozone layer by the photolysis of CFCs was later discovered by Sherwood Rowland and Mario Molina. After hearing a lecture on the subject of Lovelock's results, they embarked on research that resulted in the first published paper that suggested a link between stratospheric CFCs and ozone depletion in 1974 (for which Sherwood and Molina later shared the 1995 Nobel Prize in Chemistry with Paul Crutzen). Lovelock was sceptical of the CFC\u2013ozone depletion hypothesis for several years, calling the US ban of CFCs as aerosol propellants in the late 1970s arbitrary overkill.\nGaia hypothesis.\nDrawing from the research of Alfred C. Redfield and G. Evelyn Hutchinson, Lovelock first formulated the Gaia hypothesis in the 1960s resulting from his work for NASA concerned with detecting life on Mars and his work with Royal Dutch Shell. The hypothesis proposes that living and non-living parts of the Earth form a complex interacting system that can be thought of as a single organism. Named after the Greek goddess Gaia at the suggestion of novelist William Golding, the hypothesis postulates that the biosphere has a regulatory effect on the Earth's environment that acts to sustain life.\nWhile the hypothesis was readily accepted by many in the environmentalist community, it has not been widely accepted within the scientific community as a whole. Among its most prominent critics were the evolutionary biologists Richard Dawkins, Ford Doolittle and Stephen Jay Gould, a convergence of opinion among a trio whose views on other scientific matters often diverged. These (and other) critics have questioned how natural selection operating on individual organisms can lead to the evolution of planetary-scale homeostasis.\nIn response to this, Lovelock, together with Andrew Watson, published the computer model Daisyworld in 1983, which postulated a hypothetical planet orbiting a star whose radiant energy is slowly increasing or decreasing. In the non-biological case, the temperature of this planet simply tracks the energy received from the star. However, in the biological case, ecological competition between \"daisy\" species with different albedo values produces a homeostatic effect on global temperature. When energy received from the star is low, black daisies proliferate since they absorb a greater fraction of the heat, but when energy input is high, white daisies predominate since they reflect excess heat. As the white and black daisies have contrary effects on the planet's overall albedo and temperature, changes in their relative populations stabilise the planet's climate and keep the temperature within an optimal range despite fluctuations in energy from the star. Lovelock argued that Daisyworld, although a parable, illustrates how conventional natural selection operating on individual organisms can still produce planetary-scale homeostasis.\nIn Lovelock's 2006 book, \"The Revenge of Gaia\", he argued that the lack of respect humans have had for Gaia, through the damage done to rainforests and the reduction in planetary biodiversity, is testing Gaia's capacity to minimise the effects of the addition of greenhouse gases to the atmosphere. This eliminates the planet's negative feedbacks and increases the likelihood of homeostatic positive feedback potential associated with runaway global warming. Similarly, the warming of the oceans is extending the oceanic thermocline layer of tropical oceans into the Arctic and Antarctic waters, preventing the rise of oceanic nutrients into the surface waters and eliminating the algal blooms of phytoplankton on which oceanic food chains depend. As phytoplankton and forests are the main ways in which Gaia draws down greenhouse gases, particularly carbon dioxide, taking it out of the atmosphere, the elimination of this environmental buffering will see, according to Lovelock, most of the Earth becoming uninhabitable for humans and other life-forms by the middle of this century, with a massive extension of tropical deserts. In 2012, Lovelock distanced himself from these conclusions, saying he had \"gone too far\" in describing the consequences of climate change over the next century in this book.\nIn his 2009 book, \"The Vanishing Face of Gaia\", he rejected scientific models that disagree with the findings that sea levels are rising and Arctic ice is melting faster than the models predict. He suggested that we may already have passed the tipping point of terrestrial climate resilience into a permanently hot state. Given these conditions, Lovelock expected that human civilisation would be hard-pressed to survive. He expected the change to be similar to the Paleocene\u2013Eocene Thermal Maximum when the temperature of the Arctic Ocean was 23\u00a0\u00b0C.\nNuclear power.\nLovelock became concerned about the threat of global warming from the greenhouse effect. In 2004 he broke with many fellow environmentalists by stating that \"only nuclear power can now halt global warming\".\nIn his view, nuclear energy is the only realistic alternative to fossil fuels that can both fulfil the large scale energy needs of humankind while also reducing greenhouse emissions. He was an open member of Environmentalists for Nuclear Energy (EFN).\nIn 2005, against the backdrop of renewed UK government interest in nuclear power, Lovelock again publicly announced his support for nuclear energy, stating, \"I am a Green, and I entreat my friends in the movement to drop their wrongheaded objection to nuclear energy\". Although those interventions in the public debate on nuclear power were in the 21st century, his views on it were longstanding. In his 1988 book \"The Ages of Gaia\", he stated: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I have never regarded nuclear radiation or nuclear power as anything other than a normal and inevitable part of the environment. Our prokaryotic forebears evolved on a planet-sized lump of fallout from a star-sized nuclear explosion, a supernova that synthesised the elements that go to make our planet and ourselves.\nIn \"The Revenge of Gaia\" (2006), where he put forward the concept of , Lovelock wrote: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn 2019 Lovelock said he thought difficulties in getting nuclear power going again were due to propaganda, that \"the coal and oil business fight like mad to tell bad stories about nuclear\", and that \"the greens played along with it. There's bound to have been some corruption there \u2013 I'm sure that various green movements were paid some sums on the side to help with propaganda\".\nClimate.\nWriting in \"The Independent\" in 2006, Lovelock argued that, as a result of global warming, \"billions of us will die and the few breeding pairs of people that survive will be in the Arctic where the climate remains tolerable\" by the end of the 21st century. The same year he suggested that \"we have to keep in mind the awesome pace of change and realise how little time is left to act, and then each community and nation must find the best use of the resources they have to sustain civilisation for as long as they can.\" He further predicted in 2007 that the temperature increase would leave much of the world's land uninhabitable and unsuitable for farming, with northerly migrations and new cities created in the Arctic; furthermore, he added that much of Europe will have turned to desert and Britain will have become Europe's \"life-raft\" due to its stable temperature caused by being surrounded by the ocean. He was quoted in \"The Guardian\" in 2008 that 80% of humans will perish by 2100, and this climate change will last 100,000 years.\nIn a 2010 interview with the \"Guardian\" newspaper, he said that democracy might have to be \"put on hold\" to prevent climate change. He continued:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Even the best democracies agree that when a major war approaches, democracy must be put on hold for the time being. I have a feeling that climate change may be an issue as severe as a war. It may be necessary to put democracy on hold for a while.\nStatements from 2012 portrayed Lovelock as continuing his concern over global warming while at the same time criticising extremism and suggesting alternatives to oil, coal and the green solutions he did not support.\nIn a 2012 interview aired on MSNBC, Lovelock stated that he had been \"alarmist\", using the words \"All right, I made a mistake,\" about the timing of climate change and noted the documentary \"An Inconvenient Truth\" and the book \"The Weather Makers\" as examples of the same kind of alarmism. Lovelock still believed the climate to be warming, although not at the rate of change he once thought; he admitted that he had been \"extrapolating too far.\" He believed that climate change is still happening, but it will be felt further in the future. Of the claims \"the science is settled\" on global warming, he stated: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;One thing that being a scientist has taught me is that you can never be certain about anything. You never know the truth. You can only approach it and hope to get a bit nearer to it each time. You iterate towards the truth. You don't know it. He criticised environmentalists for treating global warming like a religion. &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It just so happens that the green religion is now taking over from the Christian religion. &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I don't think people have noticed that, but it's got all the sort of terms that religions use... The greens use guilt. That just shows how religious greens are. You can't win people round by saying they are guilty for putting (carbon dioxide) in the air.\nIn this 2012 MSNBC article, Lovelock is quoted as saying: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The problem is we don't know what the climate is doing. We thought we knew 20 years ago. That led to some alarmist books \u2013 mine included \u2013 because it looked clear-cut, but it hasn't happened.\nThe climate is doing its usual tricks. There's nothing much really happening yet. We were supposed to be halfway toward a frying world now.\nThe world has not warmed up very much since the millennium. Twelve years is a reasonable time... it (the temperature) has stayed almost constant, whereas it should have been rising \u2013 carbon dioxide is rising, no question about that. In a follow-up interview also in 2012, Lovelock stated his support for natural gas; he favoured fracking as a low-polluting alternative to coal. He opposed the concept of \"sustainable development\", where modern economies might be powered by wind turbines, calling it meaningless drivel. He kept a poster of a wind turbine to remind himself how much he detested them.\nIn \"Novacene\" (2019), Lovelock proposed that benevolent superintelligence may take over and save the ecosystem and stated that the machines would need to keep organic life around to keep the planet's temperature habitable for electronic life. On the other hand, if instead life becomes entirely electronic, \"so be it: we played our part and newer, younger actors are already appearing on stage\".\nOcean fertilisation.\nIn 2007, Lovelock and Chris Rapley proposed the construction of ocean pumps to pump water up from below the thermocline to \"fertilize algae in the surface waters and encourage them to bloom\". The basic idea was to accelerate the transfer of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere to the ocean by increasing primary production and enhancing the export of organic carbon (as marine snow) to the deep ocean. A scheme similar to that proposed by Lovelock and Rapley was later developed independently by a commercial company.\nThe proposal attracted widespread media attention and criticism. Commenting on the proposal, Corinne Le Qu\u00e9r\u00e9, a University of East Anglia researcher, said \"It doesn't make sense. There is absolutely no evidence that climate engineering options work or even go in the right direction. I'm astonished that they published this. Before any geoengineering is put to work a massive amount of research is needed \u2013 research which will take 20 to 30 years\". Other researchers claimed that \"this scheme would bring water with high natural \"p\"CO2 levels (associated with the nutrients) back to the surface, potentially causing exhalation of CO2\". Lovelock subsequently said that his proposal was intended to stimulate interest and that research would be the next step, and several research studies were published in the wake of the original proposal. However, these estimated that the scheme would require a huge number of pipes, and that the main effect of the pipes may be on the land rather than in the ocean.\nSustainable retreat.\nSustainable retreat is a concept developed by Lovelock to define the necessary changes to human settlement and dwelling at the global scale to adapt to global warming and prevent its expected negative consequences on humans.\nLovelock thought the time was past for sustainable development and that we had come to a time when development is no longer sustainable. Therefore, we needed to retreat. Lovelock stated the following to explain the concept:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Retreat, in his view, means it's time to start talking about changing where we live and how we get our food; about making plans for the migration of millions of people from low-lying regions like Bangladesh into Europe; about admitting that New Orleans is a goner and moving the people to cities better positioned for the future. Most of all, he says, it's about everybody \"absolutely doing their utmost to sustain civilization, so that it doesn't degenerate into Dark Ages, with warlords running things, which is a real danger. We could lose everything that way.\"\nThe concept of sustainable retreat emphasises a pattern of resource use that aims to meet human needs with lower levels or less environmentally harmful types of resources.\nAwards and recognition.\nLovelock was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1974. His nomination reads: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLovelock was awarded a number of prestigious prizes, including the Tswett Medal for Chromatography (1975), the American Chemical Society Award in Chromatography (1980), the World Meteorological Organization Norbert Gerbier\u2013MUMM Award (1988), the Dr A. H. Heineken Prize for Environmental Sciences (1990) and the Royal Geographical Society Discovery Lifetime award (2001). In 2006 he received the Wollaston Medal, the Geological Society of London's highest award, whose previous recipients include Charles Darwin. Lovelock was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) for services to the study of the Science and Atmosphere in the 1990 New Year Honours and a Member of the Order of the Companions of Honour (CH) for services to Global Environmental Science in the 2003 New Year Honours.\nPortraits.\nIn March 2012, the National Portrait Gallery unveiled a new portrait of Lovelock by British artist Michael Gaskell, which was completed in 2011. The collection also has two photographic portraits by Nick Sinclair (1993) and Paul Tozer (1994). The archive of the Royal Society of Arts has a 2009 image taken by Anne-Katrin Purkiss. Lovelock agreed to sit for sculptor Jon Edgar in Devon during 2007, as part of the \"Environment Triptych\" (2008) along with heads of Mary Midgley and Richard Mabey. A bronze head is in the collection of the sitter, and the terracotta is in the artist's archive.\nPersonal life.\nLovelock married Helen Hyslop in 1942. They had four children and remained married until her death in 1989 from multiple sclerosis. He first met his second wife, Sandy, at the age of 69. Lovelock stated of their relationship: \"...you would find the life of me and my wife Sandy to be an unusually happy one in simple beautiful but unpretentious surroundings.\"\nLovelock turned 100 in 2019. He died at his home in Abbotsbury, Dorset, on his 103rd birthday in 2022, of complications related to a fall.\nPublished works.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nInterviews and public lectures"}
{"id": "16546", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16546", "title": "John Akii-Bua", "text": "Ugandan hurdler\nJohn Akii-Bua (3 December 1949 \u2013 20 June 1997) was a Ugandan hurdler and the first Olympic champion from his country Uganda. In 1986, he was a recipient of the Silver Olympic Order.\nBiography.\nAkii-Bua was raised in a family of 43 children from one father and his eight wives. Akii-Bua started his athletic career as a short-distance hurdler, but failed to qualify for the 1968 Olympics. Coached by British-born athletics coach Malcolm Arnold, he was introduced to the 400 meter hurdles.\nAlthough he finished fourth in the 1970 Commonwealth Games and running the fastest time of 1971 and finishing second at the British 1972 AAA Championships, he was not a big favourite for the 1972 Summer Olympics in Munich, having limited competitive experience. Nevertheless, he won the final there, setting a world record time of 47.82 seconds despite running on the inside lane. He missed the 1976 Olympics and a showdown with United States rival Edwin Moses because of the boycott by Uganda and other African nations.\nAs a police officer, Akii-Bua was promoted by Ugandan president Idi Amin and given a house as a reward for his athletic prowess. When the Amin regime was collapsing, he fled to Kenya with his family, fearful that he would be seen as a collaborator; this was more likely because he was a member of the Langi tribe, many of whom were persecuted by Amin, whereas Akii-Bua was cited by Amin as an example of a Langi who was doing well. However, in Kenya he was put into a refugee camp. From there, he was freed by his shoe-manufacturer Puma and lived in Germany working for Puma for 3\u20134 years. He represented Uganda once again at the 1980 Summer Olympics. Later he returned to Uganda and became a coach.\nAkii-Bua died a widower, at the age of 47, survived by eleven children. He was given a state funeral. His nephew is international footballer David Obua, and his brother Lawrence Ogwang competed in the long jump and triple jump at the 1956 Olympics.\nThe phrase \"akii-buas\" has come to colloquially mean \"runs\" in Uganda.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16547", "revid": "372290", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16547", "title": "Joachim von Ribbentrop", "text": "German politician and diplomat (1893\u20131946)\nUlrich Friedrich-Wilhelm Joachim von Ribbentrop (; 30 April 1893 \u2013 16 October 1946) was a German Nazi politician, diplomat and convicted war criminal who served as Minister of Foreign Affairs of Nazi Germany from 1938 to 1945.\nRibbentrop first came to Adolf Hitler's notice as a well-travelled businessman with more knowledge of the outside world than most senior Nazis and as a perceived authority on foreign affairs. He offered his house Schloss Fuschl for the secret meetings in January 1933 that resulted in Hitler's appointment as Chancellor of Germany. He became a close confidant of Hitler, to the dismay of some party members, who thought him unintelligent, superficial and lacking in talent. He was appointed ambassador to the Court of St James's, the royal court of the United Kingdom, in 1936 and then Foreign Minister of Germany in February 1938.\nBefore World War II, he played a key role in brokering the Pact of Steel (an alliance with Fascist Italy) and the Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact (the Nazi\u2013Soviet non-aggression pact). He favoured retaining good relations with the Soviets, opposing the invasion of the Soviet Union. In late 1941, due to American aid to Britain and the increasingly frequent \"incidents\" in the North Atlantic between U-boats and American warships guarding convoys to Britain, Ribbentrop worked for the failure of the Japanese-American talks in Washington and for Japan to attack the United States. He did his utmost to support a declaration of war on the United States after the attack on Pearl Harbor. From 1941 onwards, Ribbentrop's influence declined.\nArrested in June 1945, Ribbentrop was convicted and sentenced to death at the Nuremberg trials for his role in starting World War II in Europe and enabling the Holocaust. On 16 October 1946, he became the first of the Nuremberg defendants to be executed by hanging.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEarly life.\nJoachim von Ribbentrop was born in Wesel, Rhine Province of the Kingdom of Prussia, to Richard Ulrich Friedrich Joachim Ribbentrop, a career army officer, and his wife, Johanne Sophie Hertwig. He was not born with the nobiliary particle \"von\". From 1904 to 1908, Ribbentrop took French courses at Lyc\u00e9e Fabert in Metz, the German Empire's most powerful fortress, and would become fluent in both French and English. A former teacher recalled Ribbentrop \"was the most stupid in his class, full of vanity and very pushy\". His father was cashiered from the Prussian Army in 1908 for repeatedly disparaging Kaiser Wilhelm II for his dismissal of Otto von Bismarck and the Kaiser's alleged homosexuality. As a result, the Ribbentrop family was often short of money.\nFor the next 18 months, the family moved to Arosa, Switzerland, where the children continued to be taught by French and English private tutors, and Ribbentrop spent his free time skiing and mountaineering. \nFollowing the stay in Arosa, Ribbentrop was sent to Britain for a year to improve his knowledge of English. \nFluent in both French and English, young Ribbentrop lived at various times in Grenoble, France and London, before travelling to Canada in 1910.\nHe worked for the Molsons Bank on Stanley Street in Montreal, and then for the engineering firm M. P. and J. T. Davis on the Quebec Bridge reconstruction. He was also employed by the National Transcontinental Railway, which constructed a line from Moncton to Winnipeg. He worked as a journalist in New York City and Boston but returned to Germany to recover from tuberculosis. He returned to Canada and set up a small business in Ottawa importing German wine and champagne. In 1914, he competed for Ottawa's Minto ice-skating team and participated in the Ellis Memorial Trophy tournament in Boston in February.\nWhen the First World War began later in 1914, Ribbentrop left Canada, which, as part of the British Empire, was at war with Germany, and found temporary sanctuary in the neutral United States. On 15 August 1914, he sailed from Hoboken, New Jersey on the Holland-America ship \"Potsdam\", bound for Rotterdam, and on his return to Germany enlisted in the Prussian 12th Hussar Regiment.\nRibbentrop served first on the Eastern Front, and was then transferred to the Western Front. He earned a commission and was awarded the Iron Cross, having been wounded during his service. In 1918, 1st Lieutenant Ribbentrop was stationed in Istanbul as a staff officer. During his time in Turkey, he became a friend of another staff officer, Franz von Papen.\nIn 1919, Ribbentrop met Anna Elisabeth Henkell, the daughter of a wealthy Wiesbaden wine producer. They were married on 5 July 1920, and Ribbentrop began to travel throughout Europe as a wine salesman. They had five children. In 1925, his \"aunt\" Gertrud von Ribbentrop, adopted him, which allowed him to add the nobiliary particle \"von\" to his name.\nEarly career.\nIn 1928, Ribbentrop was introduced to Adolf Hitler as a businessman with foreign connections who \"gets the same price for German champagne as others get for French champagne\". Wolf-Heinrich Graf von Helldorff, with whom Ribbentrop had served in the 12th Torgau Hussars in the First World War, arranged the introduction. Ribbentrop and his wife joined the Nazi Party on 1 May 1932. Ribbentrop began his political career by offering to be a secret emissary between Chancellor of Germany Franz von Papen, his old wartime friend, and Hitler. His offer was initially refused. Six months later, however, Hitler and Papen accepted his help.\nTheir change of heart occurred after General Kurt von Schleicher ousted Papen in December 1932. This led to a complex set of intrigues in which Papen and various friends of president Paul von Hindenburg negotiated with Hitler to oust Schleicher. On 22 January 1933, State Secretary Otto Meissner and Hindenburg's son Oskar met Hitler, Hermann G\u00f6ring, and Wilhelm Frick at Ribbentrop's home in Berlin's exclusive Dahlem district. Over dinner, Papen made the fateful concession that if Schleicher's government were to fall, he would abandon his demand for the Chancellorship and instead use his influence with President Hindenburg to ensure Hitler got the Chancellorship.\nRibbentrop was not popular with the Nazi Party's \"Alte K\u00e4mpfer\" (Old Fighters); they nearly all disliked him. British historian Laurence Rees described Ribbentrop as \"the Nazi almost all the other leading Nazis hated\". Joseph Goebbels expressed a common view when he confided to his diary that \"Von Ribbentrop bought his name, he married his money and he swindled his way into office\". \nDuring most of the Weimar Republic era, Ribbentrop was apolitical and displayed no antisemitic prejudices. A visitor to a party Ribbentrop threw in 1928 recorded that Ribbentrop had no political views beyond a vague admiration for Gustav Stresemann, fear of Communism, and a wish to restore the monarchy. Several Berlin Jewish businessmen who did business with Ribbentrop in the 1920s and knew him well later expressed astonishment at the vicious antisemitism he later displayed in the Nazi era, saying that they did not see any indications he had held such views. Ten months after the Nazi seizure of power, Ribbentrop secured a seat as a deputy to the \"Reichstag\" from electoral constituency 4 (Potsdam I) at the November 1933 parliamentary election. He was reelected in 1936 and 1938, holding this seat until the fall of the Nazi regime.\nEarly diplomatic career.\nBackground.\nRibbentrop became Hitler's favourite foreign-policy adviser, partly by dint of his familiarity with the world outside Germany but also by flattery and sycophancy. One German diplomat later recalled, \"Ribbentrop didn't understand anything about foreign policy. His sole wish was to please Hitler\". In particular, Ribbentrop acquired the habit of listening carefully to what Hitler was saying, memorizing his pet ideas and then later presenting Hitler's ideas as his own, a practice that much impressed Hitler as proving Ribbentrop was an ideal Nazi diplomat. Ribbentrop quickly learned that Hitler always favoured the most radical solution to any problem and accordingly tendered his advice in that direction as a Ribbentrop aide recalled:\nWhen Hitler said \"Grey\", Ribbentrop said \"Black, black, black\". He always said it three times more, and he was always more radical. I listened to what Hitler said one day when Ribbentrop wasn't present: \"With Ribbentrop it is so easy, he is always so radical. Meanwhile, all the other people I have, they come here, they have problems, they are afraid, they think we should take care and then I have to blow them up, to get strong. And Ribbentrop was blowing up the whole day and I had to do nothing. I had to break \u2013 much better!\"\nAnother reason for Ribbentrop's rise was Hitler's distrust of and disdain for Germany's professional diplomats. He suspected that they did not entirely support his revolution. However, the Foreign Office diplomats loyally served the government and rarely gave Hitler grounds for criticism, while the Foreign Office diplomats were ultranationalist, authoritarian and antisemitic. As a result, there was enough overlap in values between both groups to allow most of them to work comfortably for the Nazis. Nonetheless, Hitler never quite trusted the Foreign Office and was on the lookout for someone to carry out his foreign policy goals.\nUndermining Versailles.\nThe Nazis and Germany's professional diplomats shared a goal in destroying the Treaty of Versailles and restoring Germany as a great power. In October 1933, German Foreign Minister Baron Konstantin von Neurath presented a note at the World Disarmament Conference announcing that it was unfair that Germany should remain disarmed by Part V of the Versailles Treaty and demanded for the other powers to disarm to Germany's level or to rescind Part V and allow Germany \"Gleichberechtigung\" (\"equality of armaments\"). When France rejected Neurath's note, Germany stormed out of the League of Nations and the World Disarmament Conference. It all but announced its intention of unilaterally violating Part V. Consequently, there were several calls in France for a preventive war to put an end to the Nazi regime while Germany was still more-or-less disarmed.\nHowever, in November, Ribbentrop arranged a meeting between Hitler and the French journalist Fernand de Brinon, who wrote for the newspaper \"Le Matin\". During the meeting, Hitler stressed what he claimed to be his love of peace and his friendship towards France. Hitler's meeting with Brinon had a huge effect on French public opinion and helped to put an end to the calls for a preventive war. It convinced many in France that Hitler was a man of peace, who wanted to do away only with Part V of the Versailles Treaty.\nSpecial Commissioner for Disarmament.\nIn 1934, Hitler named Ribbentrop Special Commissioner for Disarmament. In his early years, Hitler's goal in foreign affairs was to persuade the world that he wished to reduce the defence budget by making idealistic but very vague disarmament offers (in the 1930s, disarmament described arms limitation agreements). At the same time, the Germans always resisted making concrete arms-limitations proposals, and they went ahead with increased military spending on grounds that other powers would not take up German arms-limitation offers. Ribbentrop was tasked with ensuring that the world remained convinced that Germany sincerely wanted an arms-limitation treaty, but he ensured that no such treaty was ever developed.\nOn 17 April 1934, French Foreign Minister Louis Barthou issued the so-called \"Barthou note\", which led to concerns on the part of Hitler that the French would ask for sanctions against Germany for violating Part V of the Versailles Treaty. Ribbentrop volunteered to stop the rumoured sanctions and visited London and Rome. During his visits, Ribbentrop met with British Foreign Secretary, Sir John Simon, and Italian dictator Benito Mussolini and asked them to postpone the next meeting of the Bureau of Disarmament in exchange for which Ribbentrop offered nothing in return other than promising better relations with Berlin. The meeting of the Bureau of Disarmament went ahead as scheduled, but because no sanctions were sought against Germany, Ribbentrop could claim a success.\nDienststelle Ribbentrop.\nIn August 1934, Ribbentrop founded an organization linked to the Nazi Party called the \"B\u00fcro Ribbentrop\" (later renamed the \"Dienststelle Ribbentrop\"). It functioned as an alternative foreign ministry. The \"Dienststelle Ribbentrop\", which had its offices directly across from the Foreign Office's building on the Wilhelmstrasse in Berlin, had in its membership a collection of \"Hitlerjugend\" alumni, dissatisfied businessmen, former reporters, and ambitious Nazi Party members, all of whom tried to conduct a foreign policy independent of and often contrary to the official Foreign Office. The Dienststelle served as an informal tool for the implementation of the foreign policy of Hitler, consciously bypassing the traditional foreign policy institutions and diplomatic channels of the German Foreign Office. However, the Dienststelle also competed with other Nazi party units active in the area of foreign policy, such as the foreign organization of the Nazis (NSDAP/AO) led by Ernst Bohle and Nazi Party office of foreign affairs (APA) led by Alfred Rosenberg. With the appointment of Ribbentrop to the Minister of Foreign Affairs in February 1938, the Dienststelle itself lost its importance, and about a third of the staff of the office followed Ribbentrop to the Foreign Office.\nRibbentrop engaged in diplomacy on his own, such as when he visited France and met Foreign Minister Louis Barthou. During their meeting, Ribbentrop suggested for Barthou to meet Hitler at once to sign a Franco-German non-aggression pact. Ribbentrop wanted to buy time to complete German rearmament by removing preventive war as a French policy option. The Barthou-Ribbentrop meeting infuriated Konstantin von Neurath, since the Foreign Office had not been informed.\nAlthough the \"Dienststelle Ribbentrop\" was concerned with German relations in every part of the world, it emphasised Anglo-German relations, as Ribbentrop knew that Hitler favoured an alliance with Britain. As such, Ribbentrop greatly worked during his early diplomatic career to realize Hitler's dream of an anti-Soviet Anglo-German alliance. Ribbentrop made frequent trips to Britain, and upon his return he always reported to Hitler that most British people longed for an alliance with Germany. In November 1934, Ribbentrop met George Bernard Shaw, Sir Austen Chamberlain, Lord Cecil and Lord Lothian. On the basis of Lord Lothian's praise for the natural friendship between Germany and Britain, Ribbentrop informed Hitler that all elements of British society wished for closer ties with Germany. His report delighted Hitler, causing him to remark that Ribbentrop was the only person who told him \"the truth about the world abroad\". Because the Foreign Office's diplomats were not so sunny in their appraisal of the prospects for an alliance, Ribbentrop's influence with Hitler increased. Ribbentrop's personality, with his disdain for diplomatic niceties, meshed with what Hitler felt should be the relentless dynamism of a revolutionary regime.\nAmbassador-Plenipotentiary at Large.\nHitler rewarded Ribbentrop by appointing him \"Reich\" Minister Ambassador-Plenipotentiary at Large. In that capacity, Ribbentrop negotiated the Anglo-German Naval Agreement (AGNA) in 1935 and the Anti-Comintern Pact in 1936.\nAnglo-German Naval Agreement.\nNeurath did not think it possible to achieve the Anglo-German Naval Agreement. To discredit his rival, he appointed Ribbentrop head of the delegation sent to London to negotiate it. Once the talks began, Ribbentrop issued an ultimatum to Sir John Simon, informing him that if Germany's terms were not accepted in their entirety, the German delegation would go home. Simon was angry with that demand, and walked out of the talks. However, to everyone's surprise, the next day the British accepted Ribbentrop's demands, and the AGNA was signed in London on 18 June 1935 by Ribbentrop and Sir Samuel Hoare, the new British Foreign Secretary. The diplomatic success did much to increase Ribbentrop's prestige with Hitler, who called the day the AGNA was signed \"the happiest day in my life\". He believed it marked the beginning of an Anglo-German alliance, and ordered celebrations throughout Germany to mark the event.\nImmediately after the AGNA was signed, Ribbentrop followed up with the next step that was intended to create the Anglo-German alliance, the \"Gleichschaltung\" (co-ordination) of all societies demanding the restoration of Germany's former colonies in Africa. On 3 July 1935, it was announced that Ribbentrop would head the efforts to recover Germany's former African colonies. Hitler and Ribbentrop believed that demanding colonial restoration would pressure the British into making an alliance with the \"Reich\" on German terms. However, there was a difference between Ribbentrop and Hitler: Ribbentrop sincerely wished to recover the former German colonies, but for Hitler, colonial demands were just a negotiating tactic. Germany would renounce its demands in exchange for a British alliance.\nAnti-Comintern Pact.\nThe Anti-Comintern Pact in November 1936 marked an important change in German foreign policy. The Foreign Office had traditionally favoured a policy of friendship with the Republic of China, and an informal Sino-German alliance had emerged by the late 1920s. Neurath very much believed in maintaining Germany's good relations with China and mistrusted the Empire of Japan. Ribbentrop was opposed to the Foreign Office's pro-China orientation and instead favoured an alliance with Japan. To that end, Ribbentrop often worked closely with General Hiroshi \u014cshima, who served first as the Japanese military attach\u00e9 and then as ambassador in Berlin, to strengthen German-Japanese ties, despite furious opposition from the Wehrmacht and the Foreign Office, which preferred closer Sino-German ties.\nThe origins of the Anti-Comintern Pact went back to mid-1935, when in an effort to square the circle between seeking a \"rapprochement\" with Japan and Germany's traditional alliance with China, Ribbentrop and \u014cshima devised the idea of an anticommunist alliance as a way to bind China, Japan and Germany together. However, when the Chinese made it clear that they had no interest in such an alliance (especially given that the Japanese regarded Chinese adhesion to the proposed pact as a way of subordinating China to Japan), both Neurath and War Minister Field Marshal Werner von Blomberg persuaded Hitler to shelve the proposed treaty to avoid damaging Germany's good relations with China. Ribbentrop, who valued Japanese friendship far more than that of the Chinese, argued that Germany and Japan should sign the pact without Chinese participation. By November 1936, a revival of interest in a German-Japanese pact in both Tokyo and Berlin led to the signing of the Anti-Comintern Pact in Berlin. When the Pact was signed, invitations were sent to Italy, China, Britain and Poland to join. However, of the invited powers, only the Italians would ultimately sign. The Anti-Comintern Pact marked the beginning of the shift on Germany's part from China's ally to Japan's ally.\nVeterans' exchanges.\nIn 1935, Ribbentrop arranged for a series of much-publicised visits of First World War veterans to Britain, France and Germany. Ribbentrop persuaded the Royal British Legion and many French veterans' groups to send delegations to Germany to meet German veterans as the best way to promote peace. At the same time, Ribbentrop arranged for members of the \"Frontk\u00e4mpferbund\", the official German World War I veterans' group, to visit Britain and France to meet veterans there. The veterans' visits and attendant promises of \"never again\" did much to improve the \"New Germany's\" image in Britain and France. In July 1935, Brigadier Sir Francis Featherstone-Godley led the British Legion's delegation to Germany. \nThe Prince of Wales, the Legion's patron, made a much-publicized speech at the Legion's annual conference in June 1935 that stated that he could think of no better group of men than those of the Legion to visit and carry the message of peace to Germany and that he hoped that Britain and Germany would never fight again. As for the contradiction between German rearmament and his message of peace, Ribbentrop argued to whoever would listen that the German people had been \"humiliated\" by the Versailles Treaty, Germany wanted peace above all and German violations of Versailles were part of an effort to restore Germany's \"self-respect\". By the 1930s, much of British opinion had been convinced that the treaty was monstrously unfair and unjust to Germany, so as a result, many in Britain, such as Thomas Jones, Deputy Secretary to the Cabinet, were very open to Ribbentrop's message that European peace would be restored if only the Treaty of Versailles could be done away with.\nAmbassador to the United Kingdom.\nIn August 1936, Hitler appointed Ribbentrop ambassador to the United Kingdom with orders to negotiate an Anglo-German alliance. Ribbentrop arrived to take up his position in October 1936, formally presenting his credentials to King Edward VIII on 30 October. Ribbentrop's time in London was marked by an endless series of social gaffes and blunders that worsened his already-poor relations with the British Foreign Office.\nInvited to stay as a house guest of the 7th Marquess of Londonderry at Wynyard Hall in County Durham, in November 1936, he was taken to a service in Durham Cathedral, and the hymn \"Glorious Things of Thee Are Spoken\" was announced. As the organ played the opening bars, identical to the German national anthem, Ribbentrop gave the Nazi salute and had to be restrained by his host.\nAt his wife's suggestion, Ribbentrop hired the Berlin interior decorator Martin Luther to assist with his move to London and help realise the design of the new German embassy that Ribbentrop had built there (he felt that the existing embassy was insufficiently grand). Luther proved to be a master intriguer and became Ribbentrop's favourite hatchet man.\nRibbentrop did not understand the limited role in government exercised by 20th-century British monarchs. He thought that Edward VIII could dictate British foreign policy if he wanted. He convinced Hitler that he had Edward's support, but that was as much a delusion as his belief that he had impressed British society. In fact, Ribbentrop often displayed a fundamental misunderstanding of British politics and society. During the abdication crisis in December 1936, Ribbentrop reported to Berlin that it had been precipitated by an anti-German Jewish-Masonic-reactionary conspiracy to depose Edward, whom Ribbentrop represented as a staunch friend of Germany, and that civil war would soon break out in Britain between supporters of Edward and those of Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin. Ribbentrop's civil war predictions were greeted with incredulity by the British people who heard them. Duke Carl Alexander of W\u00fcrttemberg had told the Federal Bureau of Investigation that Wallis Simpson, Edward's lover and a suspected Nazi sympathizer, had slept with Ribbentrop in London in 1936; had remained in constant contact with him; and had continued to leak secrets.\nRibbentrop had a habit of summoning tailors from the best British firms, making them wait for hours and then sending them away without seeing him but with instructions to return the next day, only to repeat the process. That did immense damage to his reputation in British high society, as London's tailors retaliated by telling all their well-off clients that Ribbentrop was impossible to deal with. In an interview, his secretary Reinhard Spitzy stated, \"He [Ribbentrop] behaved very stupidly and very pompously and the British don't like pompous people\". In the same interview, Spitzy called Ribbentrop \"pompous, conceited and not too intelligent\" and stated he was an utterly insufferable man to work for.\nIn addition, Ribbentrop chose to spend as little time as possible in London to stay close to Hitler, which irritated the British Foreign Office immensely, as Ribbentrop's frequent absences prevented the handling of many routine diplomatic matters. (\"Punch\" referred to him as the \"Wandering Aryan\" for his frequent trips home.) As Ribbentrop alienated more and more people in Britain, \"Reichsmarschall\" Hermann G\u00f6ring warned Hitler that Ribbentrop was a \"stupid ass\". Hitler dismissed G\u00f6ring's concerns: \"But after all, he knows quite a lot of important people in England.\" That remark led G\u00f6ring to reply \"\"Mein F\u00fchrer\", that may be right, but the bad thing is, they know \"him\"\".\nIn February 1937, Ribbentrop committed a notable social gaffe by unexpectedly greeting George VI with the \"German greeting\", a stiff-armed Nazi salute: the gesture nearly knocked over the King, who was walking forward to shake Ribbentrop's hand at the time. Ribbentrop further compounded the damage to his image and caused a minor crisis in Anglo-German relations by insisting that henceforward all German diplomats were to greet heads of state by giving and receiving the stiff-arm fascist salute. The crisis was resolved when Neurath pointed out to Hitler that under Ribbentrop's rule, if the Soviet ambassador were to give the Communist clenched-fist salute, Hitler would be obliged to return it. On Neurath's advice, Hitler disavowed Ribbentrop's demand that King George receive and give the \"German greeting\".\nMost of Ribbentrop's time was spent demanding that Britain either sign the Anti-Comintern Pact or return the former German colonies in Africa. However, he also devoted considerable time to courting what he called the \"men of influence\" as the best way to achieve an Anglo-German alliance. In order to achieve this he became a member of the Lansdowne Club, a private members' club in Mayfair. He believed that the British aristocracy comprised some sort of secret society that ruled from behind the scenes, and that if he could befriend enough members of Britain's \"secret government\" he could bring about the alliance. Almost all of the initially favourable reports Ribbentrop provided to Berlin about the alliance's prospects were based on friendly remarks about the \"New Germany\" that came from British aristocrats such as Lord Londonderry and Lord Lothian. The rather cool reception that Ribbentrop received from British Cabinet ministers and senior bureaucrats did not make much of an impression on him at first. This British governmental view, summarised by Robert, Viscount Cranborne, Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, was that Ribbentrop always was a second-rate man.\nIn 1935, Sir Eric Phipps, the British Ambassador to Germany, complained to London about Ribbentrop's British associates in the Anglo-German Fellowship. He felt that they created \"false German hopes as in regards to British friendship and caused a reaction against it in England, where public opinion is very naturally hostile to the Nazi regime and its methods\". In September 1937, the British Consul in Munich, writing about the group that Ribbentrop had brought to the Nuremberg Rally, reported that there were some \"serious persons of standing among them\" but that an equal number of Ribbentrop's British contingent were \"eccentrics and few, if any, could be called representatives of serious English thought, either political or social, while they most certainly lacked any political or social influence in England\". In June 1937, when Lord Mount Temple, the Chairman of the Anglo-German Fellowship, asked to see Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain after meeting Hitler in a visit arranged by Ribbentrop, Robert Vansittart, the British Foreign Office's Permanent Under-Secretary of State, wrote a memo stating that:\nThe P.M. [Prime Minister] should certainly not see Lord Mount Temple \u2013 nor should the S[ecretary] of S[tate]. We really must put a stop to this eternal butting in of amateurs \u2013 and Lord Mount Temple is a particularly silly one. These activities \u2013 which are practically confined to Germany \u2013 render impossible the task of diplomacy.\nAfter Vansittart's memo, members of the Anglo-German Fellowship ceased to see Cabinet ministers after they went on Ribbentrop-arranged trips to Germany.\nIn February 1937, before a meeting with the Lord Privy Seal, Lord Halifax, Ribbentrop suggested to Hitler that Germany, Italy and Japan begin a worldwide propaganda campaign with the aim of forcing Britain to return the former German colonies in Africa. Hitler turned down the idea, but nonetheless during his meeting with Lord Halifax, Ribbentrop spent much of the meeting demanding that Britain sign an alliance with Germany and return the former German colonies. The German historian Klaus Hildebrand noted that as early as the Ribbentrop\u2013Halifax meeting the differing foreign policy views of Hitler and Ribbentrop were starting to emerge, with Ribbentrop more interested in restoring the pre-1914 German \"Imperium\" in Africa than the conquest of Eastern Europe. Following the lead of Andreas Hillgruber, who argued that Hitler had a \"Stufenplan\" (stage by stage plan) for world conquest, Hildebrand argued that Ribbentrop may not have fully understood what Hitler's \"Stufenplan\" was or that in pressing so hard for colonial restoration, he was trying to score a personal success that might improve his standing with Hitler. In March 1937, Ribbentrop attracted much adverse comment in the British press when he gave a speech at the Leipzig Trade Fair in Leipzig in which he declared that German economic prosperity would be satisfied \"through the restoration of the former German colonial possessions, or by means of the German people's own strength.\" The implied threat that if colonial restoration did not occur, the Germans would take back their former colonies by force attracted a great deal of hostile commentary on the inappropriateness of an ambassador threatening his host country in such a manner.\nRibbentrop's negotiating style, a mix of bullying bluster and icy coldness coupled with lengthy monologues praising Hitler, alienated many. The American historian Gordon A. Craig once observed that of all the voluminous memoir literature of the diplomatic scene of 1930s Europe, there are only two positive references to Ribbentrop. Of the two references, General Leo Geyr von Schweppenburg, the German military attach\u00e9 in London, commented that Ribbentrop had been a brave soldier in World War I, and the wife of the Italian Ambassador to Germany, Elisabetta Cerruti, called Ribbentrop \"one of the most diverting of the Nazis\". In both cases, the praise was limited, with Cerruti going on to write that only in Nazi Germany was it possible for someone as superficial as Ribbentrop to rise to be a minister of foreign affairs, and Geyr von Schweppenburg called Ribbentrop an absolute disaster as ambassador in London. The British historian/television producer Laurence Rees noted for his 1997 series \"\" that every single person interviewed for the series who had known Ribbentrop expressed a passionate hatred for him. One German diplomat, Herbert Richter, called Ribbentrop \"lazy and worthless\", while another, Manfred von Schr\u00f6der, was quoted as saying Ribbentrop was \"vain and ambitious\". Rees concluded, \"No other Nazi was so hated by his colleagues\".\nIn November 1937, Ribbentrop was placed in a highly-embarrassing situation since his forceful advocacy of the return of the former German colonies led British Foreign Secretary Anthony Eden and French Foreign Minister Yvon Delbos to offer to open talks on returning the former German colonies in return for which the Germans would make binding commitments to respect their borders in Central and Eastern Europe. Since Hitler was not interested in obtaining the former colonies, especially if the price was a brake on expansion into Eastern Europe, Ribbentrop was forced to turn down the Anglo-French offer that he had largely brought about. Immediately after turning down the Anglo-French offer on colonial restoration, Ribbentrop, for reasons of pure malice, ordered the \"Reichskolonialbund\" to increase the agitation for the former German colonies, a move that exasperated both the Foreign Office and the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs.\nAs the Italian Foreign Minister, Count Galeazzo Ciano, noted in his diary in late 1937, Ribbentrop had come to hate Britain with all the \"fury of a woman scorned\". Ribbentrop\u2014and Hitler, for that matter\u2014never understood that British foreign policy aimed at the appeasement of Germany, not an alliance with it.\nWhen Ribbentrop traveled to Rome in November 1937 to oversee Italy's adhesion to the Anti-Comintern Pact, he made clear to his hosts that the pact was really directed against Britain. As Ciano noted in his diary, the Anti-Comintern Pact was \"anti-Communist in theory, but in fact unmistakably anti-British\". Believing himself to be in a state of disgrace with Hitler over his failure to achieve the British alliance, Ribbentrop spent December 1937 in a state of depression and, together with his wife, wrote two lengthy documents for Hitler that denounced Britain. In the first report to Hitler, which was presented on 2 January 1938, Ribbentrop stated that \"England is our most dangerous enemy\". In the same report, Ribbentrop advised Hitler to abandon the idea of a British alliance and instead embrace the idea of an alliance of Germany, Japan and Italy to destroy the British Empire.\nRibbentrop wrote in his \"Memorandum for the \"F\u00fchrer\"\" that \"a change in the status quo in the East to Germany's advantage can only be accomplished by force\" and that the best way to achieve it was to build a global anti-British alliance system. Besides converting the Anti-Comintern Pact into an anti-British military alliance, Ribbentrop argued that German foreign policy should work to \"winning over all states whose interests conform directly or indirectly to ours.\" By the last statement, Ribbentrop clearly implied that the Soviet Union should be included in the anti-British alliance system he had proposed.\nForeign Minister of the \"Reich\".\nIn early 1938, Hitler asserted his control of the military-foreign policy apparatus, in part by sacking Neurath. On 4 February 1938, Ribbentrop succeeded Neurath as Foreign Minister. Ribbentrop's appointment has generally been seen as an indication that German foreign policy was moving in a more radical direction. In contrast to Neurath's cautious and less bellicose nature, Ribbentrop unequivocally supported war in 1938 and 1939.\nRibbentrop's time as Foreign Minister can be divided into three periods. In the first, from 1938 to 1939, he tried to persuade other states to align themselves with Germany for the coming war. In the second, from 1939 to 1943, Ribbentrop attempted to persuade other states to enter the war on Germany's side or at least to maintain pro-German neutrality. He was also involved in Operation Willi, an attempt to convince the former King Edward VIII to lobby his brother, now the king, on behalf of Germany. Many historians have suggested that Hitler was prepared to reinstate the Duke of Windsor as king in the hope of establishing a fascist Britain. If Edward would agree to work openly with Nazi Germany, he would be given financial assistance and would hopefully come to be a \"compliant\" king. Reportedly, 50 million Swiss francs were set aside for that purpose. The plan was never realised.\nIn the final phase, from 1943 to 1945, he had the task of trying to keep Germany's allies from leaving her side. During the course of all three periods, Ribbentrop frequently met leaders and diplomats from Italy, Japan, Romania, Spain, Bulgaria, and Hungary. During all of that time, Ribbentrop feuded with various other Nazi leaders. As time went by, Ribbentrop started to oust the Foreign Office's old diplomats from their senior positions and replace them with men from the \"Dienststelle\". As early as 1938, 32 per cent of the offices in the Foreign Ministry were held by men who previously served in the \"Dienststelle\".\nOne of Ribbentrop's first acts as Foreign Minister was to achieve a total volte-face in Germany's Far Eastern policies. Ribbentrop was instrumental in February 1938 in persuading Hitler to recognize the Japanese puppet state of Manchukuo and to renounce German claims upon its former colonies in the Pacific, which were now held by Japan. By April 1938, Ribbentrop had ended all German arms shipments to China and had all of the German Army officers serving with the Kuomintang government of Chiang Kai-shek recalled, with the threat that the families of the officers in China would be sent to concentration camps if the officers did not return to Germany immediately. In return, the Germans received little thanks from the Japanese, who refused to allow any new German businesses to be set up in the part of China they had occupied and continued with their policy of attempting to exclude all existing German and all other Western businesses from Japanese-occupied China. At the same time, the end of the informal Sino-German alliance led Chiang to terminate all concessions and contracts held by German companies in Kuomintang China.\nMunich Agreement and Czechoslovakia's destruction.\nErnst von Weizs\u00e4cker, the State Secretary from 1938 to 1943, opposed the general trend in German foreign policy towards attacking the First Czechoslovak Republic and feared that it might cause a general war that Germany would lose. Weizs\u00e4cker had no moral objections to the idea of destroying Czechoslovakia but opposed only the timing of the attack. He favoured the idea of a \"chemical\" destruction of Czechoslovakia in which Germany, Hungary and Poland would close their frontiers to destabilise Czechoslovakia economically. He strongly disliked Ribbentrop's idea of a \"mechanical\" destruction of Czechoslovakia by war, which he saw as too risky. However, despite all of their reservations and fears about Ribbentrop, whom they saw as recklessly seeking to plunge Germany into a general war before the \"Reich\" was ready, neither Weizs\u00e4cker nor any of the other professional diplomats were prepared to confront their chief.\nBefore the Anglo-German summit at Berchtesgaden on 15 September 1938, the British Ambassador, Sir Nevile Henderson, and Weizs\u00e4cker worked out a private arrangement for Hitler and Chamberlain to meet with no advisers present as a way of excluding the ultrahawkish Ribbentrop from attending the talks. Hitler's interpreter, Paul Schmidt, later recalled that it was \"felt that our Foreign Minister would prove a disturbing element\" at the Berchtesgaden summit. In a moment of pique at his exclusion from the Chamberlain-Hitler meeting, Ribbentrop refused to hand over Schmidt's notes of the summit to Chamberlain, a move that caused much annoyance on the British side. Ribbentrop spent the last weeks of September 1938 looking forward very much to the German-Czechoslovak war that he expected to break out on 1 October 1938. Ribbentrop regarded the Munich Agreement as a diplomatic defeat for Germany, as it deprived Germany of the opportunity to wage the war to destroy Czechoslovakia that Ribbentrop wanted to see. The Sudetenland issue, which was the ostensible subject of the German-Czechoslovak dispute, had been a pretext for German aggression. During the Munich Conference, Ribbentrop spent much of his time brooding unhappily in the corners. Ribbentrop told the head of Hitler's Press Office, Fritz Hesse, that the Munich Agreement was \"first-class stupidity... All it means is that we have to fight the English in a year, when they will be better armed... It would have been much better if war had come now\". Like Hitler, Ribbentrop was determined that in the next crisis, Germany would not have its professed demands met in another Munich-type summit and that the next crisis to be caused by Germany would result in the war that Chamberlain had \"cheated\" the Germans out of at Munich.\nIn the aftermath of Munich, Hitler was in a violently anti-British mood caused in part by his rage over being \"cheated\" out of the war to \"annihilate\" Czechoslovakia that he very much wanted to have in 1938 and in part by his realisation that Britain would neither ally itself nor stand aside in regard to Germany's ambition to dominate Europe. As a consequence, Britain was considered after Munich to be the main enemy of the \"Reich\", and as a result, the influence of ardently Anglophobic Ribbentrop correspondingly rose with Hitler.\nPartly for economic reasons, and partly out of fury over being \"cheated\" out of war in 1938, Hitler decided to destroy the rump state of Czecho-Slovakia, as Czechoslovakia had been renamed in October 1938, early in 1939. Ribbentrop played an important role in setting in motion the crisis that was to result in the end of Czecho-Slovakia by ordering German diplomats in Bratislava to contact Father Jozef Tiso, the premier of the Slovak regional government, and pressure him to declare independence from Prague. When Tiso proved reluctant to do so on the grounds that the autonomy that had existed since October 1938 was sufficient for him and that to completely sever links with the Czechs would leave Slovakia open to being annexed by Hungary, Ribbentrop had the German embassy in Budapest contact the regent, Admiral Mikl\u00f3s Horthy. Horthy was advised that the Germans might be open to having more of Hungary restored to its former borders and that the Hungarians should best start concentrating troops on their northern border at once if they were serious about changing their frontiers. Upon hearing of the Hungarian mobilization, Tiso was presented with the choice of either declaring independence, with the understanding that the new state would be in the German sphere of influence, or seeing all of Slovakia absorbed into Hungary. As a result, Tiso had the Slovak regional government issue a declaration of independence on 14 March 1939; the ensuing crisis in Czech-Slovak relations was used as a pretext to summon Czecho-Slovak President Emil H\u00e1cha to Berlin over his \"failure\" to keep order in his country. On the night of 14\u201315 March 1939, Ribbentrop played a key role in the German occupation of the Czech part of Czecho-Slovakia by bullying H\u00e1cha into transforming his country into a German protectorate at a meeting in the Reich Chancellery in Berlin. On 15 March 1939, German troops occupied the Czech areas of Czecho-Slovakia, which then became the \"Reich\" Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia.\nOn 20 March 1939, Ribbentrop summoned Lithuanian Foreign Minister Juozas Urb\u0161ys to Berlin and informed him that if a Lithuanian plenipotentiary did not arrive at once to negotiate to turn over the Memelland to Germany the Luftwaffe would raze Kaunas to the ground. As a result of Ribbentrop's ultimatum on 23 March, the Lithuanians agreed to return Memel (modern Klaip\u0117da, Lithuania) to Germany.\nIn March 1939, Ribbentrop assigned the largely ethnically Ukrainian Sub-Carpathian Ruthenia region of Czecho-Slovakia, which had just proclaimed its independence as the Republic of Carpatho-Ukraine, to Hungary, which then proceeded to annex it after a short war. This was significant as there had been many fears in the Soviet Union in the 1930s that the Germans would use Ukrainian nationalism as a tool to break up the Soviet Union. The establishment of an autonomous Ukrainian region in Czecho-Slovakia in October 1938 had prompted a major Soviet media campaign against its existence on the grounds that this was part of a Western plot to support separatism in Soviet Ukraine. By allowing the Hungarians to destroy Europe's only Ukrainian state, Ribbentrop had signified that Germany was not interested, at least for now, in sponsoring Ukrainian nationalism. That, in turn, helped to improve German-Soviet relations by demonstrating that German foreign policy was now primarily anti-Western rather than anti-Soviet.\nFrench-German non-aggression pact, December 1938.\nIn December 1938, during Ribbentrop's visit to Paris to sign the French-German non-aggression pact, he had conversations with French Foreign Minister Georges Bonnet, which Ribbentrop later claimed included a promise that France would recognize all of Eastern Europe as Germany's exclusive sphere of influence. The talks with Bonnet were also conducted on the German side by Ernst von Weizs\u00e4cker, a high-ranking German diplomat who worked under Ribbentrop.\nGerman threat to Poland and British guarantee.\nInitially, Germany hoped to transform Poland into a satellite state, with Ribbentrop and Japanese military attache Hiroshi \u014cshima trying to convince Poland to join the Anti-Comintern Pact. By March 1939, German demands had been rejected by the Poles three times, which led Hitler to decide, with enthusiastic support from Ribbentrop, upon the destruction of Poland as the main German foreign policy goal of 1939. On 21 March 1939, Hitler first went public with his demand that Danzig rejoin the \"Reich\" and for \"extra-territorial\" roads across the Polish Corridor. That marked a significant escalation of the German pressure on Poland, which until then had been confined to private meetings between German and Polish diplomats. The same day, on 21 March 1939, Ribbentrop presented a set of demands to the Polish Ambassador J\u00f3zef Lipski about Poland allowing the Free City of Danzig to return to Germany in such violent and extreme language that it led the Poles to fear their country was on the verge of an immediate German attack. Ribbentrop had used such extreme language, particularly his remark that if Germany had a different policy towards the Soviet Union then Poland would cease to exist, that it led to the Poles ordering partial mobilisation and placing their armed forces on the highest state of alert on 23 March 1939.\nIn a protest note at Ribbentrop's behaviour, Poland's Foreign Minister J\u00f3zef Beck reminded him that Poland was an independent country and not some sort of German protectorate that Ribbentrop could bully at will. Ribbentrop, in turn, sent out instructions to the German Ambassador in Warsaw, Count Hans-Adolf von Moltke, that if Poland agreed to the German demands, Germany would ensure that Poland could partition Slovakia with Hungary and be ensured of German support for annexing Ukraine. If the Poles rejected his offer, Poland would be considered an enemy of the \"Reich\". On 26 March, in a stormy meeting with the Polish Ambassador, J\u00f3zef Lipski, Ribbentrop accused the Poles of attempting to bully Germany by their partial mobilisation and violently attacked them for offering consideration only of the German demand about the \"extra-territorial\" roads. The meeting ended with Ribbentrop screaming that if Poland invaded the Free City of Danzig, Germany would go to war to destroy Poland. When the news of Ribbentrop's remarks was leaked to the Polish press, despite Beck's order to the censors on 27 March, it caused anti-German riots in Poland with the local Nazi Party headquarters in the mixed town of Lininco destroyed by a mob. On 28 March, Beck told Moltke that any attempt to change the status of Danzig unilaterally would be regarded by Poland as a \"casus belli\". Although the Germans were not planning an attack on Poland in March 1939, Ribbentrop's bullying behaviour towards the Poles destroyed any faint chance of Poland allowing Danzig to return to Germany.\nThe German occupation of the Czech areas of Czecho-Slovakia on 15 March, in total contravention of the Munich Agreement, which had been signed less than six months before, infuriated British and French public opinion and lost Germany any sympathy. Such was the state of public fury that it appeared possible for several days afterwards that the Chamberlain government might fall because of a backbench rebellion. Even Ribbentrop's standard line that Germany was only reacting to an unjust Versailles Treaty and wanted peace with everyone, which had worked so well in the past, failed to carry weight. Reflecting the changed mood, Conservative MP Duff Cooper wrote in a letter to \"The Times\":Some of us are getting rather tired of the sanctimonious attitude which seeks to take upon our shoulders the blame for every crime committed in Europe. If Germany had been left stronger in 1919 she would sooner have been in a position to do what she is doing today.\nMoreover, the British government had genuinely believed in the German claim that it was only the Sudetenland that concerned it and that Germany was not seeking to dominate Europe. By occupying the Czech parts of Czecho-Slovakia, Germany lost all credibility for its claim to be only righting the alleged wrongs of Versailles.\nShortly afterwards, false reports spread in mid-March 1939 by the Romanian minister in London, Virgil Tilea, that his country was on the verge of an immediate German attack, led to a dramatic U-turn in the British policy of resisting commitments in Eastern Europe. Ribbentrop truthfully denied that Germany was going to invade Romania. But his denials were expressed in almost identical language to the denials that he had issued in early March, when he had denied that anything was being planned against the Czechs; thus they actually increased the \"Romanian war scare\" of March 1939. From the British point of view, it was regarded as highly desirable to keep Romania and its oil out of German hands. Since Germany itself had hardly any sources of oil, the ability of the Royal Navy to impose a blockade represented a British trump card to deter and, if necessary, win a war. If Germany were to occupy oil-rich Romania, that would undercut all of the British strategic assumptions on Germany's need to import oil from the Americas. Since Poland was regarded as the East European state with the most powerful army, Poland had to be tied to Britain as the best way of ensuring Polish support for Romania; it was the obvious \"quid pro quo\" that Britain would have to do something for Polish security if the Poles were to be induced to do something for Romanian security.\nOn 31 March 1939, Chamberlain announced before the House of Commons the British \"guarantee\" of Poland, which committed Britain to go to war to defend Polish independence, though pointedly the \"guarantee\" excluded Polish frontiers. As a result of the \"guarantee\" of Poland, Hitler began to speak with increasing frequency of a British \"encirclement\" policy, which he used as the excuse for denouncing, in a speech before the \"Reichstag\" on 28 April 1939, the Anglo-German Naval Agreement and the Non-Aggression Pact with Poland.\nTurkey.\nIn late March, Ribbentrop had the German \"charg\u00e9 d'affaires\" in Turkey, Hans Kroll, start pressuring Turkey into an alliance with Germany. The Turks assured Kroll that they had no objection to Germany making the Balkans its economic sphere of influence but would regard any move to make the Balkans into a sphere of German political influence as most unwelcome.\nIn April 1939, when Ribbentrop announced at a secret meeting of the senior staff of the Foreign Office that Germany was ending talks with Poland and was instead going to destroy it in an operation late that year, the news was greeted joyfully by those present. Anti-Polish feelings had long been rampant in the agency and so, in marked contrast to their cool attitude about attacking Czechoslovakia in 1938, diplomats such as Weizs\u00e4cker were highly enthusiastic about the prospect of war with Poland in 1939. Professional diplomats such as Weizs\u00e4cker who had never accepted the legitimacy of Poland, which they saw as an \"abomination\" created by the Versailles Treaty, were wholehearted in their support of a war to wipe Poland off the map. The degree of unity within the German government with both the diplomats and the military united in their support of Hitler's anti-Polish policy, which stood in contrast to their views the previous year about destroying Czechoslovakia, very much encouraged Hitler and Ribbentrop with their chosen course of action.\nIn April 1939, Ribbentrop received intelligence that Britain and Turkey were negotiating an alliance intended to keep Germany out of the Balkans. On 23 April 1939, Turkish Foreign Minister \u015e\u00fckr\u00fc Saraco\u011flu told the British ambassador of Turkish fears of Italian claims of the Mediterranean as \"Mare Nostrum\" and German control of the Balkans, and he suggested an Anglo-Soviet-Turkish alliance as the best way of countering the Axis. As the Germans had broken the Turkish diplomatic codes, Ribbentrop was well aware as he warned in a circular to German embassies that Anglo-Turkish talks had gone much further \"than what the Turks would care to tell us\". Ribbentrop appointed Franz von Papen Germany's ambassador in Turkey with instructions to win it to an alliance with Germany. Ribbentrop had been attempting to appoint Papen as an ambassador to Turkey since April 1938. His first attempt ended in failure when Turkish President Mustafa Kemal Atat\u00fcrk, who remembered Papen well with considerable distaste from World War I, refused to accept him as ambassador and complained in private the nomination of Papen must have been meant as some sort of sick German joke. The German embassy in Ankara had been vacant ever since the retirement of the previous ambassador Friedrich von Keller in November 1938, and Ribbentrop was able to get the Turks to accept Papen as ambassador only when Saraco\u011flu complained to Kroll in April 1939 about when the Germans were ever going to send a new ambassador. Papen's attempt to address Turkish fears of Italian expansionism by getting Ribbentrop to have Count Galeazzo Ciano promise the Turks that they had nothing to fear from Italy backfired when the Turks found the Italo-German effort to have been patronising and insulting.\nInstead of focusing on talking to the Turks, Ribbentrop and Papen became entangled in a feud over Papen's demand to bypass Ribbentrop and to send his dispatches straight to Hitler. As a former chancellor, Papen had been granted the privilege of bypassing the Foreign Minister while he was ambassador to Austria. Ribbentrop's friendship with Papen, which went back to 1918, ended over that issue. At the same time, Ribbentrop took to shouting at the Turkish Ambassador in Berlin, Mehemet Hamdi Arpag, as part of the effort to win Turkey over as a German ally. Ribbentrop believed that Turks were so stupid that one had to shout at them to make them understand. One of the consequences of Ribbentrop's heavyhanded behaviour was the signing of the Anglo-Turkish alliance on 12 May 1939.\nFrom early 1939 onwards, Ribbentrop had become the leading advocate within the German government of reaching an understanding with the Soviet Union as the best way of pursuing both the short-term anti-Polish and long-term anti-British foreign policy goals. Ribbentrop first seems to have considered the idea of a pact with the Soviet Union after an unsuccessful visit to Warsaw in January 1939, when the Poles again refused Ribbentrop's demands about Danzig, the \"extra-territorial\" roads across the Polish Corridor and the Anti-Comintern Pact. During the Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact negotiations, Ribbentrop was overjoyed by a report from his ambassador in Moscow, Count Friedrich Werner von der Schulenburg, of a speech by Soviet leader Joseph Stalin before the 18th Party Congress in March 1939 that was strongly anti-Western, which Schulenburg reported meant that the Soviet Union might be seeking an accord with Germany. Ribbentrop followed up Schulenburg's report by sending Dr. Karl Schnurre of the Foreign Office's trade department to negotiate a German-Soviet economic agreement. At the same time, Ribbentrop's efforts to convert the Anti-Comintern Pact into an anti-British alliance met with considerable hostility from the Japanese in late 1938 and early 1939, but with the Italians, Ribbentrop enjoyed some apparent success. Because of Japanese opposition to participation in an anti-British alliance, Ribbentrop decided to settle for a bilateral German-Italian anti-British treaty. Ribbentrop's efforts were crowned with success with the signing of the Pact of Steel in May 1939, but it was accomplished only by falsely assuring Mussolini that there would be no war for the next three years.\nPact with Soviet Union and outbreak of World War II.\nRibbentrop played a key role in the conclusion of a Soviet-German non-aggression pact, the Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact, in 1939 and in the diplomatic action surrounding the attack on Poland. In public, Ribbentrop expressed great fury at the Polish refusal to allow for Danzig's return to the \"Reich\" or to grant Polish permission for the \"extra-territorial\" highways, but since the matters were intended after March 1939 to be only a pretext for German aggression, Ribbentrop always refused privately to allow for any talks between German and Polish diplomats about those matters. Ribbentrop feared that if German\u2013Polish talks took place, there was the danger that the Poles might back down and agree to the German demands, as the Czechoslovaks had done in 1938 under Anglo-French pressure, depriving the Germans of their excuse for aggression. To block German\u2013Polish diplomatic talks further, Ribbentrop had the German Ambassador to Poland, Count Hans-Adolf von Moltke, recalled, and he refused to see the Polish ambassador, J\u00f3zef Lipski. On 25 May 1939, Ribbentrop sent a secret message to Moscow to tell the Soviet Foreign Commissar, Vyacheslav Molotov, that if Germany attacked Poland \"Russia's special interests would be taken into consideration\".\nThroughout 1939, Hitler always privately referred to Britain as his main opponent but portrayed the coming destruction of Poland as a necessary prelude to any war with Britain. Ribbentrop informed Hitler that any war with Poland would last for only 24 hours and that the British would be so stunned with this display of German power that they would not honour their commitments. Along the same lines, Ribbentrop told Ciano on 5 May 1939, \"It is certain that within a few months not one Frenchman nor a single Englishman will go to war for Poland\".\nRibbentrop supported his analysis of the situation by showing Hitler only the diplomatic dispatches that supported his view that neither Britain nor France would honour their commitments to Poland. In that, Ribbentrop was particularly supported by the German Ambassador in London, Herbert von Dirksen, who reported that Chamberlain knew \"the social structure of Britain, even the conception of the British Empire, would not survive the chaos of even a victorious war\" and so would back down over Poland. Furthermore, Ribbentrop had the German embassy in London provide translations from pro-appeasement newspapers such as the \"Daily Mail\" and the \"Daily Express\" for Hitler's benefit, which had the effect of making it seem that British public opinion was more strongly against going to war for Poland than it actually was. The British historian Victor Rothwell wrote that the newspapers used by Ribbentrop to provide his press summaries for Hitler were out of touch not only with British public opinion but also with British government policy in regard to Poland. The press summaries Ribbentrop provided were particularly important, as Ribbentrop had managed to convince Hitler that the British government secretly controlled the British press, and just as in Germany, nothing appeared in the British press that the British government did not want to appear. Furthermore, the Germans had broken the British diplomatic codes and were reading the messages between the Foreign Office in London to and from the Embassy in Warsaw. The decrypts showed that there was much tension in Anglo-Polish relations, with the British pressuring the Poles to allow Danzig to rejoin the \"Reich\" and the Poles staunchly resisting all efforts to pressure them into concessions to Germany. On the basis of such decrypts, Hitler and Ribbentrop believed that the British were bluffing with their warnings that they would go to war to defend Polish independence. In mid-1939, Ribbentrop sabotaged all efforts at a peaceful solution to the Danzig dispute, leading the American historian Gerhard Weinberg to comment that \"perhaps Chamberlain's haggard appearance did him more credit than Ribbentrop's beaming smile\", as the countdown to a war that would kill tens of millions inexorably gathered pace.\nNeville Chamberlain's European Policy in 1939 was based upon creating a \"peace front\" of alliances linking Western and Eastern European states to serve as a \"tripwire\" meant to deter any act of German aggression. The new \"containment\" strategy adopted in March 1939 was to give firm warnings to Berlin, increase the pace of British re-armament and attempt to form an interlocking network of alliances that would block German aggression anywhere in Europe by creating such a formidable deterrence to aggression that Hitler could not rationally choose that option. Underlying the basis of the \"containment\" of Germany were the so-called \"X documents\", provided by Carl Friedrich Goerdeler, in 1938\u201339. They suggested that the German economy, under the strain of massive military spending, was on the verge of collapse and led British policy-makers to the conclusion that if Hitler could be deterred from war and that if his regime was \"contained\" long enough, the German economy would collapse, and, with it, presumably the Nazi regime. At the same time, British policymakers were afraid that if Hitler were \"contained\" and faced with a collapsing economy, he would commit a desperate \"mad dog act\" of aggression as a way of lashing out. Hence, emphasis was put on pressuring the Poles to allow the return of Danzig to Germany as a way of resolving the crisis peacefully by allowing Hitler to back down without him losing face. As part of a dual strategy to avoid war via deterrence and appeasement of Germany, British leaders warned that they would go to war if Germany attacked Poland, but at the same time, they tried to avoid war by holding unofficial talks with would-be peacemakers such as the British newspaper proprietor Lord Kemsley, the Swedish businessman Axel Wenner-Gren and another Swedish businessman Birger Dahlerus, who attempted to work out the basis for a peaceful return of Danzig.\nIn May 1939, as part of his efforts to bully Turkey into joining the Axis, Ribbentrop had arranged for the cancellation of the delivery of 60 heavy howitzers from the \u0160koda Works, which the Turks had paid for in advance. The German refusal either to deliver the artillery pieces or refund the 125 million \"Reichsmarks\" that the Turks had paid for them was to be a major strain on German-Turkish relations in 1939 and had the effect of causing Turkey's politically powerful army to resist Ribbentrop's entreaties to join the Axis. As part of the fierce diplomatic competition in Ankara in the first half of 1939 between von Papen and French Ambassador Ren\u00e9 Massigli with British Ambassador, Sir Hughe Knatchbull-Hugessen to win the allegiance of Turkey to either the Axis or the Allies, Ribbentrop suffered a major reversal in July 1939 when Massigli was able to arrange for major French arms shipments to Turkey on credit to replace the weapons that the Germans had refused to deliver to the Turks.\nIn June 1939, Franco-German relations were strained when the head of the French section of the \"Dienststelle Ribbentrop\", Otto Abetz, was expelled from France following allegations that he had bribed two French newspaper editors to print pro-German articles. Ribbentrop was enraged by Abetz's expulsion and attacked Count Johannes von Welczeck, the German Ambassador in Paris, over his failure to have the French readmit him. In July 1939, Ribbentrop's claims about an alleged statement of December 1938 made by French Foreign Minister Georges Bonnet were to lead to a lengthy war of words via a series of letters to the French newspapers between Ribbentrop and Bonnet over precisely what Bonnet had said to Ribbentrop.\nOn 11 August 1939, Ribbentrop met the Italian Foreign Minister, Count Galeazzo Ciano, and the Italian Ambassador to Germany, Count Bernardo Attolico, in Salzburg. During that meeting, both Ciano and Attolico were horrified to learn from Ribbentrop that Germany planned to attack Poland and that the Danzig issue was just a pretext for aggression. When Ciano asked if there was anything Italy could do to broker a Polish-German settlement that would avert a war, he was told by Ribbentrop, \"We want war!\" Ribbentrop expressed his firmly held belief that neither Britain nor France would go to war for Poland, but if that occurred, he fully expected the Italians to honour the terms of the Pact of Steel, which was both an offensive and defensive treaty, and to declare war not only on Poland but on the Western powers if necessary. Ribbentrop told his Italian guests that \"the localisation of the conflict is certain\" and \"the probability of victory is infinite\". Ribbentrop brushed away Ciano's fears of a general war. He claimed, \"France and England cannot intervene because they are insufficiently prepared militarily and because they have no means of injuring Germany\". \nCiano complained furiously that Ribbentrop had violated his promise given earlier that year, when Italy signed the Pact of Steel, that there would be no war for the next three years. Ciano said that it was absurd to believe that the \"Reich\" could attack Poland without triggering a wider war and that now the Italians were left with the choice of going to war when they needed three more years to rearm or being forced into the humiliation of having to violate the terms of the Pact of Steel by declaring neutrality, which would make the Italians appear cowardly. Ciano complained in his diary that his arguments \"had no effect\" on Ribbentrop, who simply refused to believe any information that did not fit in with his preconceived notions. Despite Ciano's efforts to persuade Ribbentrop to put off the attack on Poland until 1942 to allow the Italians time to get ready for war, Ribbentrop was adamant that Germany had no interest in a diplomatic solution of the Danzig question but wanted a war to wipe Poland off the map. The Salzburg meeting marked the moment when Ciano's dislike of Ribbentrop was transformed into outright hatred and of the beginning of his disillusionment with the pro-German foreign policy that he had championed.\nOn 21 August 1939, Hitler received a message from Stalin: \"The Soviet Government has instructed me to say they agree to Herr von Ribbentrop's arrival on 23 August\". The same day, Hitler ordered German mobilisation. The extent that Hitler was influenced by Ribbentrop's advice can be seen in Hitler's orders for a limited mobilisation against Poland alone. Weizs\u00e4cker recorded in his diary throughout the first half of 1939 repeated statements from Hitler that any German\u2013Polish war would be a localized conflict and that there was no danger of a general war if the Soviet Union could be persuaded to stay neutral. Hitler believed that British policy was based upon securing Soviet support for Poland, which led him to perform a diplomatic U-turn and support Ribbentrop's policy of rapprochement with the Soviet Union as the best way of ensuring a local war. That was especially the case as decrypts showed the British military attach\u00e9 to Poland arguing that Britain could not save Poland in the event of a German attack and that only Soviet support offered the prospect of Poland holding out.\nThe signing of the Non-Aggression Pact in Moscow on 23 August 1939 was the crowning achievement of Ribbentrop's career. He flew to Moscow, where, over the course of a 13-hour visit, Ribbentrop signed both the Non-Aggression Pact and the secret protocols, which partitioned much of Eastern Europe between the Soviets and the Germans. Ribbentrop had expected to see only the Soviet Foreign Commissar Vyacheslav Molotov and was most surprised to be holding talks with Joseph Stalin himself. During his trip to Moscow, Ribbentrop's talks with Stalin and Molotov proceeded very cordially and efficiently with the exception of the question of Latvia, which Hitler had instructed Ribbentrop to try to claim for Germany. Ribbentrop had been instructed to claim the Daugava as the future boundary between the Greater Germanic Reich and the Soviet Union, but had also been ordered to grant extensive concessions to Stalin. When Stalin claimed Latvia for the Soviet Union, Ribbentrop was forced to telephone Berlin for permission from Hitler to concede Latvia to the Soviets. After finishing his talks with Stalin and Molotov, Ribbentrop, at a dinner with the Soviet leaders, launched into a lengthy diatribe against the British Empire, with frequent interjections of approval from Stalin, and exchanged toasts with Stalin in honour of German-Soviet friendship. For a brief moment in August 1939, Ribbentrop convinced Hitler that the Non-Aggression Pact with the Soviet Union would cause the fall of the Chamberlain government and lead to a new British government that would abandon the Poles to their fate. Ribbentrop argued that with Soviet economic support, especially in the form of oil, Germany was now immune to the effects of a British naval blockade and so the British would never take on Germany. On 23 August 1939, at a secret meeting of the \"Reich\"'s top military leadership at the Berghof, Hitler argued that neither Britain nor France would go to war for Poland without the Soviet Union, and fixed \"X-Day\", the date for the invasion of Poland, for 26 August. Hitler added, \"My only fear is that at the last moment some \"Schweinehund\" will make a proposal for mediation\". Unlike Hitler, who saw the Non-Aggression Pact as merely a pragmatic device forced on him by circumstances, the refusal of Britain or Poland to play the roles that Hitler had allocated to them, Ribbentrop regarded the Non-Aggression Pact as integral to his anti-British policy.\nThe signing of the Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact on 23 August 1939 not only won Germany an informal alliance with the Soviet Union but also neutralized Anglo-French attempts to win Turkey to the \"peace front\". The Turks always believed that it was essential to have the Soviet Union as an ally to counter Germany, and the signing of the pact undercut completely the assumptions behind Turkish security policy. The Anglo-French effort to include the Balkans into the \"peace front\" had always rested on the assumption that the cornerstone of the \"peace front\" in the Balkans was to be Turkey, the regional superpower. Because the Balkans were rich in raw materials such as iron, zinc and Romanian oil, which could help Germany survive a British blockade, it was viewed as highly important by the Allies to keep German influence in the Balkans to a minimum. That was the principal motivation behind efforts to link British promises to support Turkey in the event of an Italian attack, in exchange for Turkish promises to help defend Romania from a German attack. British and French leaders believed that the deterrent value of the \"peace front\" could be increased if Turkey were a member, and the Turkish Straits were open to Allied ships. That would allow the Allies to send troops and supplies to Romania over the Black Sea and through Romania to Poland.\nOn 25 August 1939, Ribbentrop's influence with Hitler wavered for a moment when the news reached Berlin of the ratification of the Anglo-Polish military alliance and a personal message from Mussolini that told Hitler that Italy would dishonour the Pact of Steel if Germany attacked Poland. This was especially damaging to Ribbentrop, as he always assured Hitler, \"Italy's attitude is determined by the Rome-Berlin Axis\". As a result of the message from Rome and the ratification of the Anglo-Polish treaty, Hitler cancelled the invasion of Poland planned for 26 August but ordered it held back until 1 September to give Germany some time to break up the unfavourable international alignment. Though Ribbentrop continued to argue that Britain and France were bluffing, both he and Hitler were prepared, as a last resort, to risk a general war by invading Poland. Because of Ribbentrop's firmly held views that Britain was Germany's most dangerous enemy and that an Anglo-German war was inevitable, it scarcely mattered to him when his much-desired war with Britain came. The Greek historian Aristotle Kaillis wrote that it was Ribbentrop's influence with Hitler and his insistence that the Western powers would fail to go to war for Poland that was the most important reason that Hitler did not cancel \"Fall Wei\u00df\", the German invasion of Poland, altogether, instead of only postponing \"X-day\" for six days. Ribbentrop told Hitler that his sources showed that Britain would not be militarily prepared to take on Germany at the earliest until 1940 or more probably 1941, so that meant that the British were bluffing. Even if the British were serious in their warnings of war, Ribbentrop took the view that since a war with Britain was inevitable, the risk of a war with Britain was acceptable and so he argued that Germany should not shy away from such challenges.\nOn 27 August 1939, Chamberlain sent a letter to Hitler that was intended to counteract reports Chamberlain had heard from intelligence sources in Berlin that Ribbentrop had convinced Hitler that the Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact would ensure that Britain would abandon Poland. In his letter, Chamberlain wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Whatever may prove to be the nature of the German-Soviet Agreement, it cannot alter Great Britain's obligation to Poland which His Majesty's Government have stated in public repeatedly and plainly and which they are determined to fulfil.&lt;br&gt;It has been alleged that, if His Majesty's Government had made their position more clear in 1914, the great catastrophe would have been avoided. Whether or not there is any force in that allegation, His Majesty's Government are resolved that on this occasion there shall be no such tragic misunderstanding.&lt;br&gt;If the case should arise, they are resolved, and prepared, to employ without delay all the forces at their command, and it is impossible to foresee the end of hostilities once engaged. It would be a dangerous illusion to think that, if war once starts, it will come to an early end even if a success on any one of the several fronts on which it will be engaged should have been secured\nRibbentrop told Hitler that Chamberlain's letter was just a bluff and urged his master to call it.\nOn the night of 30\u201331 August 1939, Ribbentrop had an extremely heated exchange with the British Ambassador to Germany, Sir Nevile Henderson, who objected to Ribbentrop's demand, given at about midnight, that if a Polish plenipotentiary did not arrive in Berlin that night to discuss the German \"final offer\", the responsibility for the outbreak of war would not rest on the \"Reich\". Ambassador Henderson stated that the terms of the German \"final offer\" were very reasonable but argued that Ribbentrop's time limit for Polish acceptance of the \"final offer\" was most unreasonable, and he also demanded to know why Ribbentrop insisted upon seeing a special Polish plenipotentiary and could not present the \"final offer\" to Ambassador J\u00f3zef Lipski or provide a written copy of the \"final offer\". The Henderson\u2013Ribbentrop meeting became so tense that the two men almost came to blows. The American historian Gerhard Weinberg described the Henderson\u2013Ribbentrop meeting:When Joachim von Ribbentrop refused to give a copy of the German demands to the British Ambassador [Henderson] at midnight of 30\u201331 August 1939, the two almost came to blows. Ambassador Henderson, who had long advocated concessions to Germany, recognized that here was a deliberately conceived alibi the German government had prepared for a war it was determined to start. No wonder Henderson was angry; von Ribbentrop on the other hand could see war ahead and went home beaming.\nAs intended by Ribbentrop, the narrow time limit for acceptance of the \"final offer\" made it impossible for the British government to contact the Polish government in time about the German offer, let alone for the Poles to arrange for a Polish plenipotentiary envoy to arrive in Berlin that night, thereby allowing Ribbentrop to claim that the Poles had rejected the German \"final offer\". As it was, a special meeting of the British cabinet called to consider the \"final offer\" and declined to pass on the message to Warsaw under the grounds that it was not a serious proposal on the part of Berlin. The \"rejection\" of the German proposal was one of the pretexts used for the German aggression against Poland on 1 September 1939. The British historian D.C. Watt wrote, \"Two hours later, Berlin Radio broadcast the sixteen points, adding that Poland had rejected them. Thanks to Ribbentrop, they had never even seen them\". On 31 August, Ribbentrop met with Ambassador Attolico to tell him that Poland's \"rejection\" of the \"generous\" German 16-point peace plan meant that Germany had no interest in Mussolini's offer to call a conference about the status of Danzig. Besides the Polish \"rejection\" of the German \"final offer\", the aggression against Poland was justified with the Gleiwitz incident and other SS-staged incidents on the German\u2013Polish border.\nAs soon as the news broke in the morning of 1 September 1939 that Germany had invaded Poland, Mussolini launched another desperate peace mediation plan intended to stop the German\u2013Polish war from becoming a world war. Mussolini's motives were in no way altruistic. Instead, he was motivated entirely by a wish to escape the self-imposed trap of the Pact of Steel, which obliged Italy to go to war while the country was entirely unprepared. If he suffered the humiliation of having to declare neutrality, it would make him appear cowardly. French Foreign Minister Georges Bonnet, acting on his own initiative, told the Italian Ambassador to France, Baron Raffaele Guariglia, that France had accepted Mussolini's peace plan. Bonnet had Havas issue a statement at midnight on 1 September: \"The French government has today, as have several other Governments, received an Italian proposal looking to the resolution of Europe's difficulties. After due consideration, the French government has given a 'positive response'\". Though the French and the Italians were serious about Mussolini's peace plan, which called for an immediate ceasefire and a four-power conference in the manner of the Munich conference of 1938 to consider Poland's borders, British Foreign Secretary Lord Halifax stated that unless the Germans withdrew from Poland immediately, Britain would not attend the proposed conference. Ribbentrop finally scuttled Mussolini's peace plan by stating that Germany had no interest in a ceasefire, a withdrawal from Poland or attending the proposed peace conference.\nOn the morning of 3 September 1939, when Chamberlain followed through with his threat of a British declaration of war if Germany attacked Poland, a visibly shocked Hitler asked Ribbentrop \"Now what?\", a question to which Ribbentrop had no answer except to state that there would be a \"similar message\" forthcoming from French Ambassador Robert Coulondre, who arrived later that afternoon to present the French declaration of war. Weizs\u00e4cker later recalled, \"On 3 Sept., when the British and French declared war, Hitler was surprised, after all, and was to begin with, at a loss\". The British historian Richard Overy wrote that what Hitler thought he was starting in September 1939 was only a local war between Germany and Poland and that his decision to do so was largely based on a vast underestimate of the risks of a general war. In effect, Ribbentrop's influence made Hitler go to war in 1939 with the country he wanted as his ally, the United Kingdom, and ally with the country he wanted as his enemy, the Soviet Union.\nAfter the outbreak of World War II, Ribbentrop spent most of the Polish campaign travelling with Hitler. On 27 September 1939, Ribbentrop made a second visit to Moscow. There, at meetings with the Soviet Foreign Commissar Vyacheslav Molotov and Joseph Stalin, he was forced to agree to revising the Secret Protocols of the Non-Aggression Pact in the Soviet Union's favour, most notably agreeing to Stalin's demand for Lithuania to go to the Soviet Union. The imposition of the British blockade had made the \"Reich\" highly dependent upon Soviet economic support, which placed Stalin in a strong negotiating position with Ribbentrop. On 1 March 1940, Ribbentrop received Sumner Welles, the American Under-Secretary of State, who was on a peace mission for US President Franklin Roosevelt, and did his best to abuse his American guest. Welles asked Ribbentrop under what terms Germany might be willing to negotiate a compromise peace, before the Phoney War became a real war. Ribbentrop told Welles that only a total German victory \"could give us the peace we want\". Welles reported to Roosevelt that Ribbentrop had a \"completely closed and very stupid mind\". On 10 March 1940, Ribbentrop visited Rome to meet with Mussolini, who promised him that Italy would soon enter the war. For his one-day Italian trip, Ribbentrop was accompanied by a staff of 35, including a gymnastics coach, a masseur, a doctor, two hairdressers and various legal and economic experts from the Foreign Office. After the Italo-German summit at the Brenner Pass on 18 March 1940, which was attended by Hitler and Mussolini, Count Ciano wrote in his diary: \"Everyone in Rome dislikes Ribbentrop\". \nOn 7 May 1940, Ribbentrop founded a new section of the Foreign Office, the \"Abteilung Deutschland\" (Department of Internal German Affairs), under Martin Luther, to which was assigned the responsibility for all antisemitic affairs. On 10 May 1940, Ribbentrop summoned the Dutch, Belgian and Luxembourg ambassadors to present them with notes justifying the German invasion of their countries several hours after the Germans had invaded those nations. Much to Ribbentrop's fury, someone leaked the plans for the German invasion to the Dutch embassy in Berlin, which led Ribbentrop to devote the next several months to an investigation aimed at identifying the leaker. The investigation tore apart the agency, as colleagues were encouraged to denounce each other, and was ultimately unsuccessful.\nIn early June 1940, when Mussolini informed Hitler that he would finally enter the war on 10 June 1940, Hitler was most dismissive, in private calling Mussolini a cowardly opportunist who broke the terms of the Pact of Steel in September 1939 when the going looked rough, and was entering the war in June 1940 only after it was clear that France was beaten and it appeared that Britain would soon make peace. Ribbentrop shared Hitler's assessment of the Italians but welcomed Italy coming into war. In part, that seemed to affirm the importance of the Pact of Steel, which Ribbentrop had negotiated, and in addition, with Italy now an ally, the Foreign Office had more to do. Ribbentrop championed the so-called Madagascar Plan in June 1940 to deport all of Europe's Jews to Madagascar after the presumed imminent defeat of Britain.\nRelations with wartime allies.\nRibbentrop, a Francophile, argued that Germany should allow Vichy France a limited degree of independence within a binding Franco-German partnership. To that end, Ribbentrop appointed a colleague from the \"Dienststelle\", Otto Abetz, as Ambassador to France with instructions to promote the political career of Pierre Laval, whom Ribbentrop had decided to be the French politician most favourable to Germany. The Foreign Office's influence in France varied, as there were many other agencies competing for power there. But in general, from late 1943 to mid-1944, the Foreign Office was second only to the SS in terms of power in France.\nFrom the latter half of 1937, Ribbentrop had championed the idea of an alliance between Germany, Italy, and Japan that would partition the British Empire among them. After signing the Soviet-German Non-Aggression Pact, Ribbentrop expanded on this idea for an Axis alliance to include the Soviet Union to form a Eurasian bloc that would destroy maritime states such as Britain. The German historian Klaus Hildebrand argued that besides Hitler's foreign policy programme, there were three other factions within the Nazi Party who had alternative foreign policy programmes, whom Hildebrand designated the agrarians, the revolutionary socialists, and the Wilhelmine Imperialists. Another German diplomatic historian, Wolfgang Michalka argued that there was a fourth alternative to the Nazi foreign policy programme, and that was Ribbentrop's concept of a Eurasian bloc comprising the four totalitarian states of Germany, the Soviet Union, Italy and Japan. Unlike the other factions, Ribbentrop's foreign policy programme was the only one that Hitler allowed to be executed during the years 1939\u201341, though it was more due to the temporary bankruptcy of Hitler's own foreign policy programme that he had laid down in \"Mein Kampf\" and \"Zweites Buch\" following the failure to achieve an alliance with Britain, than to a genuine change of mind. \nRibbentrop's foreign policy conceptions differed from Hitler's in that Ribbentrop's concept of international relations owed more to the traditional Wilhelmine \"Machtpolitik\" than to Hitler's racist and Social Darwinist vision of different \"races\" locked in a merciless and endless struggle over \"Lebensraum\". The different foreign-policy conceptions held by Hitler and Ribbentrop were illustrated in their reaction to the Fall of Singapore in 1942: Ribbentrop wanted this great British defeat to be a day of celebration in Germany, whereas Hitler forbade any celebrations on the grounds that Singapore represented a sad day for the principles of white supremacy. Another area of difference was Ribbentrop's obsessive hatred for Britain\u2014which he saw as the main enemy\u2014and view of the Soviet Union as an important ally in the anti-British struggle. Hitler saw the alliance with the Soviet Union as only tactical, and was nowhere as anti-British as his Foreign Minister.\nIn August 1940, Ribbentrop oversaw the Second Vienna Award, which saw about 40 per cent of the Transylvania region of Romania returned to Hungary. The decision to award so much of Romania to the Hungarians was Hitler's, as Ribbentrop himself spent most of the Vienna conference loudly attacking the Hungarian delegation for their coolness towards attacking Czechoslovakia in 1938 and then demanding more than their fair share of the spoils. When Ribbentrop finally got around to announcing his decision, the Hungarian delegation, which had expected Ribbentrop to rule in favour of Romania, broke out in cheers, while the Romanian foreign minister Mihail Manoilescu fainted.\nIn late 1940, Ribbentrop made a sustained but unsuccessful effort to have Francoist Spain enter the war on the Axis side. During his talks with the Spanish foreign minister, Ram\u00f3n Serrano Su\u00f1er, Ribbentrop affronted Su\u00f1er with his tactless behaviour, especially his suggestion that Spain cede the Canary Islands to Germany. An angry Su\u00f1er replied that he would rather see the Canaries sink into the Atlantic than cede an inch of Spanish territory. An area in which Ribbentrop enjoyed more success arose in September 1940, when he had the Far Eastern agent of the \"Dienststelle Ribbentrop\", Heinrich Georg Stahmer, start negotiations with the Japanese foreign minister, Y\u014dsuke Matsuoka, for an anti-American alliance. The result of these talks was the signing in Berlin on 27 September 1940 of the Tripartite Pact by Ribbentrop, Count Ciano, and Japanese Ambassador Sabur\u014d Kurusu.\nIn October 1940, \"Gauleiters\" Josef B\u00fcrckel and Robert Heinrich Wagner oversaw the near total expulsion of the Jews into the unoccupied zone libre of Vichy France; they deported them not only from the parts of Alsace-Lorraine that had been annexed to the \"Reich\", but also from their \"Gaue\" as well. Ribbentrop treated in a \"most dilatory fashion\" the ensuing complaints by the Vichy French government over the expulsions.\nIn November 1940, during the visit of the Soviet Foreign Commissar Vyacheslav Molotov to Berlin, Ribbentrop tried hard to get the Soviet Union to sign the Tripartite Pact. Ribbentrop argued that the Soviets and Germans shared a common enemy in the form of the British Empire, and as such, it was in the best interests of the Kremlin to enter the war on the Axis side. He proposed that, after the defeat of Britain, they could carve up the territory in the following way: the Soviet Union would have India and the Middle East, Italy the Mediterranean area, Japan the British possessions in the Far East (presuming of course that Japan would enter the war), and Germany would take central Africa and Britain. Molotov was open to the idea of the Soviet Union entering the war on the Axis side, but demanded as the price of entry into the war that Germany recognise Finland, Bulgaria, Romania, Turkey, Hungary and Yugoslavia as within the exclusive Soviet sphere of influence. Ribbentrop's efforts to persuade Molotov to abandon his demands about Europe as the price of a Soviet alliance with Germany were entirely unsuccessful. After Molotov left Berlin, the Soviet Union indicated that it wished to sign the Tripartite Pact and enter the war on the Axis side. Though Ribbentrop was all for taking Stalin's offer, Hitler by this point had decided that he wanted to attack the Soviet Union. The German\u2013Soviet Axis talks led nowhere.\nAs World War II continued, Ribbentrop's once-friendly relations with the SS became increasingly strained. In January 1941, the nadir of the relations between the SS and the Foreign Office was reached when the Iron Guard attempted a coup in Romania. Ribbentrop supported Marshal Ion Antonescu's government and Heinrich Himmler supported the Iron Guard. In the aftermath of the failed coup in Bucharest, the Foreign Office assembled evidence that the SD had backed the coup, which led Ribbentrop to restrict sharply the powers of the SD police attach\u00e9s. Since October 1939 they had operated largely independently of the German embassies at which they had been stationed. In early 1941, Ribbentrop appointed an assemblage of SA men to German embassies in eastern Europe, with Manfred Freiherr von Killinger dispatched to Romania, Siegfried Kasche to Croatia, Adolf-Heinz Beckerle to Bulgaria, Dietrich von Jagow to Hungary, and Hanns Ludin to Slovakia. The major qualifications of all these men, none of whom had previously held a diplomatic position before, were that they were close friends of Luther and helped to enable a split in the SS (the traditional rivalry between the SS and SA was still running strong).\nIn March 1941, Japan's Foreign Minister Y\u014dsuke Matsuoka, a Germanophile, visited Berlin. On 29 March 1941, during a conversation with Matsuoka, Ribbentrop, as instructed by Hitler, told the Japanese nothing about the upcoming Operation Barbarossa, as Hitler believed that he could defeat the Soviet Union on his own and preferred that the Japanese attack Britain instead. Hitler did not wish for any information that might lead the Japanese into attacking the Soviet Union to reach their ears. Ribbentrop tried to convince Matsuoka to urge the government in Tokyo to attack the great British naval base at Singapore, claiming the Royal Navy was too weak to retaliate due to its involvement in the Battle of the Atlantic. Matsuoka responded that preparations to occupy Singapore were under way.\nIn late 1940 and early 1941, Ribbentrop strongly pressured the Kingdom of Yugoslavia to sign the Tripartite Pact, despite advice from the German Legation in Belgrade that such an action would probably lead to the overthrow of Prince Paul, the Yugoslav Regent. Ribbentrop's intention was to gain transit rights through the country that would allow the Germans to invade Greece. On 25 March 1941, Yugoslavia reluctantly signed the Tripartite Pact; the next day the Yugoslav military overthrew Prince Paul in a bloodless coup. When Hitler ordered the invasion of Yugoslavia, Ribbentrop was opposed, because he thought the Foreign Office was likely to be excluded from ruling occupied Yugoslavia. As Hitler was displeased with Ribbentrop over his opposition to the invasion, the minister took to his bed for the next couple of days. When Ribbentrop recovered, he sought a chance to increase his agency's influence by giving Croatia independence. Ribbentrop chose the Usta\u0161e to rule Croatia. He had Edmund Veesenmayer successfully conclude talks in April 1941 with General Slavko Kvaternik of the Usta\u0161e on having his party rule Croatia after the German invasion. Reflecting his displeasure with the German Legation in Belgrade, which had advised against pushing Yugoslavia to sign the Tripartite Pact, Ribbentrop refused to have the German Legation withdrawn in advance before Germany bombed Belgrade on 6 April 1941. The staff was left to survive the fire-bombing as best it could.\nRibbentrop liked and admired Joseph Stalin and was opposed to the attack on the Soviet Union in 1941. He passed a word to a Soviet diplomat: \"Please tell Stalin I was against this war, and that I know it will bring great misfortune to Germany.\" When it came to time for Ribbentrop to present the German declaration of war on 22 June 1941 to the Soviet Ambassador, General Vladimir Dekanozov, the interpreter Paul Schmidt described the scene:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is just before four on the morning of Sunday, 22 June 1941 in the office of the Foreign Minister. He is expecting the Soviet Ambassador, Dekanozov, who had been phoning the Minister since early Saturday. Dekanozov had an urgent message from Moscow. He had called every two hours, but was told the Minister was away from the city. At two on Sunday morning, von Ribbentrop finally responded to the calls. Dekanozov was told that von Ribbentrop wished to meet with him at once. An appointment was made for 4\u00a0amVon Ribbentrop is nervous, walking up and down from one end of his large office to the other, like a caged animal, while saying over and over, \"The \"F\u00fchrer\" is absolutely right. We must attack Russia, or they will surely attack us!\" Is he reassuring himself? Is he justifying the ruination of his crowning diplomatic achievement? Now he has to destroy it \"because that is the \"F\u00fchrer\"'s wish\".\nWhen Dekanozov finally appeared, Ribbentrop read out a short statement saying that the Reich had been forced into \"military countermeasures\" because of an alleged Soviet plan to attack Germany in July 1941. Ribbentrop did not present a declaration of war to General Dekanozov, confining himself to reading the statement about Germany being forced to take \"military countermeasures\".\nDespite his opposition to Operation Barbarossa and a preference to concentrate against Britain, Ribbentrop began a sustained effort on 28 June 1941, without consulting Hitler, to have Japan attack the Soviet Union. But Ribbentrop's motives in seeking to have Japan enter the war were more anti-British than anti-Soviet. On 10 July 1941 Ribbentrop ordered General Eugen Ott, the German Ambassador to Japan to:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAs part of his efforts to bring Japan into Barbarossa, on 1 July 1941, Ribbentrop had Germany break off diplomatic relations with Chiang Kai-shek and recognized the Japanese-puppet government of Wang Jingwei as China's legitimate rulers. Ribbentrop hoped that recognizing Wang would be seen as a coup that might add to the prestige of the pro-German Japanese Foreign Minister Y\u014dsuke Matsuoka, who was opposed to opening American-Japanese talks. Despite Ribbentrop's best efforts, Matsuoka was sacked as foreign minister later in July 1941, and the Japanese-American talks began.\nAfter the war, Ribbentrop was found to have had culpability in the Holocaust based on his efforts to persuade the leaders of Nazi puppet states and other Axis powers to deport Jews to the Nazi extermination camps. In August 1941, when the question of whether to deport foreign Jews living in Germany arose, Ribbentrop argued against deportation as a way of maximizing the Foreign Office's influence. To deport foreign Jews living in the Reich, Ribbentrop had Luther negotiate agreements with the governments of Romania, Slovakia and Croatia to allow Jews holding citizenship of those states to be deported. In September 1941, the Reich Plenipotentiary for Nazi-occupied Serbia, Felix Benzler, reported to Ribbentrop that the SS had arrested 8,000 Serbian Jews, whom they were planning to execute en masse. He asked for permission to try to stop the massacre. Ribbentrop assigned the question to Luther, who ordered Benzler to co-operate fully in the massacre.\nIn late 1941, Ribbentrop worked for the failure of the Japanese-American talks in Washington and for Japan to attack the United States. In October 1941 Ribbentrop ordered Eugen Ott, the German ambassador to Japan, to start applying pressure on the Japanese to attack the Americans as soon as possible. Ribbentrop argued to Hitler that a war between the United States and Germany was inevitable given the extent of American aid to Britain and the increasingly frequent \"incidents\" in the North Atlantic between U-boats and American warships guarding convoys to Britain. He said that having such a war start with a Japanese attack on the United States was the best way to begin it. Ribbentrop told Hitler that because of his four years in Canada and the United States before 1914, he was an expert on all things American; he thought that the United States was not a serious military power. On 4 December 1941, the Japanese Ambassador General Hiroshi \u014cshima told Ribbentrop that Japan was on the verge of war with the United States. In turn, Ribbentrop promised that Germany would join the war against the Americans. \nOn 7 December 1941, Ribbentrop was jubilant at the news of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor and did his utmost to support a declaration of war on the United States. He delivered the official declaration to the American \"Charg\u00e9 d'Affaires\" Leland B. Morris on 11 December 1941. In early 1942, following American entry into war, the United States successfully pressured all of the Latin American states, except for Argentina and Chile, to declare war on Germany. Ribbentrop considered the acceptance of declarations of war from small states such as Costa Rica and Ecuador to be deeply humiliating, and he refused to see any of the Latin American ambassadors. He had Weizs\u00e4cker accept their declarations of war instead.\nIn April 1942, as part of a diplomatic counterpart to Case Blue, a military operation in southern Russia, Ribbentrop assembled a collection of anti-Soviet \u00e9migr\u00e9s from the Caucasus in the Hotel Adlon in Berlin with the intention to have them declared leaders of governments-in-exile. From Ribbentrop's point of view, this had the dual benefit of ensuring popular support for the German Army as it advanced into the Caucasus and of ensuring that it was the Foreign Office that ruled the Caucasus once the Germans occupied the area. Alfred Rosenberg, the German Minister of the East, saw this as an intrusion into his area of authority, and told Hitler that the \u00e9migr\u00e9s at the Hotel Adlon were \"a nest of Allied agents\". To Ribbentrop's disappointment, Hitler sided with Rosenberg.\nDespite the often fierce rivalry with the SS, the Foreign Office played a key role in arranging the deportations of Jews to the death camps from France (1942\u201344), Hungary (1944\u201345), Slovakia, Italy (after 1943), and the Balkans. Ribbentrop assigned all of the Holocaust-related work to Martin Luther, an old crony from the \"Dienststelle\" who represented the Foreign Ministry at the Wannsee Conference. In 1942, Ambassador Otto Abetz secured the deportation of 25,000 French Jews, and Ambassador Hanns Ludin secured the deportation of 50,000 Slovak Jews to the death camps. Only once, in August 1942, did Ribbentrop try to restrict the deportations, but only because of jurisdictional disputes with the SS. Ribbentrop halted deportations from Romania and Croatia; in the case of the former, he was insulted because the SS were negotiating with the Romanians directly, and in the case of the latter, he learned that the SS and Luther had pressured the Italians in their zone of occupation to deport their Jews without first informing Ribbentrop. He had required being kept updated on all developments in Italo-German relations. In September 1942, after a meeting with Hitler, who was unhappy with his foreign minister's actions, Ribbentrop changed course and ordered the deportations to be resumed immediately.\nIn November 1942, following Operation Torch (the British-American invasion of North Africa), Ribbentrop met French Chief of the Government Pierre Laval in Munich. He presented Laval with an ultimatum for Germany's occupation of the French unoccupied zone and Tunisia. Ribbentrop tried unsuccessfully to arrange for the Vichy French Armistice Army in North Africa to be formally placed under German command. In December 1942, he met the Italian Foreign Minister Count Galeazzo Ciano, who carried Mussolini's request urging the Germans to go on the defensive in the Soviet Union in order to focus on attacking North Africa. Ribbentrop joined Hitler in belittling Italy's war effort. During the same meeting in East Prussia with Count Ciano, Pierre Laval arrived. He quickly agreed to Hitler's and Ribbentrop's demands that he place French police under the command of more radical antisemites and transport hundreds of thousands of French workers as labourers in Germany's war industry.\nAnother low point in Ribbentrop's relations with the SS occurred in February 1943, when the SD backed a Luther-led internal \"putsch\" to oust Ribbentrop as foreign minister. Luther had become estranged from Ribbentrop because the latter's wife treated the former as a household servant. She pushed her husband into ordering an investigation into allegations of corruption on Luther's part. Luther's \"putsch\" failed largely because Himmler decided that a foreign ministry headed by Luther would be a more dangerous opponent than the current one under Ribbentrop. At the last minute, he withdrew his support from Luther. In the aftermath of the \"putsch\", Luther was sent to Sachsenhausen concentration camp.\nIn April 1943, during a summit meeting with Hungary's Regent Mikl\u00f3s Horthy, Ribbentrop strongly pressed the Hungarians to deport their Jewish population to the death camps, but was unsuccessful. During their meeting, Ribbentrop declared \"the Jews must either be exterminated or taken to the concentration camps. There is no other possibility\".\nDeclining influence.\nAs the war went on, Ribbentrop's influence waned. Because most of the world was at war with Germany, the Foreign Ministry's importance diminished as the value of diplomacy became limited. By January 1944, Germany had diplomatic relations only with Argentina, Ireland, Vichy France, the Italian Social Republic in Italy, Occupied Denmark, Sweden, Finland, Slovakia, Hungary, Romania, Croatia, Bulgaria, Switzerland, the Holy See, Spain, Portugal, Turkey, Thailand, Japan, and the Japanese puppet states of Manchukuo and the Wang Jingwei regime in China. Later that year, Argentina and Turkey severed ties with Germany; Romania and Bulgaria joined the Allies and Finland made a separate peace with the Soviet Union and declared war on Germany.\nHitler found Ribbentrop increasingly tiresome and started to avoid him. The Foreign Minister's pleas for permission to seek peace with at least some of Germany's enemies\u2014the Soviet Union in particular\u2014played a role in their estrangement. As his influence declined, Ribbentrop spent his time feuding with other Nazi leaders over control of antisemitic policies to curry Hitler's favour.\nRibbentrop suffered a major blow when many old Foreign Office diplomats participated in the 20 July 1944 \"putsch\" and assassination attempt on Hitler. Ribbentrop had not known of the plot, but the participation of so many current and former Foreign Ministry members reflected badly on him. Hitler felt that Ribbentrop's \"bloated administration\" prevented him from keeping proper tabs on his diplomats' activities. Ribbentrop worked closely with the SS, with which he had reconciled, to purge the Foreign Office of those involved in the \"putsch\". In the hours immediately following the assassination attempt on Hitler, Ribbentrop, G\u00f6ring, D\u00f6nitz, and Mussolini were having tea with Hitler in Rastenberg when D\u00f6nitz began to rail against the failures of the Luftwaffe. G\u00f6ring immediately turned the direction of the conversation to Ribbentrop, and the bankruptcy of Germany's foreign policy. \"You dirty little champagne salesman! Shut your mouth!\" G\u00f6ring shouted, threatening to smack Ribbentrop with his marshal's baton. But Ribbentrop refused to remain silent at this disrespect. \"I am still the Foreign Minister,\" he shouted, \"and my name is \"von\" Ribbentrop!\"\nOn 20 April 1945, Ribbentrop attended Hitler's 56th, and last, birthday party in Berlin. Three days later, Ribbentrop attempted to meet Hitler, but was rejected with the explanation the F\u00fchrer had more important things to do.\nArrest.\nAfter Hitler's suicide, Ribbentrop attempted to find a role under the new president, \"Gro\u00dfadmiral\" Karl D\u00f6nitz, but was rebuffed. He went into hiding under an assumed name (Herr Reiser) in the port city of Hamburg. On 14 June, after Germany's surrender, Ribbentrop was arrested by Sergeant Jacques Goffinet, a French citizen who had joined the 5th Special Air Service, the Belgian SAS, and was working with the British Army near Hamburg. He was found with a rambling letter written in English addressed to the British Prime Minister \"Wincent Churchill\" and Foreign Minister Anthony Eden criticizing British foreign policy for anti-German sentiments, and blaming Britain's failure to ally with Germany before the war for the Soviet occupation of eastern Germany and the advancement of Bolshevism into central Europe. In it Ribbentrop said it was Hitler's \"last political will\" and a friendship appeal and claimed to have met with Hitler shortly before his death who \"having suddenly turned around to me and said: 'You will see, my spirit will arise from my grave and one will see that I have been right.'\"\nTrial and execution.\nRibbentrop was a defendant at the Nuremberg trials. The Allies' International Military Tribunal convicted him on four counts: crimes against peace, deliberately planning a war of aggression, committing war crimes, and crimes against humanity. According to the judgment, Ribbentrop was actively involved in planning the Anschluss, as well as the invasions of Czechoslovakia and Poland. He was also deeply involved in the \"final solution\"; as early as 1942 he had ordered German diplomats in Axis countries to hasten the process of sending Jews to death camps in the east. He supported the lynching of Allied airmen shot down over Germany, and helped to cover up the 1945 murder of Major-General Gustave Mesny, a French officer being held as a prisoner-of-war. He was held directly responsible for atrocities which took place in Denmark and Vichy France, since the top officials in those two occupied countries reported to him. Ribbentrop claimed that Hitler made all the important decisions himself, and that he had been deceived by Hitler's repeated claims of only wanting peace. The Tribunal rejected this argument, saying that given how closely involved Ribbentrop was with the execution of the war, \"he could not have remained unaware of the aggressive nature of Hitler's actions.\" Even in prison, Ribbentrop remained loyal to Hitler: \"Even with all I know, if in this cell Hitler should come to me and say 'do this!', I would still do it.\"\nGustave Gilbert, an American Army psychologist, was allowed to examine the Nazi leaders who stood trial. Among other tests, he administered a German version of the Wechsler\u2013Bellevue IQ test. Ribbentrop scored 129, the 10th highest among the Nazi leaders tested. Ribbentrop was also examined by Chief Medical Officer Lt. Col. Rene Juchli who reported that Ribbentrop was \"highly neurotic\". At one point during the trial, a US Army interpreter asked Ernst \"Freiherr\" von Weizs\u00e4cker how Hitler could have promoted Ribbentrop to high office. Von Weizs\u00e4cker responded, \"Hitler never noticed Ribbentrop's babbling because Hitler always did all the talking.\"\nOn 16 October 1946, Ribbentrop became the first of those sentenced to death at Nuremberg to be hanged, after G\u00f6ring committed suicide just before his scheduled execution. The hangman was U.S. Master Sergeant John C. Woods. Ribbentrop was escorted up the 13 steps of the gallows and asked if he had any final words. He said: \"God protect Germany. God have mercy on my soul. My final wish is that Germany should recover her unity and that, for the sake of peace, there should be understanding between East and West. I wish peace to the world.\" \nNuremberg Prison Commandant Burton C. Andrus later recalled that Ribbentrop turned to the prison's Lutheran chaplain, Henry F. Gerecke, immediately before the hood was placed over his head and then he whispered, \"I'll see you again.\" The execution was botched and it took 14 minutes for Ribbentrop to die. His remains, like those of the other nine executed men and of the suicide Hermann G\u00f6ring, were cremated at Ostfriedhof (Munich) and his ashes scattered in the river Isar.\nFilm portrayals.\nRibbentrop has been portrayed by the following actors in film, television and theatre productions:\nHonours.\nRibbentrop received many orders, decorations and medals. His role as chief diplomat of the Reich meant he was a natural recipient for diplomatic honours given out by various nations. It is theorised that many of the honours bestowed on Ribbentrop were actually intended for Hitler, who only ever wore at most his WWI Iron Cross 1st Class, his wound badge and his NSDAP Party badge. Hitler refused to accept any foreign decorations and so it is thought that many of the decorations conferred on Ribbentrop were intended for Hitler.\nRibbentrop's full collection of honours were recovered and sold off after the war. He had taken great care to make sure his decorations and other valuable items were kept safe and easily accessible for a potential escape after the defeat of Nazi Germany. Shortly before the end of the war, he hid his decorations and other valuables on the second floor of the Hotel Krone in Umhausen, Tyrol, Austria. He intended to recover them and other valuables before his eventual escape into Switzerland. On 5 May 1945, the 44th Infantry Division entered Umhausen. Shortly after, a captain in the Division, Howard Goldsmith, entered the Hotel Krone intending to stay the night, something he and his men were greatly looking forward to after months of sleeping rough in the winter of the Alpine region. The proprietor of the hotel refused them entry, but they forced their way in, and on reaching the second floor they uncovered trunks filled with clothing and personal items, confidential government documents and looted art from across occupied Europe. Also in the room was a chest which Captain Goldsmith discovered was filled with Ribbentrop's personal orders and decorations.\nAccording to army rules, official and sensitive documents were to be passed on to the relevant authorities, while looted art was to be handed over to the Monuments, Fine Arts, and Archives program for restitution. However, personal items were considered legitimate war souvenirs and after asking for permission, Goldsmith was allowed to keep the items. He had Ribbentrop's decorations shipped back to his home in College Station, Texas. Upon arriving back home he had the items appraised and found that the value at that time was around $40,000 (1945 US Dollars). For years afterwards they were exhibited across the United States, and a few years later the collection was broken up and sold.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16550", "revid": "33118295", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16550", "title": "John, King of England", "text": "King of England from 1199 to 1216 (1166\u20131216)\nJohn (24 December 1166\u00a0\u2013 19 October 1216) was King of England from 1199 until his death in 1216. He lost the Duchy of Normandy and most of his other French lands to King Philip II of France, resulting in the collapse of the Angevin Empire and contributing to the subsequent growth in power of the French Capetian dynasty during the 13th century. The baronial revolt at the end of John's reign led to the sealing of Magna Carta, a document considered a foundational milestone in English and later British constitutional history.\nJohn was the youngest son of King Henry II of England and Duchess Eleanor of Aquitaine. He was nicknamed John Lackland () because, as a younger son, he was not expected to inherit significant lands. He became Henry's favourite child following the failed revolt of 1173\u20131174 by his brothers Henry the Young King, Richard, and Geoffrey against their father. John was appointed Lord of Ireland in 1177 and given lands in England and on the continent. During the reign of his brother Richard I, he unsuccessfully attempted a rebellion against Richard's royal administrators while the King was participating in the Third Crusade, but he was proclaimed king after Richard died in 1199. He came to an agreement with Philip II of France to recognise John's possession of the continental Angevin lands at the peace treaty of Le Goulet in 1200.\nWhen war with France broke out again in 1202, John achieved early victories, but shortages of military resources and his treatment of Norman, Breton, and Anjou nobles resulted in the collapse of his empire in northern France in 1204. He spent much of the next decade attempting to regain these lands, raising huge revenues, reforming his armed forces and rebuilding continental alliances. His judicial reforms had a lasting effect on the English common law system, as well as providing an additional source of revenue. His dispute with Pope Innocent III over the election of Archbishop of Canterbury Stephen Langton led to the Papal Interdict of 1208, in which church services were banned until 1214, as well as John's excommunication the following year, a dispute he finally settled in 1213. John's attempt to defeat Philip in 1214 failed because of the French victory over John's allies at the Battle of Bouvines. When he returned to England, John faced a rebellion by many of his barons, who were unhappy with his fiscal policies and his treatment of many of England's most powerful nobles. Magna Carta was drafted as a peace treaty between John and the barons, and agreed in 1215. However, neither side complied with its conditions and civil war broke out shortly afterwards, with the barons aided by Prince Louis of France. It soon descended into a stalemate. John died of dysentery contracted while on campaign in eastern England in late 1216; supporters of his son Henry III went on to achieve victory over Louis and the rebel barons the following year.\nContemporary chroniclers were mostly critical of John's performance as king, and his reign has since been the subject of significant debate and periodic revision by historians from the 16th century onwards. Historian Jim Bradbury has summarised the current historical opinion of John's positive qualities, observing that John is today usually considered a \"hard-working administrator, an able man, an able general\". Nonetheless, modern historians agree that he also had many faults as king, including what historian Ralph Turner describes as \"distasteful, even dangerous personality traits\", such as pettiness, spitefulness, and cruelty. These negative qualities provided extensive material for fiction writers in the Victorian era, and John remains a recurring character within Western popular culture, primarily as a villain in Robin Hood folklore.\nEarly life (1166\u20131189).\nChildhood and the Angevin inheritance.\nJohn was born in England around Christmastide in 1166 or 1167; the precise date is a subject of debate among historians. His father, King Henry II of England, had inherited significant territories along the Atlantic seaboard\u2014Anjou, Normandy and England\u2014and expanded his possessions by exercising his ducal claim over Brittany. John's mother was Eleanor, the powerful duchess of Aquitaine, who had a tenuous claim to Toulouse and Auvergne in southern France and was the former wife of King Louis VII of France. The territories of Henry and Eleanor formed the Angevin Empire, named after Henry's paternal title as Count of Anjou and, more specifically, its seat in Angers. The Empire, however, was inherently fragile: although all the lands owed allegiance to Henry, the disparate parts each had their own histories, traditions and governance structures. As one moved south through Anjou and Aquitaine, the extent of Henry's power in the provinces diminished considerably, scarcely resembling the modern concept of an empire at all. Some of the traditional ties between parts of the empire such as Normandy and England were slowly dissolving over time. The future of the empire upon Henry's eventual death was not secure: although the custom of primogeniture, under which an eldest son would inherit all his father's lands, was slowly becoming more widespread across Europe, it was less popular amongst the Norman kings of England. Most believed that Henry would divide the empire, giving each son a substantial portion, and hoping that his children would continue to work together as allies after his death. To complicate matters, much of the Angevin empire was held by Henry only as a vassal of the king of France of the rival line of the House of Capet. Henry had often allied himself with the Holy Roman Emperor against France, making the feudal relationship even more challenging.\nShortly after his birth, John was passed from Eleanor into the care of a wet nurse, a traditional practice for medieval noble families. Eleanor then left for Poitiers, the capital of Aquitaine, and sent John and his sister Joan north to Fontevrault Abbey. This may have been done with the aim of steering her youngest son, with no obvious inheritance, towards a future ecclesiastical career. Eleanor spent the next few years conspiring against Henry and neither parent played a part in John's very early life. John was probably, like his brothers, assigned a \"magister\" whilst he was at Fontevrault, a teacher charged with his early education and with managing the servants of his immediate household; he was later taught by Ranulf de Glanvill, a leading English administrator. John spent some time as a member of the household of his eldest living brother, Henry the Young King, where he probably received instruction in hunting and military skills.\nJohn grew up to be around tall, relatively short, with a \"powerful, barrel-chested body\" and dark red hair; he looked to contemporaries like an inhabitant of Poitou. John enjoyed reading and, unusually for the period, built up a travelling library of books. He enjoyed gambling, in particular at backgammon, and was an enthusiastic hunter, even by medieval standards. He liked music, although not songs. John would become a \"connoisseur of jewels\", building up a large collection, and became famous for his opulent clothes and also, according to French chroniclers, for his fondness for bad wine. As John grew up, he became known for sometimes being \"genial, witty, generous and hospitable\"; at other moments, he could be jealous, over-sensitive and prone to fits of rage, \"biting and gnawing his fingers\" in anger.\nEarly life.\nDuring John's early years, Henry attempted to resolve the question of his succession. Henry the Young King had been crowned King of England in 1170, but was not given any formal powers by his father; he was also promised Normandy and Anjou as part of his future inheritance. His brother Richard was to be appointed Count of Poitou with control of Aquitaine, whilst his brother Geoffrey was to become Duke of Brittany. At this time it seemed unlikely that John would ever inherit substantial lands, and he was jokingly nicknamed \"Lackland\" by his father.\nHenry II wanted to secure the southern borders of Aquitaine and decided to betroth his youngest son to Alais, the daughter and heiress of Count Humbert III of Savoy. As part of this agreement John was promised the future inheritance of Savoy, Piedmont, Maurienne, and the other possessions of Count Humbert. For his part in the potential marriage alliance, Henry II transferred the castles of Chinon, Loudun and Mirebeau into John's name; as John was only five years old, his father would continue to control them for practical purposes. Henry the Young King was unimpressed by this; although he had yet to be granted control of any castles in his new kingdom, these were effectively his future property and had been given away without consultation. Alais made the trip over the Alps and joined Henry II's court, but she died before marrying John, which left the prince once again without an inheritance.\nIn 1173 John's elder brothers, backed by Eleanor, rose in revolt against Henry in the short-lived rebellion of 1173 to 1174. Growing irritated with his subordinate position to Henry II and increasingly worried that John might be given additional lands and castles at his expense, Henry the Young King travelled to Paris and allied himself with Louis VII. Eleanor, irritated by her husband's persistent interference in Aquitaine, encouraged Richard and Geoffrey to join their brother Henry in Paris. Henry II triumphed over the coalition of his sons, but was generous to them in the peace settlement agreed at Montlouis. Henry the Young King was allowed to travel widely in Europe with his own household of knights, Richard was given Aquitaine back, and Geoffrey was allowed to return to Brittany; only Eleanor was imprisoned for her role in the revolt.\nJohn had spent the conflict travelling alongside his father, and was given widespread possessions across the Angevin empire as part of the Montlouis settlement; from then onwards, most observers regarded John as Henry II's favourite child, although he was the furthest removed in terms of the royal succession. Henry II began to find more lands for John, mostly at various nobles' expense. In 1175 he appropriated the estates of the late Earl of Cornwall and gave them to John. The following year, Henry disinherited the sisters of Isabella of Gloucester, contrary to legal custom, and betrothed John to the now extremely wealthy Isabella. In 1177, at the Council of Oxford, Henry dismissed William FitzAldelm as the Lord of Ireland and replaced him with the ten-year-old John.\nHenry the Young King fought a short war with his brother Richard in 1183 over the status of England, Normandy and Aquitaine. Henry II moved in support of Richard, and Henry the Young King died from dysentery at the end of the campaign. With his primary heir dead, Henry rearranged the plans for the succession: Richard was to be made King of England, albeit without any actual power until the death of his father; Geoffrey would retain Brittany; and John would now become the Duke of Aquitaine in place of Richard. Richard refused to give up Aquitaine; Henry II was furious and ordered John, with help from Geoffrey, to march south and retake the duchy by force. The two attacked the capital of Poitiers, and Richard responded by attacking Brittany. The war ended in stalemate and a tense family reconciliation in England at the end of 1184.\nIn 1185 John made his first visit to Ireland, accompanied by 300 knights and a team of administrators. Henry had tried to have John officially proclaimed King of Ireland, but Pope Lucius III would not agree. John's first period of rule in Ireland was not a success. Ireland had only recently been conquered by Anglo-Norman forces, and tensions were still rife between Henry II, the new settlers and the existing inhabitants. John infamously offended the local Irish rulers by making fun of their unfashionable long beards, failed to make allies amongst the Anglo-Norman settlers, began to lose ground militarily against the Irish and finally returned to England later in the year, blaming the viceroy, Hugh de Lacy, for the fiasco.\nThe problems amongst John's wider family continued to grow. His elder brother Geoffrey died during a tournament in 1186, leaving a posthumous son, Arthur, and an elder daughter, Eleanor. Geoffrey's death brought John slightly closer to the throne of England. The uncertainty about what would happen after Henry's death continued to grow; Richard was keen to join a new crusade and remained concerned that whilst he was away Henry would appoint John his formal successor.\nRichard began discussions about a potential alliance with Philip II in Paris during 1187, and the next year Richard gave homage to Philip in exchange for support for a war against Henry. Richard and Philip fought a joint campaign against Henry, and by the summer of 1189 Henry made peace, promising Richard the succession. John initially remained loyal to his father, but changed sides once it appeared that Richard would win. Henry died shortly afterwards.\nRichard's reign (1189\u20131199).\nWhen Richard became king in September 1189, he had already declared his intention of joining the Third Crusade. He set about raising the huge sums of money required for this expedition through the sale of lands, titles and appointments, and attempted to ensure that he would not face a revolt while away from his empire. John was made Count of Mortain, was married to the wealthy Isabella of Gloucester, and was given valuable lands in Lancaster and the counties of Cornwall, Derby, Devon, Dorset, Nottingham and Somerset, all with the aim of buying his loyalty to Richard whilst the King was on crusade. Richard retained royal control of key castles in these counties, thereby preventing John from accumulating too much military and political power. The King named his four-year-old nephew Arthur as his heir. In return, John promised not to visit England for the next three years, thereby in theory giving Richard adequate time to conduct a successful crusade and return from the Levant without fear of John seizing power. Richard left political authority in England\u2014the post of justiciar\u2014jointly in the hands of Bishop Hugh de Puiset and William de Mandeville, 3rd Earl of Essex, and made William Longchamp, the Bishop of Ely, his chancellor. Mandeville immediately died, and Longchamp took over as joint justiciar with Puiset, which would prove a less than satisfactory partnership. Eleanor, the queen mother, convinced Richard to allow John into England in his absence.\nThe political situation in England rapidly began to deteriorate. Longchamp refused to work with Puiset and became unpopular with the English nobility and clergy. John exploited this unpopularity to set himself up as an alternative ruler with his own royal court, complete with his own justiciar, chancellor and other royal posts, and was happy to be portrayed as an alternative regent, and possibly the next king. Armed conflict broke out between John and Longchamp, and by October 1191 Longchamp was isolated in the Tower of London with John in control of the city of London, thanks to promises John had made to the citizens in return for recognition as Richard's heir presumptive. At this point Walter of Coutances, the Archbishop of Rouen, returned to England, having been sent by Richard to restore order. John's position was undermined by Walter's relative popularity and by the news that Richard had married whilst in Cyprus, which presented the possibility that Richard would have legitimate children and heirs.\nThe political turmoil continued. John began to explore an alliance with King Philip II of France, who had returned from the crusade in late 1191. John hoped to acquire Normandy, Anjou and the other lands in France held by Richard in exchange for allying himself with Philip. John was persuaded not to pursue an alliance by his mother. Longchamp, who had left England after Walter's intervention, now returned, and argued that he had been wrongly removed as justiciar. John intervened, suppressing Longchamp's claims in return for promises of support from the royal administration, including a reaffirmation of his position as heir to the throne. When Richard still did not return from the crusade, John began to assert that his brother was dead or otherwise permanently lost. Richard had in fact been captured shortly before Christmas 1192, while en route to England, by Duke Leopold V of Austria and was handed over to Emperor Henry VI, who held him for ransom. John seized the opportunity and went to Paris, where he formed an alliance with Philip. He agreed to set aside his wife, Isabella of Gloucester, and marry Philip's sister, Alys, in exchange for Philip's support. Fighting broke out in England between forces loyal to Richard and those being gathered by John. John's military position was weak and he agreed to a truce; in early 1194 the King finally returned to England, and John's remaining forces surrendered. John retreated to Normandy, where Richard finally found him later that year. Richard declared that John\u2014despite being 27 years old\u2014was merely \"a child who has had evil counsellors\" and forgave him, but removed his lands with the exception of Ireland.\nFor the remaining years of Richard's reign, John supported his brother on the continent, apparently loyally. Richard's policy on the continent was to attempt to regain through steady, limited campaigns the castles he had lost to Philip II whilst on crusade. He allied himself with the leaders of Flanders, Boulogne and the Holy Roman Empire to apply pressure on Philip from Germany. In 1195 John successfully conducted a sudden attack and siege of \u00c9vreux castle, and subsequently managed the defences of Normandy against Philip. The following year, John seized the town of Gamaches and led a raiding party within of Paris, capturing the Bishop of Beauvais. In return for this service, Richard withdrew his (ill-will) towards John, restored him to the county of Gloucestershire and made him again Count of Mortain.\nEarly reign (1199\u20131204).\nAccession to the throne, 1199.\nAfter Richard's death on 6 April 1199 there were two potential claimants to the Angevin throne: John, whose claim rested on being the sole surviving son of Henry II, and young Arthur I of Brittany, who held a claim as the son of John's elder brother Geoffrey. Richard appears to have started to recognise John as his heir presumptive in the final years before his death, but the matter was not clear-cut and medieval law gave little guidance as to how the competing claims should be decided. With Norman law favouring John as the only surviving son of Henry II and Angevin law favouring Arthur as the only son of Henry's elder son, the matter rapidly became an open conflict. John was supported by the bulk of the English and Norman nobility and was crowned at Westminster Abbey, backed by his mother, Eleanor. Arthur was supported by the majority of the Breton, Maine and Anjou nobles and received the support of Philip II, who remained committed to breaking up the Angevin territories on the continent. With Arthur's army pressing up the Loire Valley towards Angers and Philip's forces moving down the valley towards Tours, John's continental empire was in danger of being cut in two.\nWarfare in Normandy at the time was shaped by the defensive potential of castles and the increasing costs of conducting campaigns. The Norman frontiers had limited natural defences but were heavily reinforced with castles, such as Ch\u00e2teau Gaillard, at strategic points, built and maintained at considerable expense. It was difficult for a commander to advance far into fresh territory without having secured his lines of communication by capturing these fortifications, which slowed the progress of any attack. Armies of the period could be formed from either feudal or mercenary forces. Feudal levies could be raised only for a fixed length of time before they returned home, forcing an end to a campaign; mercenary forces, often called Braban\u00e7ons after the Duchy of Brabant but actually recruited from across northern Europe, could operate all year long and provide a commander with more strategic options to pursue a campaign, but cost much more than equivalent feudal forces. As a result, commanders of the period were increasingly drawing on larger numbers of mercenaries.\nAfter his coronation, John moved south into France with military forces and adopted a defensive posture along the eastern and southern Normandy borders. Both sides paused for desultory negotiations before the war recommenced; John's position was now stronger, thanks to confirmation that Baldwin IX of Flanders and Renaud of Boulogne had renewed the anti-French alliances they had previously agreed to with Richard. The powerful Anjou nobleman William des Roches was persuaded to switch sides from Arthur to John; suddenly the balance seemed to be tipping away from Philip and Arthur in favour of John. Neither side was keen to continue the conflict, and following a papal truce the two leaders met in January 1200 to negotiate possible terms for peace. From John's perspective, what then followed represented an opportunity to stabilise control over his continental possessions and produce a lasting peace with Philip in Paris. John and Philip negotiated the May 1200 Treaty of Le Goulet; by this treaty, Philip recognised John as the rightful heir to Richard in respect to his French possessions, temporarily abandoning the wider claims of his client, Arthur. John, in turn, abandoned Richard's former policy of containing Philip through alliances with Flanders and Boulogne, and accepted Philip's right as the legitimate feudal overlord of John's lands in France. John's policy earned him the disrespectful title of \"John Softsword\" from some English chroniclers, who contrasted his behaviour with his more aggressive brother, Richard.\nSecond marriage and consequences, 1200\u20131202.\nThe new peace would last only two years; war recommenced in the aftermath of John's decision in August 1200 to marry Isabella of Angoul\u00eame. In order to remarry, John first needed to abandon his wife Isabella, Countess of Gloucester; the King accomplished this by arguing that he had failed to get the necessary papal dispensation to marry the Countess in the first place\u2014as a cousin, John could not have legally wedded her without this. It remains unclear why John chose to marry Isabella of Angoul\u00eame. Contemporary chroniclers argued that John had fallen deeply in love with her, and John may have been motivated by desire for an apparently beautiful, if rather young, girl (Isabella of Angoul\u00eame was either 12 or 14 at the time of their marriage). On the other hand, the Angoumois lands that came with her were strategically vital to John: by marrying Isabella, John was acquiring a key land route between Poitou and Gascony, which significantly strengthened his grip on Aquitaine.\nIsabella of Angoul\u00eame, however, was already engaged to Hugh IX of Lusignan, an important member of a key Poitou noble family and brother of Raoul I, Count of Eu, who possessed lands along the sensitive eastern Normandy border. Just as John stood to benefit strategically from marrying Isabella, so the marriage threatened the interests of the Lusignans, whose own lands currently provided the key route for royal goods and troops across Aquitaine. Rather than negotiating some form of compensation, John treated Hugh \"with contempt\"; this resulted in a Lusignan uprising that was promptly crushed by John, who also intervened to suppress Raoul in Normandy.\nAlthough John was Count of Poitou and therefore the rightful feudal lord over the Lusignans, they could legitimately appeal John's actions in France to his own feudal lord, Philip. Hugh did exactly this in 1201 and Philip summoned John to attend court in Paris in 1202, citing the Le Goulet treaty to strengthen his case. John was unwilling to weaken his authority in western France in this way. He argued that he need not attend Philip's court because of his special status as the Duke of Normandy, who was exempt by feudal tradition from being called to the French court. Philip argued that he was summoning John not as the Duke of Normandy, but as Count of Poitou, which carried no such special status. When John still refused to come, Philip declared John in breach of his feudal responsibilities, reassigned all of John's lands that fell under the French crown to Arthur\u2014with the exception of Normandy, which he took back for himself\u2014and began a fresh war against John.\nLoss of Normandy, 1202\u20131204.\nJohn initially adopted a defensive posture similar to that of 1199: avoiding open battle and carefully defending his key castles. John's operations became more chaotic as the campaign progressed, and Philip began to make steady progress in the east. John became aware in July that Arthur's forces were threatening his mother, Eleanor, at Mirebeau Castle. Accompanied by William de Roches, his seneschal in Anjou, he swung his mercenary army rapidly south to protect her. His forces caught Arthur by surprise and captured the entire rebel leadership at the battle of Mirebeau. With his southern flank weakening, Philip was forced to withdraw in the east and turn south himself to contain John's army.\nJohn's position in France was considerably strengthened by the victory at Mirebeau, but John's treatment of his new prisoners and of his ally, William de Roches, quickly undermined these gains. De Roches was a powerful Anjou noble, but John largely ignored him, causing considerable offence, whilst the King kept the rebel leaders in such bad conditions that twenty-two of them died. At this time most of the regional nobility were closely linked through kinship, and this behaviour towards their relatives was regarded as unacceptable. William de Roches and others of John's regional allies in Anjou and Brittany deserted him in favour of Philip, and Brittany rose in revolt. John's financial situation was tenuous, once factors such as the comparative military costs of materiel and soldiers were taken into account. While Philip enjoyed a considerable, although not overwhelming, advantage of resources over John.\nFurther desertions of John's local allies at the beginning of 1203 steadily reduced his freedom to manoeuvre in the region. He attempted to convince Pope Innocent III to intervene in the conflict, but Innocent's efforts were unsuccessful. As the situation became worse for John, he appears to have decided to have Arthur killed, with the aim of removing a potential rival and to undermine the rebel forces in Brittany. Arthur had initially been imprisoned at Falaise and was then moved to Rouen. After this, Arthur's fate remains uncertain, but modern historians believe he was murdered by John. The annals of Margam Abbey suggest that \"John had captured Arthur and kept him alive in prison for some time in the castle of Rouen\u00a0... when John was drunk he slew Arthur with his own hand and tying a heavy stone to the body cast it into the Seine.\" Rumours of the manner of Arthur's death further reduced support for John across the region. Arthur's sister, Eleanor, who had also been captured at Mirebeau, was kept imprisoned by John for many years, albeit in relatively good conditions.\nIn late 1203, John attempted to relieve Ch\u00e2teau Gaillard, which although besieged by Philip was guarding the eastern flank of Normandy. John attempted a synchronised operation involving land-based and water-borne forces, considered by most historians today to have been imaginative in conception, but overly complex for forces of the period to have carried out successfully. John's relief operation was blocked by Philip's forces, and John turned back to Brittany in an attempt to draw Philip away from eastern Normandy. John successfully devastated much of Brittany, but did not deflect Philip's main thrust into the east of Normandy.\nOpinions vary amongst historians as to the military skill shown by John during this campaign, with most recent historians arguing that his performance was passable, although not impressive.\nJohn's situation began to deteriorate rapidly. The eastern border region of Normandy had been extensively cultivated by Philip and his predecessors for several years, whilst Angevin authority in the south had been undermined by Richard's giving away of various key castles some years before. His use of mercenaries in the central regions had rapidly eaten away his remaining support in this area too, which set the stage for a sudden collapse of Angevin power. John retreated back across the Channel in December, sending orders for the establishment of a fresh defensive line to the west of Chateau Gaillard. In March 1204, Gaillard fell. John's mother Eleanor died the following month. This was not just a personal blow for John, but threatened to unravel the widespread Angevin alliances across the far south of France. Philip moved south around the new defensive line and struck upwards at the heart of the Duchy, now facing little resistance. By August, Philip had taken Normandy and advanced south to occupy Anjou and Poitou as well. John's only remaining possession on the Continent was now the Duchy of Aquitaine.\nJohn as king.\nKingship and royal administration.\nThe nature of government under the Angevin monarchs was ill-defined and uncertain. John's predecessors had ruled using the principle of (\"force and will\"), taking executive and sometimes arbitrary decisions, often justified on the basis that a king was above the law. Both Henry II and Richard had argued that kings possessed a quality of \"divine majesty\"; John continued this trend and claimed an \"almost imperial status\" for himself as ruler. During the 12th century, there were contrary opinions expressed about the nature of kingship, and many contemporary writers believed that monarchs should rule in accordance with the custom and the law, and take counsel of the leading members of the realm. There was as yet no model for what should happen if a king refused to do so. Despite his claim to unique authority within England, John would sometimes justify his actions on the basis that he had taken council with the barons. Modern historians remain divided as to whether John had a case of \"royal schizophrenia\" in his approach to government, or if his actions merely reflected the complex model of Angevin kingship in the early 13th century.\nJohn inherited a sophisticated system of administration in England, with a range of royal agents answering to the Royal Household: the Chancery kept written records and communications; the Treasury and the Exchequer dealt with income and expenditure respectively; and various judges were deployed to deliver justice around the kingdom. Thanks to the efforts of men like Hubert Walter, this trend towards improved record keeping continued into his reign. Like previous kings, John managed a peripatetic court that travelled around the kingdom, dealing with both local and national matters as he went. John was very active in the administration of England and was involved in every aspect of government. In part he was following in the tradition of Henry I and Henry II, but by the 13th century the volume of administrative work had greatly increased, which put much more pressure on a king who wished to rule in this style. John was in England for much longer periods than his predecessors, which made his rule more personal than that of previous kings, particularly in previously ignored areas such as the north.\nThe administration of justice was of particular importance to John. Several new processes had been introduced to English law under Henry II, including \"novel disseisin\" and \"mort d'ancestor\". These processes meant the royal courts had a more significant role in local law cases, which had previously been dealt with only by regional or local lords. John increased the professionalism of local sergeants and bailiffs, and extended the system of coroners first introduced by Hubert Walter in 1194, creating a new class of borough coroners. The King worked extremely hard to ensure that this system operated well, through judges he had appointed, by fostering legal specialists and expertise, and by intervening in cases himself. He continued to try relatively minor cases, even during military crises. Viewed positively, Lewis Warren considers that John discharged \"his royal duty of providing justice\u00a0... with a zeal and a tirelessness to which the English common law is greatly endebted\". Seen more critically, John may have been motivated by the potential of the royal legal process to raise fees, rather than a desire to deliver simple justice; his legal system also applied only to free men, rather than to all of the population. Nonetheless, these changes were popular with many free tenants, who acquired a more reliable legal system that could bypass the barons, against whom such cases were often brought. John's reforms were less popular with the barons themselves, especially as they remained subject to arbitrary and frequently vindictive royal justice.\nEconomy.\nOne of John's principal challenges was acquiring the large sums of money needed for his proposed campaigns to reclaim Normandy. The Angevin kings had three main sources of income available to them, namely revenue from their personal lands, or \"demesne\"; money raised through their rights as a feudal lord; and revenue from taxation. Revenue from the royal demesne was inflexible and had been diminishing slowly since the Norman Conquest. Matters were not helped by Richard's sale of many royal properties in 1189, and taxation played a much smaller role in royal income than in later centuries. English kings had widespread feudal rights which could be used to generate income, including the scutage system, in which feudal military service was avoided by a cash payment to the King. He derived income from fines, court fees and the sale of charters and other privileges. John intensified his efforts to maximise all possible sources of income, to the extent that he has been described as \"avaricious, miserly, extortionate and moneyminded\". He also used revenue generation as a way of exerting political control over the barons: debts owed to the crown by the King's favoured supporters might be forgiven; collection of those owed by enemies was more stringently enforced.\nThe result was a sequence of innovative but unpopular financial measures. John levied scutage payments eleven times in his seventeen years as king, as compared to eleven times in total during the reign of the preceding three monarchs. In many cases these were levied in the absence of any actual military campaign, which ran counter to the original idea that scutage was an alternative to actual military service. John maximised his right to demand relief payments when estates and castles were inherited, sometimes charging enormous sums, beyond barons' abilities to pay. Building on the successful sale of sheriff appointments in 1194, the King initiated a new round of appointments, with the new incumbents making back their investment through increased fines and penalties, particularly in the forests. Another innovation of Richard's, increased charges levied on widows who wished to remain single, was expanded under John. John continued to sell charters for new towns, including the planned town of Liverpool, and charters were sold for markets across the kingdom and in Gascony. The King introduced new taxes and extended existing ones. The Jews, who held a vulnerable position in medieval England, protected only by the King, were subject to huge taxes; \u00a344,000 was extracted from the community by the tallage of 1210; much of it was passed on to the Christian debtors of Jewish moneylenders. John created a new tax on income and movable goods in 1207\u2014effectively a version of a modern income tax\u2014that produced \u00a360,000; he created a new set of import and export duties payable directly to the Crown. He found that these measures enabled him to raise further resources through the confiscation of the lands of barons who could not pay or refused to pay.\nAt the start of John's reign there was a sudden change in prices, as bad harvests and high demand for food resulted in much higher prices for grain and animals. This inflationary pressure was to continue for the rest of the 13th century and had long-term economic consequences for England. The resulting social pressures were complicated by bursts of deflation that resulted from John's military campaigns. It was usual at the time for the King to collect taxes in silver, which was then re-minted into new coins; these coins would then be put in barrels and sent to royal castles around the country, to be used to hire mercenaries or to meet other costs. At those times when John was preparing for campaigns in Normandy, for example, huge quantities of silver had to be withdrawn from the economy and stored for months, which unintentionally resulted in periods during which silver coins were simply hard to come by, commercial credit difficult to acquire and deflationary pressure placed on the economy. The result was political unrest across the country. John attempted to address some of the problems with the English currency in 1204 and 1205 by carrying out a radical overhaul of the coinage, improving its quality and consistency.\nRoyal household and.\nJohn's royal household was based around several groups of followers. One group was the , his immediate friends and knights who travelled around the country with him. They also played an important role in organising and leading military campaigns. Another section of royal followers were the ; these were the senior officials and agents of the King and were essential to his day-to-day rule. Being a member of these inner circles brought huge advantages, as it was easier to gain favours from the King, file lawsuits, marry a wealthy heiress or have one's debts remitted. By the time of Henry II, these posts were increasingly being filled by \"new men\" from outside the normal ranks of the barons. This intensified under John's rule, with many lesser nobles arriving from the continent to take up positions at court; many were mercenary leaders from Poitou. These men included soldiers who would become infamous in England for their uncivilised behaviour, including Falkes de Breaut\u00e9, G\u00e9rard d'Ath\u00e9e, Engelard de Cigogn\u00e9, and Philip Marc. Many barons perceived the King's household as what Ralph Turner has characterised as a \"narrow clique enjoying royal favour at barons' expense\" staffed by men of lesser status.\nThis trend for the King to rely on his own men at the expense of the barons was exacerbated by the tradition of Angevin royal (\"anger and ill-will\") and John's own personality. From Henry II onwards, had come to describe the right of the King to express his anger and displeasure at particular barons or clergy, building on the Norman concept of \u2014royal ill-will. In the Norman period, suffering the King's ill-will meant difficulties in obtaining grants, honours or petitions; Henry II had infamously expressed his fury and ill-will towards Thomas Becket, which ultimately resulted in Becket's death. John now had the additional ability to \"cripple his vassals\" on a significant scale using his new economic and judicial measures, which made the threat of royal anger all the more serious.\nJohn was deeply suspicious of the barons, particularly those with sufficient power and wealth to potentially challenge him. Numerous barons were subjected to his , even including the famous knight William Marshal, 1st Earl of Pembroke, normally held up as a model of utter loyalty. The most infamous case, which went beyond anything considered acceptable at the time, was that of the powerful William de Braose, 4th Lord of Bramber, who held lands in Ireland. De Braose was subjected to punitive demands for money, and when he refused to pay a huge sum of 40,000 marks (equivalent to \u00a326,666 at the time), his wife, Maud, and one of their sons were imprisoned by John, which resulted in their deaths. De Braose died in exile in 1211, and his grandsons remained in prison until 1218. John's suspicions and jealousies meant that he rarely enjoyed good relationships with even the leading loyalist barons.\nPersonal life.\nJohn's personal life greatly affected his reign. Contemporary chroniclers state that John was sinfully lustful and lacking in piety. It was common for kings and nobles of the period to keep mistresses, but chroniclers complained that John's mistresses were married noblewomen, which was considered unacceptable. John had at least five children with mistresses during his first marriage, and two of those mistresses are known to have been noblewomen. John's sexual behaviour after his second marriage is less clear, however. None of his known illegitimate children were born after he remarried, and there is no actual documentary proof of adultery after that point, although John certainly had female friends amongst the court throughout the period. The specific accusations made against John during the baronial revolts are now generally considered to have been invented for the purposes of justifying the revolt; nonetheless, most of John's contemporaries seem to have held a poor opinion of his sexual behaviour.\nThe character of John's relationship with his second wife, Isabella of Angoul\u00eame, is unclear. John married Isabella whilst she was relatively young\u2014her exact date of birth is uncertain, and estimates place her between at most 15 and more probably towards nine years old at the time of her marriage. Even by the standards of the time, she was married whilst very young. John did not provide a great deal of money for his wife's household and did not pass on much of the revenue from her lands, to the extent that historian Nicholas Vincent has described him as being \"downright mean\" towards Isabella. Vincent concluded that the marriage was not a particularly \"amicable\" one. Other aspects of their marriage suggest a closer, more positive relationship. Chroniclers recorded that John had a \"mad infatuation\" with Isabella, and certainly the King and Queen had conjugal relations between at least 1207 and 1215; they had five children. In contrast to Vincent, historian William Chester Jordan concludes that the pair were a \"companionable couple\" who had a successful marriage by the standards of the day.\nJohn's lack of religious conviction has been noted by contemporary chroniclers and later historians, with some suspecting that he was at best impious, or even atheistic, a very serious issue at the time. Contemporary chroniclers catalogued his various anti-religious habits at length, including his failure to take communion, his blasphemous remarks, and his witty but scandalous jokes about church doctrine, including jokes about the implausibility of the Resurrection of Jesus. They commented on the paucity of John's charitable donations to the Church. Historian Frank McLynn argues that John's early years at Fontevrault, combined with his relatively advanced education, may have turned him against the church. Other historians have been more cautious in interpreting this material, noting that chroniclers also reported his personal interest in the life of St Wulfstan and his friendships with several senior clerics, most especially with Hugh of Lincoln, who was later declared a saint. Financial records show a normal royal household engaged in the usual feasts and pious observances\u2014albeit with many records showing John's offerings to the poor to atone for routinely breaking church rules and guidance. The historian Lewis Warren has argued that the chronicler accounts were subject to considerable bias and the King was \"at least conventionally devout\", citing his pilgrimages and interest in religious scripture and commentaries.\nLater reign (1204\u20131214).\nContinental policy.\nDuring the remainder of his reign, John focused on trying to retake Normandy. The available evidence suggests that he did not regard the loss of the Duchy as a permanent shift in Capetian power. Strategically, John faced several challenges: England itself had to be secured against possible French invasion, the sea-routes to Bordeaux needed to be secured following the loss of the land route to Aquitaine, and his remaining possessions in Aquitaine needed to be secured following the death of his mother, Eleanor, in April 1204. John's preferred plan was to use Poitou as a base of operations, advance up the Loire Valley to threaten Paris, pin down the French forces and break Philip's internal lines of communication before landing a maritime force in the Duchy itself. Ideally, this plan would benefit from the opening of a second front on Philip's eastern frontiers with Flanders and Boulogne\u2014effectively a re-creation of Richard's old strategy of applying pressure from Germany. All of this would require a great deal of money and soldiers.\nJohn spent much of 1205 securing England against a potential French invasion. As an emergency measure, he recreated a version of Henry II's Assize of Arms of 1181, with each shire creating a structure to mobilise local levies. When the threat of invasion faded, John formed a large military force in England intended for Poitou, and a large fleet with soldiers under his own command intended for Normandy. To achieve this, John reformed the English feudal contribution to his campaigns, creating a more flexible system under which only one knight in ten would actually be mobilised, but would be financially supported by the other nine; knights would serve for an indefinite period. John built up a strong team of engineers for siege warfare and a substantial force of professional crossbowmen. The King was supported by a team of leading barons with military expertise, including William Longesp\u00e9e, 3rd Earl of Salisbury, William the Marshal, Roger de Lacy and, until he fell from favour, the marcher lord William de Braose.\nJohn had already begun to improve his Channel forces before the loss of Normandy and he rapidly built up further maritime capabilities after its collapse. Most of these ships were placed along the Cinque Ports, but Portsmouth was also enlarged. By the end of 1204 he had around 50 large galleys available; another 54 vessels were built between 1209 and 1212. William of Wrotham was appointed \"keeper of the galleys\", effectively John's chief admiral. Wrotham was responsible for fusing John's galleys, the ships of the Cinque Ports and pressed merchant vessels into a single operational fleet. John adopted recent improvements in ship design, including new large transport ships called \"buisses\" and removable forecastles for use in combat.\nBaronial unrest in England prevented the departure of the planned 1205 expedition, and only a smaller force under William Longesp\u00e9e deployed to Poitou. In 1206 John departed for Poitou himself, but was forced to divert south to counter a threat to Gascony from Alfonso VIII of Castile. After a successful campaign against Alfonso, John headed north again, taking the city of Angers. Philip moved south to meet John; the year's campaigning ended in stalemate and a two-year truce was made between the two rulers.\nDuring the truce of 1206\u20131208, John focused on building up his financial and military resources in preparation for another attempt to recapture Normandy. John used some of this money to pay for new alliances on Philip's eastern frontiers, where the growth in Capetian power was beginning to concern France's neighbours. By 1212 John had successfully concluded alliances with his nephew Otto IV of Germany, a contender for the crown of Holy Roman Emperor, as well as with Renaud of Boulogne and Ferdinand of Flanders. The invasion plans for 1212 were postponed because of fresh English baronial unrest about service in Poitou. Philip seized the initiative in 1213, sending his elder son, Louis, to invade Flanders with the intention of next launching an invasion of England. John was forced to postpone his own invasion plans to counter this threat. He launched his new fleet to attack the French at the harbour of Damme. The attack was a success, destroying Philip's vessels and any chances of an invasion of England that year. John hoped to exploit this advantage by invading himself late in 1213, but baronial discontent again delayed his invasion plans until early 1214, in what was his final Continental campaign.\nScotland, Ireland and Wales.\nIn the late 12th and early 13th centuries the border and political relationship between England and Scotland was disputed, with the kings of Scotland claiming parts of what is now northern England. Henry II had forced William the Lion to swear fealty to him at the Treaty of Falaise in 1174. This had been rescinded by Richard I in exchange for financial compensation in 1189, but the relationship remained uneasy. John began his reign by reasserting his sovereignty over the disputed northern counties. He refused William's request for the earldom of Northumbria, but did not intervene in Scotland itself and focused on his continental problems. The two kings maintained a friendly relationship, meeting in 1206 and 1207, until it was rumoured in 1209 that William was intending to ally himself with Philip II of France. John invaded Scotland and forced William to sign the Treaty of Norham, which gave John control of William's daughters and required a payment of \u00a310,000. This effectively crippled William's power north of the border, and by 1212 John had to intervene militarily to support William against his internal rivals. John made no efforts to reinvigorate the Treaty of Falaise, though, and William and his son Alexander II of Scotland in turn remained independent kings, supported by, but not owing fealty to, John.\nJohn remained Lord of Ireland throughout his reign. He drew on the country for resources to fight his war with Philip on the continent. Conflict continued in Ireland between the Anglo-Norman settlers and the indigenous Irish chieftains, with John manipulating both groups to expand his wealth and power in the country. During Richard's rule, John had successfully increased the size of his lands in Ireland, and he continued this policy as king. In 1210 the King crossed into Ireland with a large army to crush a rebellion by the Anglo-Norman lords; he reasserted his control of the country and used a new charter to order compliance with English laws and customs in Ireland. John stopped short of trying to actively enforce this charter on the native Irish kingdoms, but historian David Carpenter suspects that he might have done so, had the baronial conflict in England not intervened. Simmering tensions remained with the native Irish leaders even after John left for England.\nRoyal power in Wales was unevenly applied, with the country divided between the marcher lords along the borders, royal territories in Pembrokeshire and the more independent native Welsh lords of North Wales. John took a close interest in Wales and knew the country well, visiting every year between 1204 and 1211 and marrying his illegitimate daughter Joan to the Welsh prince Llywelyn the Great. The King used the marcher lords and the native Welsh to increase his own territory and power, striking a sequence of increasingly precise deals backed by royal military power with the Welsh rulers. A major royal expedition to enforce these agreements occurred in 1211, after Llywelyn attempted to exploit the instability caused by the removal of William de Braose, through the Welsh uprising of 1211. John's invasion, striking into the Welsh heartlands, was a military success. Llywelyn came to terms that included an expansion of John's power across much of Wales, albeit only temporarily.\nDispute with the Pope and excommunication.\nWhen the Archbishop of Canterbury, Hubert Walter, died on 13 July 1205, John became involved in a dispute with Pope Innocent III that would lead to the King's excommunication. The Norman and Angevin kings had traditionally exercised a great deal of power over the church within their territories. From the 1040s onwards, however, successive popes had put forward a reforming message that emphasised the importance of the Church being \"governed more coherently and more hierarchically from the centre\" and established \"its own sphere of authority and jurisdiction, separate from and independent of that of the lay ruler\", in the words of historian Richard Huscroft. After the 1140s, these principles had been largely accepted within the English Church, albeit with an element of concern about centralising authority in Rome. These changes brought the customary rights of lay rulers such as John over ecclesiastical appointments into question. Pope Innocent was, according to historian Ralph Turner, an \"ambitious and aggressive\" religious leader, insistent on his rights and responsibilities within the church.\nJohn wanted John de Gray, the Bishop of Norwich and one of his own supporters, to be appointed Archbishop of Canterbury, but the cathedral chapter for Canterbury Cathedral claimed the exclusive right to elect the Archbishop. They favoured Reginald, the chapter's sub-prior. To complicate matters, the bishops of the province of Canterbury also claimed the right to appoint the next archbishop. The chapter secretly elected Reginald and he travelled to Rome to be confirmed; the bishops challenged the appointment and the matter was taken before Innocent. John forced the Canterbury chapter to change their support to John de Gray, and a messenger was sent to Rome to inform the papacy of the new decision. Innocent disavowed both Reginald and John de Gray, and instead appointed his own candidate, Stephen Langton. John refused Innocent's request that he consent to Langton's appointment, but the Pope consecrated Langton anyway in June 1207.\nJohn was incensed about what he perceived as an abrogation of his customary right as monarch to influence the election. He complained both about the choice of Langton as an individual, as John felt he was overly influenced by the Capetian court in Paris, and about the process as a whole. He barred Langton from entering England and seized the lands of the archbishopric and other papal possessions. Innocent set a commission in place to try to convince John to change his mind, but to no avail. Innocent then placed an interdict on England in March 1208, prohibiting clergy from conducting religious services, with the exception of baptisms for the young, and confessions and absolutions for the dying.\nJohn treated the interdict as \"the equivalent of a papal declaration of war\". He responded by attempting to punish Innocent personally and to drive a wedge between the English clergymen who might support John and those allying themselves firmly with the authorities in Rome. John seized the lands of the clergymen unwilling to conduct services, as well as estates linked to Innocent himself; he arrested the illicit concubines that many clerics kept during the period, releasing them only after the payment of fines; he seized the lands of members of the church who had fled England, and he promised protection for those willing to remain loyal to him. In many cases, individual institutions were able to negotiate terms for managing their own properties and keeping the produce of their estates. By 1209 the situation showed no signs of resolution, and Innocent threatened to excommunicate John if he did not acquiesce to Langton's appointment. When this threat failed, Innocent excommunicated the King in November 1209. Although theoretically a significant blow to John's legitimacy, this did not appear to worry the King greatly. Two of John's close allies, Emperor Otto IV and Count Raymond VI of Toulouse, had already suffered the same punishment themselves, and the significance of excommunication had been somewhat devalued. John simply tightened his existing measures and accrued significant sums from the income of vacant sees and abbeys. One 1213 estimate, for example, suggested the church had lost an estimated 100,000 marks (equivalent to ~\u00a367,000 at the time) to John. Official figures suggest that around 14% of the annual income from the English church was being appropriated by John.\nInnocent gave some dispensations as the crisis progressed. Monastic communities were allowed to celebrate Mass in private from 1209 onwards, and late in 1212 the Holy Viaticum for the dying was authorised. The rules on burials and lay access to churches appear to have been steadily circumvented, at least unofficially. Although the interdict was a burden to much of the population, it did not result in rebellion against John. By 1213, though, John was increasingly worried about the threat of a French invasion. Some contemporary chroniclers suggest that in January of that year, Philip II of France had been charged with deposing John on behalf of the papacy, although it appears that the Pope had merely prepared secret letters in case he needed to claim the credit if Philip successfully invaded England.\nUnder mounting political pressure, John finally negotiated terms for a reconciliation, and the papal terms for submission were accepted in the presence of the papal legate Pandulf Verraccio in May 1213 at the Templar Church at Dover. As part of the deal, John offered to surrender the Kingdom of England to the papacy for a feudal service of 1,000 marks (equivalent to ~\u00a3700 at the time) annually; 700 marks (~\u00a3500) for England and 300 marks (~\u00a3200) for Ireland, as well as compensation to the Church for any revenue lost during the crisis. The agreement was formalised in the , or Golden Bull. This resolution produced mixed responses. Although some chroniclers felt that John had been humiliated by the sequence of events, there was little public reaction. The Pope benefited from the resolution of his long-standing English problem, but John probably gained more, as Innocent became a firm supporter of John for the rest of his reign. Backing him in both domestic and continental policy issues. Innocent immediately turned against Philip, calling upon him to reject plans to invade England and to sue for peace. John paid some of the compensation money he had promised the Church, but he ceased making payments in late 1214, leaving two-thirds of the sum unpaid; Innocent appears to have conveniently forgotten this debt for the good of the wider relationship.\nFailure in France and the First Barons' War (1215\u20131216).\nTensions and discontent.\nTensions between John and the barons had been growing for several years, as demonstrated by the 1212 plot against the King. Many of the disaffected barons came from the north of England; that faction was often labelled by contemporaries and historians as \"the Northerners\". The northern barons rarely had any personal stake in the conflict in France, and many of them owed large sums of money to John; the revolt has been characterised as \"a rebellion of the king's debtors\". Many of John's military household joined the rebels, particularly amongst those that John had appointed to administrative roles across England; their local links and loyalties outweighed their personal loyalty to John. Tension also grew across North Wales, where opposition to the 1211 treaty between John and Llywelyn was turning into open conflict. For some the appointment of Peter des Roches as justiciar was an important factor, as he was considered an \"abrasive foreigner\" by many of the barons. The failure of John's French military campaign in 1214 was probably the final straw that precipitated the baronial uprising during John's final years as king; James Holt describes the path to civil war as \"direct, short and unavoidable\" following the defeat at Bouvines.\nFailure of the 1214 French campaign.\nIn 1214 John began his final campaign to reclaim Normandy from Philip. He was optimistic, as he had successfully built up alliances with Emperor Otto IV, Renaud of Boulogne and Ferdinand of Flanders; he was enjoying papal favour; and he had successfully built up substantial funds to pay for the deployment of his experienced army. Nonetheless, when John left for Poitou in February 1214, many barons refused to provide military service; mercenary knights had to fill the gaps. John's plan was to split Philip's forces by pushing north-east from Poitou towards Paris, whilst Otto, Renaud and Ferdinand, supported by William Longesp\u00e9e, marched south-west from Flanders.\nThe first part of the campaign went well, with John outmanoeuvring the forces under the command of Prince Louis and retaking the county of Anjou by the end of June. John besieged the castle of Roche-au-Moine, a key stronghold, forcing Louis to give battle against John's larger army. The local Angevin nobles refused to advance with John; left at something of a disadvantage, John retreated back to La Rochelle. Shortly afterwards, King Philip won the hard-fought battle of Bouvines in the north against Otto and John's other allies, bringing an end to John's hopes of retaking Normandy. A peace agreement was signed in which John returned Anjou to Philip and paid him compensation; the truce was intended to last for six years. John arrived back in England in October.\nPre-war tensions and Magna Carta.\nWithin a few months of John's return, rebel barons in the north and east of England were organising resistance to his rule. John held a council in London in January 1215 to discuss potential reforms and sponsored discussions in Oxford between his agents and the rebels during the spring. He appears to have been playing for time until Pope Innocent III could send letters giving him explicit papal support. This was particularly important for John, as a way of pressuring the barons but also as a way of controlling Stephen Langton, the Archbishop of Canterbury. In the meantime, John began to recruit fresh mercenary forces from Poitou, although some were later sent back to avoid giving the impression that John was escalating the conflict. The King announced his intent to become a crusader, a move which gave him additional political protection under church law.\nLetters of support from the Pope arrived in April but by then the rebel barons had organised. They congregated at Northampton in May and renounced their feudal ties to John, appointing Robert fitz Walter as their military leader. This self-proclaimed \"Army of God\" marched on London, taking the capital as well as Lincoln and Exeter. John's efforts to appear moderate and conciliatory had been largely successful, but once the rebels held London they attracted a fresh wave of defectors from John's royalist faction. John instructed Langton to organise peace talks with the rebel barons.\nJohn met the rebel leaders at Runnymede, near Windsor Castle, on 15 June 1215. Langton's efforts at mediation created a charter capturing the proposed peace agreement; it was later renamed Magna Carta, or \"Great Charter\". The charter went beyond simply addressing specific baronial complaints, and formed a wider proposal for political reform, albeit one focusing on the rights of free men, not serfs and unfree labour. It promised the protection of church rights, protection from illegal imprisonment, access to swift justice, new taxation only with baronial consent and limitations on scutage and other feudal payments. A council of twenty-five barons would be created to monitor and ensure John's future adherence to the charter, whilst the rebel army would stand down and London would be surrendered to the King.\nNeither John nor the rebel barons seriously attempted to implement the peace accord. The rebel barons suspected that the proposed baronial council would be unacceptable to John and that he would challenge the legality of the charter; they packed the baronial council with their own hardliners and refused to demobilise their forces or surrender London as agreed. Despite his promises to the contrary, John appealed to Innocent for help, observing that the charter compromised the Pope's rights under the 1213 agreement that had appointed him John's feudal lord. Innocent obliged; he declared the charter \"not only shameful and demeaning, but illegal and unjust\" and excommunicated the rebel barons. The failure of the agreement led rapidly to the First Barons' War.\nWar with the barons.\nThe rebels made the first move in the war, seizing the strategic Rochester Castle, owned by Langton but left almost unguarded by the archbishop. John was well prepared for a conflict. He had stockpiled money to pay for mercenaries and ensured the support of the powerful marcher lords with their own feudal forces, such as William Marshal and Ranulf de Blondeville, 6th Earl of Chester. The rebels lacked the engineering expertise or heavy equipment necessary to assault the network of royal castles that cut off the northern rebel barons from those in the south. John's strategy was to isolate the rebel barons in London, protect his own supply lines to his key source of mercenaries in Flanders, prevent the French from landing in the south-east, and then win the war through slow attrition. John put off dealing with the badly deteriorating situation in North Wales, where Prince Llywelyn was leading a rebellion against the 1211 settlement.\nJohn's campaign started well. In November John retook Rochester Castle from rebel baron William d'Aubigny in a sophisticated assault. One chronicler had not seen \"a siege so hard pressed or so strongly resisted\", whilst historian Reginald Brown describes it as \"one of the greatest [siege] operations in England up to that time\". Having regained the south-east John split his forces, sending William Longesp\u00e9e to retake the north side of London and East Anglia, whilst John himself headed north via Nottingham to attack the estates of the northern barons. Both operations were successful and the majority of the remaining rebels were pinned down in London. In January 1216 John marched against Alexander II of Scotland, who had allied himself with the rebel cause. John took back Alexander's possessions in northern England in a rapid campaign and pushed up towards Edinburgh over a ten-day period.\nThe rebel barons responded by inviting Prince Louis of France to lead them: Louis had a claim to the English throne by virtue of his marriage to Blanche of Castile, a granddaughter of Henry II. Philip may have provided his son with private support but refused to openly support Louis, who was excommunicated by Innocent for taking part in the war against John. Louis' planned arrival in England presented a significant problem for John, as Louis would bring with him naval vessels and siege engines essential to the rebel cause. Once John contained Alexander in Scotland, he marched south to deal with the challenge of the coming invasion.\nLouis intended to land in the south of England in May 1216, and John assembled a naval force to intercept him. Unfortunately for John, his fleet was dispersed by bad storms and Louis landed unopposed in Kent. John hesitated and decided not to attack Louis immediately, either due to the risks of open battle or over concerns about the loyalty of his own men. Louis and the rebel barons advanced west and John retreated, spending the summer reorganising his defences across the rest of the kingdom. John saw several of his military household desert to the rebels, including his half-brother William Longesp\u00e9e. By the end of the summer the rebels had regained the south-east of England and parts of the north.\nDeath.\nIn September 1216, John began a fresh, vigorous attack. He marched from the Cotswolds, feigned an offensive to relieve the besieged Windsor Castle, and attacked eastwards around London to Cambridge to separate the rebel-held areas of Lincolnshire and East Anglia. From there he travelled north to relieve the rebel siege at Lincoln and back east to Lynn, probably to order further supplies from the continent. In Lynn, John contracted dysentery, which would ultimately prove fatal. Meanwhile, Alexander II invaded northern England again, taking Carlisle in August and then marching south to give homage to Prince Louis for his English possessions; John narrowly missed intercepting Alexander along the way. Tensions between Louis and the English barons began to increase, prompting a wave of desertions, including William Marshal's son William and William Longesp\u00e9e, who both returned to John's faction.\nCrown Jewels.\nJohn returned west but is said to have lost much of his baggage train along the way. Roger of Wendover provides the most graphic account of this, suggesting that the King's belongings, including the English Crown Jewels, were lost as he crossed one of the tidal estuaries which empties into the Wash, being sucked in by quicksand and whirlpools. Accounts of the incident vary considerably between the various chroniclers and the exact location of the incident has never been confirmed; the losses may have involved only a few of his pack-horses. Modern historians assert that by October 1216 John faced a \"stalemate\", \"a military situation uncompromised by defeat\".\nJohn's illness grew worse and by the time he reached Newark Castle, Nottinghamshire, he was unable to travel any farther; he died on the night of 18/19 October. Numerous\u2014probably fictitious\u2014accounts circulated soon after his death that he had been killed by poisoned ale, poisoned plums or a \"surfeit of peaches\". His body was escorted south by a company of mercenaries and he was buried in Worcester Cathedral in front of the altar of St Wulfstan. A new sarcophagus with an effigy was made for him in 1232, in which his remains now rest. His heart was buried in Croxton Abbey.\nLegacy.\nIn the aftermath of John's death, William Marshal was declared the protector of the nine-year-old Henry III. The civil war continued until loyalist victories at the battles of Lincoln and Dover in 1217. Louis gave up his claim to the English throne and signed the Treaty of Lambeth. The failed Magna Carta agreement was resuscitated by Marshal's administration and reissued in an edited form in 1217 as a basis for future government. Henry III continued his attempts to reclaim Normandy and Anjou until 1259, but John's continental losses and the consequent growth of Capetian power in the 13th century proved to mark a \"turning point in European history\".\nJohn's niece Eleanor of Brittany would remain treated with honours due a princess, but according to his will, she would never be released from prison, for she might have a potential claim to the throne of Henry III.\nJohn's first wife, Isabella of Gloucester, was released from imprisonment in 1214; she remarried twice, and died in 1217. John's second wife, Isabella of Angoul\u00eame, left England for Angoul\u00eame soon after the King's death; she became a powerful regional leader, but largely abandoned her children by John. Their eldest son, Henry III, ruled as King of England for the majority of the 13th century. Their other son, Richard of Cornwall, became a noted European leader and ultimately the King of the Romans in the Holy Roman Empire. Their daughter Joan became Queen of Scotland on her marriage to Alexander II. Another daughter, Isabella, was Holy Roman Empress as the wife of Emperor Frederick II. The youngest daughter, Eleanor, married William Marshal's son, also called William, and later the famous English rebel Simon de Montfort.\nBy various mistresses, John had eight, possibly nine, sons\u2014Richard, Oliver, John, Geoffrey, Henry, Osbert Gifford, Eudes, Bartholomew and probably Philip\u2014and two or three daughters\u2014Joan, Maud and probably Isabel. Of these, Joan became the most famous, marrying Prince Llywelyn the Great of Wales.\nHistoriography.\nHistorical interpretations of John have been subject to considerable change over the centuries. Medieval chroniclers provided the first contemporary, or near contemporary, histories of John's reign. One group of chroniclers wrote early in John's life, or around the time of his accession, including Richard of Devizes, William of Newburgh, Roger of Hoveden and Ralph de Diceto. These historians were generally unsympathetic to John's behaviour under Richard's rule, but slightly more positive towards the very earliest years of John's reign.\nReliable accounts of the middle and later parts of John's reign are more limited, with Gervase of Canterbury and Ralph of Coggeshall writing the main accounts; neither of them were positive about John's performance as king. Much of John's later, negative reputation was established by two chroniclers writing after his death, Roger of Wendover and Matthew Paris, the latter claiming that John attempted conversion to Islam in exchange for military aid from the Almohad ruler Muhammad al-Nasir\u2014a story modern historians consider untrue.\nIn the 16th century, political and religious changes altered the attitude of historians towards John. Tudor historians were generally favourably inclined towards the King, focusing on his opposition to the Papacy and his promotion of the special rights and prerogatives of a king. Revisionist histories written by John Foxe, William Tyndale and Robert Barnes portrayed John as an early Protestant hero, and Foxe included the King in his \"Book of Martyrs\". John Speed's \"Historie of Great Britaine\" in 1632 praised John's \"great renown\" as a king; he blamed the bias of medieval chroniclers for the King's poor reputation.\nBy the Victorian period in the 19th century, historians were more inclined to draw on the judgements of the chroniclers and to focus on John's moral personality. Kate Norgate, for example, argued that John's downfall had been due not to his failure in war or strategy, but due to his \"almost superhuman wickedness\", whilst James Ramsay blamed John's family background and his cruel personality for his downfall. Historians in the \"Whiggish\" tradition, focusing on documents such as the Domesday Book and Magna Carta, trace a progressive and universalist course of political and economic development in England over the medieval period.\nThese historians were often inclined to see John's reign, and his signing of Magna Carta in particular, as a positive step in the constitutional development of England, despite the flaws of the King himself. Winston Churchill, for example, argued that \"[w]hen the long tally is added, it will be seen that the British nation and the English-speaking world owe far more to the vices of John than to the labours of virtuous sovereigns\".\nIn the 1940s, new interpretations of John's reign began to be published, based on research into documents dating to his reign, such as pipe rolls, charters, court documents and similar primary records. Notably, an essay by Vivian Galbraith in 1945 proposed a \"new approach\" to understanding the ruler. The use of recorded evidence was combined with an increased scepticism about two of the most colourful chroniclers of John's reign, Roger of Wendover and Matthew Paris. In many cases, the detail provided by these chroniclers, both writing after John's death, was challenged by modern historians.\nInterpretations of Magna Carta and the role of the rebel barons in 1215 have been significantly revised: Although the charter's symbolic, constitutional value for later generations is unquestionable, in the context of John's reign, most historians now consider it a failed peace agreement between \"partisan\" factions. There has been increasing debate about the nature of John's Irish policies. Specialists in Irish medieval history, such as Sean Duffy, have challenged the conventional narrative established by Lewis Warren, suggesting that Ireland was less stable by 1216 than was previously supposed.\nMost historians today, including John's recent biographers Ralph Turner and Lewis Warren, argue that John was an unsuccessful monarch, but note that his failings were exaggerated by 12th- and 13th-century chroniclers. Jim Bradbury notes the current consensus that John was a \"hard-working administrator, an able man, an able general\", albeit, as Turner suggests, with \"distasteful, even dangerous personality traits\", including pettiness, spitefulness and cruelty. John Gillingham, author of a major biography of Richard I, follows this line too, although he considers John a less effective general than do Turner or Warren, and describes him \"one of the worst kings ever to rule England\".\nBradbury takes a moderate line, but suggests that in recent years modern historians have been overly lenient towards John's numerous faults. Popular historian Frank McLynn maintains a counter-revisionist perspective on John, arguing that the King's modern reputation amongst historians is \"bizarre\", and that, as a monarch, John \"fails almost all those [tests] that can be legitimately set\". According to C. Warren Hollister, \"The dramatic ambivalence of his personality, the passions that he stirred among his own contemporaries, the very magnitude of his failures, have made him an object of endless fascination to historians and biographers.\"\nPopular representations.\nPopular representations of John first began to emerge during the Tudor period, mirroring the revisionist histories of the time. The anonymous play \"The Troublesome Reign of King John\" portrayed the King as a \"proto-Protestant martyr\", similar to that shown in John Bale's morality play \"Kynge Johan\", in which John attempts to save England from the \"evil agents of the Roman Church\". By contrast, Shakespeare's \"King John\", a relatively anti-Catholic play that draws on \"The Troublesome Reign\" for its source material, offers a more \"balanced, dual view of a complex monarch as both a proto-Protestant victim of Rome's machinations and as a weak, selfishly motivated ruler\".\nAnthony Munday's play \"The Downfall and The Death of Robert Earl of Huntington\" portrays many of John's negative traits, but adopts a positive interpretation of the King's stand against the Roman Catholic Church, in line with the contemporary views of the Tudor monarchs. By the middle of the 17th century, plays such as Robert Davenport's \"King John and Matilda\", although based largely on the earlier Elizabethan works, were transferring the role of Protestant champion to the barons and focusing more on the tyrannical aspects of John's behaviour.\nNineteenth-century fictional depictions of John were heavily influenced by Sir Walter Scott's historical romance, \"Ivanhoe\", which presented \"an almost totally unfavourable picture\" of the King; the work drew on 19th-century histories of the period and on Shakespeare's play. Scott's work influenced the late-19th-century children's writer Howard Pyle's book \"The Merry Adventures of Robin Hood\", which in turn established John as the principal villain within the traditional Robin Hood narrative.\nDuring the 20th century, John was normally depicted in fictional books and films alongside Robin Hood. Sam De Grasse's role as John in the black-and-white 1922 film version shows John committing numerous atrocities and acts of torture. Claude Rains played John in the 1938 colour version alongside Errol Flynn, starting a trend for films to depict John as an \"effeminate\u00a0... arrogant and cowardly stay-at-home\". The character of John acts either to highlight the virtues of King Richard, or contrasts with the Sheriff of Nottingham, who is usually the \"swashbuckling villain\" opposing Robin.\nAn extreme version of this trend can be seen in the 1973 Disney cartoon version, for example, which depicts John, voiced by Peter Ustinov, as a \"cowardly, thumbsucking lion\". Popular works that depict John beyond the Robin Hood legends, such as James Goldman's play and later film, \"The Lion in Winter\", set in 1183, commonly present him as an \"effete weakling\", in this instance contrasted with the more masculine Henry II, or as a tyrant, as in A. A. Milne's poem for children, \"King John's Christmas\".\nIssue.\nJohn and Isabella of Angoul\u00eame had five children:\nJohn had several mistresses, including one named Suzanne. His known illegitimate children are:\nGenealogical table.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Norman English and early Plantagenet monarchs and their relationship with rulers of Western Europe\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16551", "revid": "12460111", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16551", "title": "Jule Styne", "text": "English-American songwriter (1905\u20131994)\nJule Styne ( ; born Julius Kerwin Stein; December 31, 1905 \u2013 September 20, 1994) was an English-American songwriter and composer widely known for a series of Broadway musicals, including several famous frequently-revived shows that also became successful films: \"Gypsy,\" \"Gentlemen Prefer Blondes,\" and \"Funny Girl.\"\nEarly life.\nStyne was born to a Jewish family in London, England. His parents, Anna Kertman and Isadore Stein, were emigrants from Ukraine (then part of the Russian Empire) and ran a small grocery. Even before his family left Britain, he did impressions on the stage of well-known singers, including Harry Lauder, who saw him perform and advised him to take up the piano. At the age of eight, he moved with his family to Chicago, where he began taking piano lessons. He proved to be a prodigy and performed with the Chicago, St. Louis, and Detroit symphonies before he was 10\u00a0years old.\nCareer.\nBefore Styne attended Chicago Musical College, he had already attracted the attention of another teenager, Mike Todd, later a successful film producer, who commissioned him to write a song for a musical act that he was creating. It was the first of over 1,500 published songs Styne composed in his career. His first hit, \"Sunday\", was written in 1926.\nIn 1929, Styne was playing with the Ben Pollack band.\nStyne was a vocal coach for 20th Century Fox, until Darryl F. Zanuck fired him because vocal coaching was \"a luxury, and we're cutting out those luxuries.\" Zanuck told him he should write songs because \"that's forever\". Styne established his own dance band, which got him noticed in Hollywood, where he was championed by Frank Sinatra and began a collaboration with lyricist Sammy Cahn. He and Cahn wrote many songs for the movies, including \"It's Been a Long, Long Time\" (No. 1 for three weeks for Harry James and His Orchestra in 1945), \"Five Minutes More\", and the Oscar-winning title song for \"Three Coins in the Fountain\" (1954). Ten of his songs were Oscar-nominated, many of them written with Cahn, including \"I've Heard That Song Before\" (No. 1 for 13 weeks for Harry James and His Orchestra in 1943), \"I'll Walk Alone\", \"It's Magic\" (a No. 2 hit for Doris Day in 1948), and \"I Fall In Love Too Easily\". He collaborated with Leo Robin on the score for the 1955 musical film \"My Sister Eileen\".\nIn 1947, Styne wrote his first score for a Broadway musical, \"High Button Shoes,\" with Cahn, and over the next several decades wrote the scores for many Broadway shows, most notably \"Gentlemen Prefer Blondes,\" \"Peter Pan\" (additional music), \"Bells Are Ringing,\" \",\" \"Do Re Mi,\" \"Funny Girl,\" \"Lorelei,\" \"Sugar\" (with a story based on the movie \"Some Like It Hot,\" but all new music), and the Tony-winning \"Hallelujah, Baby!\".\nStyne wrote original music for the short-lived themed amusement park Freedomland U.S.A. that opened on June 19, 1960.\nHis collaborators included Sammy Cahn, Leo Robin, Betty Comden and Adolph Green, Stephen Sondheim, Bob Hilliard, and Bob Merrill. \nHe wrote career-altering Broadway scores for a wide variety of major stars, including Phil Silvers, Carol Channing, Mary Martin, Judy Holliday, Ethel Merman, and an up-and-coming Barbra Streisand.\nHe was the subject of \"This Is Your Life\" for British television in 1978 when he was surprised by Eamonn Andrews in New York's Times Square.\nPersonal life and death.\nStyne married Englishwoman Margaret Brown (born in Torquay) and they remained married until his death. Styne died of heart failure in New York City at the age of 88. His archive\u00a0\u2013 including original hand-written compositions, letters, and production materials\u00a0\u2013 is housed at the Harry Ransom Center.\nMargaret Styne oversaw Styne's estate until she died on February 20, 2022.\nAwards.\nStyne was elected to the Songwriters Hall of Fame in 1972 and the American Theatre Hall of Fame in 1981, and he was a recipient of a Drama Desk Special Award and the Kennedy Center Honors in 1990. Additionally, Styne won the 1955 Oscar for Best Music, Original Song for \"Three Coins in the Fountain\", and \"Hallelujah, Baby!\" won the 1968 Tony Award for Best Original Score.\nSongs.\nA selection of the many songs that Styne wrote:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16552", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16552", "title": "Jean Gray", "text": "Jean Gray may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "16553", "revid": "38056903", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16553", "title": "Julia Roberts", "text": "American actress (born 1967)\nJulia Fiona Roberts (born October 28, 1967) is an American actress. Known for her leading roles across various genres, she has received multiple accolades, including an Academy Award, a British Academy Film Award, and three Golden Globe Awards. She became known for portraying charming and relatable characters in romantic comedies and blockbusters, before expanding into dramas, thrillers, and independent films. The films in which she has starred have collectively grossed over $3.9 billion worldwide, making her one of Hollywood's most bankable stars, while the media nicknamed her \"America's Sweetheart\" in recognition of her widespread popularity and on- and off-screen charisma.\nAfter early breakthroughs in \"Mystic Pizza\" (1988) and \"Steel Magnolias\" (1989), Roberts solidified her status as a leading lady with the romantic comedies \"Pretty Woman\" (1990), \"My Best Friend's Wedding\" (1997), \"Notting Hill\" (1999), and \"Runaway Bride\" (1999). Roberts won the Academy Award for Best Actress for her portrayal of the title role in the biographical drama \"Erin Brockovich\" (2000). She then starred in films such as \"Ocean's Eleven\" (2001), \"Ocean's Twelve\" (2004), \"Charlie Wilson's War\" (2007), \"Valentine's Day\" (2010), \"Eat Pray Love\" (2010), (2013), \"Wonder\" (2017), \"Ticket to Paradise\" (2022), \"Leave the World Behind\" (2023), and \"After the Hunt\" (2025). On television, she starred as a physician during the AIDS crisis in the HBO film \"The Normal Heart\" (2014) for which she earned a Primetime Emmy Award nomination, a social worker in the first season of the streaming series \"Homecoming\" (2018), and portrayed Martha Mitchell in the Starz political limited series \"Gaslit\" (2022).\nRoberts runs the production company Red Om Films, through which she has served as an executive producer for various projects she has starred in, as well as for the first four films of the \"American Girl\" franchise (2004\u20132008). She has acted as the global ambassador for Lanc\u00f4me since 2009. She was the world's highest-paid actress throughout the majority of the 1990s and the first half of the 2000s. She received then-unprecedented fees of $20 million and $25\u00a0million for her roles in \"Erin Brockovich\" (2000) and \"Mona Lisa Smile\" (2003), respectively. As of 2020[ [update]], Roberts's net worth was estimated to be $250\u00a0million. \"People\" magazine has named her the most beautiful woman in the world a record five times.\nEarly life and family.\nJulia Fiona Roberts was born on October 28, 1967, at Crawford Long Hospital in Atlanta, Georgia, to Betty Lou Bredemus and Walter Grady Roberts. She is of English, Scottish, Irish, Welsh, German, and Swedish descent. Her father was a Baptist, her mother Catholic. Roberts was raised Catholic. Her older brother Eric Roberts (b. 1956), from whom she was estranged for several years until 2004, older sister Lisa Roberts Gillan (b. 1965), and niece Emma Roberts, are also actors. She also had a younger half-sister named Nancy Motes.\nRoberts's parents, one-time actors and playwrights, met while performing in theatrical productions for the United States Armed Forces. They later co-founded the Atlanta Actors and Writers Workshop off Juniper Street in Midtown Atlanta. They ran a children's acting school in Decatur, Georgia, while they were expecting Julia. The children of Coretta and Martin Luther King Jr. attended the school; Walter Roberts served as acting coach for their daughter, Yolanda. In gratitude for his service running the only racially integrated theater troupe in the region and due to the Roberts's financial difficulties, Coretta King paid the Roberts's hospital bill when Julia was born.\nRoberts's parents married in 1955. Her mother filed for divorce in 1971; the divorce was finalized in early 1972. From 1972, Roberts lived in Smyrna, Georgia, where she attended Fitzhugh Lee Elementary School, Griffin Middle School, and Campbell High School. In 1972, her mother married Michael Motes, who was abusive and often unemployed; Roberts despised him. The couple had a daughter, Nancy, who died at 37 on February\u00a09, 2014, of an apparent drug overdose. The marriage ended in 1983, with Betty Lou divorcing Motes on cruelty grounds; she had stated that marrying him was the biggest mistake of her life. Roberts's own father died of cancer when she was ten.\nRoberts wanted to be a veterinarian as a child. She played the clarinet in her school band. After graduating from high school, she headed to New York City to pursue a career in acting. Once there, she signed with the Click Modeling Agency and enrolled in acting classes.\nCareer.\n1987\u20131999: Acting debut and film stardom.\nFollowing her first television appearance as a juvenile rape victim in the first season of the series \"Crime Story\", with Dennis Farina, in the episode \"The Survivor\", broadcast on February 13, 1987, Roberts made her big screen debut in the dramedy \"Satisfaction\" (1988), alongside Liam Neeson and Justine Bateman, as a band member looking for a summer gig. (She had filmed a small role in 1987 opposite her brother Eric, in \"Blood Red\", though she only had two words of dialogue, and it was not released until 1989.) In 1988, Roberts had a role in the fourth-season finale of \"Miami Vice\" and her first critical success with moviegoers came with the independent romantic comedy \"Mystic Pizza\", in which she played a Portuguese-American teenage girl working as a waitress at a pizza parlor. Roger Ebert found Roberts to be a \"major beauty with a fierce energy\" and observed that the film \"may someday become known for the movie stars it showcased back before they became stars. All of the young actors in this movie have genuine gifts\".\nIn \"Steel Magnolias\" (1989), a film adaptation of Robert Harling's 1987 play of the same name, Roberts starred as a young bride with diabetes, alongside Sally Field, Dolly Parton, Shirley MacLaine and Daryl Hannah. The filmmakers were looking at both Laura Dern and Winona Ryder when the casting director insisted they see Roberts, who was then filming \"Mystic Pizza\". Harling stated: \"She walked into the room and that smile lit everything up and I said 'that's my sister', so she joined the party and she was magnificent\". Director Herbert Ross was notoriously tough on newcomer Roberts, with Sally Field admitting that he \"went after Julia with a vengeance. This was pretty much her first big film\". Nevertheless, the film was a critical and commercial darling when it was released, and Roberts received both her first Academy Award nomination (as Best Supporting Actress) and first Golden Globe Award win (Best Supporting Actress) Motion Picture for her performance.\nCatapulting on her 1989 Academy Award nomination, Roberts gained further notice from worldwide audiences when she starred with Richard Gere in the Cinderella\u2013Pygmalionesque story, \"Pretty Woman\", in 1990, playing an assertive freelance hooker with a heart of gold. Roberts won the role after Michelle Pfeiffer, Molly Ringwald, Meg Ryan, Jennifer Jason Leigh, Karen Allen, and Daryl Hannah (her co-star in \"Steel Magnolias\") turned it down. The role also earned her a second Oscar nomination, this time as Best Actress, and second Golden Globe Award win, as Best Actress \u2013 Motion Picture (Musical or Comedy). She was paid $300,000 for the part. \"Pretty Woman\" saw the highest number of ticket sales in the U.S. ever for a romantic comedy, and made $463.4million worldwide. The red dress Roberts wore in the film has been considered one of the most famous gowns in cinema.\nHer next film release following \"Pretty Woman\" was Joel Schumacher's supernatural thriller \"Flatliners\" (also 1990), in which Roberts starred as one of five students conducting clandestine experiments that produce near-death experiences. The production was met with a polarized critical reception, but made a profit at the box office and has since been considered a cult film. In 1991, Roberts played a battered wife attempting to begin a new life in Iowa in the thriller \"Sleeping with the Enemy\", a winged, six-inch-tall tomboyish Tinkerbell in Steven Spielberg's fantasy film \"Hook\" and an outgoing yet cautious nurse in her second collaboration with director Joel Schumacher, the romance drama \"Dying Young\". Although negative reviews greeted her 1991 outings, \"Sleeping with the Enemy\" grossed $175 million, \"Hook\" $300.9 million and \"Dying Young\" $82.3 million globally.\nRoberts took a two-year hiatus from the screen, during which her only appearance in a film was a cameo in Robert Altman's \"The Player\" (1992). In early 1993, she was the subject of a \"People\" magazine cover story asking, \"What Happened to Julia Roberts?\". Roberts starred with Denzel Washington in the thriller \"The Pelican Brief\" (1993), based on John Grisham's 1992 novel of the same name. In it, she played a young law student who uncovers a conspiracy, putting herself and others in danger. The film was a commercial success, grossing $195.2\u00a0million worldwide. None of her next film releases \u2014\"I Love Trouble\" (1994), \"Pr\u00eat-\u00e0-Porter\" (1994) and \"Something to Talk About\" (1995)\u2014 were particularly well received by critics nor big box office draws. In 1996, she guest-starred in the second season of \"Friends\" (episode 13, \"The One After the Superbowl\"), and appeared with Liam Neeson in the historical drama \"Michael Collins\", portraying Kitty Kiernan, the fianc\u00e9e of the assassinated Irish revolutionary leader. Stephen Frears' \"Mary Reilly\", her other 1996 film, was a critical and commercial failure.\nBy the late 1990s, Roberts enjoyed renewed success in the romantic comedy genre. In P. J. Hogan's \"My Best Friend's Wedding\" (1997), she starred opposite Dermot Mulroney, Cameron Diaz and Rupert Everett, as a food critic who realizes she's in love with her best friend and tries to win him back after he decides to marry someone else. Roberts' performance was highly praised. Considered to be one of the best romantic comedies of all time, Rotten Tomatoes gave the film an approval rating of 73% based on 59 reviews, with the critical consensus reading, \"Thanks to a charming performance from Julia Roberts and a subversive spin on the genre, \"My Best Friend's Wedding\" is a refreshingly entertaining romantic comedy.\" The film was a global box-office hit, earning $299.3 million. In her next film, Richard Donner's political thriller \"Conspiracy Theory\" (1997), Roberts starred with Mel Gibson as a Justice Department attorney. Mick LaSalle of \"San Francisco Chronicle\" stated: \"When all else fails, there are still the stars to look at\u2014Roberts, who actually manages to do some fine acting, and Gibson, whose likability must be a sturdy thing indeed.\" The film, nevertheless, grossed a respectable $137 million. In 1998, Roberts appeared on the television series \"Sesame Street\" opposite the character Elmo, and starred in the drama \"Stepmom\", alongside Susan Sarandon, revolving around the complicated relationship between a terminally-ill mother and the future stepmother of her children. While reviews were mixed-to-positive, the film made $159.7\u00a0million worldwide.\nRoberts paired with Hugh Grant for \"Notting Hill\" (1999), portraying a famous actress who falls in love with a struggling book store owner. The film displaced \"Four Weddings and a Funeral\" as the biggest British hit in the history of cinema, with earnings equalling $363million worldwide. An exemplar of modern romantic comedies in mainstream culture, the film was also received well by critics. CNN reviewer Paul Clinton called Roberts \"the queen of the romantic comedy [whose] reign continues\", and remarked: \"\"Notting Hill\" stands alone as another funny and heartwarming story about love against all odds.\" In 1999, she also reunited with Richard Gere and Garry Marshall for \"Runaway Bride\", in which she played a woman who has left a string of fianc\u00e9s at the altar. Despite mixed reviews, \"Runaway Bride\" was another financial success, grossing $309.4million around the globe. Roberts was a guest star in \"Empire\", a Season 9 episode of the television series \"Law &amp; Order\", with regular cast member Benjamin Bratt, who at the time, was her boyfriend. Her performance earned her a nomination for Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series.\n2000\u20132013: Critical acclaim and leading roles.\nRoberts became the first actress to be paid $20\u00a0million for a film, when she took on the role of real-life environmental activist Erin Brockovich in her fight against the Pacific Gas and Electric Company (PG&amp;E) of California, in \"Erin Brockovich\" (2000). Peter Travers of \"Rolling Stone\" wrote, \"Roberts shows the emotional toll on Erin as she tries to stay responsible to her children and to a job that has provided her with a first taste of self-esteem\", while \"Entertainment Weekly\" critic Owen Gleiberman felt that it was a \"delight to watch Roberts, with her flirtatious sparkle and undertow of melancholy\". \"Erin Brockovich\" made $256.3\u00a0million worldwide, and earned Roberts the Academy Award for Best Actress, among numerous other accolades. In 2000, she also became the first actress to make \"The Hollywood Reporter\"'s list of the 50 most influential women in show business since the list had begun in 1992, and her Shoelace Productions company received a deal with Joe Roth.\nHer first film following \"Erin Brockovich\" was the road gangster comedy \"The Mexican\" (2001), giving her a chance to work with long-time friend Brad Pitt. The film's script was originally intended to be filmed as an independent production without major motion picture stars, but Roberts and Pitt, who had for some time been looking for a project they could do together, learned about it and decided to sign on. Though advertised as a typical romantic comedy star vehicle, the film does not focus solely on the actors' relationship and the two shared relatively little screen time together. \"The Mexican\" earned $66.8\u00a0million in North America. In Joe Roth's romantic comedy \"America's Sweethearts\" (2001), Roberts starred as the once-overweight sister and assistant of a Hollywood actress, along with Billy Crystal, John Cusack, and Catherine Zeta-Jones. Critics felt that despite its famous cast, the production lacked \"sympathetic characters\" and was \"only funny in spurts.\" A commercial success, it grossed over $138\u00a0million worldwide, however. In her last film released in 2001, Roberts teamed with \"Erin Brockovich\" director Steven Soderbergh for \"Ocean's Eleven\", a remake of the 1960 film of the same name, featuring an ensemble cast including George Clooney, Brad Pitt, and Matt Damon. Roberts played Tess Ocean, the ex-wife of leader Danny Ocean (Clooney), originally played by Angie Dickinson. A success with critics and at the box office alike, \"Ocean's Eleven\" became the fifth highest-grossing film of the year with a total of $450\u00a0million worldwide.\nRoberts received a record $25 million, the highest ever earned by an actress at that time, to portray a forward-thinking art history professor at Wellesley College in 1953, in Mike Newell's drama \"Mona Lisa Smile\". The film garnered largely lukewarm reviews by critics, who found it \"predictable and safe\", but made over $141 million in theaters. In 2004, Roberts replaced Cate Blanchett in the role of an American photographer for Mike Nichols's film \"Closer\", a romantic drama written by Patrick Marber, based on his 1997 play of the same name, co-starring Jude Law, Natalie Portman and Clive Owen. She next reprised the role of Tess Ocean in \"Ocean's Twelve\", which was deliberately much more unconventional than the first film, epitomized by a sequence in which Roberts's character impersonates the real-life Julia Roberts, due to what the film's characters believe is their strong resemblance. Though less well reviewed than \"Eleven\", the film became another major success at the box office, with a gross of $363\u00a0million worldwide. In 2005, she was featured in the music video for the single \"Dreamgirl\" by the Dave Matthews Band. It was her first music video appearance. Roberts appeared in \"The Hollywood Reporter\"'s list of the 10 highest-paid actresses every year from 2002 (when the magazine began compiling its list) to 2005.\nIn 2006, Roberts voiced a nurse ant in \"The Ant Bully\" and a barn spider in \"Charlotte's Web\". She made her Broadway debut on April 19, 2006, as Nan in a revival of Richard Greenberg's 1997 play \"Three Days of Rain\" opposite Bradley Cooper and Paul Rudd. Although the play grossed nearly $1million in ticket sales during its first week and was a commercial success throughout its limited run, her performance drew criticism. Ben Brantley of \"The New York Times\" described Roberts as being fraught with \"self-consciousness (especially in the first act) [and] only glancingly acquainted with the two characters she plays.\" Brantley also criticized the overall production, writing that \"it's almost impossible to discern its artistic virtues from this wooden and splintered interpretation, directed by Joe Mantello.\" Writing in the \"New York Post\", Clive Barnes declared, \"Hated the play. To be sadly honest, even hated her. At least I liked the rain\u2014even if three days of it can seem an eternity.\" In Mike Nichols' biographical drama \"Charlie Wilson's War\" (2007), Roberts starred as socialite Joanne Herring, the love interest of Democratic Texas Congressman Charles Wilson, opposite Tom Hanks and Philip Seymour Hoffman. The film received considerable acclaim, made $119.5 million worldwide, and earned Roberts her sixth Golden Globe nomination.\nThe independent drama \"Fireflies in the Garden\", in which Roberts played a mother whose death sets the story in motion, was screened at the 2008 Berlin International Film Festival before being shown in European cinemas\u2014it did not get a North American release until 2011. Roberts played a CIA agent collaborating with another spy to carry out a complicated con, opposite Clive Owen, in the comic thriller \"Duplicity\" (2009). Despite mixed reviews and moderate box office returns, critic A. O. Scott praised her performance: \"Ms. Roberts has almost entirely left behind the coltish, America's-sweetheart mannerisms, except when she uses them strategically, to disarm or confuse. [...] She is, at 41, unmistakably in her prime\". She received her seventh Golden Globe nomination for her role.\nIn 2010, Roberts played a U.S. Army captain on a one-day leave, as part of a large ensemble cast, in the romantic comedy \"Valentine's Day\", and starred as an author finding herself following a divorce in the film adaptation of \"Eat Pray Love\". While she received $3\u00a0million up front against 3 percent of the gross for her six-minute role in \"Valentine's Day\", \"Eat Pray Love\" had the highest debut at the box office for Roberts in a top-billed role since \"America's Sweethearts\". She appeared as the teacher of a middle-aged man returning to education in the romantic comedy \"Larry Crowne\", opposite Tom Hanks, who also served as the director. The film was poorly received by critics and audiences, although Roberts's comedic performance was praised. In \"Mirror Mirror\" (2012), the Tarsem Singh adaptation of \"Snow White\", Roberts portrayed Queen Clementianna, Snow White's evil stepmother, opposite Lily Collins. Peter Travers of \"Rolling Stone\" felt that she tried \"way too hard\" in her role, while Katey Rich of \"Cinema Blend\" observed that she \"takes relish in her wicked [portrayal] but could have gone even further with it\". \"Mirror Mirror\" made $183 million globally.\nIn 2013, Roberts starred alongside Meryl Streep and Ewan McGregor in the black comedy drama \"\", about a dysfunctional family that re-unites into the familial house when their patriarch suddenly disappears. Her performance earned her nominations for the Golden Globe Award, Screen Actors Guild Award, Critics' Choice Award, and Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress, amongst other accolades. It was her fourth Academy Award nomination. \n2014\u2013present: Television roles and film resurgence.\nIn 2014, Roberts starred as Dr. Emma Brookner, a character based on Dr. Linda Laubenstein, in the television adaptation of Larry Kramer's AIDS-era play, \"The Normal Heart\", which aired on HBO; the film was critically acclaimed and \"Vanity Fair\", in its review, wrote: \"Roberts, meanwhile, hums with righteous, \"Erin Brokovich\"-ian anger. Between this and \"August: Osage County\", she's carving out a nice new niche for herself, playing brittle women who show their love and concern through explosive temper\". Her role garnered her a nomination for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Miniseries or a Movie.\nRoberts narrated \"Women in Hollywood\", an episode of the second season of \"\", in 2014, and appeared in Givenchy's spring\u2013summer campaign in 2015. She starred as a grieving mother opposite Nicole Kidman and Chiwetel Ejiofor in \"Secret in Their Eyes\" (2015), a remake of the 2009 Argentine film of the same name, both based on the novel \"La pregunta de sus ojos\" by author Eduardo Sacheri. Unlike the original film, the American version received negative reviews and failed to find an audience. Donald Clarke of \"Irish Times\" concluded that a \"sound job\" by the cast \"can't quite shake the whiff of compromise that hangs around the project\". In 2016, Roberts reunited with Garry Marshall and reportedly received a $3 million fee for a four-day shoot, playing an accomplished author who gave her child for adoption, in the romantic comedy \"Mother's Day\", which had a lackluster critical and commercial response. Her next film release was Jodie Foster's thriller \"Money Monster\", in which she starred as a television director, alongside George Clooney and Jack O'Connell. Sandra Hall of \"The Sydney Morning Herald\" stated: \"It may be Hollywood melodrama but it's top of the range, giving Clooney and Roberts every opportunity to demonstrate the value of star power.\" The film made a respectable $93.3 million worldwide.\nIn \"Wonder\" (2017), the film adaptation of the 2012 novel of the same name by R. J. Palacio, Roberts played the mother of a boy with Treacher Collins syndrome. \"The Times\" felt that she \"lifts every one of her scenes in \"Wonder\" to near-sublime places\". With a worldwide gross of $305.9\u00a0million, \"Wonder\" emerged as one of Roberts's most widely seen films. In 2017, she also voiced a motherly Smurf leader in the animated film \"\".\nRoberts portrayed the mother of a troubled young man in Peter Hedges's drama \"Ben Is Back\" (2018). Shaun Kitchener of \"Daily Express\" remarked: \"Roberts is often the best, or one of the best, things about any film she's in \u2014and \"Ben Is Back\" is no different\". The role of a caseworker at a secret government facility, in the first season of the psychological thriller series \"Homecoming\", was Roberts's first regular television project. The series, which premiered on Amazon Video in November 2018, garnered acclaim from critics, who concluded it was an \"impressive small-screen debut\" for Roberts that \"balances its haunting mystery with a frenetic sensibility that grips and doesn't let go.\" She received a Golden Globe nomination for Best Actress in a Television Series \u2013 Drama.\nRoberts reunited with George Clooney for the romantic comedy \"Ticket to Paradise\", which was released by Universal Pictures on October 21, 2022. She also played Martha Mitchell, a controversial figure throughout the Watergate scandal, in the political thriller television series \"Gaslit\", based on the first season of the podcast \"Slow Burn\" by Leon Neyfakh. Roberts also starred as Amanda Sandford in the 2023 film \"Leave the World Behind\", appearing alongside Ethan Hawke and Mahershala Ali. The movie is an adaptation of the novel of the same name by Rumaan Alam. The film is produced by Barack and Michelle Obama's company, Higher Ground Productions. In 2024, Roberts and Riley Keough would narrate the audiobook version of Lisa Marie Presley's memoir \"From Here to the Great Unknown\".\nOther ventures.\nPhilanthropy.\nRoberts has contributed to UNICEF as well as other charitable organizations. Her six-day visit to Port-au-Prince, Haiti in 1995, as she said, \"to educate myself\", was expected to trigger an outburst of donations \u2014$10 million in aid was sought at the time\u2014 by UNICEF officials. In 2006, she became a spokeswoman for Earth Biofuels as well as chair of the company's newly formed advisory board promoting the use of renewable fuels. In 2013, she was part of a Gucci campaign, \"Chime for Change\", that aims to spread female empowerment.\nIn 2000, Roberts narrated a documentary about Rett syndrome, a neurodevelopmental disorder, designed to help raise public awareness about the disease, and in 2014, she was the voice of Mother Nature in a short film for the Conservation International campaign \"Nature Is Speaking\", intended to raise awareness about climate change.\nProduction company.\nRoberts runs the production company Red Om Films (Red Om is \"Moder\" spelled backwards, after her husband's last name) with her sister, Lisa Roberts Gillan, and Marisa Yeres Gill. Through Red Om, Roberts has served as an executive producer for various projects she has starred in such as \"Eat Pray Love\" and \"Homecoming\", as well as for the first four films of the \"American Girl\" film series (based on the \"American Girl\" line of dolls), released between 2004 and 2008.\nEndorsements.\nIn 2006, Roberts signed an endorsement deal with fashion label Gianfranco Ferre, valued at $6 million. She was photographed by Mario Testino in Los Angeles for the brand's advertising campaign, which was distributed in Europe, Asia and Australia. Since 2009, Roberts has acted as Lanc\u00f4me's global ambassador, a role in which she has been involved in the development and promotion of the brand's range of cosmetics and beauty products. She initially signed a five-year extension with the company for $50 million in 2010. Roberts starred as the global face of Chopard's Happy Sport and Happy Diamonds collections campaigns since 2021 and then Chopard had announced her as its Global Brand Ambassador in 2023.\nRoberts endorsed President Joe Biden for re-election in 2024 and has been involved in related fundraising, even though Biden ended his re-election campaign on July 21, 2024.\nArtistry.\nActing style and reception.\nThroughout her career, Roberts has frequently been referred to as \"America's sweetheart\" by the media, a label that \"Vogue\" writer Noor Brara linked to her portrayals of characters that embody elements of the trope. BBC News Online attributed her early popularity to her roles as relatable, girl-next-door characters, often portraying vulnerable working-class women. Geoffrey Macnab of \"The Independent\" noted that during her peak, Roberts' appeal stemmed from her ability to blend the glamour of classic Hollywood stars with an approachable, down-to-earth quality. While romantic comedies cemented her status as an international star, \"Erin Brockovich\" is often cited as the film that earned her broader critical recognition as an actress. Film critic David Edelstein observed that while Roberts is widely acknowledged as a movie star, critics and cinephiles have debated the extent of her acting abilities, sometimes discussing her work with a degree of skepticism. In 2012, \"HuffPost\" writer Mike Ryan suggested that her career has relied more on her star power than on widespread acclaim for her acting, noting that she is not often included in discussions of the industry's most celebrated actresses.\nSome critics have pointed out that Roberts has frequently played characters with traits similar to her own, contributing to a screen presence that journalist and filmmaker Bilge Ebiri described as difficult to separate from her public persona. John Anderson of \"The Seattle Times\" described her as \"an actress who has never really been required to act\". Matt Singer of \"The Dissolve\" said \"Roberts has rarely strayed far from the onscreen persona that made her one of the biggest movie stars in history\u2014that of a simple girl of limited means and unlimited heart, pulling herself up by her bootstraps\". Attempts to divert from this image in the 1990s met with mixed responses, though Macnab noted her versatility in transitioning between romantic comedies, thrillers, period dramas, and independent films. Jihane Bousfiha of \"Time\" said that while her grace, warmth, and charisma \"permeates all of her roles\", no genre has highlighted these qualities as effectively as romantic comedies, describing her its \"undisputed queen\". Film critic and historian David Thomson wrote in \"Salon\" that he once received letters from upset fans over suggesting that Roberts' talent was being misused in some of her then-recent film roles. Director Mike Nichols, who worked with her on \"Charlie Wilson's War\", argued that her beauty sometimes overshadowed her acting skills, praising her intelligence, preparation, and ability to fully embody her characters. The actress said she does not have any acting techniques, commenting, \"there's nothing more boring than actors sitting around talking about acting\".\nSince \"Eat Pray Love\", Roberts has largely moved away from the romantic comedy roles that defined much of her early career, instead gravitating toward more dramatic, character-driven projects, including supporting roles in ensemble films. She has attributed this shift to evolving opportunities, personal growth, and the increasing complexity of roles available to her with age. Roberts has cited Frances McDormand, Annette Bening, and Meryl Streep as actresses she admires for balancing successful careers with family life.\nPublic image.\nRoberts has been recognized as one of the defining actors of her generation, and among the most influential actresses of the 1990s and early 2000s. During her peak, several publications described her as the world's biggest movie star. Ebiri called her \"more than a movie star ... she was an existential fact\" and \"a dominant cultural force\". Reporting on her star power in 1995, \"The New York Times\"\u2019 Josh Young described her as a \"rainmaker for women's films\", with the ability to guarantee a film's opening weekend audience and even greenlight a project simply by agreeing to star in it. He also noted that her peers had benefited by accepting roles she had turned down. Roberts\u2019 agent at the time, Elaine Goldsmith, credited her as one of the actresses in the 1990s who helped convince studios that women could lead films as successfully as men. According to Leah Rozen of \"The New York Times\", she remained \"the biggest female box office draw for 20 years\". Roberts has also been recognized as a pioneer in pushing for gender pay equity in Hollywood, negotiating salaries on par with her male counterparts. The then-unprecedented $20 million salary she commanded set a new standard for actresses' compensation, according to BBC News Online. She was the highest-paid actress in Hollywood for much of the 1990s and early 2000s. In 2000, Roberts became the first actress to be included on \"The Hollywood Reporter\"'s list of the 50 most influential women in show business, on which she was ranked the third most powerful woman in entertainment. In 2002, she became the first woman to be ranked the most bankable star in Hollywood based on an industry poll by the same publication, tying her with male actors Tom Cruise and Tom Hanks. As her career progressed, journalists began speculating whether her name alone could still guarantee box office success, particularly as some of her later films saw mixed commercial results. By 2017, Roberts stated that she no longer actively pursued roles but instead waited to see what opportunities arose. She has maintained that she is selective about her projects and that her agents never try to persuade her to take on a role.\nRoberts has stated that she has successfully maintained a clear separation between her personal life and her acting career. Kaufman likened her public image to that of leading a double life, balancing her role as both a mother and one of the most recognizable faces globally. In 2009, a critic for \"The New Yorker\" suggested that while Roberts is a skilled actress, her technical abilities might not always match the emotional depth required for audiences to fully connect with her performances, partly due to the distance she maintains in her public persona. For \"Vulture\", The Fug Girls described Roberts' public persona, which they dubbed \"Julianess\", as an overwhelming display of confidence and charm that at times borders on arrogance. Natalie Finn of E! observed that the media constantly compares younger, up-and-coming actresses to Roberts in an attempt to crown a spiritual successor, which Finn declared an unfair comparison. Some journalists have noted reports of Roberts being challenging to work with, citing alleged conflicts with certain directors and co-stars. In a 2024 interview with filmmaker Richard Curtis, she finally addressed these rumors, which she attributed to conscious efforts she has made not appear overly friendly on film sets to avoid being taken advantage of and forthright personality, but maintains that she never intends to hurt others. Edelstein observed that early in her career, Roberts was known for being edgy, hypersensitive, and difficult on set, though later profiles have emphasized her efforts to be seen as more down-to-earth.\nJournalists and critics have frequently commented on Roberts' physical appearance and sex appeal. However, film critic Patrick Goldstein and celebrity stylist Philip Bloch stated that Roberts never fully embodied the sex symbol role, despite her attractiveness. Singer observed that \"For a woman who became famous playing a prostitute, Roberts has maintained a surprisingly asexual onscreen persona\", rarely performing sex scenes. \"People\" magazine has named Roberts the \"World's Most Beautiful Woman\" a record-breaking five times, most recently in 2017.\nPersonal life.\nAncestry.\nOn a 2023 episode of \"Finding Your Roots\", Roberts learned that the surname of her biological paternal great-great-grandfather was actually Mitchell, not Roberts.\nRoberts also learned her ancestors owned slaves: \"You have to figure, if you are from the South, you're on one side of it or the other. It just seems very typical of that time, unfortunately. ... You can't turn your back on history, even when you become a part of it in a way that doesn't align with your personal compass.\"\nRoberts is a distant cousin of fellow actor Edward Norton.\nRelationships and family.\nRoberts had romantic relationships with actors Jason Patric, Liam Neeson, Kiefer Sutherland, Dylan McDermott and Matthew Perry. She was briefly engaged to Sutherland; they broke up shortly before their scheduled wedding on June 14, 1991. According to Roberts, it had been cancelled long before, not \"days before the wedding\" as the press claimed at the time, and that it was a mutual decision. On June 25, 1993, she married country singer Lyle Lovett; the wedding took place at St. James Lutheran Church in Marion, Indiana. They separated in March 1995 and subsequently divorced. From 1998 to 2001, Roberts dated actor Benjamin Bratt.\nRoberts and her husband, cameraman Daniel Moder, met on the set of her film \"The Mexican\" in 2000 while she was still dating Bratt. At the time, Moder was married to Vera Steimberg. He filed for divorce a little over a year later, and after it was finalized, he and Roberts wed on July 4, 2002, at her ranch in Taos, New Mexico. Together, they have three children: twins, a daughter and a son, born in November 2004, and another son born in June 2007.\nReligious beliefs.\nIn 2010, Roberts said she was Hindu, having converted for \"spiritual satisfaction\". Roberts is a devotee of the guru Neem Karoli Baba (Maharaj-ji), a picture of whom drew Roberts to Hinduism.\nIn September 2009, Swami Daram Dev of Ashram Hari Mandir in Pataudi, where Roberts was shooting \"Eat Pray Love\", gave her children new names after Hindu gods: Lakshmi for Hazel, Ganesh for Phinnaeus and Krishna Balram for Henry.\nPolitical views.\nRoberts supported Kamala Harris during the 2024 United States presidential election. She appeared with Harris in a campaign rally in the swing state of Georgia, and also voiced a political advertisement for Harris. Donald Trump, who ran against Harris in the election, criticized Roberts for her role in the advertisement.\nPersonal habits.\nRoberts has a preference for going barefoot, including at public events like film festivals, talk shows, and her wedding to Lyle Lovett. Her barefoot habit was incorporated into a number of her movie roles, including Tinker Bell in \"Hook\".\nActing credits and accolades.\nRoberts's films that have earned the most at the box office, as of 2021[ [update]], include:\nRoberts has received four Academy Award nominations, winning for Best Actress at the 73rd Academy Awards, for her titular portrayal in \"Erin Brockovich\", which additionally earned her a Golden Globe, a BAFTA Award and a Screen Actors Guild Award. She won Golden Globe Awards for her performances in \"Steel Magnolias\" and \"Pretty Woman\", and as of 2019, has garnered eight nominations. Roberts received two Primetime Emmy Awards nominations, one for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series, for her guest-role on \"Law &amp; Order\", and the other for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Limited Series or Television Movie, for her performance in \"The Normal Heart\". On February 28, 2025, Roberts was honored by French Minister of Culture Rachida Dati as a Knight of the Order of Arts and Letters (\"Chevalier de l'Ordre des Arts et des Lettres\") for her significant contribution to world cinema.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16554", "revid": "44217690", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16554", "title": "John Sealy Hospital", "text": "John Sealy Hospital is a hospital that is a part of the University of Texas Medical Branch complex in Galveston, Texas, United States.\nHistory.\nSealy opened on January 10, 1890. It was founded by the widow and brother of one of the richest citizens of Texas, John Sealy after his death. Accompanied by the John Sealy Hospital Training School for Nurses, which was opened two months after the hospital, the foundation became the primary teaching facility of University of Texas Medical Branch opened in October 1891. In 1922, John Sealy's children, John Sealy, II and Jennie Sealy Smith established the Sealy &amp; Smith Foundation for the hospital. This enabled construction of several new facilities, including the Rebecca Sealy Nurses' home.\nA second John Sealy Hospital was built in 1954 to replace the 1890 building. Today it is known as the John Sealy Annex and houses administrative and support services.\nThe current John Sealy Hospital was completed in 1978 at a cost of $32.5 million and was funded in full by the Sealy &amp; Smith Foundation. The 12-story hospital includes single-patient rooms and specialized intensive care units. Other features include the Acute Care for Elders Unit, or ACE Unit and a Level I Trauma Center, one of only three in the entire Greater Houston area.\nThe Sealy &amp; Smith Foundation has contributed over $600 million to UTMB since its inception.\nHurricane Ike.\nHurricane Ike forced the closing of UTMB temporarily. John Sealy Hospital and its trauma center have reopened, with renovations being undertaken in damaged areas.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16555", "revid": "44120587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16555", "title": "John the Evangelist", "text": "Name traditionally given to the author of the Gospel of John\n John the Evangelist (c.\u20096 AD \u2013 c.\u2009100 AD) is the name traditionally given to the author of the Gospel of John. Christians have traditionally identified him with John the Apostle, John of Patmos, and John the Presbyter, although there is no consensus on how many of these may actually be the same individual.\nIdentity.\nThe exact identity of John \u2013 and the extent to which his identification with John the Apostle, John of Patmos and John the Presbyter is historical \u2013 is disputed between Christian tradition and scholars.\nThe Gospel of John refers to an otherwise unnamed \"disciple whom Jesus loved\", who \"bore witness to and wrote\" the Gospel's message. The author of the Gospel of John seemed interested in maintaining the internal anonymity of the author's identity, although interpreting the Gospel in the light of the Synoptic Gospels and considering that the author names (and therefore is not claiming to be) Peter, and that James was martyred as early as AD 44, Christian tradition has widely believed that the author was the Apostle John, though many modern scholars believe the work to be pseudepigrapha.\nChristian tradition says that John the Evangelist was John the Apostle. John, Peter and James the Just were the \"three pillars\" of the Jerusalem church after Jesus' death. He was one of the original twelve apostles and is thought to be the only one to escape martyrdom. It had been believed that he was exiled (around AD 95) to the Aegean island of Patmos, where he wrote the Book of Revelation. However, some attribute the authorship of Revelation to another man, called John the Presbyter, or to other writers of the late first century AD. Bauckham argues that the early Christians identified John the Evangelist with John the Presbyter.\nAuthorship of the Johannine works.\nSince at least the 2nd century AD, scholars have debated the authorship of the Johannine works\u2014whether they were written by one author or many, and if any of the authors can be identified with John the Apostle.\nThe gospel and epistles traditionally and plausibly came from Ephesus, c.\u200990\u2013110, although some scholars argue for an origin in Syria. Eastern Orthodox tradition attributes all of the Johannine books to John the Apostle. Some today agree that the gospel and epistles may have been written by a single author, whether or not this was the apostle.\nOther scholars conclude that the author of the epistles was different from that of the gospel, although all four works originated from the same community. In the 6th century, the argued that the Second and Third Epistle of John have a separate author known as \"John the priest.\"\nHistorical critics like H.P.V. Nunn, Reza Aslan and Bart Ehrman, believe with most modern scholars that the apostle John wrote none of these works. Some scholars, though, such as John Robinson, F. F. Bruce, Leon Morris, and Martin Hengel, still hold the apostle to be behind at least some of the works in question, particularly the gospel.\nThe Book of Revelation is today generally agreed to have a separate author, John of Patmos, c.\u200995 with some parts possibly dating to Nero's reign in the early 60s.\nFeast day.\nThe feast day of Saint John in the Catholic Church, Anglican Communion, and the Lutheran Calendar, is on 27 December, the third day of Christmastide. In the Tridentine calendar he was commemorated also on each of the following days up to and including 3 January, the Octave of the 27 December feast. This Octave was abolished by Pope Pius XII in 1955. The traditional liturgical color is white.\nFreemasons celebrate this feast day, dating back to the 18th century when the Feast Day was used for the installation of Grand Masters.\nIn art.\nJohn is traditionally depicted in one of two distinct ways: either as an aged man with a white or gray beard, or alternatively as a beardless youth like John the Apostle. The first way of depicting him was more common in Byzantine art, where it was possibly influenced by antique depictions of Socrates; the second was more common in the art of Medieval Western Europe and can be dated back as far as 4th-century Rome.\nIn medieval works of painting, sculpture and literature, Saint John is often presented in an androgynous or feminized manner. Historians have related such portrayals to the circumstances of the believers for whom they were intended. For instance, John's feminine features are argued to have helped to make him more relatable to women. Likewise, Sarah McNamer argues that because of John's androgynous status, he could function as an 'image of a third or mixed gender' and 'a crucial figure with whom to identify' for male believers who sought to cultivate an attitude of affective piety, a highly emotional style of devotion that, in late-medieval culture, was thought to be poorly compatible with masculinity.\nLegends from the \"Acts of John\" contributed much to medieval iconography; it is the source of the idea that John became an apostle at a young age. One of John's familiar attributes is the chalice, often with a snake emerging from it. According to one legend from the Acts of John, John was challenged to drink a cup of poison to demonstrate the power of his faith, and thanks to God's aid the poison was rendered harmless. The chalice can also be interpreted with reference to the Last Supper, or to the words of Christ to John and James: \"My chalice indeed you shall drink.\" According to the 1910 \"Catholic Encyclopedia\", some authorities believe that this symbol was not adopted until the 13th century. There was also a legend that John was at some stage boiled in oil and miraculously preserved. Another common attribute is a book or a scroll, in reference to his writings. John the Evangelist is symbolically represented by an eagle, one of the creatures envisioned by Ezekiel (1:10) and in the Book of Revelation (4:7).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16556", "revid": "46987347", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16556", "title": "Jack Kirby", "text": "American comic book artist (1917\u20131994)\nJack Kirby (; born Jacob Kurtzberg; August 28, 1917 \u2013 February 6, 1994) was an American comic book artist, widely regarded as one of the medium's major innovators and one of its most prolific and influential creators. He grew up in New York City and learned to draw cartoon figures by tracing characters from comic strips and editorial cartoons. He entered the nascent comics industry in the 1930s, drawing various comics features under different pen names, including Jack Curtiss, before settling on Jack Kirby. In 1940, he and writer-editor Joe Simon created the highly successful superhero character Captain America for Timely Comics, predecessor of Marvel Comics. During the 1940s, Kirby regularly teamed with Simon, creating numerous characters for that company and for National Comics Publications, later to become DC Comics.\nAfter serving in the European Theater in World War II, Kirby produced work for DC Comics, Harvey Comics, Hillman Periodicals and other publishers. At Crestwood Publications, he and Simon created the genre of romance comics and later founded their own short-lived comic company, Mainline Publications. Kirby was involved in Timely's 1950s iteration, Atlas Comics, which in the next decade became Marvel. There, in the 1960s, Kirby co-created many of the company's major characters, including Ant-Man, the Avengers, the Black Panther, the Fantastic Four, the Hulk, Iron Man, the Silver Surfer, Thor, and the X-Men, among many others. Kirby's titles garnered high sales and critical acclaim, but in 1970, feeling he had been treated unfairly, largely in the realm of authorship credit and creators' rights, Kirby left the company for rival DC.\nAt DC, Kirby created his Fourth World saga which spanned several comics titles. While these series proved commercially unsuccessful and were canceled, the Fourth World's New Gods have continued as a significant part of the DC Universe. Kirby returned to Marvel briefly in the mid-to-late 1970s, then ventured into television animation and independent comics. In his later years, Kirby, who has been called \"the William Blake of comics\", began receiving great recognition in the mainstream press for his career accomplishments, and in 1987 he was one of the three inaugural inductees of the Will Eisner Comic Book Hall of Fame. In 2017, Kirby was posthumously named a Disney Legend for his creations not only in the field of publishing, but also because those creations formed the basis for The Walt Disney Company's financially and critically successful media franchise, the Marvel Cinematic Universe.\nKirby was married to Rosalind Goldstein in 1942. They had four children and remained married until his death from heart failure in 1994, at the age of 76. The Jack Kirby Awards and Jack Kirby Hall of Fame were named in his honor, and he is known as \"The King\" among comics fans for his many influential contributions to the medium.\nEarly life (1917\u20131935).\nJack Kirby was born Jacob Kurtzberg on August 28, 1917, at 147 Essex Street on the Lower East Side of Manhattan in New York City; he grew up there. His parents, Rose (Bernstein) and Benjamin Kurtzberg, were Austrian-Jewish immigrants, and his father earned a living as a garment factory worker. In his youth, Kirby desired to escape his neighborhood. He liked to draw, and sought out places he could learn more about art. Essentially self-taught, Kirby cited among his influences the comic strip artists Milton Caniff, Hal Foster, and Alex Raymond, as well as such editorial cartoonists as C. H. Sykes, \"Ding\" Darling, and Rollin Kirby. He was rejected by the Educational Alliance because he drew \"too fast with charcoal\", according to Kirby. He later found an outlet for his skills by drawing cartoons for the newspaper of the Boys Brotherhood Republic, a \"miniature city\" on East 3rd Street where street kids ran their own government.\nAt age 14, Kirby enrolled at the Pratt Institute in Brooklyn, leaving after a week. \"I wasn't the kind of student that Pratt was looking for. They wanted people who would work on something forever. I didn't want to work on any project forever. I intended to get things done\".\nCareer.\nEntry into comics (1936\u20131940).\nKirby joined the Lincoln Newspaper Syndicate in 1936, working there on newspaper comic strips and on single-panel advice cartoons such as \"Your Health Comes First!!!\" (under the pseudonym Jack Curtiss). He remained until late 1939, when he began working for the theatrical animation company Fleischer Studios as an inbetweener (an artist who fills in the action between major-movement frames) on \"Popeye\" cartoons at the same time in 1935. He left the studio before the Fleischer strike in 1937. \"I went from Lincoln to Fleischer,\" he recalled. \"From Fleischer I had to get out in a hurry because I couldn't take that kind of thing,\" describing it as \"a factory in a sense, like my father's factory. They were manufacturing pictures.\"\nAround that time, the American comic book industry was booming. Kirby began writing and drawing for the comic book packager Eisner &amp; Iger, one of a handful of firms creating comics on demand for publishers. Through that company, Kirby did what he remembered as his first comic book work, for \"Wild Boy Magazine\". This included such strips as the science fiction adventure \"The Diary of Dr. Hayward\" (under the pseudonym Curt Davis), the Western crimefighter feature \"Wilton of the West\" (as Fred Sande), the swashbuckler adventure \"The Count of Monte Cristo\" (again as Jack Curtiss), and the humor features \"Abdul Jones\" (as Ted Grey) and \"Socko the Seadog\" (as Teddy), all variously for \"Jumbo Comics\" and other Eisner-Iger clients. \nFor Robert W. Farrell\u2019s Associated Features Syndicate, he first used the surname Kirby as the pseudonymous Lance Kirby in the comic strip \"Lightnin\u2019 and the Lone Rider,\" written by Farrell in 1939 and later reprinted in Eastern Color Printing's \"Famous Funnies\" (1939-1940). He ultimately settled on the pen name Jack Kirby because it reminded him of actor James Cagney. However, he took offense to those who suggested he changed his name in order to hide his Jewish heritage.\nPartnership with Joe Simon.\nKirby moved on to comic-book publisher and newspaper syndicator Fox Feature Syndicate, earning a then-reasonable $15-a-week salary. During this time, Kirby met and began collaborating with cartoonist and Fox editor Joe Simon, who in addition to his staff work continued to freelance. Simon recalled in 1988, \"I loved Jack's work and the first time I saw it I couldn't believe what I was seeing. He asked if we could do some freelance work together. I was delighted and I took him over to my little office. We worked from the second issue of Blue Bolt through... about 25 years.\"\nAfter leaving Fox and collaborating on the premiere issue of Fawcett Comics' \"Captain Marvel Adventures\" ([March] 1941), the first solo title for the previously introduced superhero, and for which Kirby was told to mimic creator C.C. Beck's drawing style, the duo were hired on staff at pulp magazine publisher Martin Goodman's Timely Comics (later to become Marvel Comics). There Simon and Kirby created the patriotic superhero Captain America in late 1940. Simon, who became the company's editor, with Kirby as art director, said he negotiated with Goodman to give the duo 25 percent of the profits from the feature. The first issue of \"Captain America Comics\", released in early 1941, sold out in days, and the second issue's print run was set at over a million copies. The title's success established the team as a notable creative force in the industry. After the first issue was published, Simon asked Kirby to join the Timely staff as the company's art director.\nWith the success of the Captain America character, Simon said he felt that Goodman was not paying the pair the promised percentage of profits, and so sought work for the two of them at National Comics Publications (later renamed DC Comics). Kirby and Simon negotiated a deal that would pay them a combined $500 a week, as opposed to the $75 and $85 they respectively earned at Timely. The pair feared Goodman would not pay them if he found they were moving to National, but many people knew of their plan, including Timely editorial assistant Stan Lee. When Goodman eventually discovered it, he told Simon and Kirby to leave after finishing work on \"Captain America Comics\" #10. Kirby was bitterly convinced it was specifically Lee who betrayed them, ignoring Simon's willingness to give him the benefit of the doubt.\nKirby and Simon spent their first weeks at National trying to devise new characters while the company sought how best to utilize the pair. After a few failed editor-assigned ghosting assignments, National's Jack Liebowitz told them to \"just do what you want\". The pair then revamped the Sandman feature in \"Adventure Comics\" and created the superhero Manhunter. In July 1942 they began the \"Boy Commandos\" feature. The ongoing \"kid gang\" series of the same name, launched later that same year, was the creative team's first National feature to graduate into its own title. It sold over a million copies a month, becoming National's third best-selling title. They scored a hit with the homefront kid-gang team, the Newsboy Legion, featuring in \"Star-Spangled Comics\". In 2010, DC Comics writer and executive Paul Levitz observed that \"Like Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster, the creative team of Joe Simon and Jack Kirby was a mark of quality and a proven track record.\"\nWorld War II (1943\u20131945).\nWith World War II underway, Liebowitz expected that Simon and Kirby would be drafted, so he asked the artists to create an inventory of material to be published in their absence. The pair hired writers, inkers, letterers, and colorists in order to create a year's worth of material. Kirby was drafted into the U.S. Army on June 7, 1943. After basic training at Camp Stewart, near Savannah, Georgia, he was assigned to Company F of the 11th Infantry Regiment. He landed on Omaha Beach in Normandy on August 23, 1944, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2+1\u20442 months after D-Day, although Kirby's reminiscences would place his arrival just 10 days after. Kirby recalled that a lieutenant, learning that comics artist Kirby was in his command, made him a scout who would advance into towns and draw reconnaissance maps and pictures, an extremely dangerous duty.\nPostwar career (1946\u20131955).\nAfter the war, Simon arranged work for Kirby and himself at Harvey Comics, where, through the early 1950s, the duo created such titles as the kid-gang adventure \"Boy Explorers Comics\", the kid-gang Western \"Boys' Ranch\", the superhero comic \"Stuntman\", and, in vogue with the fad for 3-D movies, \"Captain 3-D\". Simon and Kirby additionally freelanced for Hillman Periodicals (the crime-fiction comic \"Real Clue Crime\") and for Crestwood Publications (\"Justice Traps the Guilty\").\nThe team had its greatest success in the postwar period by creating romance comics. Simon, inspired by Macfadden Publications' romantic-confession magazine \"True Story\", transplanted the idea to comic books and with Kirby created a first-issue mock-up of \"Young Romance\". Showing it to Crestwood general manager Maurice Rosenfeld, Simon asked for 50% of the comic's profits. Crestwood publishers Teddy Epstein and Mike Bleier agreed, stipulating that the creators would take no money up front. \"Young Romance\" #1 (cover-date Oct. 1947) \"became Jack and Joe's biggest hit in years\". The first title sold a staggering 92% of its print run, inspiring Crestwood to increase the print run by the third issue to triple the initial number of copies. Initially published bimonthly, \"Young Romance\" quickly became a monthly title and produced the spin-off \"Young Love\"\u2014together the two titles sold two million copies per month, according to Simon\u2014later joined by \"Young Brides.\" \"Young Romance\" spawned dozens of imitators from publishers such as Timely, Fawcett, Quality, and Fox Feature Syndicate. Despite the glut, the Simon and Kirby romance titles continued to sell millions of copies a month.\nBitter that Timely Comics' 1950s iteration, Atlas Comics, had relaunched Captain America in a new series in 1954, Kirby and Simon created \"Fighting American\". Simon recalled, \"We thought we'd show them how to do Captain America\". While the comic book initially portrayed the protagonist as an anti-Communist dramatic hero, Simon and Kirby turned the series into a superhero satire with the second issue, in the aftermath of the Army-McCarthy hearings and the public backlash against the Red-baiting U.S. Senator Joseph McCarthy.\nAfter Simon (1956\u20131957).\nAt the urging of a Crestwood salesman, Kirby and Simon launched their own comics company, Mainline Publications, securing a distribution deal with Leader News in late 1953 or early 1954, subletting space from their friend Al Harvey's Harvey Publications at 1860 Broadway. Mainline, which existed from 1954 to 1955, published four titles: the Western \"Bullseye: Western Scout\"; the war comic \"Foxhole\" because EC Comics and Atlas Comics were having success with war comics, but promoting theirs as being written and drawn by actual veterans; \"In Love\" because their earlier romance comic \"Young Love\" was still being widely imitated; and the crime comic \"Police Trap\", which claimed to be based on genuine accounts by law-enforcement officials. After the duo rearranged and republished artwork from an old Crestwood story in \"In Love\", Crestwood refused to pay the team, who sought an audit of Crestwood's finances. Upon review, the pair's attorneys stated the company owed them $130,000 for work done over the past seven years. Crestwood paid them $10,000 in addition to their recent delayed payments. The partnership between Kirby and Simon had become strained. Simon left the industry for a career in advertising, while Kirby continued to freelance. \"He wanted to do other things and I stuck with comics,\" Kirby recalled in 1971. \"It was fine. There was no reason to continue the partnership and we parted friends.\"\nAt this point in the mid-1950s, Kirby made a temporary return to the former Timely Comics, now known as Atlas Comics, the direct predecessor of Marvel Comics. Inker Frank Giacoia had approached editor-in-chief Stan Lee for work and suggested he could \"get Kirby back here to pencil some stuff. While freelancing for National Comics Publications, the future DC Comics, Kirby drew 20 stories for Atlas from 1956 to 1957: Beginning with the five-page \"Mine Field\" in \"Battleground\" #14 (Nov. 1956), Kirby penciled and in some cases inked (with his wife, Roz) and wrote stories of the Western hero Black Rider, the Fu Manchu-like Yellow Claw, and more. But in 1957, distribution troubles caused the \"Atlas implosion\" that resulted in several series being dropped and no new material being assigned for many months. The next year Kirby returned to the nascent Marvel.\nFor DC around that time, Kirby co-created with writers Dick and Dave Wood the non-superpowered adventuring quartet the Challengers of the Unknown in \"Showcase\" #6 (Feb. 1957), while contributing to such anthologies as \"House of Mystery\". During 30 months freelancing for DC, Kirby drew slightly more than 600 pages, which included 11 six-page Green Arrow stories in \"World's Finest Comics\" and \"Adventure Comics\" that in a rarity, Kirby inked himself. Kirby recast the archer as a science-fiction hero, moving him away from his Batman-formula roots, but, in the process, alienating Green Arrow co-creator Mort Weisinger.\nHe began drawing \"Sky Masters of the Space Force,\" a newspaper comic strip, written by the Wood brothers and initially inked by the unrelated Wally Wood. Kirby left National Comics Publications due largely to a contractual dispute in which editor Jack Schiff, who had been involved in getting Kirby and the Wood brothers the \"Sky Masters\" contract, claimed he was due royalties from Kirby's share of the strip's profits. Schiff successfully sued Kirby. Some DC editors had criticized him over art details, such as not drawing \"the shoelaces on a cavalryman's boots\" and showing a Native American \"mounting his horse from the wrong side.\"\nMarvel Comics in the Silver Age (1958\u20131970).\nSeveral months later, after his split with DC, Kirby began freelancing regularly for Atlas despite harboring negative sentiments about Stan Lee (the cousin of Timely publisher Martin Goodman's wife), whom Kirby had always found annoying on top of his aforementioned betrayal he suspected in the 1940s. Because of the poor page rates, Kirby would spend 12 to 14 hours daily at his drawing table at home, producing four to five pages of artwork a day. His first published work at Atlas was the cover of and the seven-page story \"I Discovered the Secret of the Flying Saucers\" in \"Strange Worlds\" #1 (Dec. 1958). Initially with Christopher Rule as his regular inker, and later Dick Ayers, Kirby drew across all genres, from romance comics to war comics to crime comics to Western comics, but made his mark primarily with a series of supernatural-fantasy and science fiction stories featuring giant, drive-in movie-style monsters with names like Groot, the Thing from Planet X; Grottu, King of the Insects; and Fin Fang Foom for the company's many anthology series, such as \"Amazing Adventures,\" \"Strange Tales,\" \"Tales to Astonish,\" \"Tales of Suspense,\" and \"World of Fantasy.\" His bizarre designs of powerful, unearthly creatures proved a hit with readers. Additionally, he freelanced for Archie Comics around this time, reuniting briefly with Joe Simon to help develop the series \"The Fly\" and \"The Double Life of Private Strong\". Additionally, Kirby drew some issues of \"Classics Illustrated\".\nAt Marvel Kirby hit his stride once again in superhero comics, beginning with \"The Fantastic Four\" #1 (Nov. 1961), which some have observed, shares many elements of Kirby's \"Challengers of the Unknown\". The landmark series became a hit that revolutionized the industry with its comparative naturalism and, eventually, a cosmic purview informed by Kirby's seemingly boundless imagination\u2014one well-matched with the consciousness-expanding youth culture of the 1960s. For almost a decade, Kirby provided Marvel's house style, creating many of the Marvel characters and designing their visual motifs. At the editor-in-chief's request, he often provided new-to-Marvel artists \"breakdown\" layouts, over which they would pencil in order to become acquainted with the Marvel style of story-telling. As artist Gil Kane described:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Jack was the single most influential figure in the turnaround in Marvel's fortunes from the time he rejoined the company ... It wasn't merely that Jack conceived most of the characters that are being done, but ... Jack's point of view and philosophy of drawing became the governing philosophy of the entire publishing company and, beyond the publishing company, of the entire field ... [Marvel took] Jack and use[d] him as a primer. They would get artists ... and they taught them the ABCs, which amounted to learning Jack Kirby ... Jack was like the Holy Scripture and they simply had to follow him without deviation. That's what was told to me ... It was how they taught everyone to reconcile all those opposing attitudes to one single master point of view.\nHighlights of Kirby's tenure also include the Hulk, Thor, the X-Men and Magneto, Doctor Doom, Uatu the Watcher, Ego the Living Planet, the Inhumans and their hidden city of Attilan, and the Black Panther (comics' first black superhero) and his Afrofuturist nation, Wakanda. Kirby initially was assigned to pencil the first Spider-Man story, but when he showed Lee the first six pages, Lee recalled, \"I \"hated\" the way he was doing it! Not that he did it badly\u2014it just wasn't the character I wanted; it was too heroic\". Lee then turned to Steve Ditko to draw the story that would appear in \"Amazing Fantasy\" #15, for which Kirby nonetheless penciled the cover. Lee and Kirby gathered several of their newly created characters together into the team title \"The Avengers\" and brought back old characters from the 1940s such as the Sub-Mariner, Captain Americaand Ka-Zar. In later years, Lee and Kirby disputed over who deserved credit for such creations as \"The Fantastic Four\".\nThe story frequently cited as Lee and Kirby's finest achievement is \"The Galactus Trilogy\" in \"Fantastic Four\" #48\u201350 (March\u2013May 1966), chronicling the arrival of Galactus, a cosmic giant who wanted to devour the planet, and his herald, the Silver Surfer. \"Fantastic Four\" #48 was chosen as #24 in the 100 Greatest Marvels of All Time poll of Marvel's readers in 2001. Editor Robert Greenberger wrote in his introduction to the story that \"As the fourth year of the \"Fantastic Four\" came to a close, Stan Lee and Jack Kirby seemed to be only warming up. In retrospect, it was perhaps the most fertile period of any monthly title during the Marvel Age.\" Comics historian Les Daniels noted that \"[t]he mystical and metaphysical elements that took over the saga were perfectly suited to the tastes of young readers in the 1960s\", and Lee soon discovered that the story was a favorite on college campuses. Kirby continued to expand the medium's boundaries, devising photo-collage covers and interiors, developing new drawing techniques such as the method for depicting energy fields now known as \"Kirby Krackle\", and other experiments.\nIn 1968 and 1969, Joe Simon was involved in litigation with Marvel Comics over the ownership of Captain America, initiated by Marvel after Simon registered the copyright renewal for Captain America in his own name. According to Simon, Kirby agreed to support the company in the litigation and, as part of a deal Kirby made with publisher Martin Goodman, signed over to Marvel any rights he might have had to the character.\nAt the same time, Kirby grew increasingly dissatisfied with working at Marvel, for reasons Kirby biographer Mark Evanier has suggested include resentment over Lee's media prominence, a lack of full creative control, anger over breaches of perceived promises by publisher Martin Goodman, and frustration over Marvel's failure to credit him specifically for his story plotting and for his character creations and co-creations. He began to both write and draw some secondary features for Marvel, such as \"The Inhumans\" in \"Amazing Adventures\" volume two, as well as horror stories for the anthology title \"Chamber of Darkness,\" and received full credit for doing so; but in 1970, Kirby was presented with a contract that included unfavorable terms such as a prohibition against legal retaliation. When Kirby objected, the management refused to negotiate any contract changes, bluntly dismissing his contribution to Marvel's success since they considered Lee solely responsible. Kirby, although he was earning $35,000 a year freelancing for the company (adjusted for inflation it was the equivalent of over $271,000 in 2024), then left Marvel in 1970 for rival DC Comics, under editorial director Carmine Infantino.\nDC Comics and the Fourth World saga (1971\u20131975).\nKirby spent nearly two years negotiating a deal to move to DC Comics, where in late 1970 he signed a three-year contract with an option for two additional years. He produced a series of interlinked titles under the blanket sobriquet \"The Fourth World\", which included a trilogy of new titles\u2014\"New Gods,\" \"Mister Miracle,\" and \"The Forever People\"\u2014as well as the extant \"Superman's Pal Jimmy Olsen.\" Kirby picked the latter book because the series was without a stable creative team and he did not want to cost anyone a job. Kirby was editor, writer and artist on each of these series.\nThe three books Kirby originated dealt with aspects of mythology he had previously touched upon in \"Thor\". \"The New Gods\" would establish this new mythos, while in \"The Forever People\" Kirby would attempt to mythologize the lives of the young people he observed around him. The third book, \"Mister Miracle\" was more of a personal myth. The title character was an escape artist, which Mark Evanier suggests Kirby channeled his feelings of constraint into, although others have pointed out that it may have been based on comic book artist and escape artist Jim Steranko. Mister Miracle's wife was based in character on Kirby's wife Roz, and he even caricatured Stan Lee within the pages of the book as Funky Flashman, a depiction Lee found hurtful while Kirby tried to downplay the insult when confronted about it by Lee's protege, Roy Thomas, who was similarly insulted with Flashman's sidekick, Houseroy.\nThe central villain of the Fourth World series, Darkseid, and some of the Fourth World concepts, appeared in \"Jimmy Olsen\" before the launch of the other Fourth World books, giving the new titles greater exposure to potential buyers. The Superman figures and Jimmy Olsen faces drawn by Kirby were redrawn by Al Plastino, and later by Murphy Anderson. Les Daniels observed in 1995 that \"Kirby's mix of slang and myth, science fiction and the Bible, made for a heady brew, but the scope of his vision has endured.\" In 2007, comics writer Grant Morrison commented that \"Kirby's dramas were staged across Jungian vistas of raw symbol and storm ... The Fourth World saga crackles with the voltage of Jack Kirby's boundless imagination let loose onto paper.\"\nIn addition to his artistic efforts, Kirby proposed a variety of new formats for comics such as planning to collect his published Fourth World stories into square-bound books, a format that would later be called the trade paperback, which would eventually become standard practice in the industry. However, Infantino and company were not receptive and Kirby's proposals only went as far as producing the one-shot black-and-white magazines \"Spirit World\" and \"In the Days of the Mob\" in 1971, edited, written and drawn by Kirby.\nKirby later produced other DC series including \"OMAC\", \"Kamandi\", \"The Demon\", and \"Kobra\" as well as working on such extant features as \"The Losers\" in \"Our Fighting Forces\". Together with former partner Joe Simon for one last time, he worked on a new incarnation of the Sandman. Kirby produced three issues of the \"1st Issue Special\" anthology series and created Atlas the Great, a new Manhunter, and the Dingbats of Danger Street.\nKirby's production assistant of the time, Mark Evanier, recounted that DC's policies of the era were not in sync with Kirby's creative impulses. Also Evanier said that he was often forced to work on characters and projects which he did not like. Meanwhile, some artists at DC did not want Kirby there, as he threatened their positions in the company; they also had bad blood from previous competition with Marvel and legal problems with him. Since he was working from California, they were able to undermine his work through redesigns in the New York office.\nReturn to Marvel (1976\u20131978).\nAt the comic book convention Marvelcon '75, in 1975, Stan Lee used a Fantastic Four panel discussion to announce that Kirby was returning to Marvel after having left in 1970 to work for DC Comics. Lee wrote in his monthly column, \"Stan Lee's Soapbox\", \"I mentioned that I had a special announcement to make. As I started telling about Jack's return, to a totally incredulous audience, everyone's head started to snap around as Kirby himself came waltzin' down the aisle to join us on the rostrum! You can imagine how it felt clownin' around with the co-creator of most of Marvel's greatest strips once more.\"\nBack at Marvel, Kirby both wrote and drew the monthly \"Captain America\" series as well as the \"Captain America's Bicentennial Battles\" one-shot in the oversized treasury format. He created the series \"The Eternals\", which featured a race of inscrutable alien giants, the Celestials, whose behind-the-scenes intervention in primordial humanity would eventually become a core element of Marvel Universe continuity. He produced an adaptation and expansion of the film \", as well as an abortive attempt to do the same for the classic television series \"The Prisoner\". He wrote and drew \"Black Panther\" and drew numerous covers across the line.\nKirby's other Marvel creations in this period include Machine Man and Devil Dinosaur. Kirby's final comics collaboration with Stan Lee, \"The Silver Surfer: The Ultimate Cosmic Experience\", was published in 1978 as part of the Marvel Fireside Books series and is considered Marvel's first graphic novel.\nFilm and animation (1979\u20131980).\nStill dissatisfied with Marvel's treatment of him, and with an offer of employment from Hanna-Barbera, a job located in nearby Hollywood, Kirby left Marvel to work in animation. In that field for Ruby-Spears Productions he did designs for \"Turbo Teen\", \"Thundarr the Barbarian\" and other animated series for television. In addition to a superior pay to his comics work, Kirby enjoyed excellent relations with the staff, especially with the younger artists who typically credited him as their inspiration. He worked on \"The New Fantastic Four\" animated series, reuniting him with scriptwriter Stan Lee and they kept their relations sufficiently cordial on a professional level. He illustrated an adaptation of the Walt Disney movie \"The Black Hole\" for \"Walt Disney's Treasury of Classic Tales\" syndicated comic strip in 1979\u201380.\nIn 1979, Kirby drew concept art for film producer Barry Geller's script treatment adapting Roger Zelazny's science fiction novel, \"Lord of Light\", for which Geller had purchased the rights. In collaboration, Geller commissioned Kirby to draw set designs that would be used as architectural renderings for a Colorado theme park to be called Science Fiction Land; Geller announced his plans at a November press conference attended by Kirby, former American football star Rosey Grier, writer Ray Bradbury, and others. While the film did not come to fruition, Kirby's drawings were used for the CIA's \"Canadian Caper\", in which some members of the U.S. embassy in Tehran, Iran, who had avoided capture in the Iran hostage crisis, were able to escape the country posing as members of a movie location-scouting crew.\nFinal years (1981\u20131994).\nIn the early 1980s, Kirby and Pacific Comics, a new, non-newsstand comic-book publisher, made one of the industry's earliest deals for creator-owned series, resulting in \"Captain Victory and the Galactic Rangers\", and the six-issue miniseries \"Silver Star\" (later collected in hardcover format in 2007). This, together with similar actions by other independent comics publishers as Eclipse Comics (where Kirby co-created the character Destroyer Duck in a benefit comic-book series published to help Steve Gerber fight a legal case against Marvel), helped establish a precedent to end the monopoly of the work-for-hire system, wherein comics creators, even freelancers, had owned no rights to characters they created.\nIn 1983 Richard Kyle commissioned Kirby to create a 10-page autobiographical strip, \"Street Code\", which became one of the last works published in Kirby's lifetime. It was published in 1990, in the second issue of Kyle's revival of \"Argosy\". Kirby continued to do periodic work for DC Comics during the 1980s, including a brief revival of his \"Fourth World\" saga in the 1984 and 1985 \"Super Powers\" miniseries and the 1985 graphic novel \"The Hunger Dogs\". DC executives Jenette Kahn and Paul Levitz had Kirby re-design the Fourth World characters for the \"Super Powers\" toyline as a way of entitling him to royalties for several of his DC creations. In 1985, Kirby and Gil Kane helped to create the concept and designs for the Ruby-Spears animated television series \"The Centurions\". A comic-book series based on the show was published by DC and a toy line produced by Kenner.\nIn the twilight of his life, Kirby spent a great deal of time sparring with Marvel executives over the ownership rights of his original page boards. At Marvel, many of these pages owned by the company (due to outdated and legally dubious copyright claims) were given away as promotional gifts to Marvel clients or simply stolen from company warehouses. After the passage of the Copyright Act of 1976, which greatly expanded artist copyright capabilities, comics publishers began to return original art to creators, but in Marvel's case only if they signed a release reaffirming Marvel's ownership of the copyright. In 1985, Marvel issued a release that demanded Kirby affirm that his art was created for hire, allowing Marvel to retain copyright in perpetuity, in addition to demanding that Kirby forego all future royalties. Marvel offered him 88 pages of his art (less than 1% of his total output) if he signed the agreement, but reserved the right to reclaim the art if Kirby violated the deal. After Kirby publicly slammed Marvel, calling the company thugs and claiming they were arbitrarily holding his creations, Marvel finally returned (after two years of deliberations) approximately 1,900 or 2,100 pages of the estimated 10,000 to 13,000 Kirby drew for the company.\nFor the producer Charles Band, Jack Kirby made concept art for the films \"Doctor Mortalis\" and \"Mindmaster\", which were later released as \"Doctor Mordrid\" (1992) and \"Mandroid\" (1993), respectively. \"Doctor Mordrid\" began as a planned adaptation of the Marvel Comics character Dr. Strange, but Band's option expired.\nFor Topps Comics, founded in 1993, Kirby retained ownership of characters used in multiple series of what the company dubbed \"The Kirbyverse\". These titles were derived mainly from designs and concepts Kirby had kept in his files, some intended initially for the by-then-defunct Pacific Comics, and then licensed to Topps for what became the \"Jack Kirby's Secret City Saga\" mythos. \"Phantom Force\" was the last comic book Kirby worked on before his death. The story was co-written by Kirby with Michael Thibodeaux and Richard French, based on an eight-page pitch for an unused Bruce Lee comic in 1978. Issues #1 and 2 were published by Image Comics with various Image artists inking over Kirby's pencils. Issue #0 and issues #3\u20138 were published by Genesis West, with Kirby providing pencils for issues #0 and 4. Thibodeaux provided the art for the remaining issues of the series after Kirby died.\nPersonal life and death.\nIn the early 1940s, Kirby and his family moved to Brooklyn. Kirby met Rosalind \"Roz\" Goldstein, who lived in the same Brooklyn apartment building. The pair began dating soon afterward. Kirby proposed to Goldstein on her 18th birthday, and the two became engaged. They married on May 23, 1942. The couple had four children: Susan (b. December 6, 1945), Neal (b. May 1948), Barbara (b. November 1952), and Lisa (b. September 1960).\nAfter being drafted into the U.S. Army and serving in the European Theater in World War II, Kirby corresponded with his wife regularly by v-mail, with Roz sending daily letters while she worked in a lingerie shop and lived with her mother at 2820 Brighton 7th Street in Brooklyn. During the winter of 1944, Kirby suffered severe frostbite and was taken to a hospital in London for recovery. Doctors considered amputating Kirby's legs, which had turned black, but he eventually recovered and was able to walk again. He returned to the United States in January 1945, assigned to Camp Butner in North Carolina, where he spent the last six months of his service as part of the motor pool. Kirby was honorably discharged as a private first class on July 20, 1945, having received a Combat Infantryman Badge, a European/African/Middle Eastern Campaign Medal with a bronze Battle Star.\nIn 1949, Kirby bought a house for his family in East Williston, New York, on Long Island. It was the family's home for the next 20 years; Kirby worked out of a basement studio just wide, which the family referred to jocularly as \"The Dungeon\". He moved the family to Southern California in early 1969, both to live in a drier climate for the sake of daughter Lisa's health and to be closer to the Hollywood studios Jack Kirby believed might provide work.\nIn an interview, Kirby's granddaughter Jillian Kirby said Jack Kirby was a \"liberal Democrat\". Jack Kirby held anti-communist views, once saying that \"I was against the reds. I became a witch hunter. My enemies were the commies\u2014I called them commies. In fact, Granny Goodness was a commie, Doubleheader was a commie.\"\nOn February 6, 1994, aged 76, Kirby died of heart failure in his Thousand Oaks, California home. He was buried at Valley Oaks Memorial Park in Westlake Village, California.\nArtistic style and achievements.\nBrent Staples wrote in the \"New York Times\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He created a new grammar of storytelling and a cinematic style of motion. Once-wooden characters cascaded from one frame to another\u2014or even from page to page\u2014threatening to fall right out of the book into the reader's lap. The force of punches thrown was visibly and explosively evident. Even at rest, a Kirby character pulsed with tension and energy in a way that makes movie versions of the same characters seem static by comparison.\nJack Kirby has been referred to as the \"superhero of style\", his artwork described by John Carlin in \"Masters of American Comics\" as \"deliberately primitive and bombastic\", and elsewhere has been compared to Cubist, Futurist, Primitivist and outsider art. His contributions to the comic book form, including the many characters he created or co-created and the many genres he worked on have led to him being referred to as the definitive comic book artist. Given the number of places Kirby's artwork can now be found, the toys based on his designs, and the success of the movies based upon his work, Charles Hatfield and Ben Saunders said he was \"one of the chief architects of the American imagination.\" He was regarded as a hard working artist, and it has been calculated that he drew at least 20,318 pages of published art and a further 1,385 covers in his career. He published 1,158 pages in 1962 alone. Kirby defined comics in two periods: his work in the early 1940s with Joe Simon on the Captain America strip, and then his superhero comics of the 1960s and early 1970s, first with Stan Lee at Marvel Comics and then on his own at DC Comics. Kirby also created stories in almost every genre of comics, from the autobiographical \"Street Code\" to the apocalyptic science fiction fantasy of Kamandi.\nNarrative approach to comics.\nLike many of his contemporaries, Kirby was hugely indebted to Milton Caniff, Hal Foster, and Alex Raymond who codified many of the tropes of narrative art in adventure comic strips. It has also been suggested that Kirby drew from Burne Hogarth, whose dynamic figure work may have informed the way Kirby drew figures; \"his ferocious bounding, and grotesquely articulated figures seem directly descended from Hogarth's dynamically contorted forms.\" His style drew on these influences, all major artists at the time Kirby was learning his craft, with Caniff, Foster and Raymond between them imparting to the sequential adventure comic strip a highly illustrative approach based on realizing the setting to a very high degree. Where Kirby diverged from these influences, and where his style impacted on the formation of comic book art, was in his move away from an illustrated approach to one that was more dynamic. Kirby's artistic style was one that captured energy and motion within the image, synergizing with the text and helping to serve the narrative. In contrast, successors to the illustrative approach, such as Gil Kane, found their work eventually reach an impasse. The art would illustrate, but in lacking movement caused the reader to contemplate the art as much as the written word. Later artists such as Bryan Hitch and Alex Ross combined the Kirby and Kane approaches, using highly realistic backgrounds contrasted with dynamic characters to create what became known as a widescreen approach to comics.\nKirby's dynamism and energy served to push the reader through the story where an illustrative, detailed approach would cause the eye to linger. His reduction of the presentation of a given scene down to one that represents the semblance of movement has led Kirby to be described as cinematic in his style. Kirby had worked at Fleischer Studios before coming to comics and had a grounding in animation techniques for producing motion. He also realized that comic books were not subject to the same constraints as the newspaper strip. While other comic book artists recreated the layouts that format used, Kirby swiftly utilized the space a whole comic book page created. As Ron Goulart describes, \"(h)e broke up the pages in new ways and introduced splash panels that stretched across two pages.\" Kirby himself described the creation of his dynamic style as a reaction both to the cinema and to the urge to create and compete: \"I found myself competing with the movie camera. I had to compete with the camera. I felt like John Henry... I tore my characters out of the panels. I made them jump all over the page. I tried to make that cohesive so that it would be easier to read... I had to get my characters in extreme positions, and in doing so I created an extreme style which was recognizable by everybody.\"\nStyle.\nIn the early 1940s Kirby at times disregarded panel borders. A character was drawn in one panel, but their shoulder and arm would extend outside the border, into the gutter and sometimes on top of a nearby panel. A character may be punched out of one panel, feet being in the original panel and body in the next. Panels themselves would overlap, and Kirby found new ways to arrange panels on a comic book page. His figures were depicted as lithe and graceful, although Kirby would place them thrusting from the page towards the reader. In the late 1940s and 1950s Kirby moved away from superhero comics and with Joe Simon worked in a number of genres. Kirby and Simon created the romance comics genre, and working in this as well as the war, Western and crime genres saw Kirby's style change. He left behind the diverse panel framing and layouts. The nature of the genres enabled him to channel the energy into the posing and blocking of characters, forcing the drama into the constraints of the panel.\nWhen Kirby and Stan Lee came together at Marvel Comics, his art developed again. His characters and representations became more abstract, less anatomically correct. He placed figures across three planes of a panel's depth to suggest three dimensions. His backgrounds were less detailed where he did not want the eye to be drawn. His figures moved actively along diagonals and he utilized foreshortening to make a character appear to recede more deeply into the panel, so that they appeared to move towards the reader off the page. During the 1960s Kirby also developed a talent for creating collages, initially utilizing them within the pages of \"The Fantastic Four\". He introduced the Negative Zone as a place within the Marvel Universe that would only be illustrated via collage. However, the reproduction within the published comics of the collages, coupled with the low page rate he was being paid and the time they took to develop saw their use discarded. Kirby would later return to the use of collage in his Fourth World work at DC Comics. Here he used them most often in the pages of \"Superman's Pal, Jimmy Olsen\".\nKirby's style in the late 1960s was regarded so highly by Stan Lee that he instituted it as Marvel's house style. Lee would instruct other artists to draw more like Jack, and would also assign them books to work on using Kirby's breakdowns of the story so that they could more closely hew to Kirby's style. Over time, Kirby's style has become so well known that imitations, homages and pastiche are referred to as Kirbyesque.\nKirby Krackle, also referred to as Kirby Dots, is Kirby's artistic convention of depicting the effect of energy. Within the drawing, a field of black, pseudo-fractal images is used to represent negative space around unspecified kinds of energy. Kirby Krackles are typically used in illustrations of explosions, smoke, the blasts from ray guns, \"cosmic\" energy, and outer space phenomena. The advanced technology Kirby drew, from the Afrofuturistic state of Wakanda through the Mother Boxes of the New Gods to the spaceships and design of the Celestials is gathered together under the collective term \"Kirby Tech\". John Paul Leon has described it as \"It's tech; it's mechanical even if it's alien, but it's drawn in such an organic way that you don't question it. It's just an extension of his world. I'm not sure who else you could say did that.\" Kirby's depiction of technology is linked by Charles Hatfield to Leo Marx's idea of the technological sublime, specifically utilizing Edmund Burke's definition of the Sublime. Using this definition, Kirby's view and depiction of technology is that of it as something to be feared.\nWorking method.\nUnlike many of his contemporaries, Kirby did not use preliminary sketches, rough work or layouts. He would instead start with the blank board and draw the story onto the page from top to bottom, start to finish. Many artists, including Carmine Infantino, Gil Kane and Jim Steranko have remarked on the unusual nature of his method. Kirby would rarely erase while working; the art, and therefore the story, would flow from him almost fully formed. Kirby's pencils had a reputation for being detailed, to the point that they were difficult to ink. Will Eisner remembers even in the early years that Kirby's pencils were \"tight\". Working for Eisner, Kirby initially inked with a pen, not confident enough in his ability to use the Japanese brushes Lou Fine and Eisner preferred. By the time Kirby worked with Joe Simon, Kirby had taught himself to use a brush, and would on occasion ink over inked work where he felt it was needed.\nDue to the amount of work Kirby produced, it was rare for him to ink his own work. Instead the pencilled pages were sent on to an inker; different inkers left their own stylistic stamp on the published version. As Kirby noted, individual inkers were suited to different genres. Harry Mendryk has suggested that for a period in the 1950s, Kirby inked himself due to other work drying up. By the late 1960s, Kirby preferred to pencil, feeling that \"inking in itself is a separate kind of art.\" Stan Lee recalls Kirby not really being too interested in who inked him: \"I cared much more about who inked Kirby than Kirby did... Kirby never seemed to care who inked him... I think Kirby felt his style was so strong that it just didn't matter who inked him\". Chic Stone, an inker of Kirby's during the 1960s at Marvel, recalled \"(T)he two best [inkers] for Jack were Mike Royer and Steve Rude. Both truly maintained the integrity of Jack's pencils.\"\nThe size of the art board made a difference to Kirby's style. During the late 1960s the industry shrunk the size of the art board artists used. Prior to 1967, art boards were around 14 x 21 inches, being reproduced at 7 x 10 inches. After 1967 the size of the board shrunk to 10 x 15. This affected the way Kirby drew. Gil Kane noted that \"the amount of space around the figures became less and less... The figures became bigger and bigger, and they couldn't be contained by a single panel or even a single page\". Professor Craig Fischer asserts Kirby at first \"hated\" the new size. Fischer argues that it took Kirby around 18 months to negotiate a way of working at the smaller size. Initially he retreated to a less detailed, close up style, as seen in \"Fantastic Four\" #68. In adjusting to the new size, Kirby began utilizing depth to bring the pages to life, increasing his use of foreshortening. By the time Kirby had moved to DC, he started to incorporate the use of two-page spreads into his art more. These spreads helped define the mood of the story, and came to define Kirby's late era work.\nExhibitions and original art.\nKirby's art has been exhibited as part of the Masters of American Comics joint exhibition by the Hammer Museum and Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles from November 2005 to March 2006. In 2015 Charles Hatfield curated the \"Comic Book Apocalypse\" exhibition at the California State University, Northridge Art Galleries. The exhibition focused on Kirby's work from 1965 onward. In 2018 \"A Jack Kirby Odyssey\" was organized by Tom Kraft. The exhibition displayed photocopies of unpublished Kirby pencils for stories intended for publication in the \"\" comic book adaptation series as well as reproductions of the published work. In 1994 The Cartoon Art Trust organized an exhibition in\nLondon of Kirby art, \"Jack Kirby: The King of Comic Books\", in the wake of Kirby's death. In 2010 Dan Nadel and Paul Gravett curated \"Jack Kirby: The House That Jack Built\", a retrospective of Kirby's career from 1942 to 1985. The exhibition was part of the Fumetto International Comics Festival held in Lucerne, Switzerland.\nKirby's original art regularly sells at auction, with Heritage Auctions listing the cover of \"Tales of Suspense\" #84, inked by Frank Giacoia as realizing a price of $167,300 in a February 2014 auction. A large portion of Kirby's art remains unaccounted for. Work created around World War II would have been reused or pulped due to paper shortages. DC Comics had a policy of destroying original art in the 1950s. Marvel Comics also destroyed art until 1960, when it stored artwork prior to a policy which had art returned to the artist. In Kirby's case, it is reported that about 2,100 pieces of the estimated 10,000 pages drawn were returned to him. The whereabouts of the missing pages are unknown, although some do turn up for sale, provenance unknown.\nKirby's estate.\nSubsequent releases.\nLisa Kirby announced in early 2006 that she and co-writer Steve Robertson, with artist Mike Thibodeaux, planned to publish via the Marvel Comics Icon imprint a six-issue limited series, \"Jack Kirby's Galactic Bounty Hunters\", featuring characters and concepts created by her father for \"Captain Victory\". The series, scripted by Lisa Kirby, Robertson, Thibodeaux, and Richard French, with pencil art by Jack Kirby and Thibodeaux, and inking by Scott Hanna and Karl Kesel primarily, ran an initial five issues (Sept. 2006\u2013Jan. 2007) and then a later final issue (Sept. 2007).\nMarvel posthumously published a \"lost\" Kirby/Lee \"Fantastic Four\" story, \"Fantastic Four: The Lost Adventure\" (April 2008), with unused pages Kirby had originally drawn for a story that was partially published in \"Fantastic Four\" #108 (March 1971).\nIn 2011, Dynamite Entertainment published \"Kirby: Genesis\", an eight-issue miniseries by writer Kurt Busiek and artists Jack Herbert and Alex Ross, featuring Kirby-owned characters previously published by Pacific Comics and Topps Comics.\nCopyright dispute.\nOn September 16, 2009, Kirby's four children served notices of termination to The Walt Disney Studios, 20th Century Fox, Universal Pictures, Paramount Pictures, and Sony Pictures to attempt to gain control of various Silver Age Marvel characters. Marvel sought to invalidate those claims. In mid-March 2010 Kirby's children \"sued Marvel to terminate copyrights and gain profits from [Kirby's] comic creations.\" In July 2011, the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York issued a summary judgment in favor of Marvel, which was affirmed in August 2013 by the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. The Kirby children filed a petition on March 21, 2014, for a review of the case by the Supreme Court of the United States, but a settlement was reached on September 26, 2014, and the family requested that the petition be dismissed. While the settlement has left uncertain the legal right to works governed by the Copyright Act of 1909 created before the Copyright Act of 1976 came into force, the Kirby children's attorney, Marc Toberoff, said (in 2014) that the issue of creators' rights to reclaim the work done as independent contractors remains, and other potential claims have yet to become ripe.\nAwards and honors.\nJack Kirby received a great deal of recognition over the course of his career, including the 1967 Alley Award for Best Pencil Artist. The following year he was runner-up behind Jim Steranko. His other Alley Awards were:\nKirby won a Shazam Award for Special Achievement by an Individual in 1971 for his \"Fourth World\" series in \"Forever People\", \"New Gods\", \"Mister Miracle\", and \"Superman's Pal Jimmy Olsen\". He received an Inkpot Award in 1974 and was inducted into the Shazam Awards Hall of Fame in 1975. In 1987 he was an inaugural inductee into the Will Eisner Comic Book Hall of Fame. He received the 1993 Bob Clampett Humanitarian Award at that year's Eisner Awards.\nHis work was honored posthumously in 1998: The collection of his New Gods material, \"Jack Kirby's New Gods\", edited by Bob Kahan, won both the Harvey Award for Best Domestic Reprint Project, and the Eisner Award for Best Archival Collection/Project. On July 14, 2017, Jack Kirby was named a Disney Legend for his part in the creation of numerous characters that would comprise Disney's Marvel Cinematic Universe.\nThe Jack Kirby Awards and Jack Kirby Hall of Fame were named in his honor. He was the posthumous recipient of the Bill Finger Award in 2017.\nWith Will Eisner, Robert Crumb, Harvey Kurtzman, Gary Panter and Chris Ware, Kirby was among the artists honored in the exhibition \"Masters of American Comics\" at the Jewish Museum in New York City from September 16, 2006, to January 28, 2007.\nAsteroid 51985 Kirby, discovered September 22, 2001, was named in his honor. A crater on Mercury, located near the north pole, was named in his honor in 2019.\nBibliography.\nThis is an abridged listing of Kirby's comics work (interior pencil art) for major comics publishers DC Comics and Marvel Comics. For his work at DC it lists any title Kirby worked on for eight or more issues between 1970 and 1976. Of his Marvel Comics work, it lists any title Kirby worked on for eight or more issues between 1959 and 1978.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16558", "revid": "310363", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16558", "title": "Johnny Weissmuller", "text": "American swimmer, water-polo player, and actor (1904\u20131984)\nJohnny Weissmuller ( ; born Johann Peter Wei\u00dfm\u00fcller, ; June 2, 1904 \u2013 January 20, 1984) was a Hungarian-born German American Olympic swimmer, water polo player and actor. He was known for having one of the best competitive-swimming records of the 20th century. He set world records alongside winning five gold medals in the Olympics. He won the 100m freestyle and the 4 \u00d7 200 m relay team event in the 1924 Summer Olympics in Paris and the 1928 Summer Olympics in Amsterdam. Weissmuller also won gold in the 400m freestyle, as well as a bronze medal in the water polo competition in Paris.\nFollowing his retirement from swimming, Weissmuller played Edgar Rice Burroughs' Tarzan in twelve feature films from 1932 to 1948; six were produced by MGM, and six additional films by RKO. Weissmuller went on to star in sixteen \"Jungle Jim\" movies over an eight-year period, then filmed 26 additional half-hour episodes of the \"Jungle Jim\" TV series.\nEarly life.\nJohann Peter Wei\u00dfm\u00fcller was born on June 2, 1904, in Szabadfalva, in the Kingdom of Hungary into an ethnically Banat Swabian family. An ancestor had immigrated from Baden, Holy Roman Empire c.\u20091749. Three days later he was baptized into the Catholic faith by the Hungarian version of his German name, as J\u00e1nos. Early the next year, January 26, 1905, his father, Peter Wei\u00dfm\u00fcller, and mother, Elisabeth Wei\u00dfm\u00fcller (n\u00e9e Kersch), took him on a twelve-day trip on the \"S.S. Rotterdam\" to Ellis Island. Soon they arrived in Windber, Pennsylvania, to live with family. Johnny's brother Peter was born the following September.\nThree years later they relocated to Chicago to be with his mother's parents. His parents rented a single level in a shared house where he lived during his childhood. At age nine, Weissm\u00fcller contracted polio. His doctor recommended swimming to help his recovery from the disease. Fullerton Beach on Lake Michigan is where Johnny's love for swimming took off, having his first swimming lessons there. He excelled immediately and began entering and winning every race he could. Johnny's father deserted the family when Johnny was in the eighth grade. He left school to begin working in order to support his mother and younger brother.\nWhen Weissmuller was 11 he lied to join the YMCA, which had a 12 year old minimum rule to join. He won every swimming race he entered and also excelled at running and high jumping. He eventually swam for one of the nation's best teams, the Illinois Athletic Club.\nSwimming career.\nWeissmuller tried out for swimming coach Bill Bachrach, then associated with the Illinois Athletic Club. Impressed with what he saw, Bachrach took Weissmuller under his wing, and served as a strong father figure and mentor for Johnny. On August 6, 1921, Weissmuller swam on of first meets, entering and winning four Amateur Athletic Union races. He set his first two world records at the A.A.U. Nationals on September 27, 1921, in the 100m and 150yd events.\nOn July 9, 1922, Weissmuller broke Duke Kahanamoku's world record in the 100-meter freestyle, swimming it in 58.6 seconds. \nOlympics.\nHe won the title for the 100-meter freestyle at the 1924 Summer Olympics, beating Kahanamoku for the gold medal. He also won the 400-meter freestyle and was a member of the winning U.S. team in the 4\u00d7200-meter relay.\nFour years later, at the 1928 Summer Olympics in Amsterdam, he won another two gold medals. It was during this period that Weissmuller became an enthusiast for John Harvey Kellogg's holistic lifestyle views on nutrition, enemas and exercise. He went to Kellogg's Battle Creek, Michigan, sanatorium to dedicate its new 120-foot swimming pool, and break one of his own previous swimming records after adopting the vegetarian diet prescribed by Kellogg.\nIn 1927, Weissmuller set a new world record of 51.0 seconds in the 100-yard freestyle, which stood for 17\u00a0years. He improved it to 48.5\u00a0seconds at Billy Rose World's Fair Aquacade in 1940, aged 36, but this result was discounted, as he was competing as a professional.\nAs a member of the U.S. men's national water polo team, he won a bronze medal at the 1924 Summer Olympics. He also competed in the 1928 Olympics, where the U.S. team finished in seventh place.\nIn all, Weissmuller won five Olympic gold medals and one bronze medal, 52 United States national championships, and set 67 world records. He was the first man to swim the 100-meter freestyle under one minute and the 440-yard freestyle under five minutes. He never lost a race and retired with an unbeaten amateur record. In 1950, he was selected by the Associated Press as the greatest swimmer of the first half of the 20th century.\nDuring the 1930s, before he acted as Tarzan, Weissmuller was a swimming instructor at the Miami Biltmore Hotel. He broke a world record at the Biltmore pool.\nFilm career.\nWeissmuller's first film was the non-speaking role of Adonis in the movie \"Glorifying the American Girl\". He appeared wearing only a fig leaf while hoisting actress Mary Eaton on his shoulders. He was noticed by the writer Cyril Hume, which led to his big break playing Tarzan in \"Tarzan the Ape Man\" in 1932.\nWhen asked to play Tarzan, Weissmuller was already under contract to model BVD underwear. MGM agreed to have actresses such as Greta Garbo and Marie Dressler featured in BVD ads so that he could be released from his BVD contract. The author of Tarzan, Edgar Rice Burroughs, was pleased with Weissmuller, although he so hated the studio's depiction of Tarzan as an individual who barely spoke English that he created his own concurrent Tarzan series starring Herman Brix as a suitably articulate version of the character (as is true to the original books).\nWeissmuller is considered the definitive Tarzan. He originated the famous Tarzan yell, which was created by sound recordist Douglas Shearer. Shearer recorded Weissmuller's normal yell, but manipulated it and played it in reverse.\nWeissmuller went on to play the lead in the film \"Jungle Jim\". He appeared in sixteen Jungle Jim movies over eight years, going on to film 26 episodes of the Jungle Jim TV series.\nWeissmuller retired from acting in 1957.\nPersonal life.\nWeissmuller was married five times: to band and club singer Bobbe Arnst (married 1931, divorced 1933); to actress Lupe V\u00e9lez (married 1933, divorced 1939); to Beryl Scott (married 1939, divorced 1948); to Allene Gates (married 1948, divorced 1962); and to Maria Gertrude Baumann (born 1921, died 2004; they were married from 1963 until his death in 1984).\nWith his third wife, Beryl, Weissmuller had three children: Johnny Weissmuller, Jr. (1940\u20132006), Wendy Anne Weissmuller (born 1942), and Heidi Elizabeth Weissmuller (1944\u20131962), who was killed in a car crash. He also had a stepdaughter with Baumann, Lisa Weissmuller-Gallagher.\nWeissmuller saved many people's lives throughout his own life. One very notable instance was in 1927 during training for the Chicago Marathon, when Weissmuller saved 11 people from drowning after a boat accident. On July 28, 1927, 16 children, 10 women, and 1 man drowned when the \"Favorite\", a small excursion boat cruising from Lincoln Park to Municipal Pier (Navy Pier), capsized half a mile off North Avenue in a sudden, heavy squall. When the boat tipped over, 75 women and children and 6 men sank with the boat, but rescuers saved over 50 of them. Weissmuller was one of the Chicago lifeguards who saved many.\nLater life.\nIn 1974, Weissmuller broke both his hip and leg, marking the beginning of years of declining health. While hospitalized he learned that in spite of his strength and lifelong daily regimen of swimming and exercise, he had a serious heart condition. In 1977, Weissmuller suffered a series of strokes. In 1979, he entered the Motion Picture &amp; Television Country House and Hospital in Woodland Hills, California, for several weeks before moving with his last wife, Maria, to Acapulco, Mexico, the location of his last Tarzan movie.\nOn January 20, 1984, Weissmuller died of pulmonary edema at the age of 79. He was buried just outside Acapulco, Valle de La Luz, at the Valley of the Light Cemetery. As his coffin was lowered into the ground, a recording of the Tarzan yell he invented was played three times, at his request. He was honored with a 21-gun salute, befitting a head of state, which was arranged by Senator Ted Kennedy and President Ronald Reagan.\nLegacy.\nFor his contribution to the motion picture industry, Johnny Weissmuller has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.\nHe is on the album cover of The Beatles' \"Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band\" (1967).\nHis former co-star and movie son Johnny Sheffield wrote of him, \"I can only say that working with Big John was one of the highlights of my life. He was a Star (with a capital \"S\") and he gave off a special light and some of that light got into me. Knowing and being with Johnny Weissmuller during my formative years had a lasting influence on my life.\"\nIn 1973, Weissmuller was awarded the George Eastman Award, given by George Eastman House for distinguished contribution to the art of film.\nThe Piscine Molitor in Paris was built as a tribute to Weissmuller and his swimming prowess.\nEdgar Rice Burroughs himself paid tribute to Weissmuller's powerful screen persona in the last Tarzan novel that he completed\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;But what seemed a long time to them was a matter of seconds only. The tiger's great frame went limp and sank to the ground. And the man rose and put a foot upon it and, raising his face to the heavens, voiced a horrid cry\u2014the victory cry of the bull ape. Corrie was suddenly terrified of this man who had always seemed so civilized and cultured. Even the men were shocked.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Suddenly recognition lighted the eyes of Jerry Lucas. \"John Clayton,\" he said, \"Lord Greystoke\u2014Tarzan of the Apes!\" Shrimp's jaw dropped. \"Is dat Johnny Weismuller? [sic]\" he demanded. Tarzan shook his head as though to clear his brain of an obsession. His thin veneer of civilization had been consumed by the fires of battle. ...\nWeissmuller was inducted into the International Swimming Hall of Fame in 1965 after becoming its founding chairman.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16559", "revid": "861759", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16559", "title": "Jean Grey", "text": "Marvel Comics fictional character\nDr. Jean Elaine Grey is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. Created by writer Stan Lee and artist/co-plotter Jack Kirby, the character first appeared in \"The X-Men\" #1 (September 1963). Jean Grey is a member of a subspecies of humans known as mutants\u2014individuals born with superhuman abilities\u2014with Jean possessing psionic powers. Initially capable of using only telekinesis, she later developed the power of telepathy. During her early stint with the X-Men, she used the codename Marvel Girl.\nJean is a caring, nurturing figure, but she also has to deal with being an Omega-level mutant and the physical manifestation of the cosmic Phoenix Force. Jean first experienced a transformation into Phoenix in the \"X-Men\" storyline \"The Dark Phoenix Saga\". Due to Mastermind's manipulations, Jean's psyche was twisted and she became Dark Phoenix during \"The Dark Phoenix Saga\", before sacrificing herself to prevent any further chaos. After her presumed death, Jean would return and resume her relationship with Cyclops, whom she married. Following her return, Jean fostered relationships with Rachel Summers, her daughter from an alternate future, and Cable, the son of Cyclops and Jean's clone Madelyne Pryor.\nAfter Jean died a second time, Beast brought a younger time-displaced version of Jean into the present, alongside the rest of her original teammates. Eventually, Jean would be resurrected by the Phoenix Force once more, choosing to part ways with it and live her own life separately from it. Following her return, Jean briefly assumed leadership of the X-Men's Red Team, until the \"Krakoan Age\". Resuming her relationship with Cyclops following his resurrection, Jean would reconnect with the Phoenix Force, and choose to leave the X-Men to travel in space.\nJean's exact relationship to the Phoenix Force has often been changed throughout the character's history, as has her involvement in the events of \"The Dark Phoenix Saga\". Usually depicted as the Phoenix Force's favorite and most compatible host, storylines in 2024 revealed that Jean is actually the human manifestation of the Phoenix Force and its mother. Her connection to the Phoenix Force has often resulted in clashes with the Shi'ar Empire, responsible for the massacre of most of her family members.\nOften listed as one of the most notable and powerful female characters in Marvel Comics, the character has been featured in various Marvel-licensed products, including video games, animated television series, and merchandise. Famke Janssen portrayed the character as an adult in the 20th Century Fox \"X-Men\" films, while Sophie Turner portrayed her as a teenager and young adult.\nPublication history.\nJean Grey debuted under the codename Marvel Girl in \"The X-Men\" #1 (September 1963), created by writer Stan Lee and artist/co-writer Jack Kirby. The original team's sole female member, Marvel Girl was a regular part of the team through the series' publication. Initially possessing the ability of telekinesis, the character was later granted the power of telepathy, which would be retconned years later as a suppressed mutant ability.\nUnder the authorship of Chris Claremont and the artwork of first Dave Cockrum and then John Byrne in the late 1970s, Jean Grey underwent a significant transformation from the X-Men's weakest member, to its most powerful.\nThe first comic Claremont saw at Marvel after coming there in 1969 was the first X-Men issue penciled by Neal Adams (issue 56), after which he became enamored of Jean Grey. But when he started to write X-Men in issue 94, the first issue after the creation of the new team in Giant-Size X-Men 1, Len Wein had already established that she was leaving the team. The artwork was already done, and it was too late to change. But he promised himself he would bring her back as soon as possible, which he did in issue 97 when he became the sole writer of the title. Claremont also decided to upgrade her powers significantly.\nThe storyline in which Jean Grey died as Marvel Girl and was reborn as Phoenix (\"The Uncanny X-Men\" #101\u2013108, 1976\u20131977) has been retroactively dubbed by fans \"The Phoenix Saga\", and the storyline of her eventual corruption and death as Dark Phoenix (\"The Uncanny X-Men\" #129\u2013138, 1980) has been termed \"The Dark Phoenix Saga\". This storyline is one of the most well-known and heavily referenced in mainstream American superhero comics, and is widely considered a classic, including Jean Grey's suicidal sacrifice.\nWhen the first trade paperback of \"The Dark Phoenix Saga\" was published in 1984, Marvel also published a 48-page special issue titled \"Phoenix: The Untold Story\". It contained the original version of \"The Uncanny X-Men\" #137, the original splash page for \"The Uncanny X-Men\" #138 and transcripts of a roundtable discussion between Shooter, Claremont, Byrne, editors Jim Salicrup and Louise Jones, and inker Terry Austin. The discussion was about the creation of the new Phoenix persona, the development of the story, and what led to its eventual change, and Claremont and Byrne's plans for Jean Grey, had she survived.\nChris Claremont, the longest-running writer of the \"X-Men\" comics, revealed that his and Cockrum's motivation for Jean Grey's transformation into Phoenix was to create \"the first female cosmic hero\". The two hoped that, like Thor had been integrated into \"The Avengers\" lineup, Phoenix would also become an effective and immensely powerful member of the X-Men. However, both Salicrup and Byrne had strong feelings against how powerful Phoenix had become, feeling that she drew too much focus in the book. Byrne worked with Claremont to effectively remove Phoenix from the storyline, initially by removing her powers. However, Byrne's decision to have Dark Phoenix destroy an inhabited planetary system in \"The Uncanny X-Men\" #135, coupled with the planned ending to the story arc, worried then-Editor-in-Chief Jim Shooter, who felt that allowing Jean to live at the conclusion of the story was both morally unacceptable (given that she was now a \"mass murderer\") and also an unsatisfying ending from a storytelling point of view. Shooter publicly laid out his reasoning in the 1984 roundtable:\nI personally think, and I've said this many times, that having a character destroy an inhabited world with billions of people, wipe out a starship and then\u2014well, you know, having the powers removed and being let go on Earth. It seems to me that that's the same as capturing Hitler alive and letting him go live on Long Island. Now, I don't think the story would \"end\" there. I think a lot of people would come to his door with machine guns...\nOne of the creative team's questions that affected the story's conclusion was whether the Phoenix's personality and later descent into madness and evil were inherent to Jean Grey or if the Phoenix was itself an entity merely possessing her. The relationship between Jean Grey and the Phoenix would continue to be subject to different interpretations and explanations by writers and editors at Marvel Comics following the story's retcon in 1986. At the time of the Dark Phoenix's creation, Byrne felt that, \"If someone could be seen to corrupt Jean, rather than her just turning bad, this could make for an interesting story.\" Salicrup and Byrne stated later that they viewed Phoenix as an entity that entirely possessed Jean Grey, therefore absolving her of its crimes once it was driven out. However, the creative and editorial team ultimately agreed that Phoenix had been depicted as an inherent and inseparable aspect of Jean Grey, meaning that the character was fully responsible for her actions as Phoenix. As a result, Shooter ordered that Claremont and Byrne rewrite issue #137 to explicitly place in the story both a consequence and an ending commensurate with the enormity of Phoenix's actions. In a 2012 public signing, Claremont spoke about the context of the late 1970s and the end of the Vietnam War during the story's writing, stating that the history of these events also made Jean Grey's genocidal actions difficult to redeem.\nIn the original ending, Jean does not revert to Dark Phoenix, and the Shi'ar subject her to a \"psychic lobotomy\", permanently removing all her telepathic or telekinetic powers. Claremont and Byrne planned to later have Magneto offer Jean the chance to restore her abilities, but Jean choosing to remain depowered and eliminate the threat of Dark Phoenix returning to power.\nAfter several years, Marvel decided to revive the character, but only after an editorial decree that the character be absolved of her actions during The Dark Phoenix Saga. Writer Kurt Busiek is credited with devising the plot to revive Jean Grey. Busiek, a fan of the original five X-Men, was displeased with the character's death and formulated various storylines that would have met Shooter's rule and allowed the character to return to the X-Men franchise. He eventually shared his storyline idea with fellow writer Roger Stern who mentioned it to Byrne, who was both writing and illustrating the \"Fantastic Four\" at the time. Both series writer Bob Layton and artist Jackson Guice, who were developing the series \"X-Factor\"\u2014a team of former X-Men\u2014had yet to settle on their fifth team member, initially considering Dazzler. Layton opted to fill the open spot with Jean instead, and both he and Byrne submitted the idea to Shooter, who approved it. Jean Grey's revival became a crossover plotline between the \"Avengers\" under Stern, \"Fantastic Four\" under Byrne, and \"X-Factor\" under Layton.\nBusiek later found out that his idea had been used thanks to Layton, and he was credited in \"Fantastic Four\" #286 and paid for his contributions. The decision to revive Jean Grey was controversial among fans, with some appreciating the return of the character and others feeling it weakened the impact of the Dark Phoenix Saga's ending. Busiek maintained that the idea that led to Jean Grey's official return to Marvel Comics was merely a case of sharing his ideas with friends as a fan, and that he neither formally pitched the idea to anyone nor gave it the final go ahead. Claremont expressed dissatisfaction with the retcon, stating in 2012: \"We'd just gone to all the effort of saying, 'Jean is dead, get over it,' and they said, 'Haha, we fibbed.' So why should anyone trust us again? But that's the difference between being the writer and being the boss.\" In a 2008 interview Byrne said he still felt Busiek's method of reviving Jean Grey was \"brilliant\", but agreed that in retrospect the character should have remained dead.\nIn the comics, having been fully established as separate from the \"Jean Grey\" copy created and taken over by the Phoenix Force, Jean is \"absolved\" of involvement in the atrocities of \"The Dark Phoenix\" storyline, and she returned in the first issue of \"X-Factor\" (1st Series).\nClaremont later commented on how Jean's revival affected his original plans for Madelyne Pryor, stating that the relationship between the two women was intended to be entirely coincidental. He intended Madelyne only to look like Jean by complete coincidence and exist as a means for Cyclops to move on with his life and be written out of the \"X-Men\" franchise, part of what he believed to be a natural progression for any member of the team. Claremont expressed dismay that Jean's resurrection ultimately resulted in Cyclops abandoning his wife and child, tarnishing his written persona as a hero and \"decent human being\", and the \"untenable situation\" with Madelyne was dealt with by transforming her into a prolicidal demonic villain and killing her off.\nSoon after the beginning publication of \"X-Factor\", Marvel also reprinted and released the original \"X-Men\" series under the title \"Classic X-Men\". These reissues paired the original stories with new vignettes, elaborating on plot points. One such issue, \"Classic X-Men\" #8 (April 1987), paired the original \"The X-Men\" #100 (Aug. 1976) story of Jean Grey's disastrous return flight from space immediately preceding her transformation into Phoenix (\"Greater Love Hath No X-Man...\") with the new story \"Phoenix\". The story further supported the retcon establishing Jean Grey and the Phoenix Force as two separate entities.\nFollowing the conclusion of \"Inferno\", Jean continued to be a mainstay character throughout the rest of \"X-Factor\"\n\"X-Factor\" (1st Series) ended its run featuring the original X-Men with \"X-Factor\" #70 (Sept. 1991), with the characters transitioning over to \"The Uncanny X-Men\", explained in continuity as the two teams deciding to merge. The fourteen X-Men divide into two teams\u2014\"Blue\" and \"Gold\"\u2014led by Cyclops and Storm, respectively. Jean was added to the Gold Team beginning in \"The Uncanny X-Men\" #281 (Oct. 1991).\nFollowing Cyclops's possession by the mutant villain Apocalypse and disappearance in the conclusion of the crossover storyline \"Apocalypse: The Twelve\", Jean lost her telekinetic abilities and was left with increased psychic powers, the result of the \"six-month gap\" in plot across the \"X-Men\" franchise created by the \"Revolution\" revamp. During the \"Revolution\" event, all \"X-Men\" titles began six months after the events of \"Apocalypse: The Twelve\", allowing writers to create fresh situations and stories and gradually fill in the missing events of the previous six months of continuity. Due to editing decisions following the success of the 2000 \"X-Men\" film, which depicted the character of Jean Grey with both telepathy and telekinesis, an explanation for Jean's altered powers in the comics was never explicitly made, though writer Chris Claremont revealed in interviews that it was intended to be an accidental power switch between fellow X-Man Psylocke, explaining Psylocke's new telekinetic powers as well.\nJean was next featured in the six-issue miniseries \"X-Men Forever\" written by Fabian Nicieza, which was designed to tie up the remaining plot lines. During the series, Jean revisited many of the events involving the Phoenix Force and the series introduced the concept of \"Omega level mutants\", a category for mutants with unlimited potential, which included Jean herself.\nIn June 2001, \"X-Men\" was retitled as \"New X-Men\" under writer Grant Morrison. The title consisted of a smaller team featuring Jean, Cyclops, Beast, Wolverine, Emma Frost, and Charles Xavier. The overarching plot focused on the team assuming the roles of teachers to a new generation of mutants at the Xavier Institute while navigating their personal relationships and dealing with newly emerging pro- and anti-mutant political sentiments. Jean also made minor appearances in other titles during the \"New X-Men\" run, such as Chris Claremont's \"X-Treme X-Men\", occasionally lending support to the characters.\nJean and her connection with the Phoenix Force was examined again one year after the conclusion of Morrison's run on \"New X-Men\" in \"\" written by Greg Pak in 2005. At the 2010 San Diego Comic-Con X-Men panel, when asked whether or not Jean would return, editor Nick Lowe responded by saying, \"She's dead.\"\nRegarding Jean's actual return to the \"X-Men\" franchise, Marvel indicated that Jean's eventual return is being discussed but stated that the return of Jean Grey was \"a story Marvel does not want to rush\". Marvel loosely tied questions regarding Jean Grey's eventual return to the events in 2007's ' in which a mutant girl named Hope\u2014who has red hair, green eyes, and immense mutant powers\u2014is born, and 2010's ' which sees both Hope's return as a teenager and the return of the Phoenix Force.\nFollowing the conclusion of \"Avengers vs. X-Men\" as part of the Marvel NOW! event, a teenage Jean Grey and the four other founding members of X-Men are transported across time to the present day by Beast in the series \"All-New X-Men\" by Brian Michael Bendis.\nThe original adult Jean Grey returned to the Marvel Universe in a new series titled \"Phoenix Resurrection: The Return of Jean Grey\", released on December 27, 2017. The series was written by Matthew Rosenberg with art by Leinil Francis Yu.\nFollowing the events of Extermination story, the time-displaced Jean Grey and the other original X-Men were returned to their original time, as part of Jonathan Hickman's plan to reboot the entire X-Men franchise.\nFictional character biography.\nYouth.\nJean Elaine Grey was born the second daughter of John and Elaine Grey. She had an older sister, Sara Grey-Bailey. John Grey was a professor at Bard College in upstate New York. Depictions of Jean's childhood and her relations with her family have shown a stable, loving family life growing up.\nEmergence of powers and joining the X-Men.\nJean's mutant powers of telepathy and telekinesis first manifested when her best friend was hit by a car and killed. Jean mentally linked with her friend and nearly died as well. The event left her comatose, and she was brought back to consciousness when her parents sought the help of powerful mutant telepath, Charles Xavier. Xavier blocked her telepathy until she was old enough to be able to control it, leaving her with access only to her telekinetic powers. Xavier later recruited her as a teenager to be part of his X-Men team as \"Marvel Girl\", the team's sole female member. After several missions with the X-Men, Xavier removed Jean's mental blocks and she was able to use and control her telepathic powers. She began a relationship with teammate Cyclops, which persisted as her main romantic relationship.\nPhoenix Force and first death.\nDuring an emergency mission in space, the X-Men find their shuttle damaged. Jean pilots the shuttle back to Earth, but is exposed to fatal levels of radiation. Dying, but determined to save Cyclops and her friends, Jean calls out for help and is answered by the cosmic entity the Phoenix Force. The Phoenix Force, the sum of all life in the universe, is moved by Jean's wish to save herself and her friends. It takes the form of a duplicate body to house Jean's psyche. The duplication is so exact that the Phoenix Force believes itself to be Jean Grey, and places Jean's dying body in a healing cocoon. This cocoon is later described as a Phoenix Egg. The ship crashes in Jamaica Bay, with the other X-Men unharmed.\nThe Phoenix Force, assuming Jean's identity, emerges wearing a new costume and adopts the codename \"Phoenix\"; meanwhile, the cocoon containing the real Jean Grey sinks to the bottom of the bay, unnoticed. Phoenix continues her life as Jean Grey with the other X-Men, joining them on missions and even helping to save the universe. During \"The Dark Phoenix Saga\", Phoenix becomes overwhelmed and corrupted by her first taste of evil and transforms into a force of total destruction called \"Dark Phoenix\", inadvertently killing the inhabitants of a planetary system after consuming its star, and jeopardizing the entire universe. However, Jean's personality manages to take control and Phoenix dies by suicide to ensure the safety of the universe.\nRevival.\nUpon its suicide by way of a disintegration ray, the Phoenix Force disperses into its original form and a fragment locates the still-healing Jean at the bottom of Jamaica Bay. In trying to bond with her, Jean senses its memories of death and destruction as Dark Phoenix and rejects it, causing it to bond with and animate a lifeless clone of Jean Grey created by the villain Mister Sinister. Sinister created the clone to mate with Cyclops to create genetically superior mutants. Named \"Madelyne Pryor\", the unaware clone meets Cyclops in a situation engineered by Sinister and the two fall in love, marry, and have a child, Nathan Christopher Summers. Meanwhile, the cocoon is discovered and retrieved by the Avengers and the Fantastic Four. Jean emerges with no memory of the actions of the Phoenix/Dark Phoenix. The Avengers and Fantastic Four tell her of what happened and that she was believed dead until now. She is reunited with the original X-Men and convinces them to form the new superhero team X-Factor, reusing her \"Marvel Girl\" codename. Madelyne is angered over Cyclops's decision to lead X-Factor and neglect his family. Though Jean encourages Cyclops to return to Madelyne, he finds their house abandoned and assumes that Madelyne has left him and taken their infant son. Cyclops returns to X-Factor and he and Jean continue their relationship, but the Phoenix Force's impersonation, and his marrying Madelyne, damaged their mutual trust. The team's adventures continue throughout the series, culminating in the line-wide \"Inferno\" crossover. Madelyne reappears, now nearly insane and with powers awakened by a demonic pact, calling herself the Goblyn Queen.\nLearning of her true identity and purpose as a clone created by Mister Sinister drove her completely insane and she plans to sacrifice Nathan Christopher to achieve greater power and unleash literal Hell on Earth. While attempting to stop her, Jean is reunited with the other X-Men, who are happy to learn that she is alive. Jean and Madelyne confront each other, and Madelyne attempts to kill them both. Jean manages to survive only by absorbing the remnant of the Phoenix Force housed within Madelyne, giving her both Madelyne's memories and the Phoenix's memories from \"The Dark Phoenix Saga\".\nReturn to the X-Men and marriage to Cyclops.\nUnsure of herself since returning to life, Jean finds possessing the Phoenix Force and Madelyne's memories to be difficult. Cyclops proposes to her and she meets her alternate future daughter Rachel Summers (who goes by the codename \"Phoenix\" as well and is also able to tap into the Phoenix Force), but Jean rejects them both out of the feeling that they indicate that her life is predetermined. Jean had learned during the Inferno event that her rejecting the Phoenix Force caused Madelyne to wake; Cyclops admits to Susan Storm Richards that Jean sometimes wishes that the Fantastic Four had not found her, and that he does not know how to communicate with her. When X-Factor unites with the X-Men, Jean joins the Gold Team, led by Storm. She deliberately chooses not to use a codename, so the team simply uses her civilian name. After some time, she makes up with Rachel, welcoming her into her life, and proposes to Cyclops and the two marry. On their honeymoon, the couple is immediately psychically transported 2000 years into the future to raise Cyclops's son Nathan, who had been transported to the future as an infant in hopes of curing him of a deadly virus. Jean adopts the identity of \"Redd\" along with Cyclops (\"Slym\") and they raise Nathan Christopher for twelve years before they are sent back into their bodies on their wedding honeymoon. Jean learns that a time-displaced Rachel had used her powers to transport them to the future to protect Nathan; per Rachel's request, Jean adopts the codename \"Phoenix\" once again to establish it as a symbol of good after all the bad it had caused. As her powers increase, Jean also decides to wear the original Phoenix's gold-and-green costume. Jean also met another alternate future child of hers and Scott's: the immensely powerful Nathan Grey, who accidentally revived the psionic ghost of Madelyne Pryor, leading to another confrontation between the two women.\nOnslaught.\nIn Bishop's original timeline before he ends up in the present he finds the X-Men's war room and finds a garbled distress signal from Jean about a traitor destroying the X-Men from within. Meanwhile, in the present, the X-Men begin to hear increasing news about a malevolent entity called Onslaught. Jean first sees Onslaught as a psionic image with the rest of the X-Men after Onslaught coerces Gateway to kidnap Cyclops, Wolverine, Storm, and Iceman. He later appears to her again in a similar way after rescuing her and Gambit from Bastion and offers her a chance to join him. Onslaught makes his first full appearance to Jean on the astral plane and shows her how humanity is closing in on mutants as well as revealing that Xavier was in love with her while she was a student to convince her to join him. He then telepathically brands his name to her mind when she refuses and asks him his name. When Juggernaut comes to the mansion with information about Onslaught's true identity but has a mental block preventing him from divulging it, Jean enters his mind and helps him to remember who Onslaught really is and to her horror she discovers that Onslaught is really Professor X, having gone insane ever since wiping Magneto's mind.\nProfessor Xavier calls the X-Men together for a meeting and Jean tries unsuccessfully to rally the X-Men against him before he manifests Onslaught. While Onslaught easily overtakes the rest of the X-Men, Jean escapes to the war room and sends out the distress signal that Bishop found in the future. After a massive battle against Jean and the rest of the X-Men, Onslaught escapes to carry out his plans. After Onslaught nearly kills the X-Men they team up with the Avengers to make a plan to stop him, knowing full well that it may come down to them killing Xavier if the world is to survive. Jean accompanies Cyclops, Archangel, and Psylocke to Muir Island where they and Moira McTaggert discover the \"Xavier Protocols\", secret plans that Xavier made to kill any of the individual X-Men should anyone become a threat against the world. Meanwhile, Jean's earlier distress signal makes it to X-Factor, Excalibur, and X-Force. After returning to New York, Jean works closely with Reed Richards to help build up defenses against Onslaught as well as to help create the psionic armor that could block Xavier's telepathic powers as seen in the \"Xavier Protocols\". When Jean senses that Xavier has been freed from Onslaught and is going to confront him on his own, she and Cyclops bring together the rest of the X-Men to back him up. The rest of the Avengers and Fantastic Four join them in a final stand against Onslaught before he completely destroys the world. In a final act of desperation Jean finds Hulk and locks away Bruce Banner's mind, leaving only the Hulk in control so he can fight Onslaught unencumbered. With the vast majority of earth's heroes missing and assumed dead after Onslaught is finally defeated, Jean and Cyclops open their home to Quicksilver and his daughter and try to help the X-Men to get their lives back together.\nNew X-Men.\nFollowing Cyclops's possession by the mutant villain Apocalypse and apparent death, Jean continues with the X-Men, but is distraught by the loss of her husband. She later learns that she is an \"Omega-level\" mutant with unlimited potential. Jean begins to suspect that Cyclops may still be alive and with the help of Nathan Summers (now the aged superhero \"Cable\"), is able to locate and free Cyclops of his possession by Apocalypse. The couple return to the X-Men as part of the Xavier Institute's teaching staff to a new generation of mutants. While Jean finds she is slowly able to tap into the powers of the Phoenix Force once again, her marriage to Scott begins to fail. Jean and Wolverine meet in the woods where Jean confides her feelings of distance towards Scott while Wolverine also shuts down any interest in a relationship he himself had with Jean by telling her that he knew a relationship between the two would never work and walks away from her; Cyclops grows further alienated from Jean due to her growing powers and institute responsibilities and seeks consolation from the telepathic Emma Frost to address his disillusionment and his experiences while possessed by Apocalypse. Emma psychically manipulates Scott and tries to psychically seduce him, which Jean interrupts and discovers, though she would later learn Emma was in love with Scott. Jean also realizes that Scott and Emma never had a physical affair and that Emma had, to an extent, taken advantage of Scott to telepathically seduce him.\nSecond death.\nIn a final confrontation with a traitor at the institute (the X-Men's teammate Xorn, posing as Magneto) Jean fully realizes and assumes complete control of the powers of the Phoenix Force, but is killed in a last-ditch lethal attack by Xorn. Jean dies, telling Scott \"to live\". However, after her funeral, Scott rejects Emma and her offer to run the school together. This creates a dystopian future where all life and natural evolution is under assault by the infectious, villainous, sentient bacteria \"Sublime\". Jean is resurrected in this future timeline and becomes the fully realized White Phoenix of the Crown, using the abilities of the Phoenix Force to defeat Sublime and eliminate the dystopic future by reaching back in time and telling Cyclops to move on. This leads him to accept Emma's love and her offer to run the school together. Jean then reconciles with Cyclops and fully bonds with the Phoenix Force and ascends to a higher plane of existence called the \"White Hot Room\".\nEndsong.\nA weakened Phoenix Force returns to reanimate Jean. Jean tries to convince the Phoenix Force to let her go so they can return to the White Hot Room together, but once again the Phoenix Force takes over. Jean lets Wolverine find her and tries to convince him to kill her again before the Phoenix does more damage. The Shi'ar track the Phoenix Force and make an alliance with Storm to find her and defeat her. Jean takes Wolverine to the North Pole before the Shi'ar can kill her and convinces him to kill her. He stabs her numerous times but Phoenix keeps reanimating her, prompting Jean to dive deep into the ice and freeze herself. The Phoenix Force leaves her body and once again assumes Jean's form to tempt Cyclops to attack her so she can absorb his optic blasts and become strong again. When the Phoenix Force merges with and overwhelms Emma Frost, Cyclops frees Jean from the ice. Once freed Jean ejects the Phoenix from Emma and accepts that she is one with the Phoenix Force. After feeling the love from the X-Men, the Phoenix relents and returns with Jean back to the White Hot Room. Before she departs, Jean and Cyclops share a telepathic emotional farewell.\nPostmortem manifestations.\nThough she had yet to fully return, the Phoenix Force and Jean continued to manifest themselves, particularly the Phoenix through the red-haired, green-eyed \"mutant messiah\" who slightly resembles Jean named Hope Summers, and Jean briefly appears in a vision to Emma Frost from the White Hot Room, warning the X-Men to \"prepare\". She again appears in a vision to Cyclops when he is overwhelmed by the power of Dark Phoenix, helping him abandon the power so that it can pass on to its true host. After Nightcrawler is fatally wounded by the Crimson Pirates, Jean appears to him along with Amanda Sefton and the recently deceased Wolverine to help coax him back to life. Jean's spirit begins to manifest in a more straightforward and aggressive manner to the time-displaced Jean from an alternate timeline, seemingly training her for the arrival of the Phoenix. However, after the younger Jean begins to ignore her, she possesses the time displaced Jean and uses her as a means to ambush Emma Frost.\nReturn.\nStrange psych occurrences around the world, which include a large bird flaring out from the sun and an explosion on the moon, raise red flags for the X-Men, who quickly launch an investigation of these events. After a string of bizarre encounters with familiar enemies, many of them considered deceased, the X-Men come to one conclusion: the Phoenix Force is back on Earth. The X-Men also discover that psychs are going missing or falling ill, which prompts the team to investigate the grave of Jean Grey. As they find the coffin of their long-dead teammate empty, they race to locate the Phoenix before it can find a suitable host. As it turns out, with the time-displaced teen Jean Grey out of the Phoenix Force's way, the cosmic entity has already resurrected the present adult Jean Grey. However, she does not recall her life as a mutant and an X-Man, and terrible visions from her previous life have left Jean unsure of the difference between reality and fiction. As she lies inside of what appears to be a Phoenix Egg, the X-Men theorize that the strange psych occurrences are subconscious cries for help made by Jean Grey and that they must try to stop the Phoenix from merging with their old friend. Old Man Logan is able to make Jean Grey remember her true life and she learns about the fate of her family and several of her friends, among them Cyclops. As Jean faces the Phoenix Force, she is finally able to convince the cosmic entity to stop bringing her back and let her go. Alive once again, Jean is reunited with her friends as the Phoenix Force journeys back to space.\nRestored to life, Jean gathers some of the greatest minds on Earth together so that she can read their minds to plan her next move. Recognizing that there has been a sudden surge in anti-mutant sentiment, to the point where there are plans to abort pregnancies if the mutant gene is detected, Jean announces her plans to establish a more official mutant nation, making it clear that she will not establish a geographic location for said nation as past examples make it clear that doing so just makes mutants a target. To support her in this goal, she assembles a team including Nightcrawler, X-23 and Namor, but is unaware that her actions are being observed by Cassandra Nova.\nHouse of X / Dawn of X.\nThe adult Jean returns to using her original Marvel Girl codename and wears her second green-and-yellow Marvel Girl costume. She is sent as part of a strike team to outer space to stop a satellite near the sun from being used as a Sentinel factory. Sentinels crush Jean's escape pod and she dies, but is resurrected into a cloned body. She is also a member of the Quiet Council, Krakoa's provisional government. Following the events of House of X, Jean briefly joins the Krakoan incarnation of X-Force, before resigning in protest of Beast's actions in Terra Verde.\nWhen the Phoenix Force selects Maya Lopez, also known as Echo, to be its new host, Jean cautions her to maintain connections with other people to prevent it from overwhelming her.\nPowers and abilities.\nJean Grey is an Omega-level mutant, and at her highest and strongest potential was fully merged with the Phoenix Force and with it was able to defeat even Galactus.\nEmpathy.\nJean is a powerful empath, as she can feel and manipulate emotions of other people, as shown when her power first emerged and she felt her friend Annie Richardson slowly dying. Jean can also connect people's minds to the feelings of others and make them feel the pain they inflicted.\nTelepathy.\nWhen her powers first manifested, Jean was unable to cope with her telepathic abilities, forcing Professor Charles Xavier to suppress her access to them altogether. Instead, he chose to train her in the use of her psychokinetic abilities while allowing her telepathy to grow at its natural rate before reintroducing it. When the Professor hid to prepare for the Z'Nox, he reopened Jean's telepathic abilities, which was initially explained by writers as Xavier 'sharing' some of his telepathy with her.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; The \"Women of Marvel: Celebrating Seven Decades Handbook\" detailed Jean's telepathic abilities:\nAs [an alpha-level telepath], Jean Grey can detect and read the thoughts of others, project her own thoughts into other's minds, form psychic links with other beings, control others' minds so as to manipulate their physical functions, mentally stun opponents with bolts of pure psionic force, cast near-flawless mental illusions, and project her mind and the minds of others onto the astral plane. At close range, she can manipulate almost any number of minds; however, she can only take full possession of another's mind one at a time and can only do so if she is within that being's physical presence.\nJean is also one of the few telepaths skilled enough to communicate with animals (animals with high intelligence, such as dolphins, dogs, and ravens). As a side effect of her telepathy, she has an eidetic memory. Jean was able, through telepathic therapy with the comatose Jessica Jones, to grant Jessica immunity to the Purple Man's mind control abilities, despite his powers being chemical in nature rather than psychic. When Jean absorbed Psylocke's specialized telepathic powers, her own telepathy was increased to the point that she could physically manifest her telepathy as a psionic firebird whose claws could inflict both physical and mental damage. She briefly developed a psychic shadow form like Psylocke's, with a gold Phoenix emblem over her eye instead of the Crimson Dawn mark possessed by Psylocke. Jean briefly lost her telekinesis to Psylocke during this exchange, but her telekinetic abilities later came back in full and at a far stronger level than before. It was later stated that Jean has been an omega-level telepath.\nTelekinesis.\nJean possesses a high level of telekinetic ability that enables her to psionically levitate and rapidly move about all manner of animate and inanimate matter. She can use her telekinetic abilities on herself or others to simulate the power of flight or levitation, stimulate molecules to increase friction, create protective force fields out of psychokinetic energy, or project her telekinetic energy as purely concussive force. The outer limits of her telekinetic power have never been clearly established, though she was capable of lifting approximately fifty tons of rubble with some strain. Jean was later stated to have become an Omega Level Telekinetic.\nPsychic Energy Synthesis.\nJean's younger self, who had been brought from the past into the present by an older Hank McCoy, eventually found an entirely new way to use her powers separate from the Phoenix Force. The teenage Marvel Girl learned she has the ability to harness ambient psychic energy and channel it into powerful blasts of force, which are a combination of both her telepathy and telekinesis. Its potency is such that she can match and overpower the likes of Gladiator, magistrate of the Shi'ar, with relative ease. When using this ability, Jean's whole body glows with pink psychic energy, obscuring her human form.\nTelekinetic weapons.\nUnder the tutelage of Psylocke, teenage Marvel Girl learned the ability to create psionic weapons that damage a target either physically or mentally. She showed skill in constructing multiple types of psionic weapons that differ in size, length and power which she uses in combat.\nPhoenix Force.\nThe relationship between Jean Grey and the Phoenix Force (and the nature of the powers she has) is portrayed in a variety of ways throughout the character's history. In the initial plotline of the Phoenix being a manifestation of Jean's true potential, these powers are considered her own, as part of Claremont and Byrne's desire to create \"the first cosmic superheroine\". However, since the retcon of the Phoenix as a separate entity from Jean Grey, depictions of these powers vary; these include Jean being one of many hosts to the Phoenix and \"borrowing\" its \"Phoenix powers\" during this time, being a unique host to the Phoenix, and being one with the Phoenix. She is later described as the only one currently able to hold the title of \"White Phoenix of the Crown\" among the many past, present, and future hosts of the Phoenix. Jean \u2014 both young and adult versions \u2014 is also the only character ever to force the Phoenix against its own cosmic will to do anything while not presently a host. In one instance Jean forcibly ripped the Phoenix out of Emma Frost and imposed its status upon herself. Young Jean was able to keep her psyche anchored in the Phoenix's mind postmortem despite the Phoenix's own efforts to forcibly remove her after it murdered her. Jean then subsequently forced the Phoenix to resurrect her after manipulating the Phoenix's mental landscape against it.\nOver the years, Jean's abilities while bonded to the Phoenix Force have fluctuated, but the \"Women of Marvel: Celebrating Seven Decades Handbook\" has detailed what Jean is capable of as Phoenix:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;While empowered by the Phoenix Force, Grey has total telekinetic control of matter at the molecular level, allowing her to manipulate atomic structures on a universal scale. She can generate any form of energy in seemingly unlimited amounts, as well as absorb energy from sources as great as a supernova or even convert her physical form to pure energy and back again. She can also exist in virtually any environment without harm and create space/time warps to travel through hyperspace or traverse the timestream, and her telepathic abilities are also vastly enhanced. When using her power, the Phoenix Force will manifest itself around Grey in the form of a bird of cosmic flames, the size of the bird varying with the amount of energy she is using. These flames can even manifest in seemingly impossible situations, such as the vacuum of space or underwater. This fire apparently does not require oxygen to burn, and burns so intensely that matter is consumed without by-products such as ash. The cosmic fire is a literal punctuation to the Phoenix's purpose to \"burn away what doesn't work\", as well as being described as \"burning through lies and deception\". The Phoenix Force can also resurrect the dead under some conditions, and absorb the life force from other sentient beings to bolster its own.\nThe Phoenix Force also seems to render its host unaging and, at least in some adaptations, enhances the physical strength of its avatar to superhuman levels; in certain incarnations, Jean, namely while acting as Dark Phoenix, seemed to possess some level of superhuman strength.\nResurrection.\nFor one reason or another, Jean Grey (both young and old) has, on more than one occasion, been repeatedly resurrected by either the Phoenix or apparently her sheer force of will. In some depictions, these resurrections are immediately after she or whoever she is reviving is killed, while other depictions indicate that a resurrection must occur at a \"correct\" time, sometimes taking a century. During the height of the Psych Wars, Young Jean was able to forcibly make the Phoenix Force restore her to life, despite the Phoenix's adamant resolve not to do so, completely recreating her body after it had been vaporized. After her body was taken over and completely devoured by a Poison, a small part of Jean's mind survived and, despite itself, was able to infect the whole Poison Hive and destroy it from the inside out, subsequently using nothing but her mind to reconstruct her body. This leaves Jean believing that she may not even be human anymore. This is not the first time Jean was resurrected without the Phoenix; in one instance, she was even able to fully resurrect herself after being clinically dead completely independent of the Phoenix Force.\nIn their most recent meeting, Jean tells the Phoenix Force that she should have died on the shuttle, and asks it to not resurrect her again.\nMiscellaneous abilities.\nJean Grey is a trained pilot and proficient unarmed combatant. She also has some degree of teaching ability, experience as a fashion model, and training in psychology.\nCultural impact and legacy.\nCritical response.\nMaite Molina of \"ComicsVerse\" called Jean Grey one of the most \"powerful, recognizable, and admirable heroes in Marvel Comics history,\" writing, \"Jean Grey is undoubtedly one of the most iconic characters in comic book history. Her telekinetic abilities prove her to be an incredibly formidable superhero. She has battled some of the most notorious villains in Marvel Comics while fearlessly leading her own team of heroes. With this, she has also explored her own dark side. Epic sagas such as the notable \"Dark Phoenix Saga\" depict Jean as an exemplification of evil itself. However, during this trying period, Jean still overcame the corruption within. She showed readers that even heroes can fall into the clutches of darkness and rise above. Most importantly though, Jean Grey is and always has been an incredibly multi-faceted character. She has been a student and a teacher as well as the tether between good and evil.\" Nigel Mitchell of \"Comic Book Resources\" said, \"Jean Grey was always a really popular character for readers. Partly, it was because she was one of the most sensitive and intelligent members of the X-Men, the heart of the team. The fact that she was the team's first woman also made her unique, and her beauty was a major source of crushes for the fans. She was also involved in a love triangle between herself, Cyclops, and Wolverine, which drove a lot of emotional storylines. When she became Phoenix, she became the most high-profile female superhero in comics, but the other X-Men creative team Jim Salicrup and John Byrne felt her powers overshadowed the other members and stories. That's why Marvel decided to do something that hadn't really been done before: take one of its greatest superheroes and turn her into one of its greatest supervillains. It was a journey unlike any we'd seen before \"The Phoenix Saga\" and is compelling to watch.\" David Caballero of \"Screen Rant\" stated, \"Jean Grey served no important purpose in the team before \"The Dark Phoenix Saga\", especially during the X-Men's early days. The character existed as a love interest for the group-- every member of the X-Men's original roster had feelings for her at one point-- and a mother figure to provide support and encouragement. As more and more female characters arrived--Storm, Scarlet Witch, and Mystique all debuted throughout the 60s and 70s--it became increasingly complicated to use Jean in any meaningful way. \"The Dark Phoenix Saga\" was not only a showcase but, as it turns out, a victory lap for the X-Men's first lady. The storyline took a nearly irrelevant character and elevated it to the apex of importance, turning her into one of Marvel's most overpowered figures in the process.\"\nElle Collins of \"ComicsAlliance\" referred to Jean Grey as one of the \"first ladies of Marvel Comics as well as one of the most powerful,\" saying, \"In both the movies and the comics, we have a young Jean who's still learning her full potential as a mutant and a hero, and who's written as a real person with a real personality. That's not to say Jean hasn't accumulated fans over the preceding years; she absolutely has. Whether your first Jean was the Marvel Girl in her green Go Go dress, the Phoenix (who we were later told wasn't Jean, but let's be real it was basically Jean), the hyper competent blue-headsock-wearing Jean of the '90s comic and cartoon, or the cool black leather Jean of the turn of the Century (whether drawn by Frank Quitely or played by Famke Janssen) --- it's hard not to be excited about this next era of the character.\" Tamara Jude of \"Sideshow\" asserted, \"As the only female superhero of the X-Men, Jean Grey (initially introduced as Marvel Girl) lacked an impactful role in the comic series. Her biggest storyline involved her love triangle with Cyclops and Wolverine. Claremont wanted to expand her powers with the Phoenix Force and re-brand her as an influential teammate with cosmic abilities. Much like Thor\u2019s significant addition to the Avengers, Claremont wanted Jean to hold a similar importance with the X-Men. However, as they wrote the \"Phoenix Saga\", her powers proved too dominant, and the character\u2019s presence took over the focus of the comic. Their cosmic hero proved too much for everyone involved.\" Sara Century of \"Syfy\" stated, \"When Jean Grey is introduced in \"X-Men #1\" all the way back in late 1963, she asks herself what kind of person she is going to be. The answer to that question doesn't come to her immediately, yet it is true that from her relatively one-dimensional origins eventually sprang a complex personality full of nuance and empathy that has only grown more interesting as time has gone on. From the \"Phoenix Saga\" to \"X-Factor\" to \"Inferno\" to the \"X-Cutioner\"\u2019s to \"Onslaught\" to \"New X-Men\" to \"Phoenix: Resurrection\" and countless alternate realities in between, Jean Grey has truly been beyond and back. Still, many writers have struggled to define her. The complicated, fiercely compassionate Jean Grey has not always translated well to other mediums, and even in comics Jean has been known to experience long dormant periods in which her persona is secondary to other characters. Yet her fanship has remained ever vigilant, because while she is not often cited as people\u2019s favorite X-Man, a whole lot of folks relate to her in very specific and incredibly personal ways. Also, it turns out that there\u2019s a pretty solid queer allegory in Jean\u2019s story. Though a parable about a straight character is not to be mistaken for actual queer representation, it is still worth noting that a lot of Jean Grey\u2019s most avid advocates are LGBTQIA people.\"\nDeirdre Kaye of \"Scary Mommy\" called Jean Grey a \"role model\" and a \"truly heroic\" female character. Chris Arrant of \"Newsarama\" ranked Jean Grey's Dark Phoenix persona 1st in their \"Marvel's Best Phoenix Force Hosts\" list, calling her one of the \"X-Men's core characters,\" while George Marston ranked her 5th in their \"Best X-Men Members Of All Time\" list. \"IGN\" ranked Jean Grey 6th in their \"Top 25 X-Men\" list, her Dark Phoenix persona 9th in their \"Top 100 Comic Book Villains of All Time\" list, and 13th in their \"Top 100 Comic Book Heroes\" list, while Hilary Goldstein and Richard George of \"IGN\" said, \"Jean Grey is host to the most powerful entity in the universe. One of the original X-Men, Jean has become the symbol (and cruel joke) of death and rebirth among the mutant population. Partnered with the Phoenix Force, Jean has returned to the X-Men on several occasions. However, it's her first death that remains both memorable and significant to X-Men lore. Jean sacrificed herself, choosing to die as a human than live as a God. In a universe where self-worth is almost exclusive judged on power level, Jean held her humanity so dear she was willing to give up everything she loved. The strong-willed redhead is an integral part of the X-Men's legacy.\"\nGavia Baker-Whitelaw of \"The Daily Dot\" ranked Jean Grey 7th in their \"Top 33 Female Superheroes Of All Time\" list. Jordan St James of \"Collider\" ranked Jean Grey 8th in their \"10 Most Powerful Marvel Mutants\" list, saying, \"Jean Grey has gone from sweet-natured powerhouse to planet-destroying villainess to perpetual Lazarus figure.\" Lance Cartelli of \"GameSpot\" ranked Jean Grey 10th in their \"50 Most Important Superheroes\" list, writing, \"She is super important to the X-Men and to all of us.\" Matthew Aguilar of \"ComicBook.com\" wrote, \"While Charles Xavier put the X-Men together, there is one of his students who simply dwarfs all others when it comes to power and their effect on mutant history. That honor falls to one of his first students, Jean Grey, a powerful telepath in her own right who became part of the original five X-Men. She would later grow even more powerful though, setting up some of the X-Men's most epic moments into motion. Over the years she's undergone transformations not only in her skills and abilities but also regarding her costumes. She started out in the early days like everyone else, eventually adopting the Marvel Girl suit and persona. It fit her quieter nature at the time, but she would then adopt several looks over the years that changed according to her ever-evolving personality,\" while Lance Cartelli ranked her 16th in their \"50 Most Important Superheroes Ever\" list. Darren Franich of \"Entertainment Weekly\" ranked Jean Grey 30th in their \"Let's Rank Every X-Man Ever\" list. \"The A.V. Club\" ranked Jean Grey 60th in their \"100 Best Marvel Characters\" list.\nJoe Garza of \"Slashfilm\" ranked Jean Grey 1st in their \"Most Powerful X-Men Characters\" list. Rachel Ulatowski of \"The Mary Sue\" ranked Jean Grey 1st in their \"10 Most Powerful X-Men of All Time\" list. \"Comics Buyer's Guide\" ranked Jean Grey 3rd in their \"100 Sexiest Women in Comics\" list. Joshua Corvington of \"Sportskeeda\" ranked Jean Grey 6th in their \"10 Most Overpowered Superheroes In The Marvel Universe\" list.\n\"Screen Rant\" included Jean Grey in their \"10 Female Marvel Heroes That Should Come To The MCU\" list, and ranked her 1st in their \"X-Men: The 10 Most Powerful Members Of The Summers Family\" list, 5th in their \"25 Most Powerful Mutants\" list. \"Comic Book Resources\" ranked Jean Grey 1st in their \"X-Men: The Strongest Members Of The Summers Family\" list, 1st in their \"X-Men: All Of Marvel's Omega-Level Mutants, Ranked By Power\" list, 2nd in their \"10 Best Female X-Men Characters\" list, 2nd in their \"10 Most Attractive Marvel Heroes\" list, 3rd in their \"10 Strongest Female Villains\" list, and 5th in their \"10 Bravest Mutants in Marvel Comics\" list.\nLiterary reception.\nVolumes.\n\"X-Men: The Dark Phoenix Saga\" (1980).\nDavid Caballero of \"Screen Rant\" stated, \"During the Silver and Bronze Ages of comic books, many Marvel teams had their obligatory female figure. The X-Men had Jean as Marvel Girl, the Fantastic Four had the Invisible Girl, and the Avengers had the Wasp. They provided considerable support to their men-dominated teams but never excelled in the same way their teammates did. By the 70s, more female characters were a part of the conversation, but they never took control of it. \"The Dark Phoenix Saga\" changed the discourse by having a woman take the microphone, then blowing the roof and making the entire world her stage. The mightiest being in Marvel comics was a woman, a normally obedient female character who was finally letting loose. \"The Dark Phoenix Saga\" did more for female heroes and villains with just a few numbers than an entire decade of comic book continuity.\" Tyler Huckabee of \"IGN\" included \"X-Men: The Dark Phoenix Saga\" in their \"7 Best Jean Grey Comics\" list, stating, \"We begin at the end \u2014 one of the many that Jean Grey has endured during her time as an X-Man. It\u2019s The Dark Phoenix Sagae how influential John Byrne and Chris Claremont\u2019s 1980 epic is. It was, perhaps, the first superhero stoDark Phoenix Sagatalize on just how sweeping the medium could be, while never losing sight of the tender heart that beat at the center of all Claremont\u2019s finest work. Every superhero story that came after \"The Dark Phoenix Saga\" is indebted to it in some way. Like any X-Man worth her salt, Jean\u2019s story is a bit convoluted, and the \"Dark Phoenix Saga\" is a trippier ride than most, but Claremont keeps things clipping at an even pace that helps even the wildest plot twist go down easily. And more importantly, he centers the all-important romance between Cyclops and Jean Grey, leading to some profoundly moving moments. These moments are all captured exquisitely by legendary superhero artist John Byrne, who was as deft as crafting crackling fight scenes as he was with intimate confessions of love. Nearly forty years after its publication, it\u2019s hardly a spoiler to say the Dark Phoenix ended with Jeans\u2019 (first) (temporary) death, but what rose from the ashes was a whole new era for how grand comic books could be.\"\n\"X-Men Origins: Jean Grey\" (2008).\nAccording to Diamond Comic Distributors, \"X-Men Origins: Jean Grey\" #1 was the 85th best selling comic book in August 2008.\nMichael Austin of \"Comic Book Resources\" asserted, \"This 2008 one-shot written by Sean McKeever was a true standout for the character. While the photorealism of the outwork is truly outstanding, it is the story that makes this comic great. As Jean's childhood best friend, Annie, is hit by a car, her telepathic abilities manifest for the first time. Jean is forced to experience the final thoughts of her dying friend and is traumatized as a result. With Professor Xavier's help, she works past her trauma and goes on to become a hero. The tragic, lifelike beauty of this story and illustration makes \"X-Men Origins: Jean Grey\" a stand-out among her many stories. It is a must-read for the character, as it helps inform both how she became such a powerful entity and what monsters she has lurking in the back of her mind.\" Jesse Schedeen of \"IGN\" gave \"X-Men Origins: Jean Grey\" #1 a grade of 7.5 out of 10, writing, \"Mostly, this issue is meant to appeal to fans of Mayhew's art (of which I'm sure there are plenty) and those who really want Jean back in the X-books (no clue on that one). Those two groups will be satisfied, so I suppose that means mission accomplished.\"\n\"Jean Grey\" (2017).\nAccording to Diamond Comic Distributors, \"Jean Grey\" #1 was the 13th best selling comic book in May 2017. \"Jean Grey\" #2 was the 84th best selling comic book in May 2017.\nMya Nunnally of \"ComicsVerse\" gave \"Jean Grey\" #1 a score of 95%, stating, \"In a world where teenage girls get insulted endlessly for their music choice, their taste in movies, and their hobbies, we need Jean Grey. Specifically, we need \"Jean Grey\" #1, her new solo run written by Dennis Hopeless. In this comic, Jean is an unapologetic teenage girl. A silly, pretty, emotional, selfie-taking teenage girl. And that\u2019s what makes her wonderful. Too often we see female superheroes stripping themselves of their identity to fit the mold of what a superhero should be. Maybe they wear completely ineffective armor. Or perhaps they\u2019re essentially a male character with boobs. Maybe they try to be cold and distant and masculine so that they\u2019re really just another testosterone bump to the already male team. [...] \"Jean Grey\" #1 ends in a crazy cliff-hanger, which I believe is how all first episodes should end. However, it\u2019ll definitely be divisive. Some might see it as weak storytelling relying on previous Jean-related drama. But I thought it was a natural way to go and a good way to make sure readers want to continue reading. I\u2019ll definitely keep up with this, even if it\u2019s just to keep a character I love close to my heart. Jean Grey deserved better, and now here she is, getting it.\" Jesse Schedeen of \"IGN\" gave \"Jean Grey\"#1 a grade of 7 out of 10, asserting, \"Jean Grey seems like it'll develop into a worthwhile addition to the growing ResurrXion lineup. The art is strong, and Dennis Hopeless shows a decent handle on the title character. Unfortunately, the series gets off to a needlessly slow start in this first issue, dwelling on an overlong battle with the Wrecking Crew rather than diving into the heart of Jean's struggle.\"\n\"Phoenix Resurrection: The Return of Jean Grey\" (2017).\nAccording to Diamond Comic Distributors, \"Phoenix Resurrection: The Return of Jean Grey\" #1 was the 3rd best selling comic book in December 2017.\nJoe Glass of \"Bleeding Cool\" wrote, \"Nothing with the Phoenix is ever easy and straightforward, but it is dramatic and fun, and Rosenberg has managed that tight rope expertly in this first issue. Yu's artwork is great for the issue, too. There are some really creepy moments, which Yu draws well and manages to make it creepy to look at. We get to see a fairly big number of X-Men, and he gives each their own identity clearly and the story flows well. \"Phoenix Resurrection: The Return of Jean Grey #1\" is a really great, intriguing and bizarre start for this series, and it certainly has me hooked to see how this series will evolve.\" Jesse Schedeen of \"IGN\" gave \"Phoenix Resurrection: The Return of Jean Grey\" #1 a grade of 6.3 out of 10, writing, \"The prospect of having Jean Grey back as an active player in the X-Men franchise is plenty appealing, but Phoenix Resurrection only partly realizes that potential. When this issue focuses on the enigmatic status quo of this all-powerful mutant heroine, it makes for fascinating reading. But when the rest of the X-Men enter the picture, the book begins to drag. It doesn't help that artist Leinil Yu struggles to make the most of the material. Hopefully this series can find its groove as it gets deeper into Jean's latest return to life.\"\n\"Giant-Size X-Men: Jean Grey and Emma Frost\" (2020).\nAccording to Diamond Comic Distributors, \"Giant Size X-Men: Jean Grey and Emma Frost\" #1 was the 5th best selling comic book in February 2020. \"Giant Size X-Men: Jean Grey and Emma Frost\" #1 was the 26th best selling comic book in 2020.\nMatthew Aguilar of \"ComicBook.com\" stated, \"This story is a joy from beginning to end, but it also subtly hints at larger ramifications for not only Storm but every other mutant on the planet. Macro-level ideas regarding the soul, mutant resurrection, and the state of the mind are all explored in one way or another\u2014anchored by the imminent danger to one of the X-Men's most iconic faces, and it makes for one very compelling mix. Whether you're looking for an entertaining adventure between two of your X-Men favorites, a thoughtful and action-packed journey through the mind, or another step forward in the evolution fo [\"sic\"] the X-Men, you'll find all of it in \"Giant Size X-Men: Jean Grey and Emma Frost\" #1. It is one of the most stunning one-shots on the market today. In short, don't miss out on this issue; you'll regret it.\" Mike Fugere of \"Comic Book Resources\" wrote, \"\"Giant-Size X-Men: Jean Grey and Emma Frost\" #1 is an obvious tribute to an issue of Grant Morrison and Frank Quitely's iconic run on \"New X-Men,\" but its tone is far less psychedelic and far more ethereal. There is a sense of peace throughout Storm's mind, despite the horrific revelation that's discovered by the end of the issue. How the various emotional avatars within our Omega-Level mutant's mind interact with Jean and Emma are probably the most compelling part of this issue from a storytelling standpoint. It does a wonderful job at expressing emotions that are not always openly expressed between characters with conflicting ideologies with humor and a wonderful sense of whimsy.\"\nOther versions.\nTime-displaced incarnation.\nAll-New X-Men.\nIn \"All-New X-Men\", present-day Beast goes to the past and brings a younger version of Jean to the present day along with the other original X-Men in hopes of helping the present-day Cyclops to see how far he's fallen. This version has experienced a surge in her abilities due to the trauma of being brought to the future. The time travel also caused her suppressed telepathic powers to awaken much earlier in her life than they were supposed to. She also has a habit of reading people's minds without their permission, to the great frustration of her team. During the \"Battle of the Atom\" crossover, a future version of this Jean Grey, who had never returned to the past and whose powers had grown beyond her control, would return to the present as Xorn, a member of the future Brotherhood of Mutants. Xorn perished during the battle, but in the process the X-Men also found out that there is something preventing the All-New X-Men from returning to the past. During this timeline, she reads the mind of current Beast, who regrets never admitting his feelings for her, so confronts younger Beast and gives him a kiss, which creates problems with the younger Cyclops. She and her team also leave the and go to , where she forms a reluctant friendship with Emma Frost as she trains her psychic abilities.\nJean is later kidnapped by the Shi'ar and placed on trial for the destruction done by the Phoenix Force years earlier in a 2014 crossover storyline \"The Trial of Jean Grey\". The All-New X-Men team up with the Guardians of the Galaxy to rescue Jean from the Shi'ar homeworld, but Jean awakens a new power that she never had, in which she is able to absorb massive amounts of psionic energy from others and combine her telepathy and telekinesis, which she used to defeat the powerful Gladiator, leader of the Shi'ar.\nWhile searching for new mutants, Jean and the All-New X-Men get teleported into the Ultimate Marvel universe. She teams up with Spider-Man (Miles Morales) to rescue Beast, who has been trapped by the local Doctor Doom. Before she is teleported back she gives Miles Morales a kiss. Upon their return to Earth 616, she and the All-New X-Men team up with the Guardians of the Galaxy a second time in search of The Black Vortex.\nFollowing the reconstruction of reality after the Battleworld crisis, Jean has parted ways from the rest of the time-displaced X-Men as she attempts to find her own life in the present by living a normal civilian life in College until Storm recruits her to join her new team of X-Men to help protect mutants from Terrigen. She mentions having broken up with Hank McCoy, considering him to be more of a brother. After the X-Men go to war against the Inhumans to destroy the Terrigen, Jean leaves Storm's team and attempts to return to her original timeline along with the rest of the time-displaced X-Men but realizes that they're not from the 616 timeline, leaving them stranded on Earth 616 with no idea which timeline they're from. With this new knowledge that they are from an unknown alternate timeline, Jean becomes the time-displaced X-Men's new leader and they quit the X-Men in hopes of finding their place in the current world.\nJean ends up approached by Magneto, who offers her and her team to join him in preserving Xavier's dream by defeating those who oppose it. Jean accepts and her team joins him, but in secret they train themselves in case Magneto ever reverts to his villainous roots to kill them.\nAs part of the Marvel's \"RessurXion\" event, Jean Grey received her first-ever solo series. While on a solo mission against the Wrecking Crew, Jean receives a vision that the Phoenix Force is coming back to Earth. She goes to the rest of the X-Men to warn them about her vision but as there haven't been any Phoenix sightings since the X-Men went to war against the Avengers to decide the fate of the Phoenix, she has a hard time getting Beast, Captain Marvel, and Kitty Pryde to accept that her vision was real even though they assure her that if the Phoenix ever does return then the X-Men and Avengers will come together and do all they can to stop it. Jean feels even less taken seriously when Beast begins examining her for signs of delusional hallucinations. Jean then meets with other former Phoenix hosts Colossus, Magik, Rachel Summers, Hope Summers and Quentin Quire, where the latter uses his powers to show her how the aftereffects of bonding with the Phoenix Force has individually affected each of them. A meeting with Namor helps Jean come to the conclusion that she can refuse the Phoenix and even possibly defeat it. After meeting with Thor and training with Psylocke, Jean learns how to create telekinetic weapons to help with her impending battle against the Phoenix.\nJean ends up sent back in time for unknown reasons and ends up meeting that timeline's Jean Grey shortly after she first becomes Phoenix. Time-displaced Jean attempts to ask Phoenix questions about the Phoenix Force but she dodges Jean's questions. Instead Phoenix takes Jean for a night out and shows off her powers. After witnessing Phoenix use her cosmic powers to prevent Galactus from consuming a defenseless planet, Jean contemplates warning Phoenix of her fate until an encounter with Uatu stops her from doing so. The Watcher commends Jean and tells her that choosing to not change her future means that her ultimate fate is in her own hands whether or not she ends up hosting the Phoenix Force back in her present. As Jean returns to her present, Phoenix cryptically states that they will meet again.\nBacked by a host of former Phoenix Force wielders, Emma Frost, Quentin Quire, Hope Summers, the Stepford Cuckoos and even the spirit of the adult Jean Grey, the teen Jean tries to defy destiny and stop the Phoenix before it can take her over and bend her to its will. With the Phoenix Force now on Earth, the team realizes it's going to take a lot more than they have to stop it. And while the young Jean is able to wound the Phoenix with the aid of Cable's Psi-mitar, the Phoenix seems just too strong for anyone to overcome. Teen Jean eventually managed to push the cosmic force far away from her friends and allies, where a final battle can take place. However, both Jean Greys learned how wrong they were, as the Phoenix was never coming for teen Jean, at least not like they believed. Actually, the Phoenix wants the adult Jean, but to do that it needs the young Jean out of the way. Thus, the force floods her body with flaming psychic energy, incinerating her from the inside out, leaving only a skeleton. This was done to resurrect the adult Jean Grey, which the Phoenix considers its one true host. However, after dying, the younger Jean found herself somehow in the White Hot Room despite not being a Phoenix host. Angry, the Phoenix attempted to destroy her using mental manifestations of its past hosts, created from pieces of their life forces left in the Room. Jean realized that she could control the White Hot Room against the Phoenix wishes and commanded the cosmic entity to resurrect her, which it did so in order to get rid of her. After returning to Madripoor, she was approached by her resurrected older Earth-616 counterpart, much to her surprise.\nAge of Apocalypse.\nIn the \"Age of Apocalypse\" storyline, Jean is a student of Magneto. She is forced to suppress her telepathic powers in order to escape from the Shadow King's attacks. She eventually falls in love with fellow student, Weapon X. Jean is later kidnapped by Mr. Sinister, who offers her a place among his team. She refuses, and is sent to Sinister's breeding pens. Weapon X rescues her, but not before Sinister extracted her DNA and combined it with that of Cyclops to engineer the perfect mutant, X-Man. Weapon X, and Jean leave the X-Men and join forces with the Human High Council. She learns of a plan to drop nuclear bombs on the United States to kill Apocalypse. She confronts Weapon X, then leaves him to try to stop the attack with the aid of Cyclops. She's apparently killed at the hands of Cyclops' brother, Prelate Havok, before she can hold back the nuclear bombs with her telekinesis.\nIn the tenth-anniversary limited series, it is revealed that Jean was the one that stopped the nuclear attack from the Human High Council with the last of her powers. She was also \"resurrected\" by Sinister and began displaying Phoenix Force powers, known in this reality as \"Mutant Alpha\" abilities. Jean does not remember her old life at first, so Sinister manipulated her to create a new team to fight the X-Men, the Sinister Six. During the fight between the two teams, Logan is able to connect emotionally with Jean. She turns on Sinister and incinerates him. Jean and Logan reunite, and she becomes leader of the X-Men at Magneto's behest.\nUltimate Marvel.\nIn the Ultimate Marvel continuity, Jean Grey is a responsible, but extroverted young woman; scathingly sarcastic and a bit of a tease, and she secretly reads other people's minds, particularly the other members of the X-Men. Early in the series, she has very short, cropped hair and dresses in punkish clothes. As she matures through both her studies and her role as an X-Man, she gradually shifts to more conservative outfits and grows out her hair to match the character's classic style. She has a brief affair with Wolverine, but when Wolverine reveals he was sent to kill Professor X, Jean is angry and ends the relationship. She later begins to date Cyclops although she is occasionally frustrated by his shyness. Xavier found Jean Grey while she was in a mental hospital, having problems controlling her telepathy and having troublesome visions of a \"Phoenix raptor\". It is established at the start of the series that her age is 19 and was Xavier's second student after Cyclops.\nThe exact nature of the Phoenix in the Ultimate Universe has not been revealed, but very often Jean is haunted by visions and hallucinations of the Phoenix early in the Ultimate timeline. The powers seem to reveal themselves when Jean gets angry. It appears, due to tests conducted in Ultimate X-Men #71, that the Phoenix is an actual entity and not an uncovered aspect of Jean's own mind. According to the Fire and Brimstone story arc, Jean's Phoenix powers come from the Phoenix God, although Xavier does not believe this.\nJean kills many members of the Hellfire Club in a fit of Phoenix powered rage before Xavier calms her down. Much later in the story, Jean uses her Phoenix powers often. She starts with her powers out of her control due to her anger, accidentally killing two mercenaries who were attacking the X-Men. She feels guilty over the incident for weeks, but after a while, she manifests signs of the Phoenix, beginning to draw upon more and more of the residual Phoenix energies buried within her mind to help the X-Men on several occasions, combating Magneto and the deceptive and manipulative Magician. It has been revealed that Jean envisions imaginary tiny, green goblins carrying out her telekinetic activities.\nWhen the man from the future, \"Cable\", attacks the X-Men, he kidnaps Jean Grey, but she is later rescued by the X-Men and Bishop. After Professor X's apparent death, Jean has become the headmistress of the school, along with Cyclops. She did not join Bishop's new team of X-Men, but has assisted the team when needed, often butting heads with Cyclops over when to help and when not to help.\nFurther down the line, The X-Men hunt Sinister down, finding him in the Morlock tunnels slaughtering several Morlocks in order to reach his goal; to be reborn as Apocalypse. He has the power to control mutants and brings former X-Men Cyclops, Jean, Iceman, Rogue, and Toad to NYC for a giant survival battle royal. The Fantastic Four intercept Cyclops' team, where Sue Storm traps Jean in a force field, rendering her a mere spectator. Jean is broken free of the bubble when Professor X, able to walk, uses his telepathy to free her and the other reserve X-Men, leaving her to subdue the other team of X-Men and the Morlocks. She hesitantly calls for help when Apocalypse puts Xavier on the brink of death and the Phoenix Force responds, physically manifesting herself and merging with Jean to fight Apocalypse. Using her unimaginable powers, she brings Apocalypse to his knees and melts his armor. Having fully merged with the Phoenix, Jean reverts recent history, allowing the X-Men to remember. She then travels across the universe, causing war and suicide among different races. When she reaches her destination, the Silver Surfer arrives to warn her but she pushes on to find Heaven.\nJean later inexplicably turns up at the Mansion and resettles with the X-Men. When Alpha Flight kidnaps Northstar, Jean strives to push the X-Men to fight harder, especially when Cyclops leaves to protect Colossus, Rogue, Dazzler, and Angel, who were using Banshee to rescue Northstar. Unfortunately, they believe they've failed and become Banshee addicts. Jean leads her X-Men to deal with Colossus but falls into a trance, having visions of her father, who tells her not to push her friends to failure. She recovers Northstar, crippled from the waist down, and less aggressive. Everyone but Scott returns home, so Jean tracks him into space, where he is staring down at Earth, feeling omnipotent. Jean reminds him he's in need, provoking him into attacking her. During the ensuing fight Banshee were wears off and Scott almost succumbs to vacuum. Jean encompassed him in her fire.\nDuring the events of the Ultimate Marvel crossover event Ultimatum, Magneto's Manhattan tidal wave kills Nightcrawler and Dazzler. Scott, Jean, and Logan go as the \"original X-Men\" to stop Magneto once and for all. The remaining X-Men along with the Fantastic Four, Ultimates, and SHIELD assault Magneto's base, during which they lose several more members including Wolverine, who has his Adamantium ripped from his bones by Magneto. In the end Magneto is defeated when Jean downloads Nick Fury's memories into Magneto, which reveals that mutants are not the next stage of human evolution, but rather a super-soldier experiment gone wrong. Horrified by the truth, Magneto surrenders, and Cyclops executes him with his optic blast.\nSoon after, Jean is in Washington with the remaining X-Men, where Cyclops makes a speech, attempting to bring peace to the anti-mutant hostilities and to ask that all mutants surrender to the government. He is then assassinated by Quicksilver, who lodges a bullet into his skull, and declares his intention to reform the Brotherhood. Scott dies in the arms of Storm and Colossus, while Rogue rushes a distraught Jean to safety. Jean is later seen in \"Ultimate X-Men Requiem\" alongside Rogue and Iceman as they tear down the Xavier Institute and raze their mentor's estate. They bury the bodies of the various deceased X-Men in unmarked graves on the estate grounds.\nJean then moves to Baltimore, changing her hair color to black and assuming the identity of \"Karen Grant\". She takes a nondescript job managing a store at the Cherry Square Shopping Center, where her security guard boyfriend Dave works. Despite having only worked at the mall for four months, Jean uses her telepathy to alter the memories of her coworkers so that they believe she has worked there for three years.\nJean discovers that Dave has put her photo on Facebook without permission, making her angry and culminating in their separation. Mystique and Sabretooth then ambush Dave and kill him while torching Jean's store. Meanwhile, while packing up to disappear, Jean meets the son of Wolverine, Jimmy, for the first time. Jean is later seen travelling with Jimmy to Chicago to recruit a mutant known as Derek Morgan, then to southern California to locate Liz Allan.\nOne night, Jimmy is attacked by Sabretooth. Jean had sought Bruce Banner for help and a fight ensues. Quicksilver then arrives with his newly formed Brotherhood of Mutant Supremacy but is defeated by Jean and her recruits. Nick Fury reveals that the team Jean made was part of the Xavier Protocols, and that he has been clandestinely helping mutants on the run from the government. To protect Jean's followers, Fury enlists them in S.H.I.E.L.D. as a support group known as the Ultimate X.\nJean and her team are seen en route to the SEAR to aid Hawkeye. After witnessing the heaven created by the Xorn/Zorn brothers in Tian, the Ultimate X group deserts, deciding to remain there. Nick Fury reveals that Jean is using her telekinetic powers to make the brothers believe she is in Tian in order to have an \"inside man\" when she is really in America. However, a recent meeting between Karen and Zorn implies that she may be double crossing Fury, as she is physically in Tian as well as revealing her real identity as Jean Grey.\nShe sends a spy to keep tabs on what Kitty is up to with Reservation X, forming a wide Resistance in the pages of \"\" consisting of past members like Iceman, Strom and Colossus.\n\"What If?\".\nIn \"What If\" vol. 2 #27, Jean Grey was not the last X-Man standing during the fight with the Imperial Guard and was successfully 'lobotomised', remaining with the X-Men as mansion staff, eventually re-manifesting her powers when a mission to aid the Shi'ar forced the X-Men to fight Galactus so that Jean could drive him away. Although she appeared redeemed from her past, her Phoenix persona secretly manifested itself at night to feed on dead worlds and uninhabited stars until Jean was confronted about her actions, her resulting anger when discovered causing her to lash out and accidentally kill the X-Men, especially Cyclops, her guilt and grief result in her consuming the entire universe as the entire Phoenix was unleashed.\nAnother version of Phoenix remains powerless and happily married to Cyclops until an attack by Mastermind causes her to remember her true origin; she accidentally kills the original Jean Grey. Although Phoenix tries to help the X-Men in secret, she leaves Earth and her husband and child when Destiny tells her that only death and destruction would result if she remains on Earth.\nIn another story, Vulcan destroys seven galaxies, the entire Annihilation Wave, the Shi'ar and Kree Empires before travelling to Earth. Using the Phoenix Force, he restores Krakoa before engaging in battle with Cyclops, Havok, Rachel and Cable. Vulcan appears to be winning until a strange outside force causes Vulcan to lose control of the Phoenix Force. After a brief mental battle between Vulcan and his family, Vulcan accepts his defeat by letting go of the rage and hate inside him as he dies. He is comforted by the strange force who reveals to Gabriel that wielding the ultimate power would not give him what he truly wanted.\nX-Men Forever.\nIn Chris Claremont's \"X-Men Forever\", Jean is in nearly all respects the same character as the mainline Marvel Universe character. Her flirtations with Logan are explored more in-depth in the first few issues of the title, and she confesses shortly after Logan's death that she loved him. She and Scott both recognize their romantic relationship is over, due to the revelations. Claremont has also shown that Jean still possesses the Phoenix Force, and has manifested it twice, once in the first issue to subdue Fabian Cortez after he has apparently killed Logan and Kitty Pryde, and again to attack in retaliation for her killing of Logan. She has, recently, been acknowledged as the field leader of the team during Cyclops' leave of absence. Jean continues to demonstrate signs of the Phoenix Force and wears a new blue and gold X-Men uniform which is cut in a similar style to her old Phoenix costume. After dealing with Logan's loss Jean began a relationship with the Beast but it ended after he sacrificed himself. With Cyclops's return, Jean began to share leadership of the X-Men with him and eventually she would be reunited with the true Storm. In the finale of the series, it is hinted that she and Scott resume their relationship.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16563", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16563", "title": "Jacques Dupuis (Jesuit)", "text": "Jesuit priest and theologian\nJacques Dupuis (5 December 1923 \u2013 28 December 2004) was a Belgian Jesuit priest and theologian. He spent several decades in India and taught at the Pontifical Gregorian University in Rome.\nCareer.\nJacques Dupuis became a Jesuit in 1941. After early religious and academic training in Belgium, he left for India in 1948. A three-year (1948\u20131951) teaching experience at St. Xavier's Collegiate School, Calcutta, made him discover the way Hinduism shaped the personalities of the students entrusted to him. This discovery about the variety of religions was the beginning of a lifelong search: \"does God's self-revelation necessarily pass for all through the person of Jesus Christ?\"\nAfter being ordained priest in Kurseong, India he completed a doctorate at the Gregorian University in Rome on the religious anthropology of Origen of Alexandria. He was assigned to teach Dogmatic Theology at the Jesuit Faculty of Theology of Kurseong (later shifted to Delhi, and renamed 'Vidyajyoti College of Theology').\nDirector of the journal \"Vidyajyoti Journal of Theological Reflection,\" Father Dupuis was also an adviser to the Catholic Bishops' conference of India. Besides numerous articles on theological and inter-religious topics, he published in 1973 (with Josef Neuner) a collection of church documents, \"The Christian Faith\", that went into seven editions over twenty years. Some considered it an invaluable instrument of theological learning for students of Catholicism.\nIn 1984, after 36 years in India, Dupuis was called to teach theology and non-Christian religions at the Gregorian University in Rome. His book \"J\u00e9sus-Christ \u00e0 la rencontre des religions\" (1989) was well-received and promptly translated in Italian, English and Spanish. He was made director of the journal \"Gregorianum\" and appointed consultor at the Pontifical Council for Interreligious Dialogue.\nUnder investigation.\nIn 2001, the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, a department of the Roman Curia, determined that his book \"Toward a Christian Theology of Religious Pluralism\" contained ambiguities that present \"difficulties on important doctrinal points\" with respect to the proper understanding of \"the seeds of truth and goodness that exist in other religions.\" Even a positive reviewer, Gavin D'Costa, noted that in Depuis's argument, \"there is no 'necessity' (Lumen Gentium 14) of the Church as the mediator of salvation.\"\nDupuis was told to clarify his position in relation to that document, but he was never disciplined. Future editions of his book had to include a copy of the Congregation's notification about areas in which it considered his work unclear. A visitor reported in 2003 that \"the ordeal he went through with the C.D.F. had caused havoc to his mental and physical health.\" The notification stated: \"It is consistent with Catholic doctrine to hold that the seeds of truth and goodness that exist in other religions are a certain participation in truths contained in the revelation of or in Jesus Christ. However, it is erroneous to hold that such elements of truth and goodness, or some of them, do not derive ultimately from the source-mediation of Jesus Christ.\"\nSubsequently, however, Dupuis's 'pioneering' work was highly praised on the meaning of other religions in \"God's plan of salvation of mankind.\"\nChristology.\nMany theologians argue for a Christology that is expressly based on the Trinity and an understanding of the interpersonal relationships between Father and Son and between Son and Holy Spirit. In Jacques Dupuis' \"Who Do You Say I Am?\", he argues that, within the one person of Jesus Christ, we can distinguish between his two natures, human and divine, and thus between the operations of his uncreated divine nature and his created finite human nature.\nIn order to properly phrase the relationship between Jesus Christ and the Father, Dupuis utilizes different terms to describe aspects of Christ's divine and human nature. Instead of \"absolute\" and \"definitive\", Dupuis speaks in terms of \"constitutive\" and \"universal\". In this way, Dupuis tries to lead the discussion away from dealing in absolutes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;First, our knowledge of God is not absolute or definitive; it is necessarily limited. Second, the absolute Savior is the Father, who is the ultimate source of the risen Lord and of all reality. Hence, the uniqueness and universality of Christ the Savior are 'constitutive.' As the son of God incarnate, Jesus is the center of history and the key to the entire procession of salvation, and his resurrection confers universal significance on his human existence. In this sense, he is 'constitutive' of universal salvation.\nDupuis emphasizes that Jesus' constitutive uniqueness as universal Savior rests on his personal identity as the Son of God.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16564", "revid": "26300370", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16564", "title": "Jack Brabham", "text": "Australian racing driver and motorsport executive (1926\u20132014)\nSir John Arthur Brabham (2 April 1926 \u2013 19 May 2014) was an Australian racing driver and motorsport executive, who competed in Formula One from to . Brabham won three Formula One World Drivers' Championship titles, which he won in , and , and won 14 Grands Prix across 16 seasons. He co-founded Brabham in 1960, leading the team to two World Constructors' Championship titles, and remains the only driver to have won the World Drivers' Championship in an eponymous car.\nBrabham was a Royal Australian Air Force flight mechanic and ran a small engineering workshop before he started racing midget cars in 1948. His successes with midgets in Australian and New Zealand road racing events led to his going to Britain to further his racing career. There he became part of the Cooper Car Company's racing team, building as well as racing cars. He contributed to the design of the mid-engined cars that Cooper introduced to Formula One and the Indianapolis 500, and won the Formula One world championship in 1959 and 1960. In 1962 he established his own Brabham marque with fellow Australian Ron Tauranac, which in the 1960s became the largest manufacturer of custom racing cars in the world. In the 1966 Formula One season Brabham became the only man to win the Formula One world championship driving one of his own cars. At the time of his death, he was the last surviving World Champion of the 1950s.\nAfter the 1970 Formula One season, Brabham retired to Australia, where he bought a farm and maintained business interests, which included the Engine Developments racing engine manufacturer and several garages.\nEarly life.\nJohn Arthur 'Jack' Brabham was born on 2 April 1926 in Hurstville, New South Wales, then a commuter town outside Sydney. Brabham was involved with cars and mechanics from an early age. At the age of 12, he learned to drive the family car and the trucks of his father's grocery business. Brabham attended technical college, studying metalwork, carpentry, and technical drawing.\nBrabham's early career continued the engineering theme. At the age of 15 he left school to work, combining a job at a local garage with an evening course in mechanical engineering. Brabham soon branched out into his own business selling motorbikes, which he bought and repaired for sale, using his parents' back veranda as his workshop.\nOne month after his 18th birthday on 19 May 1944 Brabham enlisted into the Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF). Although he was keen on becoming a pilot, there was already a surplus of trained aircrew and the Air Force instead put his mechanical skills to use as a flight mechanic, of which there was a wartime shortage. He was based at RAAF Station Williamtown, where he maintained Bristol Beaufighters at No. 5 Operational Training Unit. On his 20th birthday, 2 April 1946, Brabham was discharged from the RAAF with the rank of leading aircraftman. He then started a small service, repair, and machining business in a workshop built by his uncle on a plot of land behind his grandfather's house.\nRacing career.\nAustralia.\nBrabham started racing after an American friend, Johnny Schonberg, persuaded him to watch a midget car race. Midget racing was a category for small open-wheel cars racing on dirt ovals. It was popular in Australia, attracting crowds of up to 40,000. Brabham records that he was not taken with the idea of driving, being convinced that the drivers \"were all lunatics\" but he agreed to build a car with Schonberg.\nAt first Schonberg drove the homemade device, powered by a modified JAP motorcycle engine built by Brabham in his workshop. In 1948, Schonberg's wife persuaded him to stop racing and on his suggestion Brabham took over. He almost immediately found that he had a knack for the sport, winning on his third night's racing. From there he was a regular competitor and winner in Midgets (known as Speedcars in Australia) at tracks such Sydney's Cumberland Speedway, the Sydney Showground, and the Sydney Sports Ground, as well as interstate tracks such as Adelaide's Kilburn and Rowley Park speedways and the Ekka in Brisbane. Brabham has since said that it was \"terrific driver training. You had to have quick reflexes: in effect you lived\u2014or possibly died\u2014on them.\" Due to the time required to prepare the car, the sport also became his living. Brabham won the 1948 Australian Speedcar Championship, the 1949 Australian and South Australian Speedcar championships, and the 1950\u20131951 Australian championship with the car.\nAfter successfully running the midget at some hillclimbing events in 1951, Brabham became interested in road racing. He bought and modified a series of racing cars from the Cooper Car Company, a British constructor, and from 1953 concentrated on this form of racing, in which drivers compete on closed tarmac circuits. He was supported by his father and by the Redex fuel additive company, although his commercially aware approach\u2014including the title \"RedeX Special\" painted on the side of his Cooper-Bristol\u2014did not go down well with the Confederation of Australian Motor Sport (CAMS), which banned the advertisement. Brabham competed in Australia and New Zealand until early 1955, taking \"a long succession of victories\", including the 1953 Queensland Road Racing championship. During this time, he picked up the nickname \"Black Jack\", which has been variously attributed to his dark hair and stubble, to his \"ruthless\" approach on the track, and to his \"propensity for maintaining a shadowy silence\". After the 1954 New Zealand Grand Prix, Brabham was persuaded by Dean Delamont, competitions manager of the Royal Automobile Club in the United Kingdom, to try a season of racing in Europe, then the international centre of road racing.\nEurope.\nCooper.\nUpon arriving in Europe on his own in early 1955, Brabham based himself in the UK, where he bought another Cooper to race in national events. His crowd-pleasing driving style initially betrayed his dirt track origins: as he put it, he took corners \"by using full [steering] lock and lots of throttle\". Visits to the Cooper factory for parts led to a friendship with Charlie and John Cooper, who told the story that after many requests for a drive with the factory team, Brabham was given the keys to the transporter taking the cars to a race. Brabham soon \"seemed to \"merge\" into Cooper Cars\": he was not an employee, but he started working at Cooper daily from the midpoint of the 1955 season building a modified Bobtail mid-engined sports car, powered by a Bristol engine, intended for Formula One, the top category of single seater racing. He made his Grand Prix debut at the age of 29 driving the car at the 1955 British Grand Prix. It had a 2-litre engine, half a litre less than permitted, and ran slowly with a broken clutch before retiring. Later in the year Brabham, again driving the Bobtail, tussled with Stirling Moss for third place in a non-championship Formula One race at Snetterton. Although Moss finished ahead, Brabham saw the race as a turning point, proving that he could compete at this level. He shipped the Bobtail back to Australia, where he used it to win the 1955 Australian Grand Prix before selling it to help fund a permanent move to the UK the following year with his wife Betty and their son Geoff.\nBrabham briefly and unsuccessfully campaigned his own second hand Formula One Maserati 250F during 1956, but his season was saved by drives for Cooper in sports cars and Formula Two, the junior category to Formula One. At that time, almost all racing cars had their engines mounted at the front but Coopers were different, having the engine placed behind the driver, which improved their handling. In 1957, Brabham drove another mid-engined Cooper, again only fitted with a 2-litre engine, at the Monaco Grand Prix. He avoided a large crash at the first corner and was running third towards the end of the race when the fuel pump mount failed. After more than three hours of racing, the exhausted Brabham, who \"hated to be beaten\", pushed the car to the line to finish sixth. The following year, he was Autocar Formula Two champion in a Cooper, while continuing to score minor points-scoring positions with the small-engined Coopers in the World Drivers' Championship and driving for Aston Martin in Sportscars. His schedule necessitated a considerable amount of travel on the roads of Europe. Brabham's driving on public roads was described as \"safe as houses\", unlike many of his contemporaries\u2014on the way back from the 1957 Pescara Grand Prix, passenger Tony Brooks took over driving after Brabham refused to overtake a long line of lorries. In late 1958, Brabham rekindled his interest in flying and began taking lessons. He bought his own plane and on gaining his licence began to make heavy use of it piloting himself, his family, and members of his team around Europe to races.\nIn 1959, Cooper obtained 2.5-litre engines for the first time and Brabham put the extra power to good use by winning his first world championship race at the season-opening Monaco Grand Prix after Jean Behra's Ferrari and Stirling Moss's Cooper failed. More podium places were followed by a win in the British Grand Prix at Aintree after Brabham preserved his tyres to the end of the race, enabling him to finish ahead of Moss who had to pit to replace worn tyres. This gave him a 13-point championship lead with four races to go. At the Portuguese Grand Prix at Monsanto Park, Brabham was chasing race leader Moss when a backmarker moved over on him and launched the Cooper into the air. The airborne car hit a telegraph pole, throwing Brabham onto the track, where he narrowly avoided being hit by one of his teammates but escaped with no serious injury. With two wins each, Brabham, Moss, and Ferrari's Tony Brooks were all capable of winning the championship at the final event of the season, the United States Grand Prix at Sebring. Brabham was among those up until 1\u00a0am the morning before the race working on the Cooper team cars. The next day, after pacing himself behind Moss, who soon retired with a broken gearbox, he led almost to the end of the race before running out of fuel on the last lap. He again pushed the car to the finish line to place fourth, although in the event this was unnecessary as his other title rival, Brooks, finished only third. His championship-winning margin over Brooks was four points. According to Gerald Donaldson, \"some thought [his title] owed more to stealth than skill, an opinion at least partly based on Brabham's low-key presence.\"\nDespite his success with Cooper, Brabham was sure he could do better. He considered buying Cooper in partnership with Roy Salvadori and then in late 1959 he asked his friend Ron Tauranac to come to the UK and work with him, producing upgrade kits for Sunbeam Rapier and Triumph Herald road cars at his car dealership, Jack Brabham Motors, but with the long-term aim of designing racing cars. Brabham continued to drive for Cooper, but on the long flight back from the 1960 season-opening Argentine Grand Prix, he had a heart-to-heart with John Cooper. John's father Charlie and the designer Owen Maddock had been reluctant to update their car, but although a Cooper had won in Argentina, other cars had been faster before they broke down. Brabham helped design the more advanced Cooper T53, including advice from Tauranac. Brabham spun the new car out of the next championship race, the Monaco Grand Prix, but then embarked on a series of five straight victories. He won from the front at the Dutch, French, and Belgian Grands Prix, where title rival Moss was badly injured in a practice accident that put him out for two months. Two other drivers were killed during the race. At the British Grand Prix, Brabham was closing on Graham Hill's BRM before Hill spun off, leaving Brabham the victory. He then came back from eighth place to second at the Portuguese Grand Prix after sliding off on tramlines and won after race leader John Surtees crashed. Brabham's points total was put out of reach when the British teams withdrew from the Italian GP on safety grounds. Mike Lawrence writes that Brabham's expertise in setting up the cars was a significant factor in Cooper's 1960 drivers' and constructors' titles.\nCoventry Climax were late in producing the smaller 1.5-litre engine required for the 1961 season and the Cooper-Climaxes were outclassed by new mid-engined cars from Porsche, Lotus, and championship-winners Ferrari. Brabham scored only three points and finished 11th in the championship. He had a little more success in the non-championship Formula One races, where he ran his own private Coopers and took three victories at Snetterton (26 March), Brussels (9 April), and Aintree (22 April).\nThe same year, Brabham entered the famous Indianapolis 500 oval race for the first time in a modified version of the Formula One Cooper. It had a 2.7-litre Climax engine producing compared to the 4.4-litre, Offenhauser engines used by the front-engined roadsters driven by all the other entrants. Jack qualified a respectable 17th at 145.144 mp/h (pole winner Eddie Sachs qualified at 147.481 mp/h), and while the front-engined roadsters were much faster on the long front and back straights, the rear-engined Cooper's superior handling through the turns and the shorter north and south sections kept the reigning World Champion competitive. Brabham ran as high as third before finishing ninth, completing all 200 laps. Although most of the doubters in the American Indycar scene claimed that rear-engine cars were for drivers who like to be pushed around, as Brabham put it, it \"triggered the rear-engined revolution at Indy\" and within five years most of the cars that raced at Indianapolis would be rear-engined.\nBrabham.\nBrabham and Tauranac set up a company called Motor Racing Developments (MRD), which produced customer racing cars, while Brabham himself continued to race for Cooper. MRD produced cars for Formula Junior, with the first one appearing in mid-1961. Brabham left Cooper in 1962 to drive for his own team: the Brabham Racing Organisation, using cars built by Motor Racing Developments. A newly introduced engine limit in Formula One of 1500\u00a0cc did not suit Brabham and he did not win a single race with a 1500\u00a0cc car. His team suffered poor reliability during this period and motorsport authors Mike Lawrence and David Hodges have said that Brabham's reluctance to spend money may have cost the team results, a view echoed by Tauranac. During the 1965 season, Brabham started to consider retirement to manage his team. Dan Gurney, who had taken the team's first championship race win the previous year, took the lead driver role while Brabham gave up his car to several other drivers towards the end of the season. At the end of the season, Gurney announced his intention to leave and set up his own team and Brabham decided to carry on.\nIn 1966, a new 3-litre formula was created for Formula One. The new engines under development by other suppliers all had at least 12 cylinders and proved difficult to develop, being heavy and unreliable. Brabham took a different approach to the problem of obtaining a suitable engine: he persuaded Australian engineering company Repco to develop a new 3-litre eight-cylinder engine for him. Repco had experience in importing, servicing and producing Climax FPF F1 engines. Brabham had identified a suitable engine block in Oldsmobile's aluminium alloy F-85 215ci engine and persuaded the company that an engine could be designed around the block. Brabham and Repco were aware that the engine would not compete in terms of outright power, but felt that a lightweight, reliable engine could achieve good championship results while other teams were still making their new designs reliable.\nThe combination of the Repco-Brabham V8 engine, designed by Phil Irving, and the Brabham BT19 chassis designed by Tauranac worked. At the French Grand Prix at Reims-Gueux, Jack Brabham took his first Formula One world championship win since 1960 and became the first man to win such a race in a car of his own construction. Only his two former teammates, Bruce McLaren and Dan Gurney, have since matched this achievement. It was the first in a run of four straight wins for the Australian veteran. The 40-year-old Brabham was annoyed by press stories about his age and, in a highly uncharacteristic stunt, at the Dutch Grand Prix he hobbled to his car on the starting grid before the race wearing a long false beard and leaning on a cane before going on to win the race. Brabham confirmed his third championship at the Italian Grand Prix and became the only driver to win the Formula One World Championship in a car that carried his own name.\nThe 1966 season saw the fruition of Brabham's relationship with Japanese engine manufacturer Honda in Formula Two. After a generally unsuccessful 1965 season, Honda completely revised their 1-litre engine for 1966. While there was no European Formula Two championship that year, Brabham won ten of the year's 16 European Formula Two races in his Brabham-Honda, and won the \"Troph\u00e9es de France\", a championship consisting of six of the French Formula Two races.\nIn 1967, the Formula One title went to Brabham's teammate Denny Hulme. Hulme had better reliability through the year, possibly due to Brabham's desire to try new parts first.\nDespite taking pole position in the first two rounds, mechanical problems halted his chances of victory. He spun numerous times in South Africa, and at Monaco, his engine blew up at the start, and the win went to his teammate Denny Hulme. At the Dutch Grand Prix, he scored his first podium of the season, with second place, behind Scotsman Jim Clark. He retired in the Belgian Grand Prix with another blown engine. He fixed this by winning the French Grand Prix at the Bugatti Circuit in Le Mans. He came fourth at the British Grand Prix, behind Chris Amon, his teammate Hulme, and Clark. At the German Grand Prix, he had a huge battle with Amon, and Brabham eventually finished ahead of the New Zealander, by only half a second. Hulme was the winner. At the first ever Canadian Grand Prix at Mosport Park, he took a huge win, ahead of Hulme, in cold and rainy conditions. At the Italian Grand Prix at Monza, Brabham had to finish second, only a few car lengths behind John Surtees, who took his last GP win. Hulme retired from the race, cutting the gap to 3 points between the two, as the circus headed for the United States, at Watkins Glen for the United States Grand Prix. Brabham outqualified his teammate, and finished fifth in the race, and with Hulme on the podium, this meant the championship chances were looking slim for Black Jack, as the circus went to Mexico for the championship deciding and final race of the season. Once again, he outqualified his teammate, and needed to win, with Hulme fifth or lower. But Jim Clark was simply too fast during the whole weekend, and dominated the race from pole to win, with Brabham finishing over 1 minute and 25 seconds behind. Hulme finished third, and so the New Zealander won the championship, while Brabham settled for second place. The team secured the Constructors' Championship, with 67 total points scored, and 23 points ahead of Lotus which scored a total of 44 points.\nBrabham raced alongside his teammate Jochen Rindt during the 1968 season. It wasn't a good season for him. He retired from the first seven races, before scoring two points for fifth place at the German Grand Prix. He retired from the remaining four races. At the end of the year, he fulfilled a desire to fly from Britain to Australia in a small twin-engined Beechcraft Queen Air. Partway through the 1969 season, Brabham suffered serious injuries to his foot in a testing accident. He returned to racing before the end of the year, but promised his wife that he would retire after the season finished and sold his share of the team to Tauranac.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"I felt very sad, [...] I didn't feel I was giving up racing because I couldn't do the job. I felt I was just as competitive then as at any other time, and I really should have won the championship in 1970. [...] I'd have been a lot better off if I'd stayed, but sometimes family pressures don't allow you to make the decisions you'd like to.\"\n\"The World according to Jack\", Motor Sport (May 1999) p.36\nFinding no top drivers available despite coming close to bringing Rindt back to the team, Brabham decided to race for one more year. He began auspiciously, winning the first race of the season, the South African Grand Prix, and then led the third race, the Monaco Grand Prix until the very last turn of the last lap. Brabham was about to hold off the onrushing Rindt (the eventual 1970 F1 champion) when his front wheels locked in a skid on the sharp right turn only yards from the finish and he ended up second. While leading at the British Grand Prix at Brands Hatch, he ran out of fuel at Clearways and Rindt passed him to take the win while Brabham coasted to the finish in second place. After the 13th and final race of the season, the Mexican Grand Prix, Brabham did retire. He had tied Jackie Stewart for fifth in the points standings in the season he drove at the age of 44. Brabham also drove for the works Matra team during the 1970 World Sportscar Championship season and won the final race of the season and his final top level race at the Paris 1000\u00a0km in October that year. He then made a complete break from racing and returned to Australia, to the relief of his wife who had been \"scared stiff\" each time he drove.\nRetirement.\nFollowing his retirement, Brabham and his family moved to a farm between Sydney and Melbourne. Brabham says that he \"never really wanted\" the move, but his wife Betty hoped their sons could grow up away from motorsport. As well as running the new venture, he continued his interest in businesses in the UK and Australia, including a small aviation company and garages and car dealerships. He also set up Engine Developments Ltd. in 1971 with John Judd, who had worked for Brabham on the Repco engine project in the mid 1960s. The company builds engines for racing applications. Brabham was also a shareholder in Jack Brabham Engines Pty Ltd., an Australian company marketing Jack Brabham memorabilia.\nThe Brabham team continued in Formula One, winning two further Drivers' Championships in the early 1980s under Bernie Ecclestone's ownership. Although the original organisation went into administration in 1992, the name was attached to a German company selling cars and accessories in 2008, and an unsuccessful attempt to set up a new Formula One team the following year. On both occasions the Brabham family, which was unconnected to the ventures, announced its intention to take legal advice. In September 2014, Brabham's youngest son David announced Project Brabham, a new team planning to use a crowdsourcing business model to enter the 2015 FIA World Endurance Championship in the LMP2 category.\nDuring his own retirement from international motorsport, Brabham continued to be semi-involved as both a driver in Australia, mostly racing touring cars in the famed Bathurst 1000 race, and supporting the racing ambitions of his 3 sons. His last ever international race came in December 1984 at the age of 58 in the last round of the 1984 World Sportscar Championship held at Sandown Park in Melbourne, the 1984 Sandown 1000. Jack drove as a guest driver in a Rothmans sponsored Porsche 956 co-driving with 1984 British Formula 3 champion and Scottish Aristocrat, Johnny Dumfries. The pair, driving a car with an in-car camera showing Jack up close and personal at the wheel for the first time, were not classified as finishers after only completing 108 laps. The race was Australia's first ever FISA World Championship road racing event, preceding the 1985 Australian Grand Prix in Adelaide by 11 months.\nDespite his three titles, and although John Cooper considered him \"the greatest\", Formula One journalist Adam Cooper wrote in 1999 that Brabham is never listed among the Top 10 of all time, noting that \"Stirling Moss and Jim Clark dominated the headlines when Jack was racing, and they still do\". Brabham was the first post-war racing driver to be knighted when he received the honour in 1978 for services to motorsport. He has received several other honours and in 2011, the suburb of Brabham in Perth, Western Australia, was named after him. A race circuit and an automotive training school were also named after him in the early 2010s.\nIn retirement, Brabham continued to be involved in motorsport events, appearing at contemporary and historic motorsport events around the world where he often drove his former Cooper and Brabham cars until the early 2000s. In 1999, after competing at the Goodwood Revival at the age of 73 he commented that driving stopped him getting old. Despite a large accident at the 2000 Revival, the first racing accident to put him in hospital overnight, he continued to drive until at least 2004. By the late 2000s, ill-health was preventing him from driving in competition. In addition to the deafness caused by years of motor racing without adequate ear protection, his eyesight was reduced due to macular degeneration and he had kidney disease for which by 2009 he was receiving dialysis three times a week. Nonetheless, that year he attended a celebration of the 50th anniversary of his first world championship at the Phillip Island Classic festival of motorsport, and in 2010 flew to Bahrain with most of the other Formula One world Drivers' Champions for a celebration of 60 years of the Formula One world championship. Brabham was the oldest surviving F1 champion.\nBrabham and Betty had three sons together: Geoff, Gary, and David. All three became involved in motorsport, with support from Brabham in their early years. Between them, they have won sportscar and single-seater races and championships. Geoff was an Indycar and sportscar racer who won five North American sportscar championships as well as the 24 Hours of Le Mans, while David competed in Formula One for the Brabham team and has also won the Le Mans race as well as three Japanese and North American sportscar titles. Gary also drove briefly in Formula One, although his F1 career consisted of two DNPQ's for the Life team. Brabham and Betty divorced in 1994 after 43 years. Brabham married his second wife, Margaret in 1995 and they lived on the Gold Coast, Queensland. Brabham's grandson Matthew (son of Geoff) graduated from karts in 2010 and won two ladders of the Road to Indy, eventually racing in the 2016 Indianapolis 500 and winning three Stadium Super Trucks championships. Another grandson, Sam, the son of David and Lisa, whose brother Mike also was an F1 driver, stepped up to car racing from karts in 2013 when he made his debut in the British Formula Ford Championship. The Brabham family have been involved in world-class motorsport for over 60 years.\nDeath.\nBrabham made his last public appearance on 18 May 2014, appearing with one of the cars he built. He died at his home on the Gold Coast on 19 May 2014, aged 88, following a lengthy battle with liver disease. He was eating breakfast with his wife, Margaret, when he died. In a statement on the family's website, Brabham's son David confirmed his father's death.\n\"It's a very sad day for all of us\", David Brabham stated. \"My father passed away peacefully at home at the age of 88 this morning. He lived an incredible life, achieving more than anyone would ever dream of and he will continue to live on through the astounding legacy he leaves behind.\"\nBrabham was the last surviving world champion from the 1950s era.\nAt his request, his ashes were scattered at the Tamborine Rainforest Skywalk in the Gold Coast hinterland on 4 September 2014. Brabham was a frequent visitor of the skywalk.\nThe suburb of Brabham, Western Australia is named after him and features an estate development, also called Brabham, located on the former site of the Caversham Motor Raceway.\n\"* Indicates shared drive with Mike MacDowel\"\n\"\u2020 Indicates Formula 2 car\"\nRacing record.\nComplete British Saloon Car Championship results.\n\u2020 Events with 2 races staged for the different classes.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "16565", "revid": "42964511", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16565", "title": "Jones calculus", "text": "System for describing optical polarization\nIn optics, polarized light can be described using the Jones calculus, invented by R. C. Jones in 1941. Polarized light is represented by a Jones vector, and linear optical elements are represented by \"Jones matrices\". When light crosses an optical element the resulting polarization of the emerging light is found by taking the product of the Jones matrix of the optical element and the Jones vector of the incident light. Note that Jones calculus is only applicable to light that is already fully polarized. Light which is randomly polarized, partially polarized, or incoherent must be treated using Mueller calculus.\nJones vector.\nThe Jones vector describes the polarization of light in free space or another homogeneous isotropic non-attenuating medium, where the light can be properly described as transverse waves. Suppose that a monochromatic plane wave of light is travelling in the positive \"z\"-direction, with angular frequency \"\u03c9\" and wave vector k = (0,0,\"k\"), where the wavenumber \"k\" = \"\u03c9\"/\"c\". Then the electric and magnetic fields E and H are orthogonal to k at each point; they both lie in the plane \"transverse\" to the direction of motion. Furthermore, H is determined from E by 90-degree rotation and a fixed multiplier depending on the wave impedance of the medium. So the polarization of the light can be determined by studying E. The complex amplitude of E is written: \nformula_1\nNote that the physical E field is the real part of this vector; the complex multiplier serves up the phase information. Here formula_2 is the imaginary unit with formula_3.\nThe Jones vector is\nformula_4\nThus, the Jones vector represents the amplitude and phase of the electric field in the \"x\" and \"y\" directions.\nThe sum of the squares of the absolute values of the two components of Jones vectors is proportional to the intensity of light. It is common to normalize it to 1 at the starting point of calculation for simplification. It is also common to constrain the first component of the Jones vectors to be a real number. This discards the overall phase information that would be needed for calculation of interference with other beams.\nNote that all Jones vectors and matrices in this article employ the convention that the phase of the light wave is given by formula_5, a convention used by Eugene Hecht. Under this convention, increase in formula_6 (or formula_7) indicates retardation (delay) in phase, while decrease indicates advance in phase. For example, a Jones vectors component of formula_8 (formula_9) indicates retardation by formula_10 (or 90 degrees) compared to 1 (formula_11). Collett uses the opposite definition for the phase (formula_12). Also, Collet and Jones follow different conventions for the definitions of handedness of circular polarization. Jones' convention is called: \"From the point of view of the receiver\", while Collett's convention is called: \"From the point of view of the source.\" The reader should be wary of the choice of convention when consulting references on the Jones calculus.\nThe following table gives the 6 common examples of normalized Jones vectors.\nA general vector that points to any place on the surface is written as a ket formula_13. When employing the Poincar\u00e9 sphere (also known as the Bloch sphere), the basis kets (formula_14 and formula_15) must be assigned to opposing (antipodal) pairs of the kets listed above. For example, one might assign formula_14 = formula_17 and formula_15 = formula_19. These assignments are arbitrary. Opposing pairs are\nThe polarization of any point not equal to formula_24 or formula_25 and not on the circle that passes through formula_28 is known as elliptical polarization.\nJones matrices.\nJones calculus is a matrix calculus developed in 1941 by Henry Hurwitz Jr. and R. Clark Jones and published in the \"Journal of the Optical Society of America\".\nThe Jones matrices are operators that act on the Jones vectors defined above. These matrices are implemented by various optical elements such as lenses, beam splitters, mirrors, etc. Each matrix represents projection onto a one-dimensional complex subspace of the Jones vectors. The following table gives examples of Jones matrices for polarizers:\nPhase retarders.\nA phase retarder is an optical element that produces a phase difference between two orthogonal polarization components of a monochromatic polarized beam of light. Mathematically, using kets to represent Jones vectors, this means that the action of a phase retarder is to transform light with polarization \nformula_29 \nto \nformula_30 \nwhere formula_31 are orthogonal polarization components (i.e. formula_32) that are determined by the physical nature of the phase retarder. In general, the orthogonal components could be any two basis vectors. For example, the action of the circular phase retarder is such that\nformula_33\nHowever, linear phase retarders, for which formula_31 are linear polarizations, are more commonly encountered in discussion and in practice. In fact, sometimes the term \"phase retarder\" is used to refer specifically to linear phase retarders.\nLinear phase retarders are usually made out of birefringent uniaxial crystals such as calcite, MgF2 or quartz. Plates made of these materials for this purpose are referred to as waveplates. Uniaxial crystals have one crystal axis that is different from the other two crystal axes (i.e., \"ni\" \u2260 \"nj\" = \"nk\"). This unique axis is called the extraordinary axis and is also referred to as the optic axis. An optic axis can be the fast or the slow axis for the crystal depending on the crystal at hand. Light travels with a higher phase velocity along an axis that has the smallest refractive index and this axis is called the fast axis. Similarly, an axis which has the largest refractive index is called a slow axis since the phase velocity of light is the lowest along this axis. \"Negative\" uniaxial crystals (e.g., calcite CaCO3, sapphire Al2O3) have \"ne\" &lt; \"no\" so for these crystals, the extraordinary axis (optic axis) is the fast axis, whereas for \"positive\" uniaxial crystals (e.g., quartz SiO2, magnesium fluoride MgF2, rutile TiO2), \"ne\" &gt; \"no\" and thus the extraordinary axis (optic axis) is the slow axis. Other commercially available linear phase retarders exist and are used in more specialized applications. The Fresnel rhombs is one such alternative.\nAny linear phase retarder with its fast axis defined as the x- or y-axis has zero off-diagonal terms and thus can be conveniently expressed as \nformula_35\nwhere formula_6 and formula_7 are the phase offsets of the electric fields in formula_38 and formula_39 directions respectively. In the phase convention formula_5, define the relative phase between the two waves as formula_41. Then a positive formula_42 (i.e. formula_7 &gt; formula_6) means that formula_45 doesn't attain the same value as formula_46 until a later time, i.e. formula_46 leads formula_45. Similarly, if formula_49, then formula_45 leads formula_46.\nFor example, if the fast axis of a quarter waveplate is horizontal, then the phase velocity along the horizontal direction is ahead of the vertical direction i.e., formula_46 leads formula_45. Thus, formula_54 which for a quarter waveplate yields formula_55.\nIn the opposite convention formula_12, define the relative phase as formula_57. Then formula_58 means that formula_45 doesn't attain the same value as formula_46 until a later time, i.e. formula_61 leads formula_45.\nThe Jones matrix for an arbitrary birefringent material is the most general form of a polarization transformation in the Jones calculus; it can represent any polarization transformation. To see this, one can show\nformula_63\nThe above matrix is a general parametrization for the elements of SU(2), using the convention \nformula_64\nwhere the overline denotes complex conjugation.\nFinally, recognizing that the set of unitary transformations on formula_65 can be expressed as\nformula_66\nit becomes clear that the Jones matrix for an arbitrary birefringent material represents any unitary transformation, up to a phase factor formula_67. Therefore, for appropriate choice of formula_68, formula_69, and formula_70, a transformation between any two Jones vectors can be found, up to a phase factor formula_67. However, in the Jones calculus, such phase factors do not change the represented polarization of a Jones vector, so are either considered arbitrary or imposed ad hoc to conform to a set convention.\nThe special expressions for the phase retarders can be obtained by taking suitable parameter values in the general expression for a birefringent material. In the general expression:\nNote that for linear retarders, formula_70 = 0 and for circular retarders, formula_70 = \u00b1 formula_77/2, formula_69 = formula_77/4. In general for elliptical retarders, formula_70 takes on values between - formula_77/2 and formula_77/2.\nAxially rotated elements.\nAssume an optical element has its optic axis perpendicular to the surface vector for the plane of incidence and is rotated about this surface vector by angle \"\u03b8/2\" (i.e., the principal plane through which the optic axis passes, makes angle \"\u03b8/2\" with respect to the plane of polarization of the electric field of the incident TE wave). Recall that a half-wave plate rotates polarization as \"twice\" the angle between incident polarization and optic axis (principal plane). Therefore, the Jones matrix for the rotated polarization state, M(\"\u03b8\"), is \nformula_83\n where formula_84\nThis agrees with the expression for a half-wave plate in the table above. These rotations are identical to beam unitary splitter transformation in optical physics given by\nformula_85\nwhere the primed and unprimed coefficients represent beams incident from opposite sides of the beam splitter. The reflected and transmitted components acquire a phase \"\u03b8r\" and \"\u03b8t\", respectively. The requirements for a valid representation of the element are \nformula_86\nand\nformula_87\nBoth of these representations are unitary matrices fitting these requirements; and as such, are both valid.\nArbitrarily rotated elements.\nFinding the Jones matrix, J(\"\u03b1\", \"\u03b2\", \"\u03b3\"), for an arbitrary rotation involves a three-dimensional rotation matrix. In the following notation \"\u03b1\", \"\u03b2\" and \"\u03b3\" are the yaw, pitch, and roll angles (rotation about the z-, y-, and x-axes, with x being the direction of propagation), respectively. The full combination of the 3-dimensional rotation matrices is the following:\nformula_88\nUsing the above, for any base Jones matrix J, you can find the rotated state J(\"\u03b1\", \"\u03b2\", \"\u03b3\") using:\nformula_89\nThe simplest case, where the Jones matrix is for an ideal linear horizontal polarizer, reduces then to:\nformula_90\nwhere ci and si represent the cosine or sine of a given angle \"i\", respectively.\nSee Russell A. Chipman and Garam Yun for further work done based on this.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16567", "revid": "25307677", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16567", "title": "Josip Broz Tito", "text": "Leader of Yugoslavia from 1945 to 1980\nJosip Broz (7 May 1892 \u2013 4 May 1980), commonly known as Tito ( ), was a Yugoslav communist revolutionary and politician. During World War II, he led the Yugoslav Partisans, often regarded as the most effective resistance movement in German-occupied Europe. Tito led Yugoslavia as prime minister from 1943 to 1963, and as president from 1953 until his death in 1980. The political ideology and policies promulgated by Tito are known as Titoism.\nTito was born to a Croat father and a Slovene mother in Kumrovec in present-day Croatia, then part of Austria-Hungary. Drafted into military service, he distinguished himself, becoming the youngest sergeant major in the Austro-Hungarian Army of that time. After being seriously wounded and captured by the Russians during World War I, he was sent to a work camp in the Ural Mountains. Tito participated in some events of the Russian Revolution in 1917 and the subsequent Russian Civil War. Upon his return to the Balkans in 1920, he entered the newly established Kingdom of Yugoslavia, where he joined the Communist Party of Yugoslavia. Having assumed de facto control over the party by 1937, Tito was formally elected its general secretary in 1939 and later its president, the title he held until his death. During World War II, after the Nazi invasion of the area, he led the Yugoslav guerrilla movement, the Partisans (1941\u20131945). By the end of the war, the Partisans, with the Allies' backing since late 1943, took power in Yugoslavia.\nAfter the war, Tito served as the prime minister (1944\u20131963), president (1953\u20131980; from 1974 president for life), and marshal of Yugoslavia, the highest rank of the Yugoslav People's Army (JNA). In 1945, under his leadership, Yugoslavia became a communist state, which was eventually renamed the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Despite being one of the founders of the Cominform, his party became the first member of the organisation\u2014and he the only leader during Joseph Stalin\u2019s lifetime\u2014to defy Soviet hegemony in the Eastern Bloc, resulting in Yugoslavia's expulsion from the organisation in 1948 in what became known as the Tito\u2013Stalin split. In the following years, alongside other political leaders and Marxist theorists such as Edvard Kardelj and Milovan \u0110ilas, he initiated the idiosyncratic model of socialist self-management in which firms were managed by workers' councils and all workers were entitled to workplace democracy and equal share of profits. Tito wavered between supporting a centralised or more decentralised federation and ended up favouring the latter to keep ethnic tensions under control; thus, the constitution was gradually developed to delegate as much power as possible to each republic in keeping with the Marxist theory of withering away of the state. He envisaged the SFR of Yugoslavia as a \"federal republic of equal nations and nationalities, freely united on the principle of brotherhood and unity in achieving specific and common interest.\" A very powerful cult of personality arose around him, which the League of Communists of Yugoslavia maintained even after his death. After Tito's death, Yugoslavia's leadership was transformed into an annually rotating presidency to give representation to all of its nationalities and prevent the emergence of an authoritarian leader. Twelve years later, as communism collapsed in Eastern Europe and ethnic tensions escalated, Yugoslavia dissolved and descended into a series of interethnic wars.\nHistorians critical of Tito view his presidency as authoritarian and see him as a dictator, while others characterise him as a benevolent dictator. He was a popular public figure both in Yugoslavia and abroad, and remains such in the former countries of Yugoslavia. Tito was viewed as a unifying symbol, with his internal policies maintaining the peaceful coexistence of the nations of the Yugoslav federation. He gained further international attention as a co-founder of the Non-Aligned Movement, alongside Jawaharlal Nehru of India, Gamal Abdel Nasser of Egypt, Kwame Nkrumah of Ghana, and Sukarno of Indonesia. With a highly favourable reputation abroad in both Cold War blocs, he received a total of 98 foreign decorations, including the Legion of Honour and the Order of the Bath.\nEarly life.\nPre-World War I.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nJosip Broz was born on 7 May 1892 in Kumrovec, a village in the northern Croatian region of Zagorje. At the time it was part of the Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia within the Austro-Hungarian Empire. He was the seventh or eighth child of Franjo Broz and Marija n\u00e9e Javer\u0161ek. His parents had already had a number of children die in early infancy. Broz was christened and raised as a Roman Catholic. His father, Franjo, was a Croat whose family had lived in the village for three centuries, while his mother, Marija, was a Slovene from the village of Podsreda. Franjo Broz had inherited a estate and a good house, but he was unable to make a success of farming. Josip spent a significant proportion of his pre-school years living with his maternal grandparents at Podsreda, where he became a favourite of his grandfather Martin Javer\u0161ek. By the time he returned to Kumrovec to begin school, he spoke Slovene better than Croatian, and had learned to play the piano. Despite his mixed parentage, Broz identified as a Croat like his father and neighbours.\nIn July 1900, at age eight, Broz entered primary school at Kumrovec. He completed four years of school, failing 2nd grade and graduating in 1905. As a result of his limited schooling, throughout his life, Tito was poor at spelling. After leaving school, he initially worked for a maternal uncle and then on his parents' family farm. In 1907, his father wanted him to emigrate to the United States but could not raise the money for the voyage.\nInstead, aged 15 years, Broz left Kumrovec and travelled about south to Sisak, where his cousin Jurica Broz was doing army service. Jurica helped him get a job in a restaurant, but Broz soon got tired of that work. He approached a Czech locksmith, Nikola Karas, for a three-year apprenticeship, which included training, food, and room and board. As his father could not afford to pay for his work clothing, Broz paid for it himself. Soon after, his younger brother Stjepan also became apprenticed to Karas.\nDuring his apprenticeship, Broz was encouraged to mark May Day in 1909, and he read and sold \"Slobodna Re\u010d\" (lit.\u2009'Free Word'), a socialist newspaper. After completing his apprenticeship in September 1910, Broz used his contacts to gain employment in Zagreb. At age 18, he joined the Metal Workers' Union and participated in his first labour protest. He also joined the Social Democratic Party of Croatia and Slavonia.\nHe returned home in December 1910. In early 1911, he began a series of moves in search of work, first in Ljubljana, then Trieste, Kumrovec and Zagreb, where he worked repairing bicycles. He joined his first strike action on May Day 1911. After a brief period of work in Ljubljana, between May 1911 and May 1912, he worked in a factory in Kamnik in the Kamnik\u2013Savinja Alps. After it closed, he was offered redeployment to \u010cenkov in Bohemia. On arriving at his new workplace, he discovered that the employer was trying to bring in cheaper labour to replace the local Czech workers, and he and others joined successful strike action to force the employer to back down.\nDriven by curiosity, Broz moved to Plze\u0148, where he was briefly employed at the \u0160koda Works. He next travelled to Munich in Bavaria. He also worked at the Benz car factory in Mannheim and visited the Ruhr industrial region. By October 1912, he had reached Vienna. He stayed with his older brother Martin and his family and worked at the Griedl Works before getting a job at Wiener Neustadt. There he worked for Austro-Daimler and was often asked to drive and test the cars. During this time, he spent considerable time fencing and dancing, and during his training and early work life, he also learned German and passable Czech.\nWorld War I.\nIn May 1913, Broz was conscripted into the Austro-Hungarian Army for his compulsory two years of service. He successfully requested to serve with the 25th Croatian Home Guard Regiment garrisoned in Zagreb. After learning to ski during the winter of 1913 and 1914, Broz was sent to a school for non-commissioned officers (NCO) in Budapest, after which he was promoted to sergeant major. At age 22, he was the youngest of that rank in his regiment. At least one source states that he was the youngest sergeant major in the Austro-Hungarian Army. After winning the regimental fencing competition, Broz came in second in the army fencing championships in Budapest in May 1914.\nSoon after the outbreak of World War I in 1914, the 25th Croatian Home Guard Regiment marched toward the Serbian border. Broz was arrested for sedition and imprisoned in the Petrovaradin fortress in present-day Novi Sad. He later gave conflicting accounts of this arrest, telling one biographer that he had threatened to desert to the Russian side but also claiming that the whole matter arose from a clerical error. A third version was that he had been overheard saying that he hoped the Austro-Hungarian Empire would be defeated. After his acquittal and release, his regiment served briefly on the Serbian Front before being deployed to the Eastern Front in Galicia in early 1915 to fight against Russia. In his account of his military service, Broz did not mention that he participated in the failed Austrian invasion of Serbia, instead giving the misleading impression that he fought only in Galicia, as it would have offended Serbian opinion to know that he fought in 1914 for the Habsburgs against them. On one occasion, the scout platoon he commanded went behind the enemy lines and captured 80 Russian soldiers, bringing them back to their own lines alive. In 1980 it was discovered that Broz had been recommended for an award for gallantry and initiative in reconnaissance and capturing prisoners. Tito's biographer Richard West wrote that Tito actually downplayed his military record as the Austrian Army records showed that he was a brave soldier, which contradicted his later claim to have opposed the Habsburg monarchy and his self-portrait of himself as an unwilling conscript fighting in a war he opposed. Broz's fellow soldiers regarded him as \"kaisertreu\" (\"true to the Emperor\").\nOn 25 March 1915, Broz was wounded in the back by a Circassian cavalryman's lance and captured during a Russian attack near Bukovina. In his account of his capture, Broz wrote: \"suddenly the right flank yielded and through the gap poured cavalry of the Circassians, from Asiatic Russia. Before we knew it they were thundering through our positions, leaping from their horses and throwing themselves into our trenches with lances lowered. One of them rammed his two-yard, iron-tipped, double-pronged lance into my back just below the left arm. I fainted. Then, as I learned, the Circassians began to butcher the wounded, even slashing them with their knives. Fortunately, Russian infantry reached the positions and put an end to the orgy\". Now a prisoner of war (POW), Broz was transported east to a hospital established in an old monastery in the town of Sviyazhsk on the Volga river near Kazan. During his 13 months in hospital, he had bouts of pneumonia and typhus, and learned Russian with the help of two schoolgirls who brought him Russian classics by such authors as Tolstoy and Turgenev.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAfter recuperating, in mid-1916, Broz was transferred to the Ardatov POW camp in the Samara Governorate, where he used his skills to maintain the nearby village grain mill. At the end of the year, he was transferred to the Kungur POW camp near Perm where the POWs were used as labour to maintain the newly completed Trans-Siberian Railway. Broz was appointed to be in charge of all the POWs in the camp. During this time, he became aware that camp staff were stealing the Red Cross parcels sent to the POWs. When he complained, he was beaten and imprisoned. During the February Revolution, a crowd broke into the prison and returned Broz to the POW camp. A Bolshevik he had met while working on the railway told Broz that his son was working in engineering works in Petrograd, so, in June 1917, Broz walked out of the unguarded POW camp and hid aboard a goods train bound for that city, where he stayed with his friend's son. The journalist Richard West has suggested that because Broz chose to remain in an unguarded POW camp rather than volunteer to serve with the Yugoslav legions of the Serbian Army, he was still loyal to the Austro-Hungarian Empire, undermining his later claim that he and other Croat POWs were excited by the prospect of revolution and looked forward to the overthrow of the empire that ruled them.\nLess than a month after Broz arrived in Petrograd, the July Days demonstrations broke out, and Broz joined in, coming under fire from government troops. In the aftermath, he tried to flee to Finland in order to make his way to the United States but was stopped at the border. He was arrested along with other suspected Bolsheviks during the subsequent crackdown by the Russian Provisional Government led by Alexander Kerensky. He was imprisoned in the Peter and Paul Fortress for three weeks, during which he claimed to be an innocent citizen of Perm. When he finally admitted to being an escaped POW, he was to be returned by train to Kungur, but escaped at Yekaterinburg, then caught another train that reached Omsk in Siberia on 8 November after a journey. At one point, police searched the train looking for an escaped POW, but were deceived by Broz's fluent Russian.\nIn Omsk, local Bolsheviks stopped the train and told Broz that Vladimir Lenin had seized control of Petrograd. They recruited him into an International Red Guard that guarded the Trans-Siberian Railway during the winter of 1917 and 1918. In May 1918, the anti-Bolshevik Czechoslovak Legion wrested control of parts of Siberia from Bolshevik forces, the Provisional Siberian Government established itself in Omsk, and Broz and his comrades went into hiding. At this time, Broz met a 14-year-old local girl, Pelagija \"Polka\" Belousova, who hid him and then helped him escape to a Kazakh village from Omsk. Broz again worked maintaining the local mill until November 1919, when the Red Army recaptured Omsk from White forces loyal to the Provisional All-Russian Government of Alexander Kolchak. He moved back to Omsk and married Belousova in January 1920. At the time of their marriage, Broz was 27 years old and Pelagia Belousova was 14. They divorced in the 1930s in Moscow. Broz later wrote that during his time in Russia, he heard much talk of Lenin, a little of Trotsky, and \"as for Stalin, during the time I stayed in Russia, I never once heard his name\". Tito joined the Communist Party in 1920 in Omsk. In the autumn of 1920, he and his pregnant wife returned to his homeland, by train to Narva, by ship to Stettin, then by train to Vienna, where they arrived on 20 September. In early October, Broz returned to Kumrovec in what was then the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes to find that his mother had died and his father had moved to Jastrebarsko, near Zagreb. Sources differ over whether Broz joined the Communist Party of the Soviet Union while in Russia, but he said that the first time he joined the Communist Party of Yugoslavia (CPY) was in Zagreb after he returned to his homeland.\nInterwar communist activity.\nCommunist agitator.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUpon his return home, Broz was unable to gain employment as a metalworker in Kumrovec, so he and his wife moved briefly to Zagreb, where he worked as a waiter and took part in a waiters' strike. He also joined the CPY. The CPY's influence on the political life of Yugoslavia was growing rapidly. In the 1920 elections, it won 59 seats and became the third-strongest party. In light of difficult economic and social circumstances, the regime viewed the CPY as the main threat to the system of government. On 30 December, the government issued a Proclamation () outlawing communist activities, which included bans on propaganda, assembly halls, stripping of civil service for servants and scholarships for students found to be communist. Its author, Milorad Dra\u0161kovi\u0107, the Yugoslav Minister of the Interior, was assassinated by a young communist, Alija Alijagi\u0107, on 2 August 1921. The CPY was then declared illegal under the Yugoslav State Security Act of 1921, and the regime proceeded to prosecute party members and sympathisers as political prisoners.\nDue to his overt communist links, Broz was fired from his employment. He and his wife then moved to the village of Veliko Trojstvo where he worked as a mill mechanic. After the arrest of the CPY leadership in January 1922, Stevo Sabi\u0107 took over control of its operations. Sabi\u0107 contacted Broz, who agreed to work illegally for the party, distributing leaflets and agitating among factory workers. In the contest of ideas between those that wanted to pursue moderate policies and those that advocated violent revolution, Broz sided with the latter. In 1924, Broz was elected to the CPY district committee, but after he gave a speech at a comrade's Catholic funeral, he was arrested when the priest complained. Paraded through the streets in chains, he was held for eight days and was eventually charged with creating a public disturbance. With the help of a Serbian Orthodox prosecutor who hated Catholics, Broz and his co-accused were acquitted. His brush with the law had marked him as a communist agitator, and his home was searched on an almost weekly basis. Since their arrival in Yugoslavia, Pelagija had lost three babies soon after their births and one daughter, Zlatica, at the age of two. Broz felt the loss of Zlatica deeply. In 1924, Pelagija gave birth to a boy, \u017darko, who survived. In mid-1925, Broz's employer died, and the new mill owner gave him an ultimatum: give up his communist activities or lose his job. So, at age 33, Broz became a professional revolutionary.\nProfessional revolutionary.\nThe CPY concentrated its revolutionary efforts on factory workers in the more industrialised areas of Croatia and Slovenia, encouraging strikes and similar action. In 1925, the now unemployed Broz moved to Kraljevica on the Adriatic coast, where he started working at a shipyard to further the aims of the CPY. During his time in Kraljevica, he acquired a love of the warm, sunny Adriatic coastline that lasted for the rest of his life, and throughout his later time as leader, he spent as much time as possible living on his yacht while cruising the Adriatic.\nWhile at Kraljevica, he worked on Yugoslav torpedo boats and a pleasure yacht for the People's Radical Party politician, Milan Stojadinovi\u0107. Broz built up the trade union organisation in the shipyards and was elected as a union representative. A year later, he led a shipyard strike and soon after was fired. In October 1926, he obtained work in a railway works in Smederevska Palanka near Belgrade. In March 1927, he wrote an article complaining about the exploitation of workers in the factory, and after speaking up for a worker, he was promptly sacked. Identified by the CPY as worthy of promotion, he was appointed secretary of the Zagreb branch of the Metal Workers' Union and, soon thereafter, the union's whole Croatian branch. In July 1927, Broz was arrested along with six other workers, and imprisoned at nearby Ogulin. After being held without trial for some time, he went on a hunger strike until a date was set. The trial was held in secret, and he was found guilty of being a member of the CPY. Sentenced to four months' imprisonment, he was released from prison pending an appeal. On the CPY's orders, Broz did not report to court for the hearing of the appeal, instead going into hiding in Zagreb. Wearing dark spectacles and carrying forged papers, Broz posed as a middle-class technician in the engineering industry, working undercover to contact other CPY members and coordinate their infiltration of trade unions.\nIn February 1928, Broz was one of 32 delegates to the conference of the Croatian branch of the CPY. During the conference, he condemned factions within the party, including those that advocated a Greater Serbia agenda within Yugoslavia, like the long-term CPY leader Sima Markovi\u0107. Broz proposed that the executive committee of the Communist International purge the branch of factionalism and was supported by a delegate sent from Moscow. After it was proposed that the Croatian branch's entire central committee be dismissed, a new central committee was elected, with Broz as its secretary. Markovi\u0107 was subsequently expelled from the CPY at the Fourth Congress of the Comintern, and the CPY adopted a policy of working for the breakup of Yugoslavia. Broz arranged to disrupt a meeting of the Social-Democratic Party on May Day that year; in a melee outside the venue, police arrested him. They failed to identify him, charging him under his false name for a breach of the peace. He was imprisoned for 14 days and then released, returning to his previous activities. The police eventually tracked him down with the help of a police informer. He was ill-treated and held for three months before being tried in court in November 1928 for his illegal communist activities, which included allegations that police had planted the bombs found at his address. He was convicted and sentenced to five years' imprisonment.\nPrison.\nAfter Broz's sentencing, his wife and son returned to Kumrovec, where sympathetic locals looked after them, but then one day, they suddenly left without explanation and returned to the Soviet Union. She fell in love with another man, and \u017darko grew up in institutions. After arriving at Lepoglava prison, Broz was employed in maintaining the electrical system and chose as his assistant a middle-class Belgrade Jew, Mo\u0161a Pijade, who had been given a 20-year sentence for his communist activities. Their work allowed Broz and Pijade to move around the prison, contacting and organising other communist prisoners. During their time together in Lepoglava, Pijade became Broz's ideological mentor. After two and a half years at Lepoglava, Broz was accused of attempting to escape and was transferred to Maribor prison, where he was held in solitary confinement for several months. After completing the full term of his sentence, he was released, only to be arrested outside the prison gates and taken to Ogulin to serve the four-month sentence he had avoided in 1927. He was finally released from prison on 16 March 1934, but even then, he was subject to orders that required him to live in Kumrovec and report to the police daily. During his imprisonment, the political situation in Europe had changed significantly, with the rise of Adolf Hitler in Germany and the emergence of right-wing parties in France and neighbouring Austria. He returned to a warm welcome in Kumrovec but did not stay long. In early May, he received word from the CPY to return to his revolutionary activities and left his hometown for Zagreb, where he rejoined the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Croatia.\nThe Croatian branch of the CPY was in disarray, a situation exacerbated by the escape of the executive committee of the CPY to Vienna in Austria, from which they were directing activities. Over the next six months, Broz travelled several times between Zagreb, Ljubljana and Vienna, using false passports. In July 1934, he was blackmailed by a smuggler but pressed on across the border and was detained by the local \"Heimwehr\", a paramilitary Home Guard. He used the Austrian accent he had developed during his war service to convince them that he was a wayward Austrian mountaineer, and they allowed him to proceed to Vienna. Once there, he contacted the General Secretary of the CPY, Milan Gorki\u0107, who sent him to Ljubljana to arrange a secret conference of the CPY in Slovenia. The conference was held at the summer palace of the Roman Catholic bishop of Ljubljana, whose brother was a communist sympathiser. It was at this conference that Broz first met Edvard Kardelj, a young Slovene communist who had recently been released from prison. Broz and Kardelj subsequently became good friends, with Tito later regarding him as his most reliable deputy. As he was wanted by the police for failing to report to them in Kumrovec, Broz adopted various pseudonyms, including \"Rudi\" and \"Tito\". He used the latter as a pen name when he wrote articles for party journals in 1934, and it stuck. He gave no reason for choosing the name \"Tito\" except that it was a common nickname for men from the district where he grew up. Within the Comintern network, his nickname was \"Walter\".\nFlight from Yugoslavia.\nDuring this time, Tito wrote articles on the duties of imprisoned communists and on trade unions. He was in Ljubljana when Vlado Chernozemski, an assassin for the Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization (IMRO) and instructor for the Croatian ultranationalist organisation Usta\u0161e, assassinated King Alexander in Marseilles on 9 October 1934. In the crackdown on dissidents that followed his death, it was decided that Tito should leave Yugoslavia. He travelled to Vienna on a forged Czechoslovak passport, where he joined Gorki\u0107 and the rest of the Politburo of the CPY. It was decided that the Austrian government was too hostile to communism, so the Politburo travelled to Brno in Czechoslovakia, and Tito accompanied them. On Christmas Day 1934, a secret meeting of the Central Committee of the CPY was held in Ljubljana, and Tito was elected as a member of the Politburo for the first time. The Politburo decided to send him to Moscow to report on the situation in Yugoslavia, and in early February 1935, he arrived there as a full-time official of the Comintern. He lodged at the main Comintern residence, the Hotel Lux on Tverskaya Street and was quickly in contact with Vladimir \u0106opi\u0107, one of the leading Yugoslavs with the Comintern. He was soon introduced to the main personalities in the organisation. Tito was appointed to the secretariat of the Balkan section, responsible for Yugoslavia, Bulgaria, Romania and Greece. Kardelj was also in Moscow, as was the Bulgarian communist leader Georgi Dimitrov. Tito lectured on trade unions to foreign communists and attended a course on military tactics run by the Red Army, and occasionally attended the Bolshoi Theatre. He attended as one of 510 delegates to the Seventh World Congress of the Comintern in July and August 1935, where he briefly saw Joseph Stalin for the first time. After the congress, he toured the Soviet Union and then returned to Moscow to continue his work. He contacted Polka and \u017darko, but soon fell in love with an Austrian woman who worked at the Hotel Lux, Johanna Koenig, known within communist ranks as Lucia Bauer. When she became aware of this liaison, Polka divorced Tito in April 1936. Tito married Bauer on 13 October of that year.\nAfter the World Congress, Tito worked to promote the new Comintern line on Yugoslavia, which was that it would no longer work to break up the country and would instead defend the integrity of Yugoslavia against Nazism and Fascism. From a distance, Tito also worked to organise strikes at the shipyards at Kraljevica and the coal mines at Trbovlje near Ljubljana. He tried to convince the Comintern that it would be better if the party leadership were located inside Yugoslavia. A compromise was arrived at, where Tito and others would work inside the country, and Gorki\u0107 and the Politburo would continue to work from abroad. Gorki\u0107 and the Politburo relocated to Paris, while Tito began to travel between Moscow, Paris and Zagreb in 1936 and 1937, using false passports. In 1936, his father died.\nTito returned to Moscow in August 1936, soon after the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War. At the time, the Great Purge was underway, and foreign communists like Tito and his Yugoslav compatriots were particularly vulnerable. Despite a laudatory report written by Tito about the veteran Yugoslav communist Filip Filipovi\u0107, Filipovi\u0107 was arrested and shot by the Soviet secret police, the NKVD. However, before the Purge really began to erode the ranks of the Yugoslav communists in Moscow, Tito was sent back to Yugoslavia with a new mission, to recruit volunteers for the International Brigades being raised to fight on the Republican side in the Spanish Civil War. Travelling via Vienna, he reached the coastal port city of Split in December 1936. According to the Croatian historian Ivo Banac, the reason the Comintern sent Tito back to Yugoslavia was to purge the CPY. An initial attempt to send 500 volunteers to Spain by ship failed, with nearly all the volunteers arrested and imprisoned. Tito then travelled to Paris, where he arranged the volunteers' travel to France under the cover of attending the Paris Exhibition. Once in France, the volunteers crossed the Pyrenees to Spain. In all, he sent 1,192 men to fight in the war, but only 330 came from Yugoslavia; the rest were expatriates in France, Belgium, the U.S. and Canada. Fewer than half were communists, and the rest were social-democrats and anti-fascists of various hues. Of the total, 671 were killed in the fighting, and 300 were wounded. Tito himself never went to Spain, despite speculation that he had. Between May and August 1937, he travelled several times between Paris and Zagreb, organising the movement of volunteers and creating a separate Communist Party of Croatia. The new party was inaugurated at a conference at Samobor on the outskirts of Zagreb on 1\u20132 August 1937. Tito played a crucial role in organizing the return of the Yugoslav volunteers from German concentration camps to Yugoslavia when the decision was made to mount an armed resistance in Yugoslavia, the 1941 Uprising in Serbia.\nGeneral Secretary of the CPY.\nIn June 1937, Gorki\u0107 was summoned to Moscow, where he was arrested, and after months of NKVD interrogation, he was shot. According to Banac, Gorki\u0107 was killed on Stalin's orders. West concludes that despite being in competition with men like Gorki\u0107 for the leadership of the CPY, it was not in Tito's character to have innocent people sent to their deaths. Tito then received a message from the Politburo of the CPY to join them in Paris. In August 1937, he became acting General Secretary of the CPY. He later explained that he survived the Purge by staying out of Spain, where the NKVD was active, and also by avoiding visiting the Soviet Union as much as possible. When first appointed as general secretary, he avoided travelling to Moscow by insisting that he needed to deal with some disciplinary issues in the CPY in Paris. He also promoted the idea that the upper echelons of the CPY should be sharing the dangers of underground resistance within the country. He developed a new, younger leadership team that was loyal to him, including the Slovene Edvard Kardelj, the Serb, Aleksandar Rankovi\u0107, and the Montenegrin, Milovan \u0110ilas. In December 1937, Tito arranged for a demonstration to greet the French foreign minister when he visited Belgrade, expressing solidarity with the French against Nazi Germany. The protest march numbered 30,000 and turned into a protest against the neutrality policy of the Stojadinovi\u0107 government. It was eventually broken up by the police. In March 1938, Tito returned to Yugoslavia from Paris. Hearing a rumour that his opponents within the CPY had tipped off the police, he travelled to Belgrade rather than Zagreb and used a different passport. While in Belgrade, he stayed with a young intellectual, Vladimir Dedijer, who was a friend of \u0110ilas. Arriving in Yugoslavia a few days ahead of the \"Anschluss\" between Nazi Germany and Austria, he made an appeal condemning it, in which the CPY was joined by the Social Democrats and trade unions. In June, Tito wrote to the Comintern, suggesting that he should visit Moscow. He waited in Paris for two months for his Soviet visa before travelling to Moscow via Copenhagen. He arrived in Moscow on 24 August.\nOn his arrival in Moscow, Tito found that all Yugoslav communists were under suspicion. The NKVD arrested and executed nearly all of the CPY's most prominent leaders, including over 20 members of the Central Committee. Both Tito's ex-wife Polka and his wife Koenig/Bauer were arrested as \"imperialist spies\". Both were eventually released, Polka after 27 months in prison. Tito therefore needed to make arrangements for the care of \u017darko, who was 14. He placed him in a boarding school outside Kharkov, then at a school at Penza, but he ran away twice and was eventually taken in by a friend's mother. In 1941, \u017darko joined the Red Army to fight the invading Germans. Some of Tito's critics argue that his survival indicates he must have denounced his comrades as Trotskyists. He was asked for information on a number of his fellow Yugoslav communists, but according to his own statements and published documents, he never denounced anyone, usually saying he did not know them. In one case, he was asked about the Croatian communist leader Kamilo Horvatin, but wrote ambiguously, saying that he did not know whether he was a Trotskyist. Nevertheless, Horvatin was not heard of again. While in Moscow, he was given the task of assisting \u0106opi\u0107 to translate the \"History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks)\" into Serbo-Croatian, but they had only got to the second chapter when \u0106opi\u0107 too was arrested and executed. He worked on with a fellow surviving Yugoslav communist, but a Yugoslav communist of German ethnicity reported an inaccurate translation of a passage and claimed it showed Tito was a Trotskyist. Other influential communists vouched for him, and he was exonerated. A second Yugoslav communist denounced him, but the action backfired, and his accuser was arrested. Several factors were at play in his survival: his working-class origins, lack of interest in intellectual arguments about socialism, attractive personality, and capacity to make influential friends.\nWhile Tito was avoiding arrest in Moscow, Germany was placing pressure on Czechoslovakia to cede the Sudetenland. In response to this threat, Tito organised a call for Yugoslav volunteers to fight for Czechoslovakia, and thousands of volunteers came to the Czechoslovak embassy in Belgrade to offer their services. Despite the eventual Munich Agreement and Czechoslovak acceptance of the annexation and the fact that the volunteers were turned away, Tito claimed credit for the Yugoslav response, which worked in his favour. By this stage, Tito was well aware of the realities in the Soviet Union, later saying he \"witnessed a great many injustices\" but was too heavily invested in communism and too loyal to the Soviet Union to step back. After restoring the image of a decisive, coherent and non-fractional CPY to the Comintern executives, Tito was by October 1938 reassured that the party would not be disestablished; he was then tasked to compile two resolutions on plans of future CPY activities. Hoping to return to Yugoslavia before the 1938 Yugoslavian parliamentary election in December, Tito requested permission to do so from Comintern's Georgi Dimitrov several times, saying that his stay in Moscow was greatly prolonged, but to no avail. The Comintern formally ratified his resolutions on 5 January 1939, and he was appointed General Secretary of the CPY. After his appointment to the party's highest position of leadership, the newly formed Politburo of the Central Committee retained the old leadership team of Tito, Kardelj, \u0110ilas, Aleksandar Rankovi\u0107, and Ivo Lola Ribar (the representative of SKOJ) and expanded it with Franc Lesko\u0161ek, Miha Marinko and Josip Kra\u0161, and by the end of 1939 and start of 1940, Rade Kon\u010dar and Ivan Milutinovi\u0107.\nWorld War II.\nResistance in Yugoslavia.\nOn 6 April 1941, Axis forces invaded Yugoslavia. On 10 April 1941, Slavko Kvaternik proclaimed the Independent State of Croatia, and Tito responded by forming a Military Committee within the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Yugoslavia (CPY). Attacked from all sides, the armed forces of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia quickly crumbled. On 17 April 1941, after King Peter II and other members of the government fled the country, the remaining representatives of the government and military met with German officials in Belgrade. They quickly agreed to end military resistance. Prominent communist leaders, including Tito, held the May consultations to discuss the course of action to take in the face of the invasion. On 1 May 1941, Tito issued a pamphlet calling on the people to unite in a battle against the occupation. On 27 June 1941, the Central Committee appointed Tito commander-in-chief of all national liberation military forces. On 1 July 1941, the Comintern sent precise instructions calling for immediate action.\nTito stayed in Belgrade until 16 September 1941, when he, together with all members of the CPY, left Belgrade to travel to rebel-controlled territory. To leave Belgrade Tito used documents given to him by Dragoljub Milutinovi\u0107, who was a \"voivode\" with the collaborationist Pe\u0107anac Chetniks. Since Pe\u0107anac was already fully co-operating with Germans by that time, this fact caused some to speculate that Tito left Belgrade with the blessing of the Germans because his task was to divide rebel forces, similar to Lenin's arrival in Russia. Tito travelled by train through Stala\u0107 and \u010ca\u010dak and arrived to the village of Robaje on 18 September 1941.\nDespite conflicts with the rival monarchic Chetnik movement, Tito's Partisans succeeded in liberating territory, notably the \"Republic of U\u017eice\". During this period, Tito held talks with Chetnik leader Dra\u017ea Mihailovi\u0107 on 19 September and 27 October 1941. It is said that Tito ordered his forces to assist escaping Jews, and that more than 2,000 Jews fought directly for Tito.\nOn 21 December 1941, the Partisans created the First Proletarian Brigade (commanded by Ko\u010da Popovi\u0107) and on 1 March 1942, Tito created the Second Proletarian Brigade. In liberated territories, the Partisans organised People's Committees to act as a civilian government. The Anti-Fascist Council of National Liberation of Yugoslavia (AVNOJ) convened in Biha\u0107 on 26\u201327 November 1942 and in Jajce on 29 November 1943. In the two sessions, the resistance representatives established the basis for the post-war organisation of the country, deciding on a federation of the Yugoslav nations. In Jajce, a 67-member \"presidency\" was elected and established a nine-member National Committee of Liberation (NKOJ; five communist members) as a de facto provisional government. Tito was named President of NKOJ.\nWith the growing possibility of an Allied invasion in the Balkans, the Axis began to divert more resources to the destruction of the Partisans main force and its high command. This meant, among other things, a concerted German effort to capture Josip Broz Tito personally. On 25 May 1944, he managed to evade the Germans after the Raid on Drvar (\"Operation R\u00f6sselsprung\"), an airborne assault outside his Drvar headquarters in Bosnia.\nAfter the Partisans managed to endure and avoid these intense Axis attacks between January and June 1943, and the extent of Chetnik collaboration became evident, Allied leaders switched their support from Dra\u017ea Mihailovi\u0107 to Tito. King Peter II, American President Franklin Roosevelt and British Prime Minister Winston Churchill joined Soviet Premier Joseph Stalin in officially recognising Tito and the Partisans at the Tehran Conference. This resulted in Allied aid being parachuted behind Axis lines to assist the Partisans. On 17 June 1944 on the Dalmatian island of Vis, the Treaty of Vis () was signed in an attempt to merge Tito's government (the AVNOJ) with the government in exile of King Peter II. The Balkan Air Force was formed in June 1944 to control operations that were mainly aimed at aiding his forces.\nOn 12 August 1944, Winston Churchill met Tito in Naples for a deal. On 12 September 1944, King Peter II called on all Yugoslavs to come together under Tito's leadership and stated that those who did not were \"traitors\", by which time Tito was recognised by all Allied authorities (including the government-in-exile) as the Prime Minister of Yugoslavia, in addition to the commander-in-chief of the Yugoslav forces. On 28 September 1944, the Telegraph Agency of the Soviet Union (TASS) reported that Tito signed an agreement with the Soviet Union allowing \"temporary entry\" of Soviet troops into Yugoslav territory, which allowed the Red Army to assist in operations in the northeastern areas of Yugoslavia. With their strategic right flank secured by the Allied advance, the Partisans prepared and executed a massive general offensive that succeeded in breaking through German lines and forcing a retreat beyond Yugoslav borders. After the Partisan victory and the end of hostilities in Europe, all external forces were ordered off Yugoslav territory.\nIn the autumn of 1944, the communist leadership adopted a political decision on the expulsion of ethnic Germans from Yugoslavia. On 21 November, a special decree was issued on the confiscation and nationalisation of ethnic German property. To implement the decision, 70 camps were established in Yugoslav territory. In the final days of World War II in Yugoslavia, units of the Partisans were responsible for atrocities during Bleiburg repatriations, and accusations of culpability were later raised at the Yugoslav leadership under Tito. At the time, according to some scholars, Josip Broz Tito repeatedly issued calls for surrender to the retreating column, offering amnesty and attempting to avoid a disorderly surrender. On 14 May he dispatched a telegram to the supreme headquarters of the Slovene Partisan Army prohibiting the execution of prisoners of war and commanding the transfer of the possible suspects to a military court.\nAftermath.\nOn 7 March 1945, the provisional government of the Democratic Federal Yugoslavia (DFY) was assembled in Belgrade by Josip Broz Tito, while the provisional name allowed for either a republic or monarchy. This government was headed by Tito as provisional Yugoslav Prime Minister and included representatives from the royalist government-in-exile, among others Ivan \u0160uba\u0161i\u0107. In accordance with the agreement between resistance leaders and the government-in-exile, post-war elections were held to determine the form of government. In November 1945, Tito's pro-republican People's Front, led by the Communist Party of Yugoslavia, won the elections with an overwhelming majority, the vote having been boycotted by monarchists. During the period, Tito evidently enjoyed massive popular support due to being generally viewed by the populace as the liberator of Yugoslavia. The Yugoslav administration in the immediate post-war period managed to unite a country that had been severely affected by ultra-nationalist upheavals and war devastation, while successfully suppressing the nationalist sentiments of the various nations in favour of tolerance, and the common Yugoslav goal. After the overwhelming electoral victory, Tito was confirmed as the Prime Minister and the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the DFY. The country was soon renamed the Federal People's Republic of Yugoslavia (FPRY) (later finally renamed into Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, SFRY). On 29 November 1945, King Peter II was formally deposed by the Yugoslav Constituent Assembly. The Assembly drafted a new republican constitution soon afterwards.\nYugoslavia organised the Yugoslav People's Army (, JNA) from the Partisan movement and became the fourth strongest army in Europe at the time, according to various estimates. The State Security Administration (, UDBA) was also formed as the new secret police, along with a security agency, the Department of People's Security (, OZNA). Yugoslav intelligence was charged with imprisoning and bringing to trial large numbers of Nazi collaborators; controversially, this included Catholic clergymen due to the widespread involvement of Croatian Catholic clergy with the Usta\u0161a regime. Dra\u017ea Mihailovi\u0107 was found guilty of collaboration, high treason and war crimes and was subsequently executed by firing squad in July 1946.\nPrime Minister Josip Broz Tito met with the president of the Bishops' Conference of Yugoslavia, Aloysius Stepinac on 4 June 1945, two days after his release from imprisonment. The two could not reach an agreement on the state of the Catholic Church. Under Stepinac's leadership, the bishops' conference released a letter condemning alleged Partisan war crimes in September 1945. The next year, Stepinac was arrested and put on trial, which some saw as a show trial. In October 1946, in its first special session for 75 years, the Vatican excommunicated Tito and the Yugoslav government for sentencing Stepinac to 16 years in prison on charges of assisting Usta\u0161e terror and of supporting forced conversions of Serbs to Catholicism. Stepinac received preferential treatment in recognition of his status and the sentence was soon shortened and reduced to house arrest, with the option of emigration open to the archbishop. At the conclusion of the \"Informbiro period\", reforms rendered Yugoslavia considerably more religiously liberal than the Eastern Bloc states.\nIn the first post-war years, Tito was widely considered a communist leader very loyal to Moscow; indeed, he was often viewed as second only to Stalin in the Eastern Bloc. In fact, Stalin and Tito had an uneasy alliance from the start, with Stalin considering Tito too independent.\nFrom 1946 to 1948, Tito actively engaged in building an alliance with neighbouring communist Albania, with the intent of incorporating Albania into Yugoslavia. According to Enver Hoxha, the then communist ruler of Albania, in the summer of 1946 Tito promised Hoxha that the Yugoslav province of Kosovo would be ceded to Albania. Despite the decision of unification being agreed upon by Yugoslav communists during the Bujan Conference, the plan never materialised. In the first post-war years in Kosovo, Tito enacted the policy of banning the return of Serb colonists to Kosovo, in addition to enacting the first large-scale primary education program of the Albanian language.\nDuring the immediate post-war period, Tito's Yugoslavia had a strong commitment to orthodox Marxist ideas. Harsh repressive measures against dissidents and \"enemies of the state\" were common from government agents, although not known to be under Tito's orders, including \"arrests, show trials, forced collectivisation, suppression of churches and religion\". As the leader of Yugoslavia, Tito displayed a fondness for luxury, taking over the royal palaces that had belonged to the House of Kara\u0111or\u0111evi\u0107 together with the former palaces used by the House of Habsburg in Yugoslavia. His tours across Yugoslavia in his luxury Blue Train closely resembled the royal tours of the Kara\u0111or\u0111evi\u0107 kings and Habsburg emperors and in Serbia. He also adopted the traditional royal custom of being a godfather to every 9th son, although he modified it to include daughters as well after criticism was made that the practice was sexist. Just like a Serbian king, Tito would appear wherever a 9th child was born to a family to congratulate the parents and give them cash. Tito always spoke very harshly of the Kara\u0111or\u0111evi\u0107 kings in both public and private (through in private, he sometimes had a kind word for the Habsburgs), but in many ways, he appeared to his people as sort of a king.\nPresidency.\nTito\u2013Stalin split.\nUnlike other states in east-central Europe liberated by allied forces, Yugoslavia liberated itself from Axis domination with limited direct support from the Red Army. Tito's leading role in liberating Yugoslavia not only greatly strengthened his position in his party and among the Yugoslav people but also caused him to be more insistent that Yugoslavia had more room to follow its own interests than other Bloc leaders who had more reasons to recognise Soviet efforts in helping them liberate their own countries from Axis control. Although Tito was formally an ally of Stalin after World War II, the Soviets had set up a spy ring in the Yugoslav party as early as 1945, giving way to an uneasy alliance.\nIn the immediate aftermath of World War II, several armed incidents occurred between Yugoslavia and the Western Allies. Following the war, Yugoslavia acquired the Italian territory of Istria as well as the cities of Zadar and Rijeka. Yugoslav leadership was looking to incorporate Trieste into the country as well, which was opposed by the Western Allies. This led to several armed incidents, notably attacks by Yugoslav fighter planes on U.S. transport aircraft, causing bitter criticism from the West. In 1946 alone, the Yugoslav Air Force shot down two U.S. transport aircraft. The passengers and crew of the first plane were secretly interned by the Yugoslav government. The second plane and its crew were a total loss. The U.S. was outraged and sent an ultimatum to the Yugoslav government, demanding the release of the Americans in custody, U.S. access to the downed planes, and full investigation of the incidents. Stalin was opposed to what he felt were such provocations, as he believed the USSR unready to face the West in open war so soon after the losses of World War II and at the time when U.S. had operational nuclear weapons whereas the USSR had yet to conduct its first test. In addition, Tito was openly supportive of the Communist side in the Greek Civil War, while Stalin kept his distance, having agreed with Churchill not to pursue Soviet interests there, although he did support the Greek communist struggle politically, as demonstrated in several assemblies of the UN Security Council. In 1948, motivated by the desire to create a strong independent economy, Tito modelled his economic development plan independently from Moscow, which resulted in a diplomatic escalation followed by a bitter exchange of letters in which Tito wrote that \"We study and take as an example the Soviet system, but we are developing socialism in our country in somewhat different forms\".\nThe Soviet answer on 4 May admonished Tito and the Communist Party of Yugoslavia (CPY) for failing to admit and correct its mistakes and went on to accuse them of being too proud of their successes against the Germans, maintaining that the Red Army had saved them from destruction. Tito's response on 17 May suggested that the matter be settled at the meeting of the Cominform to be held that June. However, Tito did not attend the second meeting of the Cominform, fearing that Yugoslavia was to be openly attacked. In 1949 the crisis nearly escalated into an armed conflict, as Hungarian and Soviet forces were massing on the northern Yugoslav frontier. An invasion of Yugoslavia was planned to be carried out in 1949 via the combined forces of neighbouring Soviet satellite states of Hungary, Romania, Bulgaria and Albania, followed by the subsequent removal of Tito's government. On 28 June, the other member countries of the Cominform expelled Yugoslavia, citing \"nationalist elements\" that had \"managed in the course of the past five or six months to reach a dominant position in the leadership\" of the CPY. The Hungarian and Romanian armies were expanded in size and, together with Soviet ones, massed on the Yugoslav border. The assumption in Moscow was that once it was known that he had lost Soviet approval, Tito would collapse; \"I will shake my little finger, and there will be no more Tito,\" Stalin remarked. The expulsion effectively banished Yugoslavia from the international association of socialist states, while other socialist states of Eastern Europe subsequently underwent purges of alleged \"Titoists\". Stalin took the matter personally and arranged several assassination attempts on Tito's life, none of which succeeded. In one correspondence between them, Tito openly wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Stalin. Stop sending assassins to murder me. We have already caught five, one with a bomb, another with a rifle. [...] If this doesn't stop, I will send one man to Moscow and there will be no need to send another.\nOne significant consequence of the tension arising between Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union was Tito's decision to begin large-scale repression against enemies of the government. This repression was not limited to known and alleged Stalinists but also included members of the Communist Party or anyone exhibiting sympathy towards the Soviet Union. Prominent partisans, such as Vlado Dap\u010devi\u0107 and Dragoljub Mi\u0107unovi\u0107, were victims of this period of strong repression, which lasted until 1956 and was marked by significant violations of human rights. Tens of thousands of political opponents served in forced labour camps, such as Goli Otok (meaning Barren Island), and hundreds died. An often disputed but relatively feasible number that was put forth by the Yugoslav government itself in 1964 places the number of Goli Otok inmates incarcerated between 1948 and 1956 to be 16,554, with less than 600 having died during detention. The facilities at Goli Otok were abandoned in 1956, and jurisdiction of the now-defunct political prison was handed over to the government of the Socialist Republic of Croatia.\nTito's estrangement from the USSR enabled Yugoslavia to obtain U.S. aid via the Economic Cooperation Administration (ECA), the same U.S. aid institution that administered the Marshall Plan. Still, Tito did not agree to align with the West, which was a common consequence of accepting American aid at the time. After Stalin's death in 1953, relations with the USSR were relaxed, and Tito began to receive aid from the Comecon as well. In this way, Tito played East\u2013West antagonism to his advantage. Instead of choosing sides, he was instrumental in kick-starting the Non-Aligned Movement, which would function as a \"third way\" for countries interested in staying outside of the East\u2013West divide.\nThe event was significant not only for Yugoslavia and Tito, but also for the global development of socialism, since it was the first major split between Communist states, casting doubt on Comintern's claims for socialism to be a unified force that would eventually control the whole world, as Tito became the first (and the only successful) socialist leader to defy Stalin's leadership in the Cominform. This rift with the Soviet Union brought Tito much international recognition, but also triggered a period of instability often referred to as the Informbiro period. Tito's form of communism was labelled \"Titoism\" by Moscow, which encouraged purges and repression against suspected and accused \"Titoites'\" throughout the Eastern Bloc. Some Trotskyists considered Tito to be an 'unconscious Trotskyist' because of the split. However, this was rejected by Ted Grant in 1949 who asserted there were no fundamental principled differences between Stalin and Tito. He said they were both 'proletarian Bonapartists' ruling deformed workers' states \u2013 Tito modelling his regime on that of Stalin's.\nOn 26 June 1950, the National Assembly supported a crucial bill written by Milovan \u0110ilas and Tito regarding \"socialist self-management\", a type of cooperative independent socialist experiment that introduced profit sharing and workplace democracy in previously state-run enterprises, which then came under direct social ownership of the employees. On 13 January 1953, they established that the law on self-management was the basis of the entire social order in Yugoslavia. Tito also succeeded Ivan Ribar as the President of Yugoslavia on 14 January 1953, becoming the official head of state. After Stalin's death, Tito rejected the USSR's invitation for a visit to discuss the normalisation of relations between the two nations. Nikita Khrushchev and Nikolai Bulganin visited Tito in Belgrade in 1955 and apologised for wrongdoings by Stalin's administration, signing the Belgrade declaration. Tito visited the USSR in 1956, which signalled to the world that animosity between Yugoslavia and USSR was easing. Rapprochement between the two countries would not last long, as Yugoslav leadership took an increasingly explicit posture of non-alignment in the aftermath of the Hungarian Revolution of 1956. Relations further deteriorated in the late 1960s because of Yugoslav economic reforms which consciously linked Yugoslavia to the international system, as well as Tito's support for the Prague Spring, which itself found much of its inspiration in Yugoslav market socialism, and opposition to the subsequent Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia.\nThe Tito\u2013Stalin split had large ramifications for countries outside the USSR and Yugoslavia. It has, for example, been given as one of the reasons for the Sl\u00e1nsk\u00fd trial in Czechoslovakia, in which 14 high-level Communist officials were purged, with 11 of them being executed. Stalin put pressure on Czechoslovakia to conduct purges in order to discourage the spread of the idea of a \"national path to socialism\", which Tito espoused.\nNon-Alignment.\nUnder Tito's leadership, Yugoslavia became a founding member of the Non-Aligned Movement. In 1961, Tito co-founded the movement with Egypt's Gamal Abdel Nasser, India's Jawaharlal Nehru, Indonesia's Sukarno and Ghana's Kwame Nkrumah, in an action called The Initiative of Five (Tito, Nehru, Nasser, Sukarno, Nkrumah), thus establishing strong ties with third world countries. This move did much to improve Yugoslavia's diplomatic position. Tito saw the Non-Aligned Movement as a way of presenting himself as a world leader of an important bloc of nations that would improve his bargaining power with both the eastern and western blocs. On 1 September 1961, Josip Broz Tito became the first Secretary-General of the Non-Aligned Movement.\nTito's foreign policy led to relationships with a variety of governments, such as exchanging visits (1954 and 1956) with Emperor Haile Selassie of Ethiopia, where a street was named in his honour. In 1953, Tito visited Ethiopia, and in 1954, the Emperor visited Yugoslavia. Tito's motives in befriending Ethiopia were somewhat self-interested as he wanted to send recent graduates of Yugoslav universities (whose standards were not up to those of Western universities, thus making them unemployable in the West) to work in Ethiopia, which was one of the few countries that was willing to accept them. As Ethiopia did not have much of a health care system or a university system, Haile Selassie, from 1953 onward, encouraged the graduates of Yugoslav universities, especially with medical degrees, to come work in his empire. Reflecting his tendency to pursue closer ties with Third World nations, from 1950 onward, Tito permitted Mexican films to be shown in Yugoslavia, where they became very popular, especially the 1950 film \"Un d\u00eda de vida\", which become a huge hit when it premiered in Yugoslavia in 1952. The success of Mexican films led to the \"Yu-Mex\" craze of the 1950s\u20131960s as Mexican music became popular, and it was fashionable for many Yugoslav musicians to don sombreros and sing Mexican songs in Serbo-Croatian.\nTito was notable for pursuing a foreign policy of neutrality during the Cold War and for establishing close ties with developing countries. Tito's strong belief in self-determination caused the 1948 rift with Stalin and, consequently, the Eastern Bloc. His public speeches often reiterated that policy of neutrality and co-operation with all countries would be natural as long as these countries did not use their influence to pressure Yugoslavia to take sides. Relations with the United States and Western European nations were generally cordial. \nIn the early 1950s, Yugoslav-Hungarian relations were strained as Tito made little secret of his distaste for the Stalinist M\u00e1ty\u00e1s R\u00e1kosi and his preference for the \"national communist\" Imre Nagy instead. Tito's decision to create a \"Balkan Pact\" by signing a treaty of alliance with NATO members Turkey and Greece in 1954 was regarded as tantamount to joining NATO in Soviet eyes, and his vague talk of a neutralist Communist federation of Eastern European states was seen as a major threat in Moscow. The Yugoslav embassy in Budapest was seen by the Soviets as a centre of subversion in Hungary as they accused Yugoslav diplomats and journalists, sometimes with justification, of supporting Nagy. However, when the revolt broke out in Hungary in October 1956, Tito accused Nagy of losing control of the situation, as he wanted a Communist Hungary independent of the Soviet Union, not the overthrow of Hungarian communism. On 31 October 1956, Tito ordered the Yugoslav media to stop praising Nagy and he quietly supported the Soviet intervention on 4 November to end the revolt in Hungary, as he believed that a Hungary ruled by anti-communists would pursue irredentist claims against Yugoslavia, as had just been the case during the interwar period. To escape from the Soviets, Nagy fled to the Yugoslav embassy, where Tito granted him asylum. On 5 November 1956, Soviet tanks shelled the Yugoslav embassy in Budapest, killing the Yugoslav cultural attache and several other diplomats. Tito's refusal to turn over Nagy, despite increasingly shrill Soviet demands that he do so, served his purposes well with relations with the Western states, as he was presented in the Western media as the \"good communist\" who stood up to Moscow by sheltering Nagy and the other Hungarian leaders. On 22 November, Nagy and his cabinet left the embassy on a bus that took them into exile in Yugoslavia after the new Hungarian leader, J\u00e1nos K\u00e1d\u00e1r had promised Tito in writing that they would not be harmed. Much to Tito's fury, when the bus left the Yugoslav embassy, it was promptly boarded by KGB agents who arrested the Hungarian leaders and roughly handled the Yugoslav diplomats who tried to protect them. Nagy's kidnapping, followed by his execution, almost led Yugoslavia to break off diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union, and in 1957 Tito boycotted the ceremonies in Moscow for the 40th anniversary of the October Revolution, the only communist leader who did not attend.\nYugoslavia had a liberal travel policy permitting foreigners to freely travel through the country and its citizens to travel worldwide, whereas it was limited by most Communist countries. A number of Yugoslav citizens worked throughout Western Europe. Tito met many world leaders during his rule, such as Soviet rulers Joseph Stalin, Nikita Khrushchev and Leonid Brezhnev; Egypt's Gamal Abdel Nasser, Indian politicians Jawaharlal Nehru and Indira Gandhi; British Prime Ministers Winston Churchill, James Callaghan and Margaret Thatcher; U.S. Presidents Dwight D. Eisenhower, John F. Kennedy, Richard Nixon, Gerald Ford and Jimmy Carter; other political leaders, dignitaries and heads of state that Tito met at least once in his lifetime included Che Guevara, Fidel Castro, Yasser Arafat, Willy Brandt, Helmut Schmidt, Georges Pompidou, Kwame Nkrumah, Queen Elizabeth II, Hua Guofeng, Kim Il Sung, Sukarno, Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, Suharto, Idi Amin, Emperor Haile Selassie I, Kenneth Kaunda, Gaddafi, Erich Honecker, Nicolae Ceau\u0219escu, J\u00e1nos K\u00e1d\u00e1r, Saddam Hussein and Urho Kekkonen. He also met numerous celebrities.\nYugoslavia provided major assistance to anti-colonialist movements in the Third World. The Yugoslav delegation was the first to bring the demands of the Algerian National Liberation Front (FLN) to the United Nations. In January 1958, the French Navy boarded the \"Slovenija\" cargo ship off Oran, whose holds were filled with weapons for the insurgents. Diplomat Danilo Mili\u0107 explained that \"Tito and the leading nucleus of the League of Communists of Yugoslavia really saw in the Third World's liberation struggles a replica of their own struggle against the fascist occupants. They vibrated to the rhythm of the advances or setbacks of the FLN or Viet Cong.\"\nThousands of Yugoslav military advisors travelled to Guinea after its decolonisation and as the French government tried to destabilise the country. Tito also covertly helped left-wing liberation movements to destabilise the Portuguese colonial empire. He saw the murder of Patrice Lumumba in 1961 as the \"greatest crime in contemporary history\". The country's military academies hosted left-wing activists from SWAPO (Namibia) and the Pan Africanist Congress of Azania (South Africa) as part of Tito's efforts to undermine apartheid in South Africa. In 1980, the intelligence services of South Africa and Argentina plotted to return the 'favour' by covertly bringing 1,500 anti-urban communist guerrillas to Yugoslavia. The operation was aimed at overthrowing Tito and was planned during the 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow so that the Soviets would be too busy to react. The operation was finally abandoned due to Tito's death.\nIn 1953, Tito travelled to Britain for a state visit and met with Winston Churchill. He also toured Cambridge and visited the University Library.\nTito visited India from 22 December 1954 to 8 January 1955. After his return, he removed many restrictions on Yugoslavia's churches and spiritual institutions.\nTito also developed warm relations with Burma under U Nu, travelling to the country in 1955 and again in 1959, though he did not receive the same treatment in 1959 from the new leader, Ne Win. Tito had an especially close friendship with Prince Norodom Sihanouk of Cambodia, who preached an eccentric mixture of monarchism, Buddhism and socialism, and, like Tito, wanted his country to be neutral in the Cold War. Tito saw Sihanouk as something of a kindred soul who, like him, had to struggle to maintain his backward country's neutrality in the face of rival power blocs. By contrast, Tito strongly disliked President Idi Amin of Uganda, whom he saw as thuggish and possibly insane.\nBecause of its neutrality, Yugoslavia was often rare among Communist countries in having diplomatic relations with right-wing, anti-communist governments. For example, Yugoslavia was the only communist country that had diplomatic relations with Alfredo Stroessner's Paraguay. Yugoslavia went on to sell arms to the staunchly anti-communist regime of Guatemala under Kjell Eugenio Laugerud Garc\u00eda during the Guatemalan Civil War. Notable exceptions to Yugoslavia's neutral stance toward anti-communist countries include Spain under Franco, Greece under Greek junta, and Chile under Pinochet; Yugoslavia was one of many countries that severed diplomatic relations with Chile after Salvador Allende was overthrown.\nReforms.\nStarting in the 1950s, Tito's government permitted Yugoslav workers to go to western Europe, especially West Germany, as \"Gastarbeiter\" (\"guest workers\"). The exposure of many Yugoslavs to the West and its culture led many Yugoslavians to view themselves as culturally closer to Western Europe than Eastern Europe. In the autumn of 1960, Tito met President Dwight D. Eisenhower at the United Nations General Assembly meeting. They discussed a range of issues from arms control to economic development. When Eisenhower remarked that Yugoslavia's neutrality was \"neutral on his side\", Tito replied that neutrality did not imply passivity but meant \"not taking sides\". On 7 April 1963, the country changed its official name from \"Federal People's Republic\" to \"Socialist Federal Republic\" of Yugoslavia. Economic reforms encouraged smallscale private enterprise (up to five full-time workers; most of these were family businesses and largest in agriculture) and greatly relaxed restrictions on religious expression. Tito subsequently toured the Americas. In Chile, two government ministers resigned over his visit to that country.\nIn 1966, an agreement with the Holy See, fostered in part by the death in 1960 of the anti-communist archbishop of Zagreb Aloysius Stepinac and shifts in the church's approach to resisting communism originating in the Second Vatican Council, accorded new freedom to the Yugoslav Roman Catholic Church, particularly to catechise and open seminaries. The agreement also eased tensions, which had prevented the naming of new bishops in Yugoslavia since 1945. Holy See and Yugoslavia reconciled their relations and worked together on achieving peace in Vietnam. Tito's new socialism met opposition from traditional communists culminating in a conspiracy headed by Aleksandar Rankovi\u0107. Allegedly, the charge on which he was removed from power and expelled from the LCY was that he bugged Tito's working and sleeping quarters as well as those of many other high government officials. For almost 20 years, Rankovi\u0107 was at the head of the State Security Administration (UDBA), as well as Federal Secretary of Internal Affairs. His position as a party whip and Tito's way of controlling and monitoring the government and, to a certain extent, the people bothered many, especially the younger generation of government officials who were working toward a more liberal Yugoslav society. In the same year, Tito declared that communists must henceforth chart Yugoslavia's course by the force of their arguments (implying an abandonment of Leninist orthodoxy and development of liberal socialism). \nOn 1 January 1967, Yugoslavia became the first communist country to open its borders to all foreign visitors and abolish visa requirements. In the same year Tito became active in promoting a peaceful resolution of the Arab\u2013Israeli conflict. His plan called for Arabs to recognise the state of Israel in exchange for territories Israel newly occupied.\nIn 1968, Tito offered to fly to Prague on three hours' notice if Czechoslovak leader Alexander Dub\u010dek needed help in facing down the Soviets. In April 1969, Tito removed generals Ivan Go\u0161njak and Rade Hamovi\u0107 in the aftermath of the invasion of Czechoslovakia due to the unpreparedness of the Yugoslav army to respond to a similar invasion of Yugoslavia.\nIn 1971, the Federal Assembly reelected Tito as president of Yugoslavia for the sixth time. In his speech before the Federal Assembly, he introduced 20 sweeping constitutional amendments to provide an updated framework on which the country would be based. The amendments provided for a collective presidency, a 22-member body consisting of elected representatives from six republics and two autonomous provinces. The body would have a single chairman of the presidency, and chairmanship would rotate among six republics. When the Federal Assembly failed to agree on legislation, the collective presidency would have the power to rule by decree. Amendments also provided for a stronger cabinet with considerable power to initiate and pursue legislation independently from the Communist Party. D\u017eemal Bijedi\u0107 was chosen as the Premier. The new amendments aimed to decentralise the country by granting greater autonomy to republics and provinces. The federal government would retain authority only over foreign affairs, defence, internal security, monetary affairs, free trade within Yugoslavia, and development loans to poorer regions. Control of education, healthcare, and housing would be exercised entirely by the governments of the republics and the autonomous provinces.\nTito's greatest strength, in the eyes of the western communists, had been in suppressing nationalist insurrections and maintaining unity throughout the country. It was Tito's call for brotherhood and unity, and related methods, that held together the people of Yugoslavia. This ability was put to a test several times during his reign, notably during the Croatian Spring (also referred as the or Maspok for short, meaning \"Mass Movement\") when the government suppressed both public demonstrations and dissenting opinions within the Communist Party. Despite this suppression, much of Maspok's demands, including for decentralisation, were later realised with the new constitution, heavily backed by Tito himself against opposition from the Serbian branch of the party, who favoured centralisation. On 16 May 1974, the new Constitution was passed, and the 82-year-old Tito was named president for life. But the 1974 constitution caused issues for the Yugoslavian economy and distorted its market mechanism, leading to escalation of ethnic tensions.\nTito's visits to the U.S. avoided most of the Northeast due to large minorities of Yugoslav emigrants bitter about socialism in Yugoslavia. Security for the state visits was usually high to keep him away from protesters, who frequently burned the Yugoslav flag. During a visit to the United Nations in the late 1970s, emigrants shouted \"Tito murderer\" outside his New York hotel, which he protested to United States authorities.\nFinal years and death.\nAfter the constitutional changes of 1974, Tito began reducing his role in the day-to-day running of the state, transferring much of it to the prime minister who was the head of government, but retained the final word on all major policy decisions as president and head of state and as the head of the League of Communists of Yugoslavia. The 40th anniversary of his communist party leadership was observed on the Youth Day of 1977 throughout Yugoslavia. He continued to travel abroad and receive foreign visitors, going to Beijing in 1977 and reconciling with the Chinese leadership that had once branded him a revisionist. In turn, Chairman Hua Guofeng visited Yugoslavia in 1979. In 1978, Tito travelled to the U.S. During the visit, strict security was imposed in Washington, D.C., owing to protests by anti-communist Croat, Serb and Albanian groups.\nTito became increasingly ill over the course of 1979. During this time, \"Vila Srna\" was built for his use near Morovi\u0107 in the event of his recovery. On 7 January and again on 12 January 1980, Tito was admitted to the Medical Centre in Ljubljana, the capital city of the SR Slovenia, with circulation problems in his legs. Tito's stubbornness and refusal to allow doctors to follow through with the necessary amputation of his left leg played a part in his eventual death of gangrene-induced infection. His adjutant later testified that Tito threatened to take his own life if his leg was ever amputated and that he had to hide Tito's pistol in fear that he would follow through on his threat. After a private conversation with his sons \u017darko and Mi\u0161o Broz, he finally agreed, and his left leg was amputated due to arterial blockages. The amputation proved to be too late, and Tito died at the Medical Centre of Ljubljana on 4 May 1980, three days short of his 88th birthday.\nThe state funeral of Josip Broz Tito drew many world statesmen. It attracted government leaders from 129 states. Based on the number of attending politicians and state delegations, at the time it was the largest state funeral in history; this concentration of dignitaries would be unmatched until the funeral of Pope John Paul II in 2005 and the memorial service of Nelson Mandela in 2013. Those who attended included four kings, 31 presidents, six princes, 22 prime ministers, and 47 ministers of foreign affairs. They came from both sides of the Cold War, from 128 countries out of 154 UN members at the time.\nReporting on his death, \"The New York Times\" wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Tito sought to improve life. Unlike others who rose to power on the communist wave after WWII, Tito did not long demand that his people suffer for a distant vision of a better life. After an initial Soviet-influenced bleak period, Tito moved toward radical improvement of life in the country. Yugoslavia gradually became a bright spot amid the general grayness of Eastern Europe.\u2014\u200a\nTito was interred in the House of Flowers, a mausoleum in Belgrade which forms part of a memorial complex in the grounds of the Museum of Yugoslav History (formerly called \"Museum 25 May\" and \"Museum of the Revolution\"). The museum keeps the gifts Tito received during his presidency. The collection includes original prints of \"Los Caprichos\" by Francisco Goya, and many others.\nEvaluation.\nDominic McGoldrick writes that as the head of a \"highly centralised and oppressive\" regime, Tito wielded tremendous power in Yugoslavia, with his authoritarian rule administered through an elaborate bureaucracy that routinely suppressed human rights. The main victims of this repression during the first years were known and alleged Stalinists, such as Dragoslav Mihailovi\u0107 and Dragoljub Mi\u0107unovi\u0107, but in later years, even some of the most prominent of Tito's collaborators were arrested. On 19 November 1956, Milovan \u0110ilas, perhaps the closest of Tito's collaborators, widely regarded as his possible successor, was arrested because of his criticism of Tito's regime. Victor Sebestyen writes that Tito \"was as brutal as\" Stalin. The repression did not exclude intellectuals and writers, such as Venko Markovski, who was arrested and sent to jail in January 1956 for writing poems considered anti-Titoist.\nEven if, after the reforms of 1961, Tito's presidency had become comparatively more liberal than other communist regimes, the Communist Party continued to alternate between liberalism and repression. Yugoslavia managed to remain independent from the Soviet Union, and its brand of socialism was in many ways the envy of Eastern Europe, but Tito's Yugoslavia remained a tightly controlled police state. According to David Matas, outside the Soviet Union, Yugoslavia had more political prisoners than all of the rest of Eastern Europe combined. Tito's secret police were modelled on the Soviet KGB. Its members were ever-present and often acted extrajudicially, with victims including middle-class intellectuals, liberals and democrats. Yugoslavia was a signatory to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, but scant regard was paid to its provisions. \nTito's Yugoslavia was based on respect for nationality, though Tito ruthlessly purged any flowerings of nationalism that threatened the Yugoslav federation. But the contrast between the deference given to some ethnic groups and the severe repression of others was sharp. Yugoslav law guaranteed nationalities the right to use their language, but for ethnic Albanians, the assertion of ethnic identity was severely limited. Almost half of Yugoslavia's political prisoners were ethnic Albanians imprisoned for asserting their ethnic identity.\nYugoslavia's post-war development was impressive, but the country ran into economic snags around 1970 and experienced significant unemployment and inflation.\nDeclassified documents from the CIA state in 1967, it was already clear that although Tito's economic model had achieved growth of the gross national product around 7%, it also created frequently unwise industrial investment and a chronic deficit in the nation's balance of payment. In the 1970s, uncontrolled growth often created chronic inflation, which Tito and the Party could not fully stabilise or moderate. Yugoslavia also paid high interest on loans compared to the LIBOR rate, but Tito's presence eased investors' fears since he had proven willing and able to implement unpopular reforms. By 1979 with Tito's passing on the horizon, a global downturn in the economy, consistently increasing unemployment and growth slowing to 5.9% throughout the 1970s, it had become likely that \"the rapid economic growth to which the Yugoslavs [had] become accustomed\" would aggressively decline.\nWith the passing of the 1974 Yugoslav Constitution, Tito initiated what, according to A. Ross Johnson of the United States Department of State, \"constituted the first effort in postwar Yugoslavia (and the first attempt in any Communist system) to establish depersonalised and institutionalised 'rules of the game' in Party decision-making bodies intended to apply to the period of succession.\" This system created a state and party presidency that was governed collectively, each limited to one year term of office. But this system might have contributed to the collapse of Yugoslavia, according to professor Robert M. Hayden: \"While perhaps no federal structure could have contained the political pressures of Yugoslavia in 1989/91, the flaws of the 1974 constitution served to ensure that they became unmanageable, thus making civil war virtually inevitable. Responsibility for the war must thus be shared, between the Slovenes, whose actions destroyed the federal structure, Slobodan Milo\u0161evi\u0107, whose aggressive politics goaded the Slovenes into doing so, and the drafters of the constitution, who made the chimaera of a \"confederation\" seem a reasonable constitutional structure.\"\nLegacy.\nTito is credited with transforming Yugoslavia from a poor nation to a middle-income one that saw vast improvements in women's rights, health, education, urbanisation, industrialisation, and many other areas of human and economic development. A 2010 poll found that as many as 81% of Serbians believe that life was better under Tito. Tito also ranked first in the \"Greatest Croatian\" poll which was conducted in 2003 by the Croatian weekly news magazine \"Nacional\".\nDuring his life and especially in the first year after his death, several places were named after Tito; several of these have since returned to their original names.\nFor example, Podgorica, formerly Titograd (though Podgorica's international airport is still identified by the code TGD), and U\u017eice, formerly known as Titovo U\u017eice, which reverted to its original name in 1992. Streets in Belgrade, the capital, have all reverted to their original pre-World War II and pre-communist names as well. In 2004, Antun Augustin\u010di\u0107's statue of Broz in his birthplace of Kumrovec was decapitated in an explosion. It was subsequently repaired. Twice in 2008, protests took place in what was then Zagreb's Marshal Tito Square (since 2017 the Republic of Croatia Square), organised by a group called Circle for the Square (), with an aim to force the city government to rename it to its previous name, while a counter-protest by Citizens' Initiative Against Usta\u0161ism () accused the \"Circle for the Square\" of historical revisionism and neo-fascism. Croatian president Stjepan Mesi\u0107 criticised the demonstration to change the name.\nIn the Croatian coastal city of Opatija the main street (also its longest street) still bears the name of Marshal Tito. Rijeka, third largest city in Croatia, also refuses to change the name of one of the squares in the city centre named after Tito. There are streets named after Tito in numerous towns in Serbia, mostly in the country's north (Vojvodina). One of the main streets in downtown Sarajevo is called Marshal Tito Street, and Tito's statue in a park in front of the university campus (ex. JNA barrack \"Mar\u0161al Tito\") in Marijin Dvor is a place where Bosnians and Sarajevans still today commemorate and pay tribute to Tito. The largest Tito monument in the world, about high, is in Tito Square (), the central square in Velenje, Slovenia. One of the main bridges in Slovenia's second largest city of Maribor is Tito Bridge (). The central square in Koper, the largest Slovenian port city, is named Tito Square. The main-belt asteroid 1550 Tito, discovered by Serbian astronomer Milorad B. Proti\u0107 at Belgrade Observatory in 1937, was named in his honour.\nThe Croat historian Marijana Belaj wrote that for some people in Croatia and other parts of the former Yugoslavia, Tito is remembered as a sort of secular saint, mentioning how some Croats keep portraits of Catholic saints together with a portrait of Tito on their walls as a way to bring hope. The practice of writing letters to Tito has continued well after his death with several websites in former Yugoslavia devoted entirely as forums for people to send him posthumous letters, in which they often write about personal problems. Every year on 25 May, several thousand people from the former Yugoslavia gather in Tito's hometown of Kumrovec and his resting place, House of Flowers, to pay tribute to his memory and celebrate the former country's Youth Day, which in the Yugoslav era was one of the biggest annual celebrations and was marked by the Relay of Youth with a birthday pledge to Tito. Belaj wrote that much of the Tito cult's posthumous appeal centres around Tito's everyman persona and his image as a \"friend\" to ordinary people, in contrast to the way in which Stalin was depicted in his cult of personality as a cold, aloof, godlike figure whose extraordinary qualities set him apart from ordinary people. Most of those who come to Kumrovec on 25 May to kiss Tito's statue are women. Belaji wrote that the Tito cult's appeal today owes less to communism, observing that most people who come to Kumrovec do not believe in communism, than to nostalgia for Tito's Yugoslavia and affection for an \"ordinary man\" who became great. Tito was not a Croat nationalist, but the fact that Tito became the world's most famous Croat, serving as the leader of the Non-Aligned Movement and being seen as an important world leader, inspires pride in certain quarters of Croatia.\nEvery year a \"Brotherhood and Unity\" relay race is organised in Montenegro, North Macedonia, and Serbia that ends on 25 May at the \"House of Flowers\", Tito's final resting place. At the same time, runners in Slovenia, Croatia, and Bosnia and Herzegovina set off for Kumrovec. The relay is a leftover from the Relay of Youth from Yugoslav times, when young people made a similar yearly trek on foot through Yugoslavia that ended in Belgrade with a massive celebration.\n\"Tito and Me\" (), a Yugoslav comedy film by Serbian director Goran Markovi\u0107, was released in 1992.\nIn the years following Yugoslavia's dissolution, historians started highlighting that human rights were suppressed in Yugoslavia under Tito, particularly in the first decade before the Tito\u2013Stalin split. On 4 October 2011, the Slovenian Constitutional Court found a 2009 naming of a street in Ljubljana after Tito to be unconstitutional. While several public areas in Slovenia (named during the Yugoslav period) already bear Tito's name, on the issue of renaming an additional street the court ruled that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The name \"Tito\" does not only symbolise the liberation of the territory of present-day Slovenia from fascist occupation in World War II, as claimed by the other party in the case but also grave violations of human rights and basic freedoms, especially in the decade following World War II.\nBut the court made clear that the purpose of the review was \"not a verdict on Tito as a figure or on his concrete actions, as well as not a historical weighing of facts and circumstances\". Slovenia has several streets and squares named after Tito, notably \"Tito Square\" in Velenje, incorporating a 10-meter statue.\nSome scholars have named Tito as responsible for the systematic eradication of the ethnic German (Danube Swabian) population in Vojvodina by expulsions and mass executions following the collapse of the German occupation of Yugoslavia at the end of World War II, in contrast to his inclusive attitude towards other Yugoslav nationalities.\nFamily and personal life.\nTito was married several times and had numerous affairs. In 1918 he was brought to Omsk, Russia, as a prisoner of war. There he met Pelagija Belousova, who was then 14; he married her a year later, and she moved with him to Yugoslavia. They had five children, but only their son \u017darko Leon Broz (born 4 February 1924) survived. When Tito was jailed in 1928, Belousova returned to Russia. After the divorce in 1936, she remarried.\nIn 1936, when Tito stayed at the Hotel Lux in Moscow, he met the Austrian Lucia Bauer. They married in October 1936, but the records of this marriage were later deliberately erased.\nHis next relationship was with Anna Koenig, whom he married in 1936 and who died in 1937.\nIn 1940, he married Herta Haas. Tito left for Belgrade after the April War, leaving Haas pregnant. In May 1941, she gave birth to their son, Aleksandar \"Mi\u0161o\" Broz. Throughout his relationship with Haas, Tito maintained a promiscuous life and had a parallel relationship with Davorjanka Paunovi\u0107, who, under the codename \"Zdenka Horvat\", served as a courier in the resistance and became his personal secretary. Haas and Tito suddenly parted company in 1943 in Jajce during the second meeting of AVNOJ after she reportedly walked in on him and Davorjanka. The last time Haas saw Broz was in 1946. Davorjanka died of tuberculosis in 1946, and Tito insisted that she be buried in the backyard of the Beli Dvor, his Belgrade residence.\nHis best-known wife was Jovanka Broz. Tito was just shy of his 60th birthday and she was 27 when they married in April 1952, with state security chief Aleksandar Rankovi\u0107 as the best man. Their marriage came about somewhat unexpectedly since Tito actually rejected her some years earlier when his confidante Ivan Stevo Kraja\u010di\u0107 originally presented her to him. At that time, she was in her early 20s, and Tito objected to her upbeat personality. Not one to be easily discouraged, Jovanka continued working at Beli Dvor, where she managed the staff and eventually got another chance. But their relationship was not happy. It had gone through many, often public, ups and downs, with episodes of infidelity and even allegations of preparation for a \"coup d'\u00e9tat\" by the latter pair. Certain unofficial reports suggest Tito and Jovanka formally divorced in the late 1970s, shortly before his death, but during Tito's funeral, she was present in an official capacity as his wife and later claimed inheritance rights. The couple had no children.\nTito's grandchildren include Sa\u0161a Broz, a theatre director in Croatia; Svetlana Broz, a cardiologist and writer in Bosnia and Herzegovina; Josip Broz (better-known as Jo\u0161ka Broz), a politician in Serbia; Edvard Broz and Natali Klasevski, an artisan of Bosnia and Herzegovina.\nAs president, Tito had access to extensive (state-owned) property associated with the office and maintained a lavish lifestyle. In Belgrade, he resided in the official residence, the Beli Dvor, and maintained a separate private home at 10 U\u017ei\u010dka Street. The Brijuni Islands were the site of the State Summer Residence from 1949 on. The pavilion was designed by Jo\u017ee Ple\u010dnik and included a zoo. Close to 100 foreign heads of state visited Tito at the island residence, along with film stars such as Elizabeth Taylor, Richard Burton, Sophia Loren, Carlo Ponti, and Gina Lollobrigida. On the island of Brijuni, a museum displays photos of the many visitors that Tito received over more than three decades.\nAnother residence was maintained at Lake Bled, while the grounds at Kara\u0111or\u0111evo were the site of \"diplomatic hunts\". By 1974 Tito had at his disposal 32 official residences, large and small, the yacht \"Galeb\" (\"seagull\"), a Boeing 727 as the presidential aeroplane, and the Blue Train. After his death, the presidential Boeing 727 was sold to Aviogenex, the \"Galeb\" remained docked in Montenegro, and the Blue Train was stored in a Serbian train shed for over two decades. While Tito was the person who held the office of president for by far the longest period, the associated property was not private, and much of it continues to be used by national governments, as public property or for use by high-ranking officials.\nTito claimed to speak Serbo-Croatian, German, Russian, and some English. His official biographer and then fellow Central Committee-member Vladimir Dedijer said in 1953 that he spoke \"Serbo-Croatian ... Russian, Czech, Slovenian ... German (with a Viennese accent) ... understands and reads French and Italian ... [and] also speaks Kazakh.\" At the 38th World Esperanto Congress held in Zagreb in 1953, Tito revealed his knowledge of Esperanto, which he had learned during his time in prison.\nIn his youth, Tito attended Catholic Sunday school and was later an altar boy. After an incident where he was slapped and shouted at by a priest when he had difficulty helping the priest remove his vestments, Tito did not cross another church's threshold. As an adult, he identified as an atheist.\nEvery federal unit had a town or city with historical significance to World War II renamed to include Tito's name. The largest of these was Titograd, now Podgorica, the capital city of Montenegro. With the exception of Titograd, the cities were renamed simply by the addition of the adjective \"Titov\" 'Tito's'. The names reverted to their original names after the Fall of Communism. The cities were:\nLanguage and identity dispute.\nIn the years after Tito's death and up to the present, many conspiracy theories have been put forward suggesting the existence of several people who were actually Tito, none with any serious evidence to support them. Serbian journalist Vladan Dini\u0107 argued in \"Tito Is Not Tito\" that three separate people had identified as Tito. Tito's personal physician, Aleksandar Matunovi\u0107, wrote a book about Tito in which he questioned his true origins, noting that Tito's habits and lifestyle could mean only that he was from an aristocratic family.\nIn 2013, media coverage was given to a declassified NSA study in \"Cryptologic Spectrum\" that concluded Tito had not spoken Serbo-Croatian like a native speaker. The report noted that his speech had features of other Slavic languages (Russian and Polish). The hypothesis that \"a non-Yugoslav, perhaps a Russian or a Pole\" assumed Tito's identity was included with a note that this had happened during or before the Second World War. The report notes Dra\u017ea Mihailovi\u0107's impressions of Tito's Russian origins after he had personally spoken with Tito.\nHowever, the NSA's report was disputed by Croatian experts. The report failed to recognise that Tito was a native speaker of the very distinctive local Kajkavian dialect of Zagorje. His strong accent, present only in Croatian dialects, which Tito was able to pronounce perfectly, is the strongest evidence for his Zagorje origins.\nOrigin of the name \"Tito\".\nAs the Communist Party was outlawed in Yugoslavia starting on 30 December 1920, Josip Broz took on many assumed names during his activity within the Party, including \"Rudi\", \"Walter\", and \"Tito\". Broz himself explains:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It was a rule in the Party in those times not to use one's real name, in order to reduce the chances of exposure. For instance, if someone working with me was arrested, and flogged into revealing my real name, the police would easily trace me. But the police never knew the real person hiding behind an assumed name, such as I had in the Party. Naturally, even the assumed names often had to be changed. Even before going to prison, I had taken the name of Gligorijevi\u0107, and of Zagorac, meaning the 'man from Zagorje'. I even signed a few newspaper articles with the second.\nNow I had to take a new name. I adopted first the name of Rudi, but another comrade had the same name and so I was obliged to change it, adopting the name Tito. I hardly ever used Tito at first; I assumed it exclusively in 1938, when I began to sign articles with it. Why did I take this name 'Tito' and has it special significance? I took it as I would have any other, because it occurred to me at the moment. Apart from that, this name is quite frequent in my native district. The best-known Zagorje writer of the late eighteenth century was called Tito Brezova\u010dki; his witty comedies are still given in the Croatian theatre after more than a hundred years. The father of Ksaver \u0160andor Gjalski, one of the greatest Croatian writers, was also called Tito.\nAwards and decorations.\nJosip Broz Tito received a total of 119 awards and decorations from 60 countries around the world (59 countries and Yugoslavia). 21 decorations were from Yugoslavia itself, 18 having been awarded once, and the Order of the National Hero on three occasions. Of the 98 international awards and decorations, 92 were received once, and three on two occasions (Order of the White Lion, Polonia Restituta, and Karl Marx). The most notable awards included the French Legion of Honour and National Order of Merit, the British Order of the Bath, the Soviet Order of Victory, the Japanese Order of the Chrysanthemum, the West German Federal Cross of Merit, and the Order of Merit of the Italian Republic.\nThe decorations were seldom displayed, however. After the Tito\u2013Stalin split of 1948 and his inauguration as president in 1953, Tito rarely wore his uniform except when present in a military function, and then (with rare exception) only wore his Yugoslav ribbons for obvious practical reasons. The awards were displayed in full number only at his funeral in 1980. Tito's reputation as one of the Allied leaders of World War II, along with his diplomatic position as the founder of the Non-Aligned Movement, was primarily the cause of the favourable international recognition.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0Journals and papers\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "16568", "revid": "1093475", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16568", "title": "John Stauber", "text": "American progressive writer\nJohn Stauber is an American writer. Stauber has co-authored five books about government propaganda, private interests and the public relations industry. His work includes one book about how industry manipulates science (\"Trust Us, We're Experts\"), one about the history and current scope of the public relations industry (\"Toxic Sludge is Good for You\"), and one about mad cow disease (\"Mad Cow USA\"), which predicted the surfacing of the disease within the United States.\nIn July 2003, Stauber and Sheldon Rampton wrote \"Weapons of Mass Deception: The Uses of Propaganda in Bush's War on Iraq\", which argued that the Bush administration deceived the American public into supporting the war. In 2004, the two co-authored \"Banana Republicans,\" which argued that the Republican Party is turning the U.S. into a one-party state. The book argues that the far-right and its functionaries in the media, lobbying establishment and electoral system are undermining dissent and squelching pluralistic politics in the United States. In 2006 the two wrote \"The Best War Ever: Lies, Damned Lies, and the Mess in Iraq,\" which builds upon the arguments they posited in \"Weapons of Mass Deception\".\nStauber is the founder and former executive director of the Center for Media and Democracy, which sponsors PR Watch and SourceWatch. Since the 1960s, he has worked with public interest, consumer, family farm, environmental and community organizations at the local, state and national level. He edits and writes for the Center's quarterly newsmagazine, \"PR Watch\". He is also a member of the Liberty Tree Board of Advisers.\nStauber grew up in a conservative Republican household in Marshfield, Wisconsin, but the war in Vietnam turned him into an anti-war and environmental activist while still in high school.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16569", "revid": "1206340023", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16569", "title": "James P. Hogan (writer)", "text": "British science fiction author (1941\u20132010)\nJames Patrick Hogan (27 June 1941 \u2013 12 July 2010) was a British science fiction author. His major works include the \"Giants\" series of five novels published between 1977 and 2005.\nBiography.\nHogan was born in London, England. He was raised in the Portobello Road area on the west side of London. After leaving school at the age of sixteen, he worked various odd jobs until, after receiving a scholarship, he began a five-year program at the Royal Aircraft Establishment at Farnborough studying the practice and theory of electrical, electronic, and mechanical engineering. He was married four times and fathered six children.\nHogan worked as a design engineer for several companies and eventually began working with sales during the 1960s, traveling around Europe as a sales engineer for Honeywell. During the 1970s he joined the Digital Equipment Corporation's Laboratory Data Processing Group and during 1977 relocated to Boston, Massachusetts to manage its sales training program. He published his first novel, \"Inherit The Stars\", during the same year to win an office bet.\nHe quit DEC during 1979 and began writing full-time, relocating to Orlando, Florida, for a year where he met his third wife Jackie. They later relocated to Sonora, California. \nDuring his later years, Hogan adopted a number of contrarian opinions. He was a proponent of Immanuel Velikovsky's version of catastrophism, arguing Velikovsky's critics were part of \"an entrenched priesthood\" who refused to seriously examine Velikovsky even when some of his predictions were validated (such as Venus's extremely high surface temperature which was contrary to prevailing scientific opinion in the 1950s); and as of 1999 Hogan accepted the Peter Duesberg hypothesis that AIDS is caused by pharmaceutical use rather than HIV (see AIDS denialism). He criticized the idea of the gradualism of evolution, though he did not propose theistic creationism as an alternative. Hogan was skeptical of scientific consensus about climate change and ozone depletion.\nHogan believed that the Holocaust did not happen in the manner described by mainstream historians, writing that he found the work of Arthur Butz and Mark Weber to be \"more scholarly, scientific, and convincing than what the history written by the victors says\". In March 2010, in an essay defending Holocaust denier Ernst Z\u00fcndel, Hogan stated that the mainstream history of the Holocaust includes \"claims that are wildly fantastic, mutually contradictory, and defy common sense and often physical possibility\".\nHogan died of heart failure at his home in Ireland on Monday, 12 July 2010, aged 69.\nBibliography.\nOmnibus editions.\nCompilations of novels in the \"Giants series\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16570", "revid": "1398", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16570", "title": "Jeff Lynne", "text": "English musician (born 1947)\nJeffrey Lynne (born 30 December 1947) is an English musician, singer-songwriter and record producer. He is the co-founder and only consistent member of the rock band Electric Light Orchestra (ELO), which was formed in 1970. He has written all of the band's music since 1972, including hits such as \"Evil Woman\", \"Livin' Thing\", \"Telephone Line\", \"Mr. Blue Sky\", \"Don't Bring Me Down\" and \"Hold On Tight\". He also has had a solo career, with two albums: \"Armchair Theatre\" (1990) and \"Long Wave\" (2012).\nBorn in Birmingham, Lynne became interested in music during his youth and was heavily inspired by the Beatles. He began his music career in 1963 as a member of the Andicaps, then left the group the next year to join the Chads. From 1966 to 1970, he was a founding member and principal songwriter of the Idle Race. In 1970, he accepted Roy Wood's offer to join the Move and was a major contributor to the band's last two albums. Later that year, Lynne, Wood and Bev Bevan formed the band ELO as a side project to which they intended to devote most of their energies, out of their desire to create modern rock and pop songs with classical overtones. Following Wood's departure from ELO in 1972, Lynne assumed sole leadership of the band and wrote, arranged and produced virtually all of its subsequent records. During the 1970s and 1980s, ELO released a string of top 10 albums and singles, including the band's most commercially successful album, the double album \"Out of the Blue\" (1977). Two ELO albums reached the top of the British chart: the disco-inspired \"Discovery\" (1979) and the science fiction\u2013themed concept album \"Time\" (1981). In 1986, Lynne disbanded the group after losing interest in it, though he subsequently revived it from 2000 to 2001 and again from 2014 to 2025. Lynne produced all fifteen ELO singles that rose to the Top 10 record charts in the UK. \nAfter ELO's original disbandment in 1986, he began producing for various artists. In 1988, under the pseudonyms Otis Wilbury and Clayton Wilbury, he co-founded the supergroup Traveling Wilburys with George Harrison, Bob Dylan, Roy Orbison and Tom Petty. Lynne co-produced the Beatles' \"Anthology\" reunion singles from John Lennon demos, \"Free as a Bird\" (1995), \"Real Love\" (1996) and \"Now and Then\" (2023). In 2014, Lynne re-formed ELO and resumed concert touring under the name \"Jeff Lynne's ELO\". Outside of ELO, Lynne's producing credits include the UK or US Top 10 albums \"Cloud Nine\" (Harrison, 1987), \"Mystery Girl\" (Orbison, 1989), \"Full Moon Fever\" (Petty, 1989), \"Into the Great Wide Open\" (Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers, 1991), \"Flaming Pie\" (Paul McCartney, 1997) and \"Get Up!\" (Bryan Adams, 2015).\nIn 2014, Lynne received a star on the Birmingham Walk of Stars and was awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame the following year. He received three Ivor Novello Awards, including the award for Outstanding Services to British Music. In 2017, Lynne was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as a member of ELO, and was appointed Officer of the Order of the British Empire in 2020.\nEarly life.\nLynne was born in Erdington, Birmingham, England, to Nancy and Philip Lynne, and grew up nearby in Shard End, Birmingham, where he attended Alderlea Boys' Secondary School. As a native of Birmingham, he still has his Brummie accent. His father bought him his first acoustic guitar for \u00a32, which he was still playing as of 2012.\nMusical career.\nEarly years.\nSome time in or after 1965, Lynne acquired his first item of studio recording equipment, a Bang &amp; Olufsen 'Beocord 2000 De Luxe' stereo reel-to-reel tape recorder, which allowed multi-tracking between left and right channels. He says it \"taught me how to be a producer\". In 1966, Lynne joined the line-up of the Nightriders (later known as the Idle Race) as guitarist, having responded to an advertisement in the \"Birmingham Evening Mail\".\nIn 1968, while performing with the Idle Race, Lynne and the other members of the band were invited to a Beatles session at Abbey Road Studios. While there, he met the Beatles during the making of \"The White Album\", witnessing the band making it together. He spent an hour at the session, before going back to the sessions with the Idle Race. Years later, he admitted that being in the same room \"caused me not to sleep for, like, three days\". \nIn 1970, Lynne accepted an offer from friend Roy Wood to join the line-up of the more successful band the Move.\n1970\u20131986: The Move and ELO.\nLynne contributed many songs to the Move's last two albums while formulating, with Roy Wood and Bev Bevan, a band built around a fusion of rock and classical music \u2013 a project which would eventually become the Electric Light Orchestra (ELO). The original idea was that both bands would exist in tandem. Bevan has, however, since suggested that Lynne had little interest in the Move, stating: \"The only reason Jeff Lynne ever joined the Move was to form a new band. He was never interested in being a part of the Move.\"\nThe original aim of Electric Light Orchestra was to take up \"where the Beatles had left off, and to present it on stage.\" John Lennon later praised the group, calling them the \"sons of the Beatles\" on a radio station when discussing the group's 1973 single \"Showdown\" on the New York radio station WNEW. Critics often compared Electric Light Orchestra to the Beatles, and they were often criticised for \"ripping off\" the band. Lynne admitted that he \"was very influenced by the Beatles' sound of '68 and '69. That has obviously been a big influence on the way [he] looked at songwriting\" and said that being compared with the Beatles was the \"ultimate compliment\".\nThe band's eponymous first album was released in December 1971, featuring heavy contributions from Lynne and Wood and producing the band's debut single \"10538 Overture\". Problems led to Wood's departure in 1972 (he formed the band Wizzard later that year), a year after the release of the band's first album, leaving Lynne as ELO's dominant creative force.\nIn 1976, working as a solo artist, Lynne covered the Beatles songs \"With a Little Help from My Friends\" and \"Nowhere Man\" for the film \"All This and World War II\". Lynne then issued his debut solo single, \"Doin' That Crazy Thing\", in 1977.\nThe pinnacle of ELO's chart success and worldwide popularity was the expansive double album \"Out of the Blue\" (1977), which was largely conceived in a Swiss chalet during a two-week writing marathon. The band's 1978 world tour featured an elaborate \"space ship\" set and laser light show. In order to recreate the complex instrumental textures of their albums, the band used pre-recorded supplemental backing tracks in live performances. Although that practice has now become commonplace, it caused considerable derision in the press of the time. Lynne has often stated that he prefers the creative environment of the studio to the rigours and tedium of touring. Lynne followed up the success of \"Out of the Blue\" with \"Discovery\" (1979), which held No. 1 in the UK for five weeks. The album is primarily associated with its two disco-flavoured singles (\"Shine a Little Love\" and \"Last Train to London\") and with the title's word play on \"disco\" and \"very\". However, the remaining seven non-disco tracks on the album reflected Lynne's range as a pop-rock songwriter, including a heavy, mid-tempo rock anthem (\"Don't Bring Me Down\") which uses a drum loop. Lynne later recalled his forays into dance music: \"I love the force of disco. I love the freedom it gave me to make different rhythms across it. I enjoyed that really steady driving beat. Just steady as a rock. I've always liked that simplicity in the bass drum.\"\nIn 1979, Lynne rejected an offer for ELO to headline the Knebworth Concert in the UK, allowing Led Zeppelin to headline instead. In the absence of any touring to support \"Discovery\", Lynne had time to contribute five tracks to the soundtrack for the 1980 film musical \"Xanadu\". The score yielded three Top 20 singles for ELO in both the UK and the US: \"I'm Alive\" (UK No. 20, US No. 16), \"All Over The World\" (UK No. 11, US No. 13) and the title track \"Xanadu\", featuring Olivia Newton-John joining ELO on lead vocals, which reached number one in the UK (US No. 8). Nevertheless, Lynne was not closely involved with the development of the film, and his material consequently had only superficial attachment to the plot. \"Xanadu\" performed weakly at the box office (although it later has experienced popularity as a cult favourite).\nLynne took the band in a somewhat different direction with the science-fiction themed album \"Time\" (1981), reaching number one for two weeks in the UK, producing the second top three single in less than two years. The strings were still featured, but with heavily synthesised textures. Following a marginally successful tour, Lynne kept this general approach with \"Secret Messages\" (1983) and a final contractually-obligated ELO album \"Balance of Power\" (1986). Lynne discusses the contractually-obliged nature of the final albums on the short interview included with the 'Zoom' DVD. ELO now had only three remaining official members (Lynne, Bevan and Tandy), and Lynne began devoting more time to producing. \nIn 1984, Lynne (working a solo artist for the first time since 1977) contributed two original songs \"Video!\" and \"Let It Run\" to the film \"Electric Dreams\". A third solo song, \"Sooner Or Later\", was released as the b-side of \"Video!\". Richard Tandy was a session musician on these tracks; Lynne collaborated with Tandy again in 1986 with Lynne producing the charity single \"Action!\" for Tandy Morgan Band. \nIn contrast to the dense, boomy, baroque sound of ELO, Lynne's post-ELO studio work has tended toward more minimal, acoustic instrumentation and a sparse, \"organic\" quality that generally favours light room ambience and colouration over artificial reverb, especially on vocals. Lynne's recordings also often feature the jangling compressed acoustic guitar sound pioneered by Roger McGuinn and a heavily gated snare drum sound.\n1980s: Production work.\nEven before the official end of ELO, Lynne began his move toward focusing almost exclusively on studio production work. Lynne produced and wrote the 1983 top-40 hit \"Slipping Away\" for Dave Edmunds and played on sessions (with Tandy) for Edmunds's album, \"Information\". Lynne also produced six tracks on Edmunds's follow-up album in 1984, \"Riff Raff\". \nLynne also wrote the songs \"The Story of Me\", which was recorded by the Everly Brothers on their comeback album \"EB84\", and \"One Way Love\" from Agnetha F\u00e4ltskog for her second post-ABBA album, \"Eyes of a Woman\".\nLynne started working with George Harrison very closely in the late 1980s. This friendship eventually led to Harrison's appearance at the Birmingham Heartbeat Charity Concert, showing up as the finale of the concert and joining many other musicians in a rendition of \"Johnny B. Goode\", as well as a one-off Electric Light Orchestra concert, both in 1986. In 1987, he appeared with Harrison at The Prince's Trust event at Wembley Arena.\n1987\u20131991: Traveling Wilburys.\nLynne's Beatles influence was evident in his ELO work, and the connection to the Beatles strengthened when Lynne produced George Harrison's \"Cloud Nine.\" Released in 1987, it was a successful comeback for Harrison, featuring the popular singles \"Got My Mind Set on You\", \"When We Was Fab\" (appearing in the video) and \"This Is Love\", the last two of which were co-written by Lynne. Lynne's association with Harrison led to the 1988 formation of the Traveling Wilburys, a studio \"supergroup\" including Tom Petty, Bob Dylan, and Roy Orbison that resulted in two albums (\"Vol. 1\" and \"Vol. 3\"), both produced by Harrison and Lynne. In 1988, Lynne also worked on Orbison's album \"Mystery Girl\", co-writing and producing Orbison's last major hit, \"You Got It\", plus two other tracks on that album. \nIn the late 1980s Lynne co-wrote and produced \"Let It Shine\" for Brian Wilson's first solo album. Lynne also contributed three tracks to an album by Duane Eddy and \"Falling in Love\" on \"Land of Dreams\" for Randy Newman.\nIn 1989, Lynne co-produced \"Full Moon Fever\" by Tom Petty, which included the hit singles \"Free Fallin'\", \"I Won't Back Down\" and \"Runnin' Down a Dream\", all co-written by Lynne. This album and \"Traveling Wilburys Vol. 1\" received nominations for the Grammy Award for Best Album of the Year in 1989. The Traveling Wilburys won a Grammy for \"Best Rock Performance By a Duo or Group with Vocal\" that year.\nIn 1990, Lynne collaborated on the Wilburys' follow up \"Traveling Wilburys Vol. 3\" and released his first solo album \"Armchair Theatre\". The album featured Tandy and Harrison and included the singles \"Every Little Thing\" and \"Lift Me Up\". It received some positive critical attention but little commercial success. Lynne also provided the song \"Wild Times\" to the motion picture soundtrack \"\". \nIn 1991, Lynne returned to the studio with Petty, co-writing and producing the album \"Into the Great Wide Open\" for Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers, which featured the singles \"Learning to Fly\" and \"Into the Great Wide Open\". The following year he produced two songs on Roy Orbison's posthumous \"King of Hearts\", including the single \"I Drove All Night\".\n1990s\u20132000s.\nFor 1991's \"Rock On!\", the final Del Shannon album, Lynne co-wrote \"Walk Away\" and finished off several tracks after Shannon's death.\nIn February 1994, Lynne worked with the three surviving Beatles on the \"Anthology\" album series. At Harrison's request, Lynne was brought in to assist in reevaluating John Lennon's original studio material. The songs \"Free as a Bird\" and \"Real Love\" were created by digitally processing Lennon's demos for the songs and overdubbing the three surviving band members to form a virtual Beatles reunion that the band had mutually eschewed during Lennon's lifetime. He also worked on the song \"Now and Then\", which remained unfinished until 2023. Lynne has also produced records for Ringo Starr and worked on Paul McCartney's Grammy-nominated album \"Flaming Pie\".\nLynne's work in the 1990s also includes production of a 1993 album for singer-songwriter Julianna Raye titled \"Something Peculiar\" and production or songwriting contributions to albums by Roger McGuinn (\"Back from Rio\") and Joe Cocker (\"Night Calls\"), plus songs by Aerosmith (\"Lizard Love\"), Tom Jones (\"Lift Me Up\"), Bonnie Tyler (\"Time Mends a Broken Heart\"), Hank Marvin (\"Wonderful Land\" and \"Nivram\") and Et Moi (\"Drole De Vie\"), as well as the film \"Still Crazy\". In 1996, Lynne was officially recognised by his peers when he was awarded the Ivor Novello Award for \"Outstanding Contributions to British Music\" for the second time.\nIn the year 2000, Lynne reactivated ELO and released the retrospective box set \"Flashback\", containing many newly finished, previously unreleased tracks. The following year Lynne debuted the first new ELO album in fifteen years, \"Zoom\". The album featured guest appearances by Ringo Starr, George Harrison and Richard Tandy, with Lynne multi-tracking a majority of the instruments and vocals. The album received positive reviews but had no hit singles. It was marketed as a \"return to the classic ELO sound\" in an attempt to connect with a loyal body of fans and to jump-start a planned concert tour (with Lynne and Tandy as the only returning original ELO members). While a live performance was taped at CBS Television City over two consecutive nights and shown on PBS (with subsequent DVD release), the tour itself was cancelled.\nIn 2001, Lynne started work with George Harrison on what would turn out to be Harrison's final album, \"Brainwashed\". After Harrison's death from cancer on 29 November 2001, Lynne returned to the studio in 2002 to help finish the uncompleted album. Lynne was heavily involved in the memorial \"Concert for George\", held at London's Royal Albert Hall in November 2002, which also featured Traveling Wilburys member Petty. Lynne sang the lead vocal on \"The Inner Light\", \"I Want to Tell You\", and \"Give Me Love (Give Me Peace on Earth)\", and subsequently produced the Surround Sound audio mix for the \"Concert for George\" DVD, released in November 2003, which later received a Grammy. Lynne reunited in 2006 with Petty to produce the latter's third solo release, \"Highway Companion\". In 2004, Lynne and Petty inducted Harrison into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, and performed \"Handle with Care\" with Dhani Harrison, and \"While My Guitar Gently Weeps\" with Prince, Steve Winwood and others.\nIn a Reuters article on 23 April 2009, Lynne said that he had been working on the follow-up to his 1990 solo debut album \"Armchair Theatre\" with a possible tentative release date of \"later this year\". He also produced four tracks on Regina Spektor's fifth album \"Far\", released on 23 June 2009.\n2010s.\nIn a March 2010 interview with the \"Daily Express\" newspaper, Lynne confirmed he was working on a new album with Joe Walsh and simultaneously \"writing a couple of albums under his own name, though he won't tell us in which musical direction he's heading.\" Lynne contributed a cover of Buddy Holly's \"Words of Love\" for the tribute album \"\", which was released on 6 September 2011. On 31 December 2011, Brian Williams reported on NBC New Year's Eve with Carson Daly that \"2012 releases will include rare new work from Jeff Lynne.\"\nIn 2012, Walsh released his \"Analog Man\" album which was produced by Lynne. Lynne's second solo album, a covers album titled \"Long Wave\", was released on 8 October 2012. A greatest hits collection of re-recorded ELO songs by Lynne titled \"\" was also released under the ELO moniker on the same day. Lynne suggested that a new album with original material could be released during 2013. In 2012, Lynne and Tandy teamed up at Lynne's Bungalow Palace home studios to record a live set of ELO's songs. This was broadcast on TV as part of the \"Mr. Blue Sky\" documentary. Lynne and Tandy reunited again on 12 November 2013 to perform, under the name Jeff Lynne and Friends, \"Livin' Thing\" and \"Mr. Blue Sky\" at the \"Children in Need Rocks\" concert at Hammersmith Eventim Apollo, London.\nOn 9 February 2014, Lynne performed George Harrison's \"Something\" with Joe Walsh and Dhani Harrison on \"\", as well as \"Hey Bulldog\" from the \"Yellow Submarine soundtrack\", while accompanying Dave Grohl, commemorating the 50th anniversary of the Beatles' performance on \"The Ed Sullivan Show\". On 5 March 2014, Lynne received an honorary doctorate degree from Birmingham City University. He also mentioned he was working with Bryan Adams on new material. On 14 September 2014, Jeff Lynne and his touring band, under the name Jeff Lynne's ELO, played a public concert for the first time in over 25 years, headlining at the Radio 2 festival in Hyde Park, London. Never particularly enthusiastic for live performance even in his younger days, Lynne has called this event \"easily the best concert I've ever been involved with\".\nOn 8 February 2015, Lynne appeared at the Grammy Awards, playing \"Evil Woman\" and \"Mr. Blue Sky\" with Ed Sheeran.\nOn 10 September 2015, Lynne's website announced he had signed a contract to deliver an album of new ELO music for Columbia Records marking the first time in 14 years new ELO music would be released. On 24 September 2015, \"When I Was a Boy\", the first single from \"Alone in the Universe\" was released on the internet with a music video scheduled not long after. The album was released on 13 November 2015 and was followed by promotional shows including the first ELO shows in the United States in 30 years. A 2016 European tour was scheduled, with Dublin, Amsterdam and Z\u00fcrich being some of the locations toured. Notably, the Dublin concert was delayed by a week due to medical advice given to Lynne. In September, 2016, shortly after the European dates, ELO played three shows at the Hollywood Bowl, Los Angeles, with full orchestra and fireworks. Jeff Lynne's ELO also played two concerts at Radio City Music Hall in New York City, on 16 and 18 September 2016 respectively.\nOn 24 June 2017, Lynne performed at Wembley Stadium to a crowd of 60,000, playing a 24-song setlist including \"Xanadu\", \"Do Ya\" and \"Twilight\". The concert was released on DVD and CD, under the title \"Wembley or Bust\". On 2 August 2018, Lynne and his band Jeff Lynne's ELO began a 10-city tour of North America which included Oakland, Los Angeles, Denver, Houston, Dallas, Rosemont, Illinois, Detroit, New York City, Philadelphia and Toronto. On 12 September 2018, Jeff Lynne's ELO began a tour throughout Europe including dates in Stockholm, Oslo, Copenhagen, Hamburg, Berlin, Munich, Mannheim, Vienna, Amsterdam, Nottingham, Glasgow, Manchester, Newcastle upon Tyne, Birmingham, Leeds, London, Liverpool, Dublin and Belfast. On 20 June 2019, Jeff Lynne's ELO began a North American tour with Dhani Harrison.\nOn 26 September 2019, Jeff Lynne's ELO announced a new album, called \"From Out of Nowhere\", which was subsequently released on 1 November of the same year. The album was accompanied by the release of an eponymous single which premiered on BBC Radio 2 that same day. The album went to number one on the UK Albums Chart.\n2020s.\nOn 18 March 2024, Jeff Lynne's ELO announced the Over And Out Tour, a final tour of North America that would span from August to October 2024. Tandy died on 1 May 2024, at the age of 76. Announcing his death on social media, Lynne memorialised Tandy as \"a remarkable musician and friend\". In December 2024, Lynne received an award from Spotify celebrating 1 billion streams of ELO's biggest hit, \"Mr. Blue Sky\".\nPersonal life.\nLynne was married to his first wife Rosemary Adams, from 1972 to 1977, and then to Sandi Kapelson, with whom he has two daughters, in 1979. After divorcing Kapelson, Lynne married Camelia Kath in 2017.\nDespite his success, Lynne has spoken of his aversion to the stereotypical rock star lifestyle. Reflecting on the 1970s, he told \"Rolling Stone\" magazine: \"I was reluctant to become a real rock star. I was shy and was always told to not get a big head. And my favourite thing in the world was to work 14 hours a day in the studio. Everything else was peripheral to me, like having the record out and promoting it. I did have a big house, but I didn't do rock-star things. I never saw myself like that. I was a songwriter, singer and producer. Rock stars are different. They dress all flashy and hang out in nightclubs. That just wasn't my priority. I liked to spend my spare moments at the pub.\"\nLynne was appointed Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in the 2020 Birthday Honours for services to music. He is a fan of Birmingham City F.C.\nIn July 2025, during his Over and Out tour, Lynne revealed he had suffered a hand injury while travelling in a taxi in London. The last two shows on the UK tour (which were to be the band's last ever) were cancelled due to Lynne's health, with no plans to reschedule.\nDiscography.\nAs producer, composer or session musician.\n\"For releases of bands which Lynne was a member of see The Idle Race discography, the Move discography, Electric Light Orchestra discography, Traveling Wilburys discography\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16572", "revid": "62058", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16572", "title": "Judge Dredd", "text": "Fictional comic book character\nJudge Joseph Dredd is a fictional character created by writer John Wagner and artist Carlos Ezquerra. He first appeared in the second issue of the British weekly anthology comic \"2000 AD\" (1977). He is the magazine's longest-running character, and in 1990 he got his own title, the \"Judge Dredd Megazine\". He also appears in a number of film and video game adaptations.\nJudge Dredd is a law enforcement and judicial officer in the dystopian future city of Mega-City One, which covers most of the east coast of North America. He is a \"street judge\", empowered to summarily arrest, convict, sentence, and execute criminals. Judge Dredd stories often satirise American and British culture, with a focus on authoritarianism and police brutality.\nJudge Dredd made his live-action debut in 1995 in \"Judge Dredd\", portrayed by Sylvester Stallone. Later, he was portrayed by Karl Urban in the 2012 adaptation \"Dredd\". In audio dramas by Big Finish Productions, Dredd is voiced by Toby Longworth.\nPublication history.\nWhen comics editor Pat Mills was developing \"2000 AD\" in 1976, he brought in his former writing partner, John Wagner, to develop characters. Wagner had written a \"Dirty Harry\"-style \"tough cop\" story, \"One-Eyed Jack\", for \"Valiant\", and suggested a character who took that concept to its logical extreme. In a 1995 interview, Wagner said: \"When Pat was putting together \"2000 AD\", we realised from the success of \"One-Eyed Jack\" this was the kind of story the paper should have \u2013 a really hard, tough cop.\"\nMills had developed a horror strip called \"Judge Dread\" (named after the stage name of British ska and reggae artist Alexander Minto Hughes), before abandoning the idea as unsuitable for the new comic; but the name, with the spelling modified to \"Dredd\" at the suggestion of sub-editor Kelvin Gosnell, was adopted by Wagner. \nAccording to Mills, the name Joseph \u2013 given to Dredd in a story written by Mills which appeared in \"prog\" (short for programme or issue) no. 30 \u2013 refers to where he went to school, St Joseph's College, Ipswich.\nThe task of visualising the character was given to Carlos Ezquerra, a Spanish artist who had worked for Mills before on \"Battle Picture Weekly\". Wagner gave Ezquerra an advertisement for the film \"Death Race 2000\", showing the character Frankenstein (played by David Carradine) clad in black leather on a motorbike, as a suggestion of Dredd's appearance. Ezquerra added body-armour, zips, and chains, which Wagner initially objected to, commenting that the character looked like a \"Spanish pirate.\" Wagner's initial script was rewritten by Mills and drawn up by Ezquerra. The hardware and cityscapes Ezquerra had drawn were far more futuristic than the near-future setting originally intended; in response, Mills set the story further into the future, on the advice of his art assistant Doug Church. The original launch story written by Wagner and drawn by Ezquerra was vetoed by the board of directors for being too violent. A new script was needed for the first episode.\nBy this stage, Wagner had quit, disillusioned that a proposed buy-out of the new comic by another company, which would have given him and Mills a greater financial stake in the comic, had fallen through. Mills was reluctant to lose \"Judge Dredd\" and farmed the strip out to a variety of freelance writers, hoping to develop it further. Their scripts were given to a variety of artists as Mills tried to find a strip which would provide a good introduction to the character. This \"Judge Dredd\" would not be ready for the first issue of \"2000 AD\", launched in February 1977.\nThe story chosen to introduce the character was submitted by freelance writer Peter Harris, and was extensively re-written by Mills, who added a new ending suggested by Kelvin Gosnell. It was drawn by newcomer Mike McMahon. The strip debuted in prog 2. Around this time Ezquerra quit and returned to work for \"Battle\". There are conflicting sources about why. Ezquerra says it was because he was angry that another artist had drawn the first published \"Judge Dredd\" strip. Mills says he chose McMahon because Ezquerra had already left, having been offered a better deal by the editor of \"Battle\".\nWagner soon returned to the character, starting in prog 9. His storyline, \"The Robot Wars\", was drawn by a rotating team of artists (including Ezquerra), and marked the point where Dredd became the most popular character in the comic, a position he has rarely relinquished. Judge Dredd has appeared in almost every issue since, most of the stories written by Wagner (in collaboration with Alan Grant between 1980 and 1988).\nIn 1983, Judge Dredd made his American debut with his own series from publisher Eagle Comics, titled \"Judge Dredd\". It consisted of stories reprinted from the British comic, but since 2012 IDW Publishing has published a variety of \"Judge Dredd\" titles featuring original stories. Since 1990, Dredd has also had his own title in Britain, the \"Judge Dredd Megazine\". With Wagner concentrating his energies on that, the \"Dredd\" strip in \"2000 AD\" was left to younger writers, including Garth Ennis, Mark Millar, Grant Morrison and John Smith. Their stories were less popular with fans, and sales fell. Wagner returned to writing the character full-time for \"2000 AD\" in 1994.\n\"Judge Dredd\" has also been published in a long-running comic strip (1981\u20131998) in the \"Daily Star\", and briefly in \"Metro\" from January to April 2004. These were usually created by the same teams writing and drawing the main strip, and some of the \"Daily Star\" strips have been collected into two hardback volumes. Originally published in black and white, some of the \"Daily Star\" strips were subsequently coloured and published in \"Metal Hammer\" magazine in the 1990s.\nIn 2012, Dredd was one of 10 British comic characters commemorated in a series of stamps issued by the Royal Mail.\nBetween 2015 and 2018, Hachette Partworks published a fortnightly partwork collection of hardback books entitled \"\". This included not only \"Judge Dredd\" stories but also a variety of spin-off stories set in the same universe.\nLists of stories.\nAlmost all of the stories from both comics are currently being reprinted in their original order of publication in a series of trade paperbacks. Stories from the regular issues of \"2000 AD\" and the \"Megazine\" are collected in a series entitled \"Judge Dredd: The Complete Case Files.\" This series began in 2005 and is still ongoing as of 2025. Stories from special holiday issues and annuals appeared in \"Judge Dredd: The Restricted Files\". This four-volume series began in 2010 and concluded in 2012.\nCharacter and appearance.\nJoseph Dredd is the most famous of the Street Judges that patrol Mega-City One, empowered to instantly convict, sentence, and sometimes execute offenders. Dredd is armed with a \"Lawgiver\", a pistol programmed to recognise only his palm-print and capable of firing six types of ammunition, a daystick, a boot knife and stun or gas grenades. His helmet obscures his face, except for his mouth and jaw. He rides a large \"Lawmaster\" motorcycle equipped with machine-guns, a powerful laser cannon, and full artificial intelligence capable of responding to orders from the Judge and operating itself.\nIn an interview, Ezquerra commented on how he designed the character, stating he received the basic description of \"a menacing policeman dressed in black and driving a motorbike.\" He later described his process on creating the character: \"When I create a character, I'll do it fairly quickly, the longer you stay working on an idea, the more chances you have to spoil it and Dredd was not an exception. I draw the essentials: grim face, black suit, menacing helmet (based on the Greeks), protections, and gun readily available when sitting on the bike, after that I started to embellish the protections and bike with symbols, maybe a couple of days in total.\"\nDredd's entire face is never shown in the strip. This began as an unofficial guideline, but soon became a rule. As John Wagner explained: \"It sums up the facelessness of justice \u2212 justice has no soul. So it isn't necessary for readers to see Dredd's face, and I don't want you to\".\nOn rare occasions, Dredd's face has been seen in flashbacks to his childhood; but these pictures lack detail. In an early story, Dredd is forced to remove his helmet and the other characters react as if he is disfigured, but his face was covered by a faux censorship sticker. In prog 52, during Dredd's tenure on the Lunar Colonies, he uses a 'face-change' machine to impersonate the crooked lawyer of a gang of bank robbers.\nIn Carlos Ezquerra's original design, Dredd had large lips, \"to put a mystery as to his racial background\". Not all of the artists who worked on the strip were told of this. Mike McMahon drew Dredd as a black man, while Brian Bolland and Ron Smith drew him as white. The strip was not yet printed in colour, and this went unnoticed. The idea was dropped.\nTime passes in the \"Judge Dredd\" strip in real time, so as a year passes in life, a year passes in the comic. The first Dredd story, published in 1977, was set in 2099, 122 years in the future, and so stories published in 2025 are set 122 years in the future, in 2147. Consequently, as former editor Alan McKenzie explains, \"every year that goes by Dredd gets a year older \u2013 unlike Spider-Man, who has been a university student for the past twenty-five years!\". Therefore, Dredd was 38 when he first appeared, but is now years old, with years of active service (2079\u20132147), and for almost 30 years Dredd's age and fitness for duty were recurring plot points (in prog 1595 (2008), Dredd was diagnosed with benign cancer of the duodenum).\nHow Dredd's aging would be addressed was a source of reader speculation until 2016, when writer Michael Carroll and artist Ben Willsher published the story \"Carousel\", in which Dredd is ordered to undertake rejuvenation treatment that restores him to his physical prime. Regarding the possible death of the character, in an interview with \"Empire\" in 2012 Wagner said: \"There could be many ways to end it, but the probability is that I won't still be around when it happens! I would love to write it, but I can't see it happening. I'll leave the script in my will\".\nWeapon.\nThe Lawgiver is a fictional weapon used by the Judges including \"Judge Dredd\". The Lawgiver is a self-loading handgun featuring manual and automatic focusing and targeting, plus a built-in computer capable of controlling its operation. An in-line gunsight shows the view directly down the barrel. A Lawgiver can only be operated by its designated Judge owner, whose palm print is programmed into the gun's memory. Any attempt by a non-designated user, even another Judge, to fire a Lawgiver causes the weapon to self-destruct (a feature introduced by writer Malcolm Shaw).\nThe gun fires six different kinds of rounds, which a Judge can switch via voice command:\nAs well as the usual six rounds listed above, a stun shot has also been depicted in the comic, and a variety of other rounds have been shown in the films.\nSetting.\nDredd's first stories take place in the year 2099, 122 years after their publication date in 1977. His regular stories are generally set 122 years after their real-world publication date (unless otherwise stated as a flashback or prequel story), so that stories published in 2025 are set in 2147.\nThe setting of \"Judge Dredd\" is a dystopian future Earth damaged by a series of international conflicts; much of the planet has become radioactive wasteland, and so populations have aggregated in enormous conurbations known as 'mega-cities'. The story is centred on the megalopolis of Mega-City One, on the east coast of North America. Within Mega-City One, extensive automation (including intelligent robots) has rendered the majority of the population unemployed. As a consequence, the general population is prone to embracing any fashion or craze they encounter. Mega-City One is surrounded by the inhospitable \"Cursed Earth\", a radioactive desert populated by outlaws and mutants. Much of the remaining world's geography is somewhat vague, although other mega-cities are visited in the strip.\nThe majority of Mega-City One's population lives in gigantic towers known as City Blocks, each holding some 50,000 people. Each is named after some historical person or TV character, usually for comic effect. A minority live in \"mopads\" - an evolution of the mobile home, and constantly travel Mega-City One's extensive road network. Mega-City One extends from Boston to Charlotte; but extended into Florida before the Apocalypse War laid waste to the southern sectors. At its height, the city contained a population of about 800 million; after the Apocalypse War, it was halved to 400 million.\nThe Judge system.\nStreet Judges act as police, judge, jury, and executioner. Capital punishment in Mega-City One is rarely used, though deaths while resisting arrest are commonplace. Numerous writers have used the Judge System to satirize contemporary politics.\nJudges, once appointed, can be broadly characterised as \"Street Judges\" (who patrol the city), and administrative (office-based) Judges. The Justice Department is responsible not only for law enforcement, but is also the government, since the United States was overthrown in 2070 following the Third World War, which devastated much of America. The Judges are a ruling class, the ordinary citizens having no participation in government except at the municipal level. Dredd was once offered the job of Chief Judge, but he refused it.\nThe Judge System has spread world-wide, with various super-cities possessing similar methods of law enforcement. As such, this political model has become the most common form of government on Earth, with only a few small areas practicing civilian rule.\nFictional character biography.\nIn 2066, Joseph Dredd and his older (by twelve minutes) \"brother\" Rico Dredd are cloned from the DNA of Chief Judge Fargo, the founder of the Judge System, who was said to have died in the line of duty years before. Their growth is artificially accelerated in gestation so they are \"born\" with the physiological and mental development of a 5-year-old child, with appropriate knowledge and training already implanted in their brains. The last name \"Dredd\" is chosen by the genetic scientist who created them, Morton Judd, to \"instill fear in the population.\"\nIn 2070, the corrupt President Robert Linus Booth starts World War III, also known as the Atomic Wars, and the Judges move to restore order to the panic-stricken public. Cadets Joe Dredd and Rico Dredd are temporarily made full judges to help restore order under the supervision of Judge Kinnison, despite being physically and mentally only nine years old. They make their first kills stopping a rape gang but are unable to prevent Kinnison's death in action. During the war, they discover their clone-father Eustace Fargo is still alive, hidden by higher ranking judges. Seeing them as kin, Fargo recruits Joe and Rico to be his temporary bodyguards. He openly tells them his doubts regarding the Justice Department, wondering if the system has taken away \"life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness\" while trying to instill strict order and control. Three weeks later, Fargo is placed in suspended animation and the Dredd brothers return to the Academy. After the Battle of Armageddon in 2071, President \"Bad Bob\" Booth is captured, tried for war crimes, and sentenced to suspended animation. In the wake of World War III, the office of the President is retired and the Judges now have full control over what's left of America.\nDistinguishing themselves, the Dredds are fast-tracked through the Academy of Law. Rico graduates at the top of their class in 2079, with Joseph graduating second. Joe's final assessment is done under the supervision of Judge Morphy, who is impressed with the young man and passes him. Joe later discovers Rico has embraced corruption, engaging in multiple crimes including murder, justifying his actions by saying Judges are thugs and killers by nature. Rico asks Joe to help him cover his crimes, but Joe arrests his brother instead, sentencing him to 20 years of hard labour on the penal colony on Saturn's moon Titan (a typical punishment for corrupt Judges). Joe Dredd continues operating as a judge, quickly gaining a reputation throughout the city as a formidable and incorruptible law enforcement agent. In 2099, Rico Dredd returns to Earth after serving his 20-year sentence. He comes after Joe for revenge, challenging him to a fast draw. No longer used to Earth's gravity, Rico loses and Joe shoots him dead in self-defence. Visibly upset, Joe insists he be the one to carry his brother's body away.\nOver the decades, Joe Dredd becomes a major force protecting Mega-City One and is sometimes the biggest catalyst in preventing its destruction. Offered the opportunity to become Chief Judge in 2101, Dredd declines, preferring to serve on the streets enforcing the law, though he does temporarily serve in other senior positions. In \"Tour of Duty\", Dredd is appointed to the Council of Five, Mega-City One's highest governing body below the Chief Judge, on which he serves for two years (2132 to 2134). On several occasions, he saves his city from conquest or destruction by powerful enemies, and in 2114, he saves the entire world during the Fourth World War.\nIn 2107, Dredd loses his eyes in combat during the story \"City of the Damned\". He has them replaced with bionic eyes that grant him night-vision. In 2112, he suffers near-fatal wounds when a battle causes him to fall into a lake of acidic chemicals, burning his entire body. Later on, he undergoes rejuvenation treatment, healing him and adding more vitality than a man his age would normally have. In 2130, Dredd is diagnosed with cancer of the duodenum, though it was benign. In 2138, at 72 years old, Dredd undergoes another \"rejuve\" treatment after being ordered to. It is specified that his entire epidermis, vascular, and muscular tissue are rebuilt on a cellular level, once again restoring some lost youth and vitality. He turns down an offer for a full treatment that would rebuild his internal organs and skeleton.\nAlthough Dredd holds his duty above every other priority, this devotion is not blind. On two occasions (in \"The Robot Wars\" and \"Tale of the Dead Man\"), Dredd resigns from the force on principle, but both times he later returns, believing the Judge System, while imperfect and vulnerable to corruption, is the best protection that currently exists for people. In 2113, Dredd insists the Justice Department gamble its existence on a referendum to prove its legitimacy. In 2116, he risks 20 years imprisonment with hard labour when he challenges the policy of a Chief Judge. In 2129, Dredd threatens to resign if the Chief Judge doesn't change the city's harsh anti-mutant apartheid laws.\nIn 2129 (\"2000 AD\" #1535), Dredd is present when his clone-father Eustace Fargo is revived from cryogenic suspension, only to die later the same day. Before Fargo dies, he calls for Dredd to be at his side and admits his conclusion that the Judge system was a mistake that killed the American Dream, that it was meant to fix things but not last forever. Since Joe and Rico Dredd are his blood, Eustace hopes they will fix his mistakes, implying they should replace the Judge System with something else (he was unaware Rico Dredd had gone renegade and later died by Joe's hand). After Eustace Fargo dies, Dredd decides not to share the man's final words.\nIn more recent years, Dredd has met other Fargo clones such as Kraken and Nimrod. He has also developed a family of sorts with the introduction of two younger clones of his own named Dolman and Judge Rico (no first name). Dredd also discovered his older brother Rico Dredd fathered a daughter, Vienna Dredd, who now sees Joe as an uncle.\nRecurring adversaries.\nDredd's adversaries generally do not return in sequels, since they are usually killed or sentenced to long terms of incarceration. However, a few villains have returned in multiple stories, and some later got their own spin-off series.\nMajor storylines.\nThere have been a number of Judge Dredd stories that have significantly developed the Dredd character and/or the fictional world, or which create and add to a larger storyline. These are listed below (for a complete list of all stories see here).\nAlternative versions.\nShortly before the release of the 1995 film, three new comic book titles were released, followed by a one-off comic version of the film story.\nDC Comics published an alternative version of Judge Dredd between 1994 and 1996, lasting 18 issues. Continuity and history were different from both the original \"2000 AD\" version and the 1995 film. A major difference was that Chief Judge Fargo, portrayed as incorruptible in the original version, was depicted as evil in the DC version. Most issues were written by Andrew Helfer, but the last issue was written by Gordon Rennie, who has since written \"Judge Dredd\" for \"2000 AD\" (Note: the DC crossover story \"\" featured the original Dredd, not the version depicted in this title).\nAnother DC Comics title, lasting 13 issues between 1994 and 1995. Although these were intended to feature the same version of Judge Dredd as in the other DC title, the first four issues were written by John Wagner and Alan Grant and were consistent with their original \"2000 AD\" version.\nFrom the same publishers as \"2000 AD\", this was nevertheless a completely different version of Dredd aimed at younger readers. Editor David Bishop prohibited writers from showing Dredd killing anyone, a reluctance which would be completely unfamiliar to readers acquainted with the original version. As one reviewer put it years later: \"this was Judge Dredd with two vital ingredients missing: his balls.\" It ran fortnightly for 23 issues from 1995 to 1996, plus one \"Action Special\".\nWritten by Andrew Helfer and illustrated by Carlos Ezquerra and Michael Danza. Published by DC Comics in 1995, but a different version of Dredd to that in the DC comic books described above.\nIn Japan, manga comic \"Sh\u014dnen Jump Autumn Special\" (1995) included a one-off story featuring a unique version of Judge Dredd which was entirely different to both the comic character and the film character. Set in Tokyo in 2099, Dredd Takeru is a part-time street judge whose day job is working as a primary school teacher.\nFrom the same publishers as \"2000 AD\", this was a series of ultra-violent one-off stories from \"a separate and aggressive Dredd world\". The first eight episodes were originally published in \"Rock Power\" magazine, and were all co-written by John Wagner and Alan Grant and illustrated by Simon Bisley. These were reprinted, together with 11 new stories (some by other creators), in \"Judge Dredd Megazine\". The original eight stories were collected in a trade paperback by Hamlyn in 1993. The complete series was collected by Rebellion Developments in 2009.\nIn the week that the 2012 film \"Dredd\" was released in the UK, a 10-page prologue was published in issue #328 of \"Judge Dredd Megazine\", written by its editor, Matt Smith, and illustrated by Henry Flint. \"Top of the World, Ma-Ma\" told the backstory of the film's main antagonist, Ma-Ma. Five more stories featuring this version of the character were published in \"Judge Dredd Megazine\": \"Underbelly\" in #340\u2013342 (2013), \"Uprise\" in #350\u2013354 (2014), \"Dust\" in #367\u2013371 (2015\u2013'16), \"Furies\" in #386\u2013387 (2017), and \"The Dead World\" in #392\u2013396 (2018) (there were also two \"Judge Anderson\" stories featuring the film version of that character in #377\u2013379).\n\"Year One, Mega-City Two, Deviations, Under Siege, Toxic\" and \"False Witness\" were later reprinted in the \"Judge Dredd Megazine\" from 2022 to 2024.\nIn other media.\nFilms.\n\"Judge Dredd\" (1995).\nAn American film loosely based on the comic strip was released in 1995, starring Sylvester Stallone as Dredd. The film received generally negative reviews. On Rotten Tomatoes it has a 22% rating, and the site's critical consensus states that \"Director [Danny] Cannon fails to find the necessary balance to make it work\". In deference to its expensive Hollywood star, Dredd's face was shown. In the comic, he very rarely removes his helmet, and even then his real face is never revealed. Also, the writers largely omitted the ironic humour of the comic strip, and ignored important aspects of the \"Dredd mythology\". The co-creator and main writer of the comic character, John Wagner, said: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn retrospect the film received some praise for its depiction of Dredd's city, costumes, humour and larger-than-life characters.\n\"Dredd\" (2012).\nReliance Entertainment produced \"Dredd\", which was released in September 2012. It was positively received by critics with Rotten Tomatoes' rating of 80%. It was directed by Pete Travis and written by Alex Garland. Michael S. Murphey was co-producer with Travis. Karl Urban was cast as Judge Dredd and Olivia Thirlby portrayed Judge Anderson. Dredd's costume was radically redesigned for the film, adding armor plates and reducing the size and prominence of the shoulder insignia.\nThe main \"Judge Dredd\" writer John Wagner said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It's high-octane, edge of the seat stuff, and gives a far truer representation of Dredd than the first movie.\nThe film was shot in 3-D and filmed in Cape Town and Johannesburg. Funding was secured from Reliance Big Entertainment.\nThird film attempt.\nIn 2025, it was reported that a new film adaptation of Judge Dredd was in development. Taika Waititi (' and \"Jojo Rabbit\") will direct while Drew Pearce (\"Iron Man 3\" and ') will write the screenplay.\nTelevision.\nIn March 1995, it was reported that an animated adaptation of \"Judge Dredd\" was being developed for release following the 1995 film to potentially air during the 1996-97 television season.\nOn 10 May 2017, \"Entertainment Weekly\" announced that independent entertainment studio IM Global and Rebellion have partnered to develop a live-action TV show called \"Judge Dredd: Mega-City One\". The show is planned to be an ensemble drama about a team of Judges as they deal with the challenges of the future-shocked 22nd century.\nJason Kingsley, owner of Rebellion, told the \"Guardian\" in May 2017 that the TV show will be far more satirical than the film adaptions and could become \"one of the most expensive TV shows the UK has ever seen\".\nAccording to Karl Urban, the studio's concept is to \"build the show around more rookie judges and young, new judges\", where Dredd himself \"would come in and out\". Urban stated that he would be interested in reprising the role for this, on the condition that Dredd's part of the story be implemented in a \"meaningful way\".\nIn November 2018, Rebellion began setting up a new studio in Didcot, Oxfordshire, valued at $100 million, for Film and TV series based on \"2000 AD\" characters, including \"Judge Dredd: Mega City One.\"\nNovels.\nFrom 1993 to 1995, Virgin Books published nine Judge Dredd novels. In August 2015, these novels were re-released as e-books. The books are:\nAlso in 1995, St. Martin's Press published two novelizations of the film:\nIn 1997, Virgin published a \"Doctor Who\" novel by Dave Stone which had originally been intended to feature Judge Dredd, called \"Burning Heart\". However this idea was abandoned after the film was released, and Dredd was replaced by another character called Adjudicator Joseph Craator.\nFrom 2003 to 2007, Black Flame published official \"2000 AD\" novels, including a new run of Judge Dredd novels. After Black Flame closed in 2007, Rebellion picked up the rights to their \"2000 AD\" titles in 2011, and began republishing them as e-books. Their nine Judge Dredd books are:\nIn July 2012, three of these novels \u2013 Gordon Rennie's \"Dredd Vs Death\", David Bishop's \"Kingdom of the Blind\", and Matt Smith's \"The Final Cut\" \u2013 were republished in a single paperback volume titled \"Dredd\", as a tie-in with the 2012 film of the same title. ()\nIn August 2012, Rebellion announced a new series of e-books under the series title \"Judge Dredd: Year One\", about Dredd's first year as a judge (the stories in the comic strip having begun in his 20th year when he was already a veteran). All three stories were published by Abaddon Books in a paperback book called \"Judge Dredd Year One Omnibus\" in October 2014.\nIn 2016 and 2017, more e-books were published under the series title \"Judge Dredd: Year Two\":\nIn 2020, more e-books were published under the series title \"Judge Dredd: Year Three\":\nNovels about related characters.\nAs well as novels starring Judge Dredd, there are other novels and novellas in the franchise about other characters. For a list of books about Anderson, see Judge Anderson#Novels.\nMichael Carroll wrote three novellas about Dredd's brother, Rico Dredd, under the series title \"Rico Dredd: The Titan Years\". They were originally published as e-books, but the trilogy was published in an omnibus paperback volume by Abaddon Books in 2019.\nAnother series of books, collectively called \"Judges\", is about the first generation of judges, and are set six decades before Dredd's first stories to appear in the comic. The books, all published by Abaddon Books, are:\nThese books were later republished in three omnibus volumes.\nA trilogy about the Dark Judges, \"The Fall of Deadworld\", was written by \"2000\u00a0AD\"'s editor, Matt Smith, and published by Abaddon Books:\nThese were collected into an omnibus edition in June 2020.\nA trilogy of novellas called \"The Apocalypse War\", all written by John Ware, was released in 2022:\nThese were collected in an omnibus edition called \"Apocalypse War Dossier\".\nGames.\nVideo games.\nThere have been multiple Judge Dredd games released for various video game consoles and several home computers such as the ZX Spectrum, PlayStation and Commodore 64. The first game, titled \"Judge Dredd\", was released in 1986. Another game, also titled \"Judge Dredd\", was released in 1990. At one time, an arcade game was being developed by Midway Games but it was never released. It can however be found online and has three playable levels.\nA game loosely based on the first live action film, called \"Judge Dredd\" was developed by Probe Software and released by Acclaim for the Genesis, Super Nintendo Entertainment System, Game Boy, and Game Gear. Bally produced a \"Judge Dredd\" pinball machine based on the comics. In 1997, Acclaim released a \"Judge Dredd\" arcade game, a rail shooter with 3D graphics and full motion video footage shot specifically for the game.\n\"\" was produced by Rebellion Developments and released in early 2003 by Sierra Entertainment for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 2, Xbox, and GameCube. The game sees the return of the Dark Judges when Mega-City One becomes overrun with vampires and the undead. The player takes control of Judge Dredd, with the optional addition of another Human player in co-operative play. The game is a first-person shooter \u00a0\u2013 with key differences such as the requirement to arrest lawbreakers, and an SJS death squad which will hunt down Dredd should the player kill too many civilians. The player can also go up against three friends in the various multiplayer modes which include \"Deathmatch\", \"Team Deathmatch\", \"Elimination\", \"Team Elimination\", \"Informant\", \"Judges Vs. Perps\", \"Runner\" and more. A novel was based on the game.\nA costume set for the PlayStation 3 video game \"LittleBigPlanet\" was released in May 2009, which contained outfits to dress the game's main character Sackboy as five \"2000 AD\" characters, one of which is Judge Dredd. Dredd's uniform is also used to create the Judge Anderson costume for the Sackpeople.\nIn 2012, Rebellion released \"Judge Dredd Vs. Zombies\", a game application for iPhone, Android phones, Windows 8 and Windows Phone.\nRole-playing games.\nGames Workshop released a \"\" role-playing game in 1985. Mongoose Publishing released \"The Judge Dredd Roleplaying Game\" in 2002 and another \"Judge Dredd\" game using the \"Traveller\" system in 2009. Their licence ended in 2016. In February 2017, EN Publishing announced the new \"Judge Dredd &amp; The Worlds of 2000 AD Tabletop Adventure Game\" using the WOIN (\"What's OLD is NEW\") role-playing game system.\nOn 17 July 2012, Tin Man Games released a \"Judge Dredd\"-themed digital role-playing gamebook titled \"Judge Dredd: Countdown Sector 106\", available for the iOS operating system.\nBoard games.\nGames Workshop produced a \"Judge Dredd\" board game based on the comic strip in 1982. In the game players, who represent judges, attempt to arrest perps that have committed crimes in different location in Mega City One. A key feature of the game is the different action cards that are collected during play; generally these cards are used when trying to arrest perps although some cards can also be played against other players to hinder their progress. The winner of the game is the judge who collected the most points arresting perps. Players could sabotage each other's arrest attempts. Additionally, there were many amusing card combinations such as arresting Judge Death for selling old comics, as the \"Old Comic Selling\" crime card featured a \"2000 AD\" cover with Judge Death on it. The game used characters, locations and artwork from the comic. It was re-released by Rebellion in 2022.\nIn 1987, Games Workshop published a second Dredd-inspired board game, \"Block Mania\". In this game for two players, players take on the role of rival neighboring blocks at war. This was a heavier game than the earlier Dredd board game, focused on tactical combat, in which players control these residents as they use whatever means they can to vandalize and destroy their opponent's block. Later the same year, Games Workshop released the Mega-Mania expansion for the game, allowing the game to be played by up to four players.\nMongoose Publishing have released a miniatures skirmish game of gang warfare based in Mega-City One called \"Gangs of Mega-City One\", often referred to as GOMC1. The game features judges being called in when a gang challenges another gang that is too tough to fight. A wide range of miniatures has been released including box sets for an Ape Gang and an Undercity Gang. A Robot Gang was also produced but was released as two blister packs instead of a box set. Only one rules expansion has been released, called \"Death on the Streets\". The expansion introduced many new rules including usage of the new gangs and the ability to bring Judge Dredd himself into a fight. This game went out of print shortly thereafter, but was replaced by the \"Judge Dredd Miniatures Game\", which was published free in many stages as the company sought feedback from fans and players. In 2012, an expansion was released called \"Block War!\". Miniatures continue to be manufactured at a slow pace.\nIn November 2017, Osprey Games announced their development of a new graphic adventure card game, entitled \"Judge Dredd: The Cursed Earth\". The game is designed and based on \"The Lost Expedition\", a game from designer Peer Sylvester. In the game, one to five players \"[lead] a team of judges against dinosaurs, mutants, and the Cursed Earth itself\". It was released on 21 February 2019.\nCollectible card game.\nThere was a short-lived collectible card game called simply \"Dredd\". In the game, players would control a squad of judges and arrest perps. The rules system was innovative and the game was well-received by fans and collectors alike, but various issues unrelated to the game's quality caused its early demise.\nPinball.\nThere was a four-player pinball game released in 1993, produced by Bally Manufacturing.\nAudio series.\n\"The Day the Law Died\" and \"The Apocalypse War\" stories were produced by Dirk Maggs and broadcast in three-minute segments (40 for each story) on Mark Goodier's afternoon show on BBC Radio One in 1995. The cast include Lorelei King and Gary Martin. They were issued separately on dual cassette and double CD. Both titles have since been deleted. \"The Apocalypse War\" also contains plot elements from \"Block Mania\", because this story set the scene for the main story.\nSince then, Big Finish Productions has produced 18 audio plays featuring \"2000 AD\" characters. These have mostly featured Judge Dredd, although three have also featured characters from the series \"Strontium Dog\". In these, Judge Dredd is played by Toby Longworth, and Johnny Alpha from \"Strontium Dog\" is played by Simon Pegg.\nThe list of \"2000 AD\" audio plays featuring Dredd includes:\n\"Note: 3 and 10 are \"Strontium Dog\" stories that do not feature Dredd.\"\nStarting in 2009, four further Judge Dredd titles were released under the banner \"Crime Chronicles\", once more featuring Toby Longworth.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
